O - 
. wien, 
Du ie 





X ii S i aa A I WEEN UA D E 
Cie I n - n T MRT (ue LN 
L GE iin SC uns ke: s i 
LUES M Me. — 

KO v 


SU LV Di donee 















IN edt t Di dé Ü AN Ze inh 
| ACA RNE A ie wees heh S Miz 


H LO 
ILIO Y) 


A A? Se M tee 
Welt Wire lgl: . j X Ue 






Li EC put CR 
ré T J r4 6 Ge * M We D i D 7 
| Wu. WES A DERE RRI NW Ge 
ay ey ( = WK â wos SR ib L 
Dn ELLE NU ! Cu ie jh 15.0.1 UM 
f D 
Li 
P 
J 
LE 
^ 
q 
E 






i 
! 
ì ^ 
' ' À i i . T Jr 
-n T 1 Ae " " Liza y i J M ) LGE LUTPAT AU 1 or W A Wer uu sl | NW 
[] ' i} n - [| I vi L| [| m d J 
i iy AM d A ` HE I A et VO MAJI - " 
d 4 I ' nd i ' A i LA i da 
k I D i i Y^ d I A LO Ful DN DEN , 
E ^ > JK t I i i J It L| i MI 
"^ DE, DE T i - ik m n : H n 7 
i L] M H | Y 
7 D A3 I ls Ad, I i d TE ri ! D 
N It } g 
OU ( . 1l i ' ith T T A I d e 
i ` i I T p Li ! i ` E A 
t ^ lt ` d. ; 7 i I : i Va gé y 
Ke dk: k d CU Wi T t ' I H HAN E Wu LE E 
i AL A , LI Ié T > | í ry e ml ` H LN ( ln "ATE Lj eu 
j lj ' d Pm ory i S i Jr de TAM He Ar JA, 
a ky f AV LU I4 FX ` i n UT T NY, M. 
‘as d "t r ^ T > » M Lik - ! CS LA d "t AY Mn re 
D A / (2) l i f i MU : MÉI i / "n n ie () lu ' Let 
I- TY j ` i "nun WI MT J] E | Gei "oft Li 
H L ) [ 2 i ' nm E a | | ; i rut ve NT TAN wu nV 
i i T e i I AT Jp Leen y MU ^u , ij Y 2 1 1 i Al 21 ON 
d nn, i T TO SATAAN ex LN GC : ' TY. Yu vi N MO MATT 
oO - p mni "ERUIT Mae Kg? A it, Vole ("LOS Uu DE 
; mi Ka Hi LR FOE UE 1674. gd VE A Met Maes, ée La 
(e, ds LM AR ie) Pome ten LU VE Ln, 
H i U Th LI me Sa dE LA Te nml s Ti. VIR AU * E" Se 
ke" 5 kaea" A - " \ A \ TKA p AA OS ^n 
VC " ; if ; i "n 1 "up i n 
n it i quA i ) tf LZ i p ` Į LE : 
7 A OU 4 ' AR di Y! : AU MA . TE AN a a Tu Lu T M gt D 
f d l Or ^ " f MN SC E Kén E, ty | XL 1 "e "on Y IN (EZ ASA) ih Ge ij 
T2 vM MAT Wäi R EA PAL ' dÄ i e AX. i DG n ur. Ui 4 TR l " 
EM i uU 4 i D A, n et CU es 
SOR HE RENT See s COE TOY OTRO e sts GE EE lr 
» E Wu deg? ^ NU Fog d ^ Ys SI SS s EAS "EL d) ANE déi dE ed A Er i 
4 | å L| " " , ALS U dë Ly L| » j 
` éi D A 7" i "v TE Tann Feet, 3 SN: 7 dl NS Al 

















Ki 
> ^" 
" Pus 
Së P 5. , dE 
» + 
ru 


















27/1/39 
GAELIC DICTIONARY 


of Man Who Taught Himself 


Printing 


Dwruv, a genealogist, who 
printing and published works 
language and on parish 


pedigrees, died on Wednesday 
Fleet, Hampshire, aged 74. 
ba nk clerk in London, he com- 
and published, single-handed, 
onary of over 1000 pages and 
strations. For this he was awarded 
, pension. 

| were widely read by genealogists 
1 widespread interest in America. 
o had an index of about 500,000 
'ences to names for family 
a member of many societies 
e and abroad interested in 








http.//www.archive.org/details/illustratedgaeli01 dweluoft 


[Frontispiece to Vol. I. 


E. DWELLY WHEN HE FIRST COMMENCED TO COLLECT 
WORDS FOR A GAELIC DICTIONARY IN 1881—4AGED 17. 





LaCelt 
D585*. 














Illustrated 
GAELIC 4 
Dictionary — 





SPECIALLY DESIGNED FOR 


BEGINNERS AND FOR 
USE IN SCHOOLS, 


INCLUDING EVERY GAELIC WORD IN ALL THE 

OTUER GAELIC DICTIONARIES AND PRINTED 

BOOKS, AS WELL AS AN IMMENSE NUMBER 
NEVER IN PRINT BEFORE, 


BY 


EDWARD DWELLY. 


Yol. 1 
Rebised Evition 


PRINTED & PUBLISHED BY THE AUTIIOR 
SINGLEHANDED, AT HIS GENEALOGICAL OFFICE 
e IN KING'S ROAD. 


E 
d 1918 





e Sol 
FLEET, HANTS: i 











parts under the title of Faclair vata 
le dealbhan, and the nom-de-plume of “ Ewen 

, MacDonald” being now out of print, the 
necessity has arisen for a new edition. The one I now 
present to the public will, I trust, be found of equal 
service both to beginners and advanced students of the 
language. The first edition of the work has been care- 
fully revised and no expense or labour spared to make 
this the most reliable and complete Gaelic Dictionary 
obtainable. 

The work was originally undertaken solely for my 
own private use, but after continual urging by other 
Gaelie students who had seen it, and proved its utility 
by experience, I at last consented to print it and so 
make the result of my labours accessible to all. 

The vocabulary is based on that of MacLeod & Dewar, 
so much appreciated by Gaelie students, and where the 
orthography of that work differs from MacDain's Gaelic 
Dietionary that of the latter has been generally adopted 
here. All the words not given by MacLeod & Dewar, 
but appearing in any of the other Gaelic Dictionaries are 
now included besides some thousands of words gathered | 
from Common Speech and the whole range of Modern 
Scottish Gaelic Literature, including the Gaelic names 
of Plants, Diseases and Birds, Technical Terms, Ee, com- 





Y 


piled from lists given in pamphlets and periodicals from 
time to time. All the examples of idiomatic phrases 
and proverbs given by MacAlpine have been retained, 
as well as Armstrong’s, where not practically the same, 
and many from Nicolson’s Gaelie Proverbs have been 
added, with large numbers from various other sources, 
Local words and provincialisms from Common speech, 
&c., many never printed before. 

My thanks are chiefly due to his Most Gracious 
Majesty the late King Edward, for graciously awarding 
me a Civil List Pension when only about one half of 
the Dictionary had been issued to the publie, and his 
Majesty’s lamentable death is one of the dark shadows 
that mars my pleasure at the completion of my life-work, 
by preventing the possibility of my offering a copy for 
his acceptance. The great expense entailed by the 
publication of a book of this magnitude singlehanded, is 
a constant and heavy drain on the income of anyone of 
small means, and were it not for the receipt of this 
pension when it was awarded, the continuation of the 
publication beyond page 600 would have been, at least 
for many years, an absolute impossibility. Before 
proceeding any farther, I should have had to execute 
enough remunerative work to enable me to purchase the 
necessary materials to continue the Dictionary as well as 
to live upon, an exceedingly hard task after the struggles 
l had already gone through, and one which would have 
no doubt eventually ended in the abandonment of the 
publication in an unfinished state. Owing to unfor- 
tunate investments I had already had to earn all the 
money to purehase the necessary materials to produce this 
book as well as much of my living for some years by 
doing any printmg I could get; but the strain on brain 
and eyesight entailed by thus always working at the high- 
est pressure and for exceptionally long hours, so that 
the Dictionary might be completed as quickly as possible, 
could not have been coutinued much longer. 


iii oe 

I have much pleasure in acknowledging the great 
help given by my correspondents in all parts of the 
world, both by sending numbers of words that were new 
to me and by obtaining many subscribers to the work. 
I am also indebted to my wife for revising proofs, as- 
sisting in folding sheets, and preparing parts for post, 
as well as for advising many translations. The suc- 
cess of the work is in no small measure due to her 
assistance in household matters, and by keeping down 
domestic expenses making money available for its pro- 
duction that would have otherwise been spent in an un- 
productive way. The following gentlemen have kindly 
assisted by following the work during its progress through 
the press, and it is largely due to their suggestions and 
additions that the compilation of such a full and accurate 
vocabulary of Scottish Gaelic has been possible. 
Malcolm Macfarlane, Elderslie, Johnstone. 
Rev. Charles M. Robertson, Craighouse. Jura. 
Henry Whyte, “ Fionn,” Glasgow. 
Rev. J. MacRury, Snizort, Skye. 
Wm. Cameron, Poolewe, Ross-shire, 
Duncan MacIsaac, Oban. 
A. Henderson, Kilmory, Kilchoan. 
J. G. MacKay, London. 
Donald MacKenzie, late I. R., Killimster, Wick. 
Malcolm MacDonald, Stornoway. 
Rev. D. Campbell, m.a. PH.D., Bunachton, Dores. 
Rev. Malcolm MacLeod, m.a. Broadford, Skye. 
Donald Murray, Aberdeen. 
David Urquhart, w.4., Kyle, Lochalsh. 
Rev. D. M. Cameron, Ledaig, Argyll. 
Rev. D. Munro, Ferintosh, Ross-shire. 


Rev. C. M. Robertson and Mr. Henry Whyte have 
have also assisted me considerably with Proper Names and 
Technical Terms. 

I am particularly indebted to Dr. W. J. Watson for 
Kindly revising and adding to the list of Gaelic Proper 


bd 


DA? 


Names which I have been collecting for a period of thirty 
years. This is the first general list ofthe kind published 
for all Scotland. I must not omit my great obligation to 
the Press both at home and abroad, for the detailed 
reviews they have given of the parts as they appeared, 
and for their hearty appreciation of my labours. 

The Highland Society of London kindly contributed 
£25 towards the cost of publication. 

No one who has always spoken a language like 
Gaelic from the cradle can ever realize the extraordinary 
difficulties presented to a stranger who wishes to acquire 
it. First, the majority of Gaelie speakers only a very 
few years ago could neither read nor write it, so when 
one heard an unfamiliar word or phrase and the first 
instinct was of course to write it down lest it should be 
forgotten, the question was how to spell it—of course 
the speaker could not tell ! I was baulked in this way 
times without number, and my progress with the language 
immensely retarded in consequence. Next, the great 
difficulty of inducing a Gael to engage in a Gaelic con- 
versation if he thinks he can make himself understood at 
all by means of indifferent English, or even if there is 
anyone present who cannot understand Gaelic, makes the 
acquisition of a knowledge of colloquial Gaelic much more 
difficult than is the case with other modern tongues, for 
it is only by posing as a Highlander and one who knows 
Gaelic that one can ever hope to hear it spoken habitually 
and without restraint. These are real difficulties, but 
they may be overcome by scheming and perseverance as 
I have proved. 

This Dictionary is of especial value to the beginner. 
Many who did not learn the language in infancy, but ac- 
quired it in later life through the medium of books, have 
notified me of the difficulties of grammar and idiom they 
met with. Such difficulties are likely to puzzle other 
novices, and have therefore been explained under their 
Bppropriate headings. Grammatical difficulties have been 


v $ 


elucidated by good Gaclic scholars, and no labour has 
been spared to make the work as complete and reliable 
as possible. Some have found fault with my explan- 
ations here and there as being too full but I have always 
purposely inclined to being too explicit rather than too 
vague, because while one reader may be far beyond any 
assistance a certain explanation gives, the next may find 
in it an elucidation of a difficulty that he has been try- 
ing to get explained for months. This has been 
brought home vividly to me by some of my proof-readers 
making such remarks as, *uunecessary," *'self-evident," 
&c. beside explanations I have given of difficulties that 
had puzzled me considerably when a beginner, and the 
full understanding of which I had imperceptibly acquired 
as I attained increased fluency in speaking the language. 

Some scholars object to some of the words given in 
other Dictionaries as being Irish and not Scottish Gaelic, 
but many of these so-called Irish words are in daily use 
in Cantyre and appear in the Scottish Gaelic Bible, and 
the close similarity the Gaelic speech of the West of 
Scotland has to that of the North of Ireland (much closer 
than the native English of places not farther removed from 
one another and with no sea between them) makes the 
interchange of words easy and often convenient. Man 
of those who condemn the use of what they call “ Irish” 
words, have no scruple in introducing English and Doric 
words, which they try to pronounce and write according 
to Gaelic rules, apparently to make their identity seme- 
what obscure, when there are already two or three native. 
Gaelic words much more to the point. 

A few correspondents have complained that the work 
is too crowded, in places, with obsolete or English words, 
but only those given in other Gaelic Dictionaries figure 
here, although more prominence has been given to the 
character of Anglicisms. Words marked obsolete in 
some Dictionaries, may often have been obsolete for a long 
period in the districts in which the compilers of those 


gé vi 
particular works lived, while still used in other places. 
The usual rule hitherto adopted in Gaelic Dictionaries 
with regard to English words in Gaelic dress has been— 
| clare, s.m. A clerk. 
Sometimes Eng. or Lng. word is added, but not often. 
A new system has been adopted here, and all such words 
have been inserted thus— 
clàre, s.m. Gaelic spelling of clerk. 

This is the first Dictionary of the Gaelic language 
in which an attempt has been made to explain words by 
means of diagrams, and the first in which especial care 
has been taken in collecting localisms, the names of old 
Highland implements, &c., and their parts, many of which 
are now only to be found in one or two remote parishes 
of the Western Isles, from which they are fast disappear- 
ing. The lists of technical terms here given have never 
been published before, and the whole of the illustrations, 
with one or two exceptions, have been specially drawn 
for the work. 

It is a cause of regret that type of a larger size , 
could not have been used, but, owing to the great increase 
that would have caused in the bulk of the book, it was 
found to be impossible. 

No attempt has been made to give a so-called phone- 
tic spelling of each word as MacAlpine does. The 
orthodox spelling of the Gaelic language being practically 
phonetic on its own lines, by far the simplest way is to 
learn the correct sounds of the various Gaelic combin- 
ations of letters from some good text-book, of which there 
are many, and if possible, with the aid of a native Gaelic 
speaker. 

Readers must use their own discretion in practising 
some of the forms given when translating from English 
into Gaelic. Many of the words which have here been 
added to MacLeod & Dewar's vocabulary are localisms 
and the persons or books from whom they were obtained 
being nearly always indicated by signs or initials, the 


Se 

) Vil 

\ a s "e . MN à 
PUR Ts D PI 


districts in which they may be met with are easily found. 
Some such meanings while easily understood in one place, 
might be quite unintellgible even in another part of the 
same county. The name of a place given after any 
word or sentence signifies that it has been heard there, 
but its use may not be confined to that particular locality. 
Where dialectic quotations from common speech or books 
are given the dialectic form of spelling is usually retained. 
The past participles of verbs are spelt in the Dictionaries 
according to the old Gaelic rule, “ leathann ri leathann,” 
but there is a tendency among Gaelie writers at present 
to violate that rule and spell phonetically, as spadíe for 
spadía, &c. Irregular forms of infinitives or present 
participles are not generally given by other Dictionaries 
under their roois, so they cannot be found unless you 
already know them. They are given here both under 
the roots and in their own places. 

Every effort has been made to get the work finished 
as quickly as possible compatible with correct work and 
in consequence I worked long hours on many days when 
really too ill to do any work at all. The unique obstacles 
encountered in acquiring a fluent knowledge of Gaelic 
and compiling this Dictionary, as well as the difficulty 
in not being able to pay the heavy expense of having it 
printed and published in the ordinary way and so being 
finally eompelled to learn how to print and publish it 
myself, have been fully described by the Press from time 
to time and an epitome of these accounts will be found in 
my History of the Dwelly family. I have set up every 
letter of the type myself from beginning to end, and the 
only assistance I have had in connection with the printing 
of this book has been the occasional distribution of type 
by members of my family amounting to nearly 40 pages 
and by others 10 pages—in all under 50 pages. 

E. D. 


*. 


Y 


a 


viii 











AUTHORITIES QUOTED IN THIS WORK: 


Most of the works not marked are taken from 
MacLeod & Dewar’s Gaelic Dictionary, but the 
sources ofall important additions have been 
marked as follows. ('The places in brackets show 
the «districts whose localisms the various au- 
thorities specially represent.) 

*  MacAlpine's Pron. Gaelic Dict. [chiefly 

Islay & neighbourhood.] 


t Obsolete words or meanings. - 

1 MacBain’s Etymological Gaelic Dict. E 
(Badenoch, el Be s=- 

? Cameron’s Gaelic Names of Plants. a. 

T Gaelic Names of Birds, collected by Dr. | adv. 
Alex. Carmichael for C. Ferguson, and | aff. 
inserted by the latter in Gaelic Soc’y of | art. 
Inverness Trans. xi and xii. col. 

| Dr. H. Cameron Gillies’ Gaelic Names of | comp. 
Diseases. conj. 

** Armstrong'sGaelic Dictionary[Mid Perth- | conj. interr. 
shire.] contr. 


tt MacEachen’s Gaelic Dictionary [Arisaig | dat. 
& Badenoch.] 

tt Highland Society's Gaelic Dictionary. 

Car. Gad.—Carinina Gadelica. 

Celt. Mag.—Celtic Magazine. 

CGI—Gaelic Society of Inverness Transactions. 

CM —Celtic Monthly. 

C. Rev.—Celtic Review. 

Donn. Bàn—Dun. Macintyre's poems, 5th. ed. 

G —An Gaidheal (magazine 1872-1878.) 

Gàidh.— ` do. do. 

G. nà B.—Guth na Bliadhna (magazine.) 

GsI—Gaelic Society of Inverness Transactions. 

JGC. S.—J. G. Campbell's ‘* Superstitions.” 

JGO. W.—J. G. Caupbell's '* Witchcraft.” 

Leabh.-nan-c.—Leabhar nan cnoc. 

Leabh. na Féinne. - 

M—Menzies’ Orain Ghàidhealaich. - 

McI—Dun. Macintyre’s poems, 5th. edition. 

McMh. A.—Alex. MacDonald’s poems, 1902. 

MS —Large manuscript English-Gaelio Dict. in 
possession of Rev. D. Walker MacIntyre, Kil- 
monivaig. It was revised on Nov. 1, 1823, 
aud purchased at the sale of Sir Wm.MacLeod 
Bannatyne’s Library in 1834 by Donald Greg- 
ory, Edinhurgh, who gave it to Angus Mac- 
Donnell, inch. No compiler’s or reviser's 
name is given. 

NGP—Nicolson’s Gaelic Proverbs, 

R—Wm. Ross’ songs, 1877. 

RGG—Reid’s Gaelic Grammar. 

Wit—Campbell’s West Highland Tales. 


“ h \ — Waifs & Strays of Celtic tradition 


AC—Dr. Alex. Carmichael, author of ** Carmina 
Gadelica ” (W, Isles] 

AF—Gaelic Names of Beasts, &c., by Alex. 
Forbes, Edinburgh. 

AH— Alex. Henderson, Ardnamurchan. 

CR—Rev. C. M. Robertson, Jura (Perthshire 
& West coast.of Ross.) 

« al Campbell, Broadford [Argyll & 

S 


DIM—D. J. Matheson, Kyleakin, 
DM-Dvncan Maclsaac, Oban. 

DMC—Rev. D. M. Cameron, Ledaig. 
DMelL—Duncan MacLachlan, Connel. 
D5IK—Donald MacKenzie, Killimster, Wick. 
DMu -Yev. D. Munro, Ferintosh. 

DMy- Donald Murray, Aberdeen [Lewis] 
G—J. I". Gates, London. 

JGM—J. G. Mackay, London. 

JM—Kav. J. MacRury, Snizort (Skye & Uist.]| in Welsh." 


dim. 


fut. 


int. 
interr., ^ 


poss. 

poss. pron. 
pref. 

prep. 

prep. pron. 
part, 


| advantage. 


def. Y. ——— 


| 


JMcF-—John MacFadyen, Glasgow. e 
MM—Malcolm MacFarlane, Elderslie. 
MMcD—Malcolm MacDonald, Stornoway. 

M McL—Malcolm MacLeod, Uig, Lewis Lewis) 
MMcN—Michael MacNeill, Castlebay. 
PJM—P. J. Maclver, Kyle. 

TS—Rev. T. Sinton, Dores. 

WC—Wm. Cameron, Poolewe, 


ABBREVIATIONS. 





active voice 

adjective 

adverb 

affirmative 

article 

colloquial 

comparative degree 
conjunction 

interrogative conjunction ` 
contraction 

dative case 

defective verb 

diminutive 

feminine 

future tense 

genitive case 

that is 

impersonal 

improper 3s 
indeclinable ` ` V 
indicative A \ 
infinitive X 
interjection ; 
interrogative > 
masculine 
nominative case 
negative d 
passive 

plural 

possessive 

possessive pronoun 
prefix 

preposition 
prepositional pronoun 
participle d 
present participle 
past participle 
pronouu 

provincial 

relative 

relative pronoun 
substantive 

feminine substantive 
singular number 
masculine substantive 
superlative degree 
verb 

active verb 

neuter verb 

irregular verb . 
transitive verb 


The following abbreviated remarks, with the 
exception of those on pronunciation, are ins^rt- 
ed here as reminders for those already xcyua.nt- 
ed with the rudiments of the lungua ze. 

The compiler of this Dictionary wa le his first 
start with Munro's Gaelic Primer with great 

There is still an urgent need tor a 
manual to teach the art of speca«ing Gaelic on 
the sime lines as Spurrell’s '* Practical Lessons 


ix 


END o ee 


The Gaelic Language. 


PRONUNCIATION. 


. HE Gaelic Alphabet contains eighteen 
M stters- a. b,c,d,ef,g,h 
r, 8, 6, u. 

The vowels are divided into broad and smail. 
The broad area, o, and u 





The Consonants are classed as—dentals d, E long like oo in poor, as ur, 


within; used only in these two words. 
d long like awin fawn as corr 
d2 long like o in bold, as lon, meadow, bo, cow. 
; à short like o in modest, as cor, condition ; orra, 
,ilmmo Ps | on them. 
8 short like o in bowl, as dol, going; cro h,cattle. 
- the small e, and i. i= long like ow in down, as fonn, land; toi, hole. 


heron; 91, drink. 


new; ùprait, bustle. 


s; labials b, f, m, p ; linguals], n, r ; palatals | ù SCH like win fully, as cur, sending ; guth, 


Ki is the mark of aspiration and is never found 


Ce. 
SOUNDS OF THE DIPHTHONGS. 


alone in a word, but always after the letters b, ai 1 like à &t, as daimh, kinship. 


c, d, f, g, m, p, S, t. E 
; There are two accents—the grave and acute. S : 
Either of these placed over a vowel indicates | m d 
that it is long. and that it has a specific sound aid 
ace :rding to which is used. The accents also | 
serve to distinguish between words that are), 
a f E : S ol 
the same in spelling but different in meaning. 

In almost all polysyllables, excepting some | o 
words compounded with a preposition, the 3€- | aa 2 
cent falls on the first syllable. The others arc | Es 3 
short and unaccented, and the vowels in that! ^ 4 
situation have iu general short obscure sounds. éi l 
Herce it happens that the vowels in these ‘| * 
syl'ables are so often used indiscriminately. 

Th-re are no quiescent final vowets. 

There are sume sounds in Cae:ie to which: 
there are none perfectly similari English, and. E 
the same cowbinatio does not invariably re-!? 

resent the same sound in differe! t parts of the | : 

tighlands. The powers of the ditterent letters i BE 
may be exp!sined with a certain degree of aC ii 1 
curacy, yet much wiil still remain to be learned i Wë 
by the ear alone. Asthis subject is fully dis-!. 
cussed 2l explainei in “Gaelic as a Speciticj io 3 
Subject” we must refer the reader to thao work , 10 4 
fea feller iniorm«tienon account of our linited | 10 3 
space here. Tie following remarks are how-|; 4 
ever, reproduce}, chiefly from “Comhraithean Pak 
az Goidhlig ia am Peurla," LyRev. D MacItnes, ! 17 3 
as giviuga good general ilea of Gaelic pronun- Ss S 
Giation ‘o those quite unacquainted with the | 1" 
languagz. iu 4 


Further remerks on proi unciation will hea, 








ei 
éi 
i 


2 
3 
4 
61 
02 


„ &&i,as daimh, of an ox. 

„ à, the i being silent, as fàilte, welcome. 

„ a, the ¢ being silent, as tais, soft. 

„ & Short, the ? being silent, as tairbhe, 
profit ; airm, arms. 

„ A, the o being silent, as aog, death; 
caol, slender. 

„ $ short, & à, as geall, wager. 

, @, Short, & à, as geal, white. 

„ è, a being silent, as dean, do. 

; å, a being silent, as lean, fol.ow. 

» e : beiug silent & dh sounded, as déidh, 
wish. 

„ ê, iissilent & ch sounded, as deich, tem. 

„ é, thei being silent, as céile, spouse. 

» &, the ibeing silont, as ceist, question. 

„ è slightly sounded & ò, as ceòl, musio, 

„ å Slightly sounded and A, as beothail, 
lively. 

„ 6, the « being silent, as ceum, a step. 

„ 1 & aobscure, as ciall, sense; iar, 
west. 

» ithe obeing silent, as lion, fill. 

, obscure & o silent, as ciont, guilt. 

„» iL theo being silent, as iomlan, com- 
pleie. 

„ uin up, as ciod? what? 

» 1&0, as fiù, worthy. 

„» 1&d, asiubhar, a yew-tree. 

„ ù, the ibeing silent, asvitlt, refuse. 

„ À. thet being silent, as diugh, to-day. 

» DÄ, as cloimh, wool. 

à Ei as cloimh, mange. 


foun: in the boy cf this work under the respec- j; 3 "' nee: : ` : 
tive letters. y i D joi 3 ,, 6, the é being silent, as toiscach, begin- 
| ning. 
SOUNDS CF THE VOWELS. in ` » 3 S B ae M ua AMO 
s long lize a in far, as dàn, 2 poem ; bàn, white lui2 2 &&isilentas sluig, swallow; duine, 
4 short like a in that, as pronounced by a Low- man. 
Jauder not as by an Englishman,as fad, leng.h; T 
gail, withe. SOUNDS OF THE [IRIPHTHONGS. . ; 
Along bei. re dh like u drawled in burn, as The Triphthongsare ac), eai, eoi. 141, 101, Ual. 


ladhran, hocfs. 
& short sound of foregoing, =s lagh, law. 


As the sounds of the diphthongs depend on 
those of the dual vowels, so the sounds of the 


â before un and l), like à above and u in fully, | triphthongs depend on those of the diphthongs. 


as clann, children * call, loss. 
a in unaccented syllabies has the obscure broad 
sound mentfoned abore. 
à long like e in there, as gnè, kind. 
é long like a in /a:me, as dé, yesterday; cé, earth. 
è short like ein Jet. as dheth. of him or it. 
8 short like a in rate, as teth, ho’; leth half. 


i 








b, 


short obscure sound, as coille, a wood, 
1 lone like e in me, as sid, weather; dith, want. i 
! short like d in king, as fir, mon; min, meal. 
1 short like Zin figAt, as tigh, house; a stigh, 


The rule that tie vowel immediately before or 
immediately after a plain palatal or lingual 
ofte loses its sound holds good in regard to the 
triphihongs. The vowel in the triphthong that 
loses its sound is the last 4. 


SOUNDS OF THE CONSONANTS. 


: i i t ; , 
e in unaccented syllables, has generally the | bh, UM ne ae Er 


v, as bha, was. 


and end of a word is like 
1n the middle of a word it 


is sometimes like v, and sometimes like w, 
as leabhar, book ; but often silent, as dubh- 
ar, shade. 


B 


ËTT 
0, before a broad vowel, like c in can, as carn, bathar, pro. ba-ar,‘ goods ; bàih (pro. ! à) 


a heap of stones. " e drown. 
before ‘a small vowel, like k in keen, as ciun, |1, a, r, are the only letters that are don led in 
heads. fhe mi ldle of a word. No better is doubled at 


eh, before or after a broad vowel. is like ch the beginning of a word. 
in loch, as chuir, put; deoch, a drink. 
ch, before or after a small vowel is like the 
Greek cht aa pronounced in Scotland, as ORTHOGRAPHY. 
chi, shall see; deich, ten. ` : 
o, at the end of a syllable is like chk, as mac, | The chief exceptions to the above rules fre- 





son.--Exoeptions, chunnaic, ionraic, òir- | quently met with in writing are :— 
dheirc, éiric. : is, 13 ; so, this; sud, yonder; ged, although; 
chd, is like ch in loch with k added. and tigh, a house. 
d, before a broad vowel is like d in door, as| We have continued the usual way of spelling 
dorus, door. is and ged throughout this work, but there is 
d, before a small vowel is like 4 in dew, as| au increasing tendency to spell ''so" seo, 
déan, do. "sud" siod, aud ''tizh" taigh, so we have 
dh, before or after a broad vowel has no sound; adopted these forms as being more in uni- 
in English exactly like it. formity with the spelling of the rest of the 
dh, before or aftera small vowel is like y in| language. Seoandsiod are also the more cor- 
yield, as dhibh, of you; féidh, deer (pl.) rect as representiug the Oid Gaelic foruis seo 
f, is like f in English. a d siw’. A met 
fh, at the beginning of a word is silent, except | The Oe generally adopted in ' his Dic- 
in the words fhuair, fhathast, when it 1s; tionary is that used by the best scholars of 
like hk in hat. the presant day. 
8 lior a broad vowel is like g in go, as gath, 
ake. 
g, before a small vowel is like g in give, aa INFLECTIONS 


géill, yield. í 
gh, before or after a smal! vowel is like y in 
yield, as ghéill, yielded; faigh, get. OF TH E ARTICLE. 
gh, beiure oraftera broad vowel, has no soundi The following statement from Dr. Gillies’ 
in English exactly like it. © o.. | Gaelic Grammar, shows the Article in position 
1, before a broad vowel has no sound in Engiish ' before Nouns of both genders bey ning with 





exactly like it. every letter of the Alphavet, an: m suc la- 
l, before a small vowel is like J in lure, as liadh, ! SCH o Prdgstiüsns astor vut all Ze 
a ladle, or blade of a» oar. . possible forms. 


ll, at tho end of a syllable or word preceded by 
$, is like // in million, as pill, return; pill- 


MASCULINE NOUNS. 
tinn,returning; when preceded by a broad wo 


vowel it has no sound like it in English. S 
m, is like m in English. P P 
mh, at the beginning and end ofa word or Sed E . go MEE 
flanked by vowels,is like v, as mharbh (pro. Bowe MET H 25 SËZ 
ib ^ PDSS uZigg ge 8 - £c 
vary) killed ` nàimh, an enemy. edhHdiLt-chs2s3cu712 a 
mh, after a vowel and followed by a consonant, Sass ER SERGE SE 
is generally silent. but it imparts a nasal BQO OR WAS ER. E EE 2 
sound to the vowel precedi«g it, as co.nh- AS AR RR ARR AA RAR ASA e 
radh, dialogue; and is sometimes souuded = aS d 
u orw, as in samhradh, summer. — 3 oH 3 S = 23 
n, beforca broad vowel has no sound in Eng- ZS dem. EE - e § vez 
lish exactly like it. HS39 shades 753.8253 335 
n, befor: a small vowelas like » in pew. as KENE EK gaan 
neach, à person Sen De A D e Ni Ss E 
` person, San yeu BRO wR WS ef E 
nn, after à broad vowel his no sound exactly fn- AAA eg Se Dan eu 
like itin English. dSOagddddzcosdaadduzd Ff 
nn, after ¢ is like n in pinion. : S vi o 
n, after ed m, t, is usuaily like r, as cnàmh, | e 8 : S 3 
decay, digest; gniomh, deed, action; mnath- 3 HG a d zo m 
an, women; tnù, envy; but correct speakers, & ,-3 dc. SS Jo. GE 
ronounce it n. B @Phes Eatin et once es 
d ee X RESO na so 2 aE 92 Er" 
p, like p in English. aire: BOSS 22224 EZ A2 
E 8 e . S440] 2c2xzEgN- ug Q = 
ph, at the beginning of a word is like f as phill, eec re e, MEL usn 
returned. Buadddeulduascadzdd Bee 
8, before or after a broad vowel is like s in Eug- E > SEs 
D E e te o 
lish. — " GB ro a SS A ag 
8, beforeor after a small vowel is liko 5h, as sin, $5. . 82 =x; = S aup 
stretch ; tais, soft. Steed PS 3 I P Rss 
sh, at the beginning of a word islike h, as shin ech, SES. SS EZ E a 
(pro. heen,) stre'ched. PALERAN ER FR 
t, before or after a broad vowel is like t in tone, MCK es Ze - KL 
as tog, raise ; lot, a wound. B HESS g ECKER 224 
t, before or after a small vowel is like the) Zac .348.-.*2..2-3 ESS 
first element of ch in chin, a3 teine, fire. Saraguro Sant =3 GE: E e 
th, at the beginning of a word is like h, as thig, GEERT ECK te 
D V pies S * et Ach m ont Ln onal hae 
come. Ti c secs ood = Z 
th, in the middle and end of a word is silent, as ARSE Rea EReeSaa BB 


xi 





-m m — o 


FEMININE NOUNS, 


s E D hes D 
=. 2 cito SE. ge, o Aë 
TE CR OR EES fu 
IE: AE H iL. A 
KAES SR dL E ER o - 
bor Sousa Shon Pees g 
"paad e e o @ as SS agb 8 
SENG — ps e e see e EI 
v Əz 
*à4. 
s - Ne ES ei E 
= € ES e E? KEE 
Cru 2 EF. EES E E. & bel 
E "9 oe LoriaP va m = ee eS cot Gude, D = 
See a Pee ce yet Re ESE 
Bees 2552 re ce ag T* 
AE I NE. e Lat t- : 
Tesi gn E e H Eé Ze EN "52323 zac 
E. ou SS =. SA. ee El S 
o See a Ae eege ee de 
t£ 
. « 
a 
= 3 : à 
- e © om EI 
E 5 = gaits e wtes 
ED gU Oe Se ee SS DU LL 
eise 275 Md te Séi = 
TEE EK 
STara ee F Se tL ee EK ee R 
NL EDU UESTE-c == aa, = es 
- E - =) rf eS =e H we 
ERES e EE E aes 
SESS s2rF€t-aSe4nsg Baz 
Se ee aR LLELLE TF 
L we md ES 
t § devis. .g BAS 
S ` S Ree b 
X S SE ee e E K.Z Rw 
zeg e V Ta = E E a Sé Le D - 
LE :5-iSEIBIDILSD gg 
E.SSETUZISV.f2 03S d 
C^ SS Lee Peter oe va o 
B~ Se Eens ZS "Zsé ew 29 d 
= maa vit . BS Ss 5 
Se SE ke aAA LX E 
ES oc ZE eg ".. Bea 
Cd = es 9 - Bue a = E 
D Bä sees E E £93 
E Ee e E E E a SE =F 
A ECKE wes E A a H SZ 
SÉ E SÉ =- IR- ceaOSotwt as ba Q 
Cas Segen äer E ac si roe ARO 
aw oo -— rh 
EE EE aa SE SE éi ede 
e cd e oeeec goe ée ARE 


OF VERDS. 


In this Dictionary the root of the verb is | formed by adding e to the Non; but 


always given first, immediately followed 
bv the Pres. Part. 
ail Verbs are also given. 


the ROOT or THEM of every Gaelic Verb. 
Jndicative Mood, Active Voice— 

lic Past Teuse of a Verb is formed by as- 
pr ‘he initial consonant of its root, as— 

aisg, fold (bon ` phaisg e, ke folded. Verbs 
beziuning with l, n, r, sc, 8g, sin, sp, st, do not 
take the aspirated forin, and when a Verb 
€ nnnences with a vowel the past tenseia formed 
by pretixing dh’? to theroct, as—dl, drink thou; 

h'ol e, he drank. 

The Future Teuse is formed by adding idh to 
the root of all Verbs, as—Buail, strike thou ; 
buaili:th wi, Z shal strile. When the last vo- 


wl ot Che root is broud «idk is added instead of | €358, 


(dh. 

Tue Jufinitive Mood and Pres. Prrt. are gener- 
ally tormed by adding ad^ to the root, as— 
Bail, sfrile, a bhualadh Zo strike; a’ bual- 
ad., striking. 1 


OF SUBSTANTIVES. 

In this Dictionary the noun is given in 
the Nom. Sing., immediately followed by 
tbe terminations of the Gen. Sing. and 
Nom. Plur. All irregular inflections of 
other casesare also given. When only one 
termination, a or a», is given, it is that of 
the Nom. Plur., and the Gen. Sing. is in 


-— 


Irregular inflections SM 





such cases the same as the Nom, Sing. 

When the only termination given is uot a 
or an, itis that of the Gen. Sing. and 
Nom. Plur., which in such cases are alike. 
General Rules —The Nom. and Dat. Sing. ef 


Mase. Nouns arealike. 
The Gen. and Dat. Sing. of Fem. Nouns are 


alike. 


‘fhe Gen. aud Vec. Sing. of Masc. Nouns are 
alike. 

fae Nem. and Voc. Sing. of Fem. Nouns are 
alike. 


| PLUR\L.—The Nom. Plur. is often like the Gen. 


Siug., or it.is formed by adding @, an, or ean to 
the Nom. tung. 

The Gan. Pi. is either like the Nem. Sing. or 
Nom. Pilar. 

The Dat. Pl. is like the Nom. PL, the older 
form in 46% or aibh being practically obsolete, 

The Voc. Pl.is the same as the Nom., aspira- 
ted aud ending in 4 oram. 


A noun with the article before it is definite, 
aud without tbe article, indefinite. 


A definite masc. noun aspirates the Gen. and 
Dat. Sing; ^ut a definzte fem. noun aspirates the 
Nom. and Dat. Siang. 

A definite noun beginning with d, 1, n, r, s, or 
t, does not aspirate any case. 


Nouns beginning with @ consonant, and whose 
last vowel is broad. 
The Gen. Sing.isusually formed by inserting 


; $ after the last vowel of the Nom. Sing. 


| Nouns beginning with a consonant, and whose 


last vowel is small. 
The Gen. Sing. masc. and fem. is generally 
ouns of 
more than one syllable genera ly terminate 
alike in all cases in the Singular. 
Novas commencing with a vowel. 


A definite masc. Noun requires (- efore it in 


Nom. Sing., -i Nom. and Dat Pl. 
The 2nd. Pers. singu!ar Zmperatire" Mood is | the om. en, EE tng NM AN A 


A definite fem. Noun requires & before it. in 
the Gen. Sing., and in the Nom. and Dat. Plur. 


A definite masc. Noun beginning with s fol- 
lowed by a vowel, or a liquid requires t- before 
itin the Gen. and Dat. Sing., and a definite 
fem. Noun in the Nom. and Dat. Sing. 


.OF ADJECTIVES. 
In this Dictionary Adjectives are given 
in the Positive form, followed by the ter- 


mination of the first Comparative. 
Adjectives are declined by number, gender, 
and form, and their oblique cases are form- 
ed from the Nom., according to therules already 
given for the formation of the cases of nouns. 

The Nom. Sing. Masc. and Fem. end alike, 
but the feminineis aspirated. 

‘The Gen. Sing. Fem. is formed from the Gen. 
Sing. Masc., by dropping the aspirated forin, 
and, if à monosyllable, it generally ends ine or a. 

The Plural of ali adjectives of one syllable 
endsin a (eifthe preceding vowel is small) 
&ud of those of moro than one syllable, like the 
Nom. Sing. 

The Nom. Dat. and Voc. Fem., and the Gen. 
and Voc. Masc. are aspirated in the Sing. either 
with or without the article. 

The Dat. of an adjective combined with a 
definite noun is aspirated in both genders. 


Pa 


xit 


Adjectives of twe or more syllables seldom 
add eto the Gen. “ing. ' : 

An adjective beginving with a vowel admits 
of no initial change, and one ending in a vowel 
admits of no final change. 
COMPARISON.—There are only two degrees of 
comparison in Gaelic, the Positive, and Com- 
parative, and a Superlative of extent. d 

The Comparative has three forms of Compari- 
son, the frst, second. and third. 

The first form 1s like the Gen. Sing, Fem., the 
second is formed from the first by changing e in- 
to id, and the third from the second by chang- 
ing id into ead; as— be. 
Ban, fair, 1stC.bàine, 2ndC.bainid, 3rd€. and 

Abst. Noun, bainead, whiteness " 
Crion, little, 1stC.crine, 2ndC.crinid, 3rdC.crin- 
ead, liitleness. . 

The three forms of comparison take the aspi- 

rated form, but no final change whatever, 


EXAMPLES. 


NOUNS WITH AND WITHOUT ARTICLE. 
A REGULAR BROAD VOWEL NOUN. 
Bard, masc. a poet. 
i Plur. 


ing. 

Nom. bàrd, a poet. bàird, poets. 

Gen. bàird, of a poet. bhàrd, of poets. 

Dat.airbard, on a poet. air bàird, (bàrdaibh) 
on poets 

Voc. a bhàird | Opoet! a bhàrda ! O poets! 

ES The Dative case of an indefinite Noun is 


plain, unless preceded by a preposition which 
aspirates the noun following, as—de, do, fo, &c. 


Am Bard, the poet. 
Nom. am bard, the poet. na bàird, the poets. 
Gen. a’ bhaird, of the poet.nam bard, of the poets 
D ie a’ bhàrd, onthe poet. do na baird [bàrd- 
' C do'n bhàrd, to the poet. [aibh] to the poets. 


Sing. Plur. | Sing. Plur. 
Prés, fem. a shoe. A’ bhrog, the shoe. 
Nom. bròg, brògan. a’ bhròg, na bro-an. 
Gen. bròige, bhròg. na bròige, nam bròg. 
Dat. bròig, brògan. Er bhròig na brògan. 


Voc. a bhròg ! a bhrògan ! 


_ A REGULAR SMALL VOWEL NOUN. 
Mir, masc., a piece Am mìr, the piece. 


Nom. mir, mìrean. am mir na mìrean. 
Gen. mire, mhirean. a’ mhire, nam mìrean. 
Daut. mir, mirean,-ibh.do’n mhìr, do na mìr- 


Voc. a mhìr ! a mhìrean | 
Poit, Jem., a pob. 


cean, or miribh. 
A" phoit, the pot. 


Nom. poit, poitean. @’ phoit, "a poitean 
Gen. poite, phoit. na poite, nam poit. 
Dat. poit, poitean,-ibh. do’n phoit, do na 


Voc. à phoit ! a phoitean ! poitean, -ibh. 
A FEMININE NOUN DECLINED WITH AN ADJ. 
Cluas mhór, a large ear. 

Plur. 


1 Sing. 
XNom.cluas mhór, cluasan móra. 
chluasan móra. 


Gen. cluaise móire, 
Dat. cluais mhóir, cluasan [or-aibh] móra. 
Voc. achluas mhór! a chiuasa móra ! 


A’ chluas mhór, the large ear. 
Nom. a’ chluas mhór na cluasan móra. 
Gen. na cluaise móire, nan cluasan móra. 
Pat. don chluais mhóir,do na. c uasan f-aibh] 


A MASCULINE NOUN DECLINED WITH AN ADJ. 
Uan beag, a little lamb. 
Nom. uan . eag, uain bheaga. 
Gen. uain bhig, uan beaga. 
Dat. uan beag, uain le heaga or uane 
[aibh beaga. 
Voc. uain bhig ! uana beaga !. 


An t-uan beag, the lit:le lamb. 
Nom. an t-uan beag, na h-uain bheaga. 
Gen. an uain bhig, nau uan beaga. 
Dat. do’n uan bheag, na h-uain bheaga, or 
[uanaibh beaga. 


COMPOUND NOUNS. 

When two Nouns comine to form a compound 
Noun the first is deciined regularly. The 
second has the Genitive form always and in all 
thecases. Itmay be Singular or Plural. Ifit 
is Singular, it takes the Aspiration ofan Adjeo- 
tive in agreement with the first Noun, if Plural 
it takes the Aspirate throughout. 

Singular. 


afull tide «hen-house anut-wo0d 
Nom. lan-mara taigh-chearc  coille-chnd 
Gen. làin-mhara taigh-chearc coille-chnd 
Dat. làn-mara taigh-chearc  coille-chnd 


Voc. a làin-mhara,a thaigh-cheare,a choille-chnd 


When a Noun ang Adjective combine to form. 
a Compound Noun both partsare regularly de- 
clined asif they stood apart. 

Coileach-dubh, e black-rock. 


Singular. Plural. 
Nom: coileach-dubh coilich-dnubha 
Gen.  coilich-dhvibh eoileach-dubha 
Dat. coileach-dubh coilich-dhubha 
Voc. a choilich-dhuibh a choileacha-dubha. 


Final n and ¿ of the first element prevente 
aspiration of initial dental of the second—aig. 
sgoil-dannsaidh, at a dancing-school. 

Whenan Adjective and Noun combine, the 
Adjective retains the Nominative form through- 
out, and the Noun isregularly declined and nas- 
the aspiration throughout. 


Dubh-fhacal, & dark saying 
Singulas. lural. 
Nom. dubh-fhacal dubh-fhacail 
Gen. dubh-fhacail dubh-fhacal 
Dat. dubh-fhacal dubh-fhacail 
Voc. a dhubh-fhacaik a dhubh-fhacla: 
VERBS. 


There are two Conjugations in Gaelic,—the 
First and the Second. Verbs beginning with 
a consonant, except f pure, are of the First con- 
jugation, and those beginning with a vowel or f 
pure are of the Second, 


A REGULAR VERB OF THE FIRST CONJUGATION. 
Paisg, Fold or wrap. 
—Actwe Voice— 
Simple Tenses. 
Indicative or Affirmative Mood 
Past Tense, , 
Sing.1. Phaisg mi, or do phaisg mi, I folded 
2. Phaisg thu, thou foldedst 
8. Phaisg e, he folded 
Plur.1. Phaisg sinn, we folded 
2. Phaisg sibh, ye folded 
8. Phaisg iad, they folded 
Future Tense. 
Sing. 1. Paisgidh mi. I shall or will fold 
2. Paisgidh tu, thou shalt or wilt fold. 
8. Paisgidh e, he shall or will fold 
Plur. 1. Paisgidh sinn, we shall fold 
2. Paisgidh sibh. ye shall fold 
9 Ua4agidh iad thev shalt fald 


- 





Negative or Interrogative Mood 
Pesi Tense. 
(an.., cha.., nach.., mur.., &c.) ! 
Sing. 1. An do phaisg mi ? did I fold ? {Sing.1. Bithidh mi air pasgadh, I shall have 
Bing. 1. Cna do phaisg mi, I did not fold | folded 
Sing. 1. Nach do phaisg mi ? did I not fold ? 2. Bithidh bu air pasgadh, thou shalt have 
Sing. 1. Mur do phaisg mi, if I did not fold | folded (folded 


e M MM M En, 
8. Bithidh iad a’ pasgadh, they shall be 
folding 


Future Tense, No. 2 Form. 





Future Tense. 8. Bithidh e air pasgadh, he shall have 
(am..,cha ph—, nach.., mur..) Plur.1. Bithidh sinn air pasgadh, we shall 
Sing. 1. ....paisgmi, (shall &c.) I fold have folded 


-— Subjunctive Mood. 2. gs sibh air pasgadh, ve RE ae 
ast Tense. "ENIM : 
‘Ging. 1. Phaisginr. I would fold 8. Bithidh iad air pasgadh, they shall have 
2. Phaisgeadb tu, thou wouldst fold Negative Mood 
3. Phaisgeadh e, he would fold (am bheil ? cha'n'eil, nach "el, mur 'eil) 
Plur. 1. Phaisgea: id, we would fold Present Tense. 
2. Phaisgeadu sibh, ye would fold Sing. 1. Cha’n eil mia’ pasgadh. &c., Iam nob 
8. Phaisgeadh iad, they would fold folding, &c., 
Future Tense Present Tense, No. 2 Form. 
Sing. 1. (Ma) phaisceas mi,(if) I shall fold Sing.l. Cha'n eil mi air pasgadh, &c., I have 
» Ppheaisesas tu, (if) thou shalt fold | not folded, &c., 


Past Tense. 
Sing. 1. Cha robh mı a’ pasgadh, &c., I was nob 


. un Diaisgeas e, (if) he shall fold 
Plurl. ,, phaisgeas sinn, (if) weshail fold 
» phai  assibh, (if) ye shall fold folding, &c., 
» püuai:geas iad, (if) they shall fold | Past Tense, No. 2 Form. 
lmperative Mood, Sing. 1. Ki ER mi air pasgadh, &c., I had not 
Sing. L EE e, me fold HE oe 
. Paisg. told thou i s i 
3. Paisg-adh e, let him fold Sing. 1. ie mi a passadi, &c., I shall nob 
Plur. 1. Paisgeamaid, let us fold Dam Doat NES Ce 
PME. fold ye Sing. 1. Cha bhi mi air pasgadh, &c., I shall 
3. Eeh ad, B anon fold fec Faye lollie ak 
nfinitive Mood. ; pot Nee A 
A pbasgadh, to fold. Subjunctive Mood. 


' 4 : Past Tense 

A' pasgadh. folding. (pres. part.) e ES. ; 

Air pasgadh, folded Sing. 1. Mi x mapadh, &c., I would be 
Past Tense, N o. 2 Form. 





-Compound Tenses, 


: Sing. 1l. Bhithinn air pasgadh, &c., I would. 
Affirmative Mood ; have folde el , , 
Present Terse, Future Tense. 


Sing. 3. Ma bhitheas mia’ pasgadh, &c., If I 
shall be folding, &c., 
Future Tense, No. 2 Form. 


Bing. 1. ha mia’ pasgadh, I am folding. 
= AN bus pec, thon an olding. 
3. Tha v ©’ pasgadh, he is folding sens : E 
Plu, 1. The siun a’ pasgadh, we are folding | Sivg. L eana ial pasgadh, Ze, If I 
2. Tha sibh a' pasgadh, ye are fuidiug p 
3. Tha iad a’ pasgadh, they are folding f .. Imperative Mood. r 
Present Tense, No. 2 Form. KR A ewer a’ pasgadh, let me be folding 
Sing. 1. Tha mi air pasgadb, I have folded Mu : 
2. Tha thu air pasgadh, thou hasi folded | sing 1. Bitheam air pasgadh, let me have folded 
3. Thaeair pasgadh, he has folded Infinitive Mood 
Plur. 1. Tha siun airspasgadh, we have folded | A(ordo) bhith a’ pasgadh, to be folding. 
2. Tha sibh air pasgadh, ye have folded | Air bhith a pasgadh, been folding. 
8. Tha iad air pasgadh, they have folded | Do bhith air pasgadh, to have been folding. 
Past Tense. | 
Sing. 1. Bh» mi a’ pasgadh, I was toldin 


g — Passive Voice— 
2. Bha thu a’ pasgadh, thon wast folding 


3. Bnae a’ pasgadh, he was folding Simple Tenses. 
Plur.1. Bha sinn a’ pasgadh, we were folding Affirmative Meod 

“2. Bha sibh a’ pasgadh, ye were folding | Past 

WR e * Po. Kat Wee TUE Sing.1i. Do phaisgeadh mi, or Phaisgeadh mt, & 
Bing. 1. Bha ini air pasgadh, I had folded e foided, &c., 
/ i sgad d : È 

A ana u E. ‘als m 7 C Sing.l. Paisgear mi, I shall be folded, &c.. 

Plur. 1. Bha sinn air paszadh, we had folded Negative Mood. 


?. Bha sibh air pasgadh, ye had folded (an ..,cha.., nach.., mur..) 


3. Isha iad air pasgadh, they had folded |, P5t- 


Bains’ Tense Sing.1. Cha do phaisgeadh mi, I was not folded. 
€ BUENO: x^ : Future. 
s. gemi ma reae; d eren) Sing 1. Cha phaisgear mi, I shall not be folded. . 


2. Bithidh tu a’ pasgadh, thou shalt be Subjunctive Mood. 
3. Bithidh e a’ pasgarth, he shall be folding| Past. : 
Plur. 1. Bithidh sinn a" pasgadh, we shall be,Sing.l. Phaisgteadh mi, I would befolded, &c., 
folding (folding | Future. 
<2, Bithidh sibh a’ pasgadh, ye shall be! Sing.1. Ma phaisgear mi, If I shall be folded, 


xiv 


Cee a a 


Imperative Mood. i , Tnfloitive Mood, 
Sing.1. Paisgtear mi, lot me be folded, &c. Air (ord) bhi pai«gte. to be folded. 
Participle. Do bnith air mo puasgadh, to have been foldad" 


Paisgte, Folded. 
gt e A REGULAR VERE: YF THE SECOND COKIUëis 


Compound Tenses. TiuN. 
Affirmitive Moo. 
Present. dort int. 
Sing.1. Tha mi paisgte, I amfolded, Ee, opes b Active yos, REC 
Present, No. 2. ded Simple Tenses. 
Siug.i. Tha miair mophasgadh, I have been iol- Mf od. Past. Fnture: 
Past. Affi ti Dh'ordv Orduichi dhs. 
Sing.1. Bha mi paisgte, I was folded. Ee e T'ordulo 3 Ord mi s 











Past, No. 2. {ded 
Sing.1. Bha mi air mo phasgadh, I bas been fol- 
Futu-e. 
Sing.i. Bithidh mi paisgte, I shall be folded. 
Future, No. 2. 
Siag.i. Bithidh mi air mo phasgadh, I shall 
have been folded 
vegative Mood. 


h 
Subjunctive, Divorduichina, F h'orduicheas 
»,1pp  Dh'orliicheamnaid 
Se Dh’ rduicheadn 
tu. e, sibh, & 


iad. 

Imperative, Ordaicheam ; Infinitive, QU 

adu. 
— Passive F'oice— 

Affirmative, Dh’orduicheadh, Orduichear 

Negative, Y’ordvicheadh, Ordniche r 

Subj uctive, Dwor uiehteadh, Dn'orduicheae 

Imperative, Orduicatear ; Participle, Orduichte 


Present. 
Sing. L Cia’n ’eil mi paisgte, I am not folded. 
Present, No. 2. 
Sing Cha’n ’eil miair mo phasgadh, X have not 
been folded. 
A VrREBEGINNINOG WITH F. 
Falaich, hide. 
—Actire Fotce— 


ras. 
Sios i. Cha rooh mi paisgte, I was not folded. 
Patt. No. 2. " 
Siu:.]. Cha robh mi air mo phasgadh, [had not 
been folded. 
Future. 

&inz.| Coa bhi mi paisgte, I shall not be folded 
Future, No. 2. j 
$iuy.i. Cha bhimi air mo phasgadh, I shall not 

bave been fold d. 
j Subjunctive Mood. 
^asb 


Sin, i. Bhithinn paisgte, I would be folded. 
Past, No. 2. 
Sing.1. Bhithinn air mo phasgadh, I would have 
been folded. 
Future. 
Si:g.1. Ma bhitheas mi paisgte, If I shall be 
folded, 
Fu: ure, No. 2. 
Sing.l.Ma bhitueas mi air mo phasgadh, lf I 
shall have been foldet. 
Imperative Mood. The Compound Tenses of Verbs of the 
Bitheam paisgte, Let me be folded 


M Second Conjugation are formed in exactly 
—— folded. haag dey Bëbee been |the same manuer as those of the First.. 


Mood. ast. Future. 
Affirmative, Dh’fhalaich, Falaichidh 
Negative, p'fbalaich, Falaich 


Subjunctive,  Dh'fhalaichinn, Dh’fhalaicheas: 
» lpp  Di'fhalaicheamaid 
A Dh’ fhalaicheadh 
tu,e, sibh, & 


iad. 
Imperative, Falaicheam ; Infin. Dh'fhalachadb: 


— Passive Voice— 
Affirmative, Dh’fhalaicheadh,Falaichear 
Negative, Dp'fhalaicheadh, Falaichear 
S:bjun tlve, Dbhb'fhalaichteadh,Dh'fhalaichear 
Imperative, Falaichtear; Part. Falaichte. 


PREPOSITIONAL PRONOUNS.. 


Singular, Plural; 
2 9 m. .9 f. 1 8 

: mi, me tu, thee, e, him, i, her, sinn, us, sibh, you, iad, them 
aig, at, agam agad aige aice againn agaibh aca 
air, on, orm ort air oirre oirnn oirbh orra 
anu, in, annam annad ann innte annainn auraibh annta 
as, out of, asam asad as aisde &sainn asaibh asua 
de, of, divm diot deth dith- dinu aibn uuuh 
e to, domh duit da dith duinn duibh doirbh 
eadar, between, eadarainn eaaaraibh — eutorra. 
fo, under, fodham fodhad fodha foipe fodhainn f.dbaibun topa 
gu, touards, chugam chugad cuuige eLuice  ehu,ainn cLugaibh chuca 
le, with, lean leat leis leatha  leimn lerbu lto 
miu, about, umam uinad uime uii pe ut,ainn un.aibh umpa 
0, from, Ui.m uat uaidh uaipe ` uainn uarbh uupa 
n, to, rium riut ris rithe rinn rbh riu 
rontih, before, roi: ham ronihad roimhe rowpe ronbainn rcmhaibh rompa 
thar, over, tharam tharad thairis arr tkairis orra, tharainn tharaibh tharta 


$roinib, thro’, tronibam trombud — üroinhe trumpe trowLainn trowhwbh = ticmpa 








GAELIC DICTIONARY 


(Mur faigh thu am facal «tha thi aziarraidh 
‘na àite fèin a réir ordu:h ovh-aibid 1, seall air 
ashon 's an Leasacha:lh.] 

[1f vou cannot find the word vou wan: in the 
body of the work, look for it in the Appendix.] 


ZX 


A, ailm, the Elm-tree. The rst. letter of 


the Gaelic alphabet, now in use. 
It has three sounds ; (1) both long and short. 
Long, like a in father as—al, brood, àr, 
slaughter. Short, like a in fat. cut, as pro- 
nounced by à Lowlander, but not as pronoun- 
ced by an Englishnian, as——falt, hair; 
cas, Joot. (2) both long and short, 
when immediately preceding dh and gh; in 
which state it has no correspoading sound in 
English. Long as adhradh, worship, teagh- 
lach, family. Short, as lagb, law ; cladh, 
trench. (8) short and obscure, like e in hin- 
der, as—an, am, a’, (he; ina, if; na’m, ua'n, 
Vy that; and the plural terminations -a,-an, as 
laghanna, laws ; beanntan, mountains. 

al es. d dat. masc., and nom. d dat. rem, of 
the art. The. 
Used before the three labials B M P, and the 
two palatals OandG, when aspirated, A’ 
mhàthair, the mother ; a’ choin, of thedog ; ai 
phàisde, of the child ; a’ ghruagach, the damsel, 
Aspirated F is preceded by an, as—an fhir, of 
the man; an fhreagairt, the answer. 

A, the sign of the Vocative case of substan- 
tives, as—A dhuine dhìomhain ! O vain man ! 

&, poss. pron. His, her, its. After a, his, the 
substantive is always aspirated, but after a, 
her, it is plain. 
Amhac, his son; a nighean, her daughter. A, 
his, is omitted and an apostrophe inserted in 
{ts place before a word commencing with a 
vowel or fh, and before a consonant when 
preceded by a prep, ending in a vowel ; as— 
gu 'mhac, tohis son; 'fhalt, his hair; ’aghaidh, 
bis countenance, In the fem, an h- is interpo- 


c 


2 

sed between a, her, and the noun, as—a h-each 
her hors, ; a h-cun, her bird. When the fh is 
followed by & consonant, the pronoun is re- 
tained in the masc., as—8 fhliuiche, Ws wetness, 
Cha b'urrainn ial a thogail no ’fhagai', they 
could neithe: lift nor leave him it. his lift- 
ing or leaving : theab iad a moarbhanh, 
they hud almost killed him, Vit.-—his killing.) 
In « nigheun, hi daughter, n is aspirated in 
pr nunciation, but the letter 2 is not written 
after l, n, r, in Scottish Gaelic. In some 
instances the diference between the plain 
and aspirated sonn of these letters is only 
to be detected by & keen ear, while in others 
it is easily distincuishe le. 

a, rel. pron.. gen. d dat. Who, which, whom, 
that, what. 

Gach gaisgeach a b'aosda, dàn'* each hero 
that was ag-«d and bold; a’ bhean a bha 
tinn, the woman that was sick; an cù a bha 
caillte, the dog that was lost; na daoine a 
chaidh seachad, the men that went by. 
**Sometimes a sign of the past tense, 'Nuair 
a thubhairt erium, when he said to me. 

a, prep. 1 At, to, into. 2 About, in the act of. 

á,prep. Out of. 

á taigh na daorsa, out of the house of bondage s 
á tir na h-Eiphit, out of the land of Egypt; A 
baile, out of town, from home. 

a’, prep. for ann, in. Ciod a chuir sin a’ d 
ities? what put that into your head? 

a, particle used in adverbs, phrases, or before 
numerals when not followed by nouns, as—a 
bhos, on this side ; a dha, two. 

a’, sign of the pres, part. (for ag. ) Used before 
consonants, as—a’ fas, growing ; a’ dùnadh, 
shutting ; a’ dol, going. 

a, sign of the infin. mood, as—a bhualadh, to 
strike ; a cheangal an duine, to bind the man. 

[Always aspirates word following. ] 

ta,** Chariot, car, waggon. 2 Ascent, hill, pro- 
montory. 

aaid,f sf. Magpie, see pigheid. 

tab-,** nogative particle. 

tab,** s.m. Water. 

ab, A, -achan, s. m. +Father, title of respect, 
2 lord, abbot. 

tab, past. def. v. Is, for a b’,—see bu. 


ab 


gb ! int. Fie! for shame! 
tava. s.m. Causo, matter, business. 
aba, 3m. Abbot. Anni à ni an dara h-aba subh- 
ach, ni e dubhach an t-aba eile, what makes 
cune abbot glad makes the other abbot sad. 2 
gen sing. of ab. 
ababt int. Fie; On, for shame! pshaw ! 
avan,* s.m. Filth, dirt. 
ababach,* a. Filthy, dirty. 
ababachd,* s.f. Filthiness, dirt. 
ababardaich*, a, E repetition of abab. 
tanac,** -aic, see abhag. ' 
tabach, s.m. Entrail:, pluck. 2 Proclamation. 
abaciiala, -aidh, s. m. Ripening, state of ripen- 
ing. 2 Progress toward maturity. Ag a—, 
pr. part, v. abaich e : 
abhachd, -an, 3. f. Abbey, see abaid. 2 Priorship 
abachd, s. J. ind. see abaichead. 
fabachnd, 8.J. ind. Exploits. 2 Gain, lucre. 
tabact, s. f. Taunting, ironical joking. 
aladh, -aidh, -ean, s$. m. Syllable, uiterance. 
2+ Satirical poem. 
&'22,** -aig, Sf. Voice. 
avaich, a. Ripe, mellow, mature. 2**iteady, 
prepared, expert. 
abaich, v.a. n. Ripen, mellow, maturate, 
become ripe. 2 Bring to maturity. ` 
aiaichead, -eid, s. m. Ripcness, matnrity. 2 
Pertness. Tha e dol an abaichead, ii is grow- 
iny riper and riper. > 
abaichear, fut. pass. of v. abaich. Shall or will 
be ripened. 
abaicheas, fut. sub. act. v. abaich. Ma-dh’ab- 
aicheas e, f it. shall ripen. 
abaid, -ean, SE (ala) Abbey. 2 Cowl or 
hood of a monk. A’ triall chum na h-abaid, 
strolling to the abbey. 
abaid,** s.m. Abbot. Lios an abaid, (he abbot's 
court, 
abaideachd, s. f. ind. Abbacy. 
abaideal,* s.f. Colic. 
abaidealach*, a. Griping. 
abaidh*, a. (for abaicu) Pert. Duine abaidh, 
a pert person. 
tabaid4,** 8. f. Bud, blossom. 
fabail,** s. f. Death. 
abailt, -e,-ean, 8.f. Abbey. 12 Death. 
abair, v.a. d n. irr. Say, utter, affirm, express. 
Active Voice— 
IND. past thubhairt mi &c., 7 said, Also 
dubhairt—Sfewart. 
fut., their mi, &c., Z shall or will say, 
ERR. past (an? nach? cha) dubhairt 
mi, &»., : 
» Jut. (an ? nach ? cha'n) abair mi, &c., 
SUBJUNC. past (ged theirinn, (thongh) 7 
would say ; ged theireadh tu, &c. though ‘nou 
wonldst say; ged theireamaid, tourh we 
would say ; ged theireadh sivi, &c., though 
you would say, 
» fut. (ma) their mi, &c., (if) J shall say, 
IMPER. Abaiream, let me say, 
INFIN. A radh, to say, 
PRES. PART. Agradh, saying, 
Passive Voice— . 
IND. past thuirteadh e, i£ was said, 
» fut. theirear e, it shall be said, 
INTER. past (an? nach ? cha) dubhairteadh 
Jul. (an ? nach ? cha’n) abairear, 
ast (ge) theirteadh, 
s ut. (ma) theirear. 
tf" Abur lias anotner form of the Past Sahi, 
used after interr. and neg. particles . as (*t 7) 
theirinn, if Z would say ; but (nan) adaraiuis. 
The Passive has also a parallel im; ors. form 
—(ma) theirteadh, tf it would be said ; but 
(nan) abairteadh e. 





INT 


UBJ. 


2 


abhagach 


Wa abair ach beagan, agus abair gu math e, 
say but little and say it well. 

abaiream, l per. sing. imp. act. of abair. 

abairear, imp., & fui, ind. pass. v. abair. Some 
times contract: d “abrar,” as—Abrar e, letit 
be suid, or ti wil: Le said. 

abairion, irr. pt. subj. v abair. 

tabairt, sf. Accoutrements, apparatus. 2 Cus- 
to:u, usage, habit. 

abairt,*s..f. Babbling 2 Recrimination, scold- 
ing. 3 Politeness in idiom. 4 Education. 5 
Specch, articulation. 

abaisb -ean, a.m. Brat, impudent person. 

apa't, sf. L seeabaid. 2 speech. 

tabalta,* a. Expert, proficient, masterly, able. 
2 Strong, active, powerful. 

taba.tachd, s.f. Ability, proficiency, dexterity. 
2 Strength. 

T4batcaiche,* s.m. Proficient, adept. 

tavaoi, 8f. Descent, sun-setting. 

tabar, -air, -ean, 8 m. 1 Conilue-ice, place where 
two or more streams meet. 2 Marsh, bog, fen, 
fenny grour.l 3see abairt. 

abaraen, @. (abair) Bold, courageous. 2 (abar) 
Fenny, hoggy, marshy, of, or pertaining to 
4 marsh. 

atarachd, sf. Marshiness, bogginess. 

abaralun, see abairinn. 

abardair. s.m. (n bair) Dictionary. 

apardairiene, s.m. Lexicographer. 

acarrach,* sf. Bold masculine female. 

-c a. lndeiicate, as a female. 

a^"arrachd,* s.f. see abartachd. 

ab:rsgaic,* -ean, see aparsaig. 
abarta. for abartach. Tha e ro abarta, 
too }.ert—Isles. 

abar ach, a. (abair) Bold, daring, impudent, 
talkative. 

abartachd, sf. Mcde of speech, idiom. 2 Lo- 
qqseier. 8* I delicacy, as ofa female, impu- 

ence, turbulonce. 

abartair,* s.m. Babbler. 2**see abardair. 

abvartairiche, see abardairiche. 

àbh, -a, -an, s.m. Hand-net, hose-net, sock-net, 
landing-net. 2 Skill, dexterity. $** Instru- 
ment. 14 Water. 

abh, s.m.ind. Barking of a dog. 

abhac, -aic, -an, 8.m. see abhag. 

abhacan, see abhagan. 

àbhacas, -ais, s.m. Diversion, sport, merriment, 
2 Ridicule. 3** Boisterous day. Ball àbhacais, 
a laughing-stock, fear an abbacais, a merry 
Fellow, ri abhacais ann an teaghlach a mhoir- 
eir, making diversion in his lordship's family. 

tàbhach, -aiche, a. see àbhachdach. 

àbhactd,* sf. ind. Sport, diversion, joy, hu- 
mour, hilarity. 2** Gibe, irony. 'N a aobhar 
spòrs agus àbhachd, a cause of. sport and di- 
version. 

àbhachdach, -aiche, æ. Humorous, merry, joyful, 
joyous, jolly. 2** Corpulent. 8** Inclined to 
pe jesting or raillery. Gach creutair a’ 

zail an cinn gu h-àbhachdach, each creature 
lifting their heads joyjully. 

abbachdaiche, s.m. Hurmvrous person 2**Railer. 

—— —— — —, comp. of a. àbhachdach. 

àbhach 'ai],** a. Joyful, humorous, jocose. 

àbhachdas,-ais, see àbhacas. 

àbhadh,** -aidh, s.m. see Abh. 2 Fold, hollow. 
3 Instrument. 4 Flyingcamp. 6 Abode. 6 
Lampoon. 

abha th-citil*, sr Musical instrument. 

a hag, -alg,-ar. (2 L) s Terrier Mrt Dwarf, 
spectre 8** in derision, petulant person. An 
&hhaz & bh'aig Fioun, the terrier F. had. 

abhazach, -aiche, (abhag) a. Like a terrier, of, 
or relating to & terrier, 2 Petulant, snappish, 





see 
(abartach. 


he is 


ahhacail 


waspish, carping, yelping. 

abhnagail, a. mei dn 

&»ha au, n. pl. of abhaz. 

atbagas. ais an. sf. Flying rumour, surmise. 
Gheit:h duine dna.s na. h-at hagais, a man will 
receive the rewardof false suspicion. 

at baíc.gen.sing. of at hac. 

f^..haiche, comp. of a. a hach. 

a hatg, gen. sing. of abhag. 

al.liail, s m. tDesth. 2 gen. sing. of abhal. 

abbaill, gen. sing. of abhall. 

a bhàin, see a hàn. 

al hainn, gen.s.a.thne,n. & gen. pl. aibhnich- 
ean. $J. River, stream. Bruach na 
h-aibhne, the bank of the river ; far an taine 
an abba nn", ann a's móa fnaim, where the 
river is shallowest it makes most noise. 

abhaioneach, -eiche a. Fluviai, abounding in 
rivers, of, or pertaining to, a river. 

abhair, gen. sing. of àbhar. 

k thais, mi see àbhaist. 2+ Bird. 

à chais ach, see absiaisteach. 

&^"aiseachd, see àbhaisteachd. 

è. haist, sf Habit. usage, custom, manner, 
consu»tude. A’ leanachd na h-àbhaist a b’ 
&oibhinn. following the habit that once was 
pleasant ` cha e sod àbhaist Theadbaich, 
that was not Tedaco’s custom: tha thus’ an 
sin war à b’ abha st, or mara b’abhaist dhuit, 
you are there as usual. 

abhaisteach, -tiche,a@. Usual. habitnal, custom- 
ary, adhering to custom, according to custom. 

6c -— sf. Customariness, frequency, 

abit. 

Abhaisteir, see Abharsair. 

abha:stiche, comp. of a. àbhaisteach. 

abhal, ail, abhlan, see ' bhal. 

abnall, -aill ° s.m.Apple-tree. 2 Orchard. 

abha'lach, see ubhalach. 

abha!l-tiadhaich, see ubhal-fiadhaich. 

a’ hall- hort, see nbhal-ghort. 

abhall-ghortach, see ul-hal-ghortach. 

a bhàn, adv. Down, downwards. 

abhar, -air, -an, see aobhar. 

&bharach, -aiche, see aobharach. 

tabharach,** -aich, am. Youth under age, whe 
a't- asa man. 

Abharachd, sf. ind. see aobharachd. 

al har: ,* s./ Silly est or joke. 

ab arr, pen, Above. 2 Down, down from. 

a! bharra h,* a. Given to silly jests or jesting. 

a bha rachd, prep. Besides, over and above. 
A bharra hd air a’ cheud ghorta, besides the 
first famine. 

Abharsair, -ean, $.m. The Devil, Satan. 





h e e 
EE A.C, s.Feast, festival, rich enter- 
& h. -t»dh. $ Ps 
a hi ah ach, s m. Barking of a dog. 

& ad «an, sf. (àbha hd) Jest, anything 
ind rous. 2 Pleasantry. 


abhca.dca:h, -eiche, a. 
make merry. 

abhcaideachd, s.f. ind.  Pleasantry, 
inerriment, cheerfulness. 

tàbh ciü!l, see abhadh-ciuil. 

&!h.il? (for am bheil ?) v. irr. see bi. 

ee, -aiche, Mute, dumb, speechless, 
silent. 

abhlach, see ablach. 

abhliain, gen. sing. and n. ph. of abhlan. 

abhlan, -ain, -an, s.m. Wafer, round cake. 
see annlan. 3**n.pl. of abhal & abhall. 
Abhlan coisrigte, consecrated wafers. 

abhlanach,** a. Wafery, like a wafer. 

ab hlar, air,-airean, see amhlair. 

&bh-mh àthair -ar, 3/. Mother abbess, 


umorous, sportive, to 


gaiety; 


9** 


3 


abultachd 


abh a,(foraibhne) gen. & dat. sing. of abhainn. 

abhnas, -aig, sf. A little river. 

a bhobuig ! see boban. 

a bhos, adv. On this side, here. An taobh a 
bhos, on this side ;thall’sa bhos, hither and 
thither. 

tubhra,** a. Dark. 

abhra, -an, 

abhrad, -aid, -aidean, see fabhra. 

abhradh, -aidi, -aidhean 

abhrais, gen. sing. of anbras. 

abhran, -ain, see org, 2n. pl. of abhra. 

abhras, -ais, s.m. **Yarn. 2 Spinning. 3 Flax, 
wool. 4 Worsted, a y materials of woollen 
mannfacture. 5 Maunal prodnce. 6**Ready 
answer. Ag abhras, spinniny ` cloinh abh- 
rais, oiled wool, wool prepared for spinning. AC 

abhrasach, -aiche,a. Ot, or oelonging to yarn, 
or spinning of woul. 2 Well supplied with 
materials of wooilen manufacture. 8 Enga- 
ged in honse or home thrift. 

abhrasaiche, -ean, s m. Carder of wool or flax. 

tabhron, s.m. Cauldron. 

abhsadh, -aidh, -ean, s.a Down-haul or slack- 
euing of a sail. 

tabhsan,** -ain,s.m. Hollow. 2 Furrow. 

abhsporay, -aig, -an, s.f. Paunch. 2 Tripe. 3 
Stomach of a cow. 

abhuinn, s.f. see abhainn. 

abhuinneach, a. see alshainneach. 

àbhuist, sf. see abbaist. 

abhull,it s.m. see abhall. ‘Bu tu m'abhull ag 
m'übliian"—TFilidh nain beann, p. 75 

abbus, nis, -àn, s.m. sce amhas. 

labile, s.m. Wooded hill. 

ablach, -aich, pl. -aich, & -aichean, sm Man- 
gied carcase. 2 Carrion. 3 Remains of a 
creature destroyed by wild beasts. 4 Brat, 
term of personal contempt. Ablach gun deo, 
a breathless carcase. 

ablaich, gen. and voc. sing., and nom. pl. of ab- 
lach. Ablaich tha thu ann! brat that you are! 

— — —,* v.u. Mangle, spoil. 

ablaoch, auch, sm. (ab neg.tlaoch) Brat, 
pithiess person. see a lach 4. 

ab gen. and voc. sing., and nom. pl. of ab- 

ao h. 

tabrad, a. Exalted. 2 Far removed. 

abram, contr. of abaiream. 

abran, -ain, -an, s.m. (aparan) Oar-patch or 
sheath on à boat’s gunwale, to prevent the 
oars wearing it down 2**see abhran. 

tabraun,** s.m. Bad news. 

t ** a. Lustful, lecherous, lascivious. 

Abraon, -aoin, s.m. April. 

abrar, fut. ind. pass. of v. abair. 

absaloid,** s.f. Absolution. 

abstoil, see abstol. 

abstol, -oil, [ &-olan] s.m. Apostle. Litir an 
abstoil, the letter of the apostle; litrichean nan 
abstol, the letters of the apostles. 

abstolach, -aiche, a. Apostolical, of, or belong- 
ing to an apostle. 

abstolachd, s.f. ind. Apostleship. 
a., grace and apostlesh ip. 

ab! inf. An ancient war-cry of the Gaidheal. 

abnchadh, -aidh, s.m. 

abnich, a. and v. 

abuicheachd, s. 

abuichead, 8. 

abuichear, v. 

abuicheas, v. 

abuidh,* a. 

&buidheachd,* s.f. ind. see abaichead. 

tabnirt, s.f. Speech, conversation. 

fabulta, a. see abalta. 

tabultachd, s. f. ind. 











Gras agus 


see aba 





see abaltachd. 


&C 


ac, a, -an & -anna, s.f. 

łac, -a, ëm. Denial, refusal. 
tongue. 

aca, or ac’, prep. pron. (aig+iad) Of them, on 
their side, with them, at them, on them, in 
their possession, their. Tha méran ac’ ag 
radh, many of them say; tha e aca 'na sheir- 
bhiseach, he ?s with them as a servant; aca 
siod, in the possession of those people; an taigh 
aca, their house, tnat is, an taigh a th'aca, lit. 
the house which is to them; chaidb ac’ air a 
cheannsachadh, they conquered him; théid ac' 
orm, t ey shall conquer, or yet the better of me. 

facadamh, -aimh, s.m. Academy. 

acaid, -e, - ean, sf. Pain, hurt, a transient lan 

| cinating pain, stitch. Is trom an acaid a tha 
^m lot, intense ix the pain that is in my wound. 

acaideach, -diche, a. Uneasy. 2 Painful. 3 
Sickly. 4 Groaning. 

tacaideadh, -didh, s.m. Inhabitant, tenant. 

acaidiche, comp. of a. acaideach. 

acain, -e, -in, s.f. Moan, sob, sigh. 
plaint. 3 Wailing, weeping, murmur. 
for acfhuinn. Gun och gun acain, without 
alas or moan: crathaidh e a cheann 's e ag 
acain, he shall shaxe his head moaning,—lit. 
and he moaning. 

acain, pr part. acain, v.n. Sigh, moan. 

acaineach, -niche, a. Plaintive. 2 Distressful. 
8 Sickly. 4 Sobbing. 5 Causing sorrow or 
wailing. Gutha., a sobbing voice. 

acainear, Jr, s.m. (acain+fear) Complainer. 
2 Mourner, sobber, wailer. 8**One who ails. 

acainich,* s.f. Grief. 2 Sobbing, plaintive 
moaning. Iadsana b'aille m'acainich, they 
who would desire to partake of my grief. 

acainiche, comp. of acaineach. 

——————,**8.m Wailer, mourner, 
weeper, complainer. 

acair, acrach, acraichean, s.f. Anchor. 2 A.C. 
Stone, originally one used as an anchor. 3 
Acre of land. 4(AG) Small stack of corn on 
field. 5(AG) Hand-screw. Acair an anama, 
the anchor of the soul; ceithir acraichean, 
Jour anchors. 

acair-pholl, -phuill, s.m. Anchorage, road for 
ships. 2 Harbour. 

acairseid, -ean, sJ. Port, harbour, haven. 2 
Anchorage. 

tacais,** s.f. 

Facalla,** s. 

acan,s.&v. see acain. 

acanaich, seeacainich 

tacar,** a. Sharp, sour, bitter. 

acarach, -aiche, a. Gentle, mild. 2 Obliging. 
4 ere 4 Kind, merciful. 5**Respect- 
ul. 

acarachd, s.f.ind. Gentleness, mildness. 2 
Moderation. 3 Kindness, mercifulness. 4 
Respectfulness. Gun acarachd, without mer- 
cy; ghlac e sinn le h-acarachd, he grasped 
ws (our hands) with kindness. 

jacaradh, -aidh, s.m. see ocar. 

acaraiche, comp. of a. acarach. 

facaran, -ain. sm Lumber. 

acarra,* a. see acarach. 2 (JM) W. Isles— 
Handy, useful. Seo agad spaid cho acarra ’s 
a laimhsich mi riamh, here’s as handy a spade 
as I ever used. 

acarrachd,* see acarachd. 

acarsaid,* see acairseid. 

acartha,t s. Profit. 

——,** a. see acarach. 

aca-sa, Emphatic form of prep. pron. aca. 

&Ca-8aD, ” IT 99 oo 

acasdair, see acastair. 

ecastair, ean, $.f. Axle-tree. 


see achd. 
2 Son. 3 Speech, 


2 Com- 
4** 


sobber, 


Poison. 


Conversation. see agalladh. 


4 acfhuinneach 


tacastaran, -ain, pl. -ain. [& -ana], see acast&fb» 


acduinn, see acfhuinn 
acduinaeach, », acfhuinneach. 
acduinniche, », acfhuinniche. 


acfhuinu, -e, -ean, s.f. Apparatus, implements, 
utensils, tackle, tools, appendages of anykind. 
2 Salve, ointment. 3 Harness, equipa e. 4 
Rigging. Acfhuinn an t-saoir, the carpenter’s 

tools; a. airson na coise, a salve for the ( din 
Joot; a. gunna, the lock af a gun; a. thogallac 
distilling imp.ements; a. an eich, the horse's 
harness; a. na slaite, the tackling of the fishing 
rod; a. na luinge, the rigging of the ship; 8G. 
sgrìobhaidh, writing utensils; a. is inneil 
ciuil, instruments of music; a. shaoirsneachd, 
joiner’s or carpenter’s tools; a. na cartach, cart 
harness; 8. threabhaidh, ploughing harness 
a. chliathaidh, harrowing harness. 
PARTS OF A HORSE'S HARNESS—(see illustra- 
tion. 

1 Sréinean dùbailt. double reins.*'Srian''in 
W. Isles generally means the head gear 
and the lines together; ‘‘claigionn” the 
part of the reins about the head.—J.M. 

2 Strap no Iall na h-iasgaid, haunch-sirap. 

3 Braid, collar. Bràighde,—W.1sles, J.M. 

4 Braid chluaisean, hames. Siollachan, 
— W. Isles, J.M. 

b Srathair, saddle. 

A riding-saddle is Diollaid. 

6 Briogais, bree. ping 

6A à breech-chains.—J.M. (not seen 
in illust.) 

7 TEE back-chain, in groove of sad- 

e. 

8 Cromagan na briogais, breeching-hooks. 

9 Giort na cartach, cart belly-band. 

10 Guailleachain, shoulder-slings, draught- 
chains, shouider-chains. An tarruinn, 
—W. Isles, J.M. 

11 Sparrag. aill-bheul, cabstar,  **bit. 

parrag, bridle-bit.—D.M. Mirionnach 
Paz” oi bit in horse’s mouth.— W. Isles, 

12 Gogalaich, blinders. 

13 Arannach sréine, bridle-rein. 

14 Iall na leasraidh, loin-strap. 

15 Bann-droma, back-band. Druim (druim- 
eal—Tiree)—J.M. 

16 Sineachain-tarruing, trace-chains. An 
tarruinn— W.Jsles, J.M. 

17 Cromag-tharruing, draught-hook. 

18 Greallag, stretcher,—W. Isles, J.M. 

19 Giort, belly-band. (not seen in illust. of 
shaft-horse. ) Tarrach (from ‘‘tarr’’ 
belly) —-W. Isles, J.M. 

20 Bonn dronnain, rump-band. 

21 Sroinein, Strap across the nose.—W.Isles. 

22 Smeachan, Strap below the jaws—W. 
Isles, J.M. 

23 Cruipean, eislean, braman, **erupper. 
(Strap through which the tail passes, 
Sech, in illust.) Gurpan, bod-chrann— 
D.M. 

24 Bann-bhraid, | **Band (strap joining 

Truis-bhraid, the hames.) e 
PLOUGHING HARNESS.—W Isles, J.M. 

Drumaunach, back-band, used to keep the 
traces (sintean) in position. The other 
parts are Srian, braighde, and siollach- 
an, Wë above. 

RIGGING OF a SHIP, see long. 

PARTS OF A BOAT, see bata. 
TOOLS or IMPLEMENTS used in trades, see 

under respective trades. 
&cfhninneach, -niche, a. Equipped. 2 har- 
nessed. 3 Expert. 4 Potent. 5**Of, or Det: 





avhdarra 











ANNIA a A Un Gurl kel a 





` 
Du w 
A A 
e = 
* x 
Aks 3 s 
T SP ES 
jus 
AN 3 


CON 


Nc» e-e- 


taining to tools, tackling, harness,or furnitufe. 

aefhuinnean, n. pl. of acfhuinn. 

acfhuinniche, comp. of a. acíhuinneach. 

acfuinn, see acfhuinn. 

acfuinneach, see acfhuinneach. 

ach! int. Ahlan! expression of disgust. 

ach, conj. But, except, besides. Ach mise, but 
me ; cha d’rinn neach ach thus’ e, none but 
you did it; ach cosiod air a’ cnarraig mar cheò 
but who is yonder on the hill like mint ? dh’ 
fhalbh iad uile ach a h-aon, they eil d-parted 
but one; ach beag, almost, nearly; ga vheidh 
mi faclair mur bi an clodn-bhualadn ach air 
an dara taobh a mhàin, J will take a Dictio- 
nary if the printing be en one side (of the 
paper) only. The literal Eng. trans, of this 
sentence—“ if the printing be not but on one 
side” &c., conveys an exactly opposite mean- 
ing. Bheirinn dhuit each gu bheil thu gun 
chiall, I would give it to you were it not that 
you are without understanding; be mo 
chomhairle dha a’ cheud bair a ghabhail 
ach i a bhith onorach, 1 would advine him to 
take the first work if honest. See also "ach 
am.’ 


tach, -a,3.f. Skirmish. 

+——-, -a, -an, s.m. Mound, bank. 

——, see achadh. 

achadh, -aidh, pl. -aidhean, -aidhnean, & ach» 
ańna, sm. Field, plain, meadow. Cornfield 
newly cut or ready for reaping. Bha sinn a’ 
ceangal sguab ’s an achadn, we were bindin 
sheaves in the field; an t-achadh a cheannaic 
Abraham, the field that A. bought. 

achaidh, gen. sing. of achadh. 

t , an, 8f. Given in some dictionaries 
with the meaning "home" as the derivation 
of ‘‘dachaidh,” which should be do+tnaigat. 

achain, -e, -ean, s.f. Prov. for athchuinge. 

achaineach, see athchuingeach. 

achainiche, see athchuingiche. 

ach am, ach an, adv. ‘ill. Fuirich thus’ an 
sinach gus an téid mise far a bheil thu, ’s 
bheir mise ort e ! wait you but till I come 
where you are, and I'll give it to you ! 

tachamair, -e, a. Short, abridged. 2 Timely, 
soon. 

tachamaireachd, at ind. Abridzing, abridg- 
ment. 

achanaich, -e, -ean, s.f. see athchuinge. 

—— ——,* v.n. see athchuingich. 

a chaoidh, adv. For ever. Cha till ea chaoidh, 
he shall never return; a seo suas a chaoidh, 
henceforth and for ever. 

tachar, air, s.m. Distance. 

lacharadh, aidh, -ailhean, s.m. Sprite. 2 
Dwarf, diminutive person. 

achasan.-ain, -an, see ah: ‘hasan. 

achasanaich, see achmhas:naich. 

ach beag, adv. Almost, well nigh. 

achd, pl. -anna, 8.7. Act, statute, decree. 2 
Deed. 8 Case. 4 Account. 5 State, condi- 
tion. 6 manner, way. 7* Objection. Ismér 
na h-achdanna a th’agad you have many 
objections; air aon achd, on any account; air ng 
h-uile achd, at all events; Achd Pàrlamaid, an 
Ac! of Parliament; airan achd seo, in this way. 

,*v.a. see achdaich. 

t , 8f. Body. 2 Peril. 3 Nail. 4 Claw. 

achdaich, v.a. Enact, decree, 

—————, 8. Law, established rule. 

achdaidh,(AG) adv. Certainly. Gu h-achdaidh, 
according to rule. ^ 

achdair, -drach, -draichean, 8f. see acair. 

achda'r-pholl, see acair-pholl. 

achda'rseid, see acairseid. 

achdarra, @ Methodical. 2 Expert, skilfmk 











achiartba 


achiartha, see &chdarra. 

tichdra,** er, Naval expedition. 

tachdran, A1. sm., Foreigner, adventurer. 

tachdran:.ach, a. Foreign, adventurous. 
——————-,$.m. see achdran. 
see acfhuir n. 

achduinneach, see acfbuinneach. 

a cheana, adv. Already. 

a chéile, Each other. 

a chianamh, «dv. A little while ago.— Forbes'G. 

fachiar, a. Sharp, sour, bitter. 

a chionn, adv. Because, as. 

achladh, -aidh, s.m. Fishery, art of fishing. 

&chlaid.-e. -ean, sf. Chase, pnrsuit. 

tachlaidh, a. Smouvth, fine, soft. 

achlais, -e, -ean, 8f. <Arim-pit, ‘‘oxter,”’ 
**Arm. 3 Bosoin, breast. 
his crm; ràimn 'g an snioinh aun an achia. 
nan àrd-thonn, oars twisting in 1} Loa m €; 
lofty waves; lag na h-achiaise, the a. m-pit 

achlais-dheireaih, -aise-leiridh, -ean-deiridh, 
s.f. Stern-collar (of a boat.) 

&chlaise, gen. sing. of achlais. 

achlaisean, sf. pl. Knees to rowers’ benches 
(in a boat.) 

ach'aisich, v.a. Put under thearm. 2 Cherish. 

achlais-thoiseach, -aise-toisich, -ean-toisich, 8.f. 
Bow-collar of a boat. 

achlan, -a/n, s.m. Lamentation. 

acblas,** -ais, 8.f. Bundle, little truss. 
achlais. 

achlasan, -ain, s.m. Armful. 2 Anything car- 
ried nnder the arm. 3 Parcel. : 

achlasan Chaluim Chi!le$, ./f. (lit. armpit 
package of St Columba.) Perforated St. 
John’s wort, sez eala bhuidhe. 

a chlisge, adv. Soon, in a short time, instantly. 

fachmhaing, a. Powerful. . 

achmhaingidh, €. see acfhuinneach. 

achmhas, v.a. see achmhasanaich. 

achmhaxaich, 3s T 

achmhasain, gen.sing. & nom. pl. of achmhasan. 

achmhasan, -ain, 8. m. Reproof, reprimand, 
rebnke, scold. 2 Reproach. Thug 'athair 
achmhasan da, his falher rebuked him; ach- 
mhasain teagaisg, the reproofs of instruction; 
fuath no eud no achmhasan, nor hate nor 
jealousy nor reproach. 

achinhasanach, -aiche, a. Causing a rebuke, 
liable to rebuke, of, or pertaining to rebuke, 
reprehensible. 

achiuhasanaich, v.a. Rebuke, reprove, chide, 
censure, reprehend. 

achinhasanaiche, 8. m. One who rebukes or 
ceusures, animadverter. 

———— ————-, comp. of &. achmhasanach. 

acnambhach,** -aich, s.m. Food of a labourer. 

a chóir, prep. Near to. 

fachran, -ain, s.m. Intricacy, entanglement, 
perplexity. 

achrannach, -aiche, a. Intricate, entangled. 
2 what retards progress, or confounds. 

achrannaich, v.g. Entangle. 

tachsal, s.m. Angel. 

tacht, see ach, conj., and achd. sf. 

tachta, s. see achd. 

tachtain, v. see achdaich. 

achuinge, see athchuinge. 

achuingeach, see athchuingeach. 

a chum, prep. For, in order that, for the pur- 
pose of. 2Therefore. 8 To, towards. 

tacmhaing see acfhuinn. 

tacmhaingeach, see acfhuinneach. 

tacinhuivg,s.f. Address,ability,power,strength, 
influence. 

—, v.a. Subdue, vanquish, conquer, 

overcome. 

tacobhar, s.m. 


achduinn, 


2 see 


Avarice, covetousness. 


2|tacranu, -ainn, s.m. 
Fo ’actilais, under 


atha 


*acobhrach, a. Inor inately desirous, covetous. 

facomail, v.a. Leap together. cor grogute, 
increase.—8.f. Assewoly, Meeting, gither iz. 

tacon, -cin, -ean, 8.97. Rolina nega d ND 

+acor, -OÌT, $.084. see ocar. 

Jacorach, see acrach. 

facra, see aair. 

acrach, -aicbe, a. Hungry. 

,** -aich, s.m. Hurry person. Diadh do'm 
acrach, food to the hunyry. 

acraih, v.a. Anchor, moor. 

acraiche, comp. of a. acrach. 

acraichean, n.p?. of acair. 

acraichte, pt. part. of acraich. 

acrais, gen. sing. of acras. 

see achran. 

tacr&nnach, a. see achrannach. 

acras, -ais, s.m. Hunger. 2 Fa;nine, Tha 
acras orm, / am Atnory; tha mi air acras, 
lam hungry; am bheil acras ort ? uirre, ir, 
oirbh. orra) art thou (is she, he, ave you, they) 
hungry ? mar mhial-choinair acras, like hun 
gry hounds. 

acrasach, -aiche, a. H ingry. 

acsa, acSan, See aca-sau. 

acsal,** ail, 8.72. Angel. 

** aile, a. Generous, noble. 

tacnil, sf. Eagle. 

acuinn, see acflininn. 

acuinneach, see acfhuinneach. 

acus, see agus. 

tad, pers. pron. 2nd. pers. sing. Thou. 2 8. m. 
Wacer. 3 Old sign of past ind. act. of verbs, 
now do. Ad chualaiu, I have heard; ud 
chualamar, we have heard. 

a’ d’, (ann ad for ann do) Na bi a’ d’ uambas 
dhomh, be not (as) a terror to me. 

ad, poss. pron. Thy, thi;e. Ann ad ghialaibh, 
in thy jaws; 'n ad chluais, tn thine ear. 
[Aspirates noun following. : 

ad, Prov.foriad. (Emphatic, àdsan.] 

ad, aide, pl. adan, adachan, $s.f. Hat. Ad ar 
bhile òir, the gold-rimmed hat; bile na h-aide, 
the rim of the hat. 

ad-,{ insep.prefiz, in ferce and origin same as 
Latinad. It is to be separated, though with 
a un from the ad- arisi:g from ot. or 
ath-. 

tada ** adai, s.f. Victory. 

alad ! int. Hah! ahah ! atat! 

adag, -aig, 8.f. Shock of corn, consisting of 12 
sheaves, 'stook." 2 Haddock (fish.) An da 
chuid na h-adagan agus an t-arbhar, both the 
shocks and the standing corn; is cho math 
moe” ri adaig deth, a sheafis as good as a 
shock of it—i.e. I have had enough of it. 

adagach, a. Aboundingin shocks of corn, of, or 
pertaining to shocks of corn. 

adagachadh, -aidh, s.m. Employment of making 
shocks of coru, *stooking." ag a—, pr. part. 
of v. adagaich. Gathering corn into shocks. 

adagaich, v.a. Gather corn iuto shocks. 

adagaichte, pt.part. Gathered into shocks. 

adajon -ain, $.3n. Little hat or cap. 2 n.pl. of 
adag. 

Ie m -aint, s. Adamant. 

tadamhair, s,f. Play, sport, diversion. 2 v.Play, 
sport, divert. 

fadamhradh, -aidh, s.m. Admiration, wonder. 

tadbheart, fora thubhairt. 

tadchuas, adchualas, pt. pass. of cluinn. Was 
heard. 

tadh, adha, s.m. Law. 

adh, àdha, see agh. 

adh-{, see ad-}. 

adh, s.f. Heifer. 2 Hind, 

adha, pl. àinean, s.m. The liver. dinear nam 
piocach, livers of the ooal fts. 


6 


























àdhachd, see agh. 
adha-geir, ©, sf. The fatof liver. 2 Fish- or 
train-oil. 
adhail, gen.sing. of adhal. 
tadhailg, s./. ire. 2 Will, inclination. 
adhaill,** s.f. Precipice. ^ 
& dh’aindedin, adv. In spite of. A dh'aindeóin 
co theireadh e! in Ste of all opposition— 
motto of MacDonald oí Clanranald ; a dheòin 
no à dh’aindedin, with or without one’s consent. 
s&dühainn, see aghann. 
fadhair, gen. sing. of adhradh (aoradh.) Bile 
magh adhair, a tree in the plain of adoration. 
adhair,** s.f. Fire. 
adhairc, gen. sing. of adharc. 
adhairceach, -eiche, a. Horned. 2 having large 
horns. Bo adhairceach, a horned cow. 
adhaircean, n.pl. of adharc. 
—— ———, see adi'arcan. 
&dhairt, see aghairt. 2 gen.sing. of adhart. 
adhais, see athais. 
adhaiseach, see athaiseach. 
adhaiseachd, see athaiseachd. 
adhal, -ail, -ean, s.m. Flesh-hook. 
adhalach, a. Like a flesh-hook, of, or pertaining 
to a flesh-hook. 
tadhall, a. Dull, deaf, stupid, senseless. 
+ **, -aill, em, Sin, corruption. 
tadhallach, -ai-he, a. Sinful, corrupt, perverse. 
tadhalrach, s.m. Nourisher. 
om -ain, s.m. Simpleton, dull stupid 
ellow. 





sdhaltrach, -aiche, a. Adulterous, guilty of 
adultery. 

Adhaltrachd, ep. Adultery. 

adhaltraiche, s.m. Adulterer. 

adhaltranach, -aiche, o  Adulterous. Urra 


a., leanabh a., an adulterous child, ginealach 
a., an adulterous generation 
—— —— ———, -aich, s.m. Aclulterer. 
adhaltranachd, sf. Adultery. 
adhaltranaich, gen.sing. of adnaltranach. 
ean, n.pl. of z 
adhaltranais, gen.sing. of adhaliranas. 
adhaltranais, an adulterer. 
adhaltranas, -ais,s.m. Adultery, cuckoldom. 
A’ deanamh adhaltranais, comm tting a. ; làn 
de dh'adhaltranas, full of adultery. 
adhaltras, -ais, s.m. Adultery. Urra adhaltrais, 
an adulterous child. 
adhaltrasach, see adhaltranaeh. 
adhaltrasachd, see adha!tzanachd. 
&dhaltrus, see adhaltranas. 
ach, seeadhal:rauach. 





Fear 


————achd, see aihultranechd. 
fadhamhra, æ. Glorious, noble, illustrious, 
excellent. 


fadhamhrach, -aiche, a. Blessed, happy. 

&dhau,*-ain, s.àm. see ag an. 

adhaun, -ainn & aidbne,s.f. see arhann. 

,-ainne, s. f. Colt’s foot (plain .) 
athan—see cluas liath. 

țtadhannadh. s.f. Koindling. infamiug. 

fadhapnta, a. Kindled, inflamed. 2 Exssrerated 

tadhanntach, -aiche, a. Bashful, mode.:t. 

tadhanntachd, s.f. Blush, bashiulness. 

& dh'aon obair, adv. Purposely. 

adhar, -air,s.m. see athar i. 

t , gen. aidhre, $n. Stow, 

adharach, -aiche, see atharail. 

adharachd, see atharachd. 

adharadh, see aoradh. 

&dbarag,-aig,-an, see atharag. 

&dharay, see atharail. 

adharc, -airc, -ean, £. P, Horn, sounding horn. 





for 





2 Frost. 


&dhfhlath 

adharcach. a. Horned. 2 Horny. 3 Attired, 
in heraldry. 

adharcag, -a/g, s.f. Little horn. 2 (AG) Lap- 
wiug.— Reay country. 

adharcail, a. Horny, full of horns. 

adharcan, -ain, 8.2. Lapwing. see a.-luachrach 

adharc an diabhoil,§ s.f. Bird’s foot tret. il. 
see barra-nihislean. 





Audharcan-cudtchrach. 
adharean-luacnrach, -aiu-aich, s.m. Lapwing 
or peewit.—vanellus cristaius. 
adhare-fhaghaid, -airc, -ean, s.f. Bugle-horn. 
adnarc-flt .a r, -airc, -ean, s.f. Powuer-horn. 


adhar-mhéidi, s.f. see athar-m—. 

adnar-sheó:adair, -air, -ean, s.f. see athar-s—. 

adhart, -airt, s.m. Pillow, bolster. 2 Head of 
à bed. 3**Linen. 4**Bed-linen. 

, -airt, s. m. Progress, forwardness. 2 
Front, van, advance. **seldoni used except 
in connection with prep. air, as,—thig air t' 
adhart, come forward; thai 'teachd air a h- 
adhart, she is very forward, she is coming on. 

adhartach, -aiche, a. Forward, progres ive. 2 
Diligent, assiduous, having a wish or tendency 
to be forwards or onwards. 3**Like linen,of, 
or belonging to linen. 

adhartachd. s.f. Advancement. 

adhartaich, v.a. Bolster. 2 Forward. 

adhartan, -ain, 8. m. dim. of adhart. 
bolster or piilow. 
bed-lineus. 

tadhartar, -air, sm. Dream. 2 Dreamer. 

*tadhartha, a. Aérial. 

adhar-thomhas, -ais, -sean, s.m. see athar-t—. 

tadhas, -ais, s. m. Prosperity, success, good 
fortune. 

,** a. Good, proper. 

adhastar, -air, -can, 8.7^. see aghastar. 

tadhbha, gen. aidhbh, & aidhbhe,s.f see abhadh. 
2 see adhbhadh. 

tadibhachtach, -aiche, a. 

tadibhadh, -aidh, a, s.m. Yortres , garrison. 
2 Palace. 3 Habitation, house. 

tadnbhagan,** am, dim. of abhadh. 

adhbhal, -aile, a. Vast, huge. 2 Terrible,awful, 
wonderful, fearful. 

tadhbhal-throcaireach, a. Abounding in mercy. 

tadhbhan-trireach, s’m. Kind of music in taree 
parts, or sung by three voices. 

fadhbhan-triuireach, see a—trireach. 

adh bar, -air, see aobhar. 

—ach, see aobharach. 

achd, see aobbarachd. 

tadnbharas, -ais, see abharas. 

fadi.bharrach, see aobharrach. 

f.diibbarsach, s.m. Comber or carder of wool. 
2 Dresser of flax. 

adhvha3,** -ais, s.m. Garrison. 

talhbluidh,** s.f. Joy, merriment. 

adhbronn,' see aobrann. 

a dh'eas huidh, prep. Without, in want of. 

a dheoin, adv. Willingly. 

a dh'fhios, prep. To the knowledge of. 2M? 
Towards. 3CR Incase. Thoir leat e (a) dh’ 
fhios am bi feum air, take tt in case there be 
need of it. 

tadhfhlath, -aith, 3.m. Lawful sovereign. 





Little 
2**n.»l. of adhart, Linens, 





Gross, fat. 





adnfhuar 


fad b-fhuar, -uaire, a. Excessively cold. 

faih-huachmhaireachd, «jf. Abomination, 
hair d, detestation. 

¢a.ta-cauathinhar, a. Frightful, 
dreadful, dismal, hideous, borrible. 

a dh'ionnsuidh. prep. Towards, unto. to. 

a dhìth, adv. Wanting, without. Chaidh e a 
dhìth, he went to nothingness. 

ad>lac, 216, sf. Burial, interment, funeral. 
ait’ adhlaic, a bury!ng-place. 

&dh'acadh, -aidh, 8.7. Burial, ceremony of 
iuterring. àit’ adhlacaidh, a buryina-place. 
aga—, pr.part. of v. adhlaic. Buryiug, in- 
Ari g 

ad. lacair, -ean, 8.7. Burier, undertaker. 2 
Grave-digger. 

adolacanach, see a thiacair. 

adhlaic, v.a. Bury, inter. M’anam adhlacadh 
au sgleó, to bury my spirit in the mist. 

,** 3.7. Longing desire fur what is good, 

adhlaicear,** fut.pass. of v. adhlaic. 

adulaichte, a £ pt.part. Bur.ed, interred. 

tadnlan,** -ain, s.m. Hero, ceramvion. 

fadhloishe, 8.f. (adhall) Dullnes:, heaviness. 

tadhana, sym. Knowledge, intelligeuce. 2 Ex- 
ercise, continual practice. 

tadhma. d. see teòma. 

+adninad, -aid, sf. see maide. 

fadhmall, a. Unsteady, weak, debilitated, 
sickly, feeble. 

adhnth ire, comp. of a. àghmhor. 

adhmhol, see ard-mhol. 

adhmholadh, see ard-mholadh. 

adhmnolta, see ard-mholta. 

adamhor, -oire, d. see aghmhor. 

adhmhorachd, see àághmhorachd. 

adhna, aidhne, am, — Advocate. 


fadhnac, s.m. 
see adhlac. 


Tadhnacal, s.m. 

fT2jlhnach, s.m. 

Tadhnadh, -aidh, s.m. Advocate. 2 Encoura- 
ging. 3 Recruiting. 4 kin.ling of fire. 

tadhnair, saf- Wickeuness, baseness, depravity, 
villany. 

tadhuaire, 8. f. (ad, insep. intens. prefix, + naire) 
Shame, disgrace, ignominy, reproach. 2 
Blushing face. 

adhnaireach, -eiche, a. Modest, shamefaced, 
bashful. 

adhnaireachd, 8.f. (adhna) Pleading, defence. 
2 Discussion. 

adhnarach, -aiche, a. (adh+narach) Causing 
shame. 





terrib.e, 





adh’or, see àghmhor. 
adhrach 
&dhracnail. 1 see aoradh. 


&dhradair, 8 m. (adhradh+fear) see aoradair. 

adhradh, -aidh, 8.2/1. ses aoradh. 

tachram, v. pres. ind. I venerate, worship. 

fadiuatharra, a. Abominable. 

+ —————chd,$8.f. Abomination, horror. 
alominableness. 

fadaudh, (teine C riosda) s.m. Circle-fire. 

tadhuizh, sf. Night. 

tadhmhall, -aille, a. 

ad-olviun, sf. Felt. 

tadrai, 

ien, | v.n. He arose. 

fadrime, a. Aforesaid. as I have said. 

taduadh, -aidh, s.m. Horror, detestation, 

taduan, -ain, s.m. Stranger. 

faduarra, a. Horrible. detestable. 

faduath, s.m. (adh+fuath) Horror. 

&dutbairt, see thubhairt. 

fadubhram, -air, -amar, -adar, v. 
they said. 

ae, n.pi. àinean, $m. The liver. see adha. 


see adhmall. 


I, thou, we, 


8 ayaiteach 





tao, d. see Aon. 

fae!ach. see aodach. 

fae inar, see sthar 1. 

aeir, gen.8ing. of aer. 

taeun, see aon. 

tacnachd. see aonachd. 

faenosd, s.f. Church. 

faenta, 8. f. Unity, 
brotherly harmony. 

taer, see athar 1. 

facrdha, a. Airy. 

facrihaite, a. Sky-coloured. 

aes, see aos, fois. 

afraighe, s. f. Rising or preparing for battle. 

ag, v.v. Hesitate, refuse, doubt, contradict, 
scruple. 

ag, aig, s.m. Doubt, hesitation, contradiction, 
scruple. 9?**Hesitation or lisp in speech. 

ag. pr^p.,(aiz) sign of pr.part. as— ag éirigh, 
rising; ag iasgachd, fishing. [ Used befora 
words beginning with a vowel, also r@dh, and 
sometimes : efure other words be-inning with 
a consonant.] 

ag. dim.termination, fem., as— nizhean, a girl; 
nighneag (or nionag) a little girl. 

taga, s f Bottom of any depth. 

agach ,a-Tnclined to doubt or refuse, scrupulous, 
sceptical. 2**Staminering, listing. 

agad, prep. pron. (aig-Ftu) At thee, ou thee, 

with thee, in thy possession. .tyad is also 
used in the sense of a possessive pronoun, as 
an taigh agad, thy house; a’ bhean agad, thy 
wife. **This use of arad is not often met with 
in our classical writers, but in common lan- 
guage itis very frequent. ‘Tha ts, or are, is 
understood, as— a’ bhean (a th’)jagad, your 
wife. Fan mar a th’agdd, stay as you are. 
{Emphatic form—agad-sa, agad-fheéin.] 

agadh, -aidh, s.n. Doubt, hesitation. 2 Con- 
tradiction. 8 Hesitancy in speech. 

agadh, a db, s.m. Ox. 

agad-sa, emphatic form of agad. 

tagag,** -aig, s.f. Habitation, settlement. 

agaibh, prep. pron. (aig+sibh) At you, on you, 
with you, in your possession. 2**Of you, from 
among you. Co agaibh do'n iarrari? whom 
of you is she sought for? ; chaidh agaibh orra, 
you got the better of them. Also used as a 
possessive pronoun, as—an taigh agaibh, your 
house. | Emphatic form—agaibh-se, agaibh- 
fhéin.j 

agaibh-se, emphatic form of agaibh. . 

agaid, (AG) 8.7. Giddy female. 

agaidh, gen.sing. of agadh. 

agail, a. Doubtful. 2 Sceptical. 8 Suspicious. 
4 Lisping. 5**In jeopardy. 

agaileachd, s.f. Doubtfulness, suspiciousness, 
2 scepticism. 8 Tenderness. 4 Tendency to 
lisp, habit of lisping. 

againy, prep. pron. At us, with us, in our pos- 
session. 2 Of us froin amongst us. Faoil- 
eagan a’ chladaich againn fhéin, The seagulls 
of our own shore. In other worda, we prefer 
our own country, ovr owu people, even our 
own seagulls. [ Einphatie forin—againne, 
again u-fhéin. } 

agair, pr.part. agagairt, v.a. Plead, claim. 2 
avcuse, 3 Crave, require, demand. Na agrar 
orra e, let it not be laid to their charge. 

agairg,§ 8.f. Mushroom—agoricus. 

agairt, s.m. Claiming. 2 Pleading, craving. 
3 Accusing, blaming. 4 Pursuing Ag a—, 

r.part. of v. agair. Tha a chogais 'g a agairt, 
is conscience accuses him; tha e ag a. orm, he 

craves me; tha e 'g agairt, he prosecutes. 

agait,** s.f. Agate. 

agaiteach,** a. Like an agate, of, or pertain- 


- wee —— —— 





harmony of sentinies$ 


agalacha 





Ing to an agate, full of agates. 

agalachd,* sf. see agaileachd. 

avall,** -aill, s.m. Speech, dialogue. Uu" 

agallach, 4. Couversational, of, or pertaining 
to speech or dialect. : : 

agallaih, -ailh, s.m.  Conferring, arguing, 
speaking, speech. 

aga laich,,AU) s. Eloqnence. 

agallamh, -ainh, s.m. see agalladh. 

agam, prep. pron. (aig+mi, Atine, with me, 
iu my possession. It is also used a3 a poss- 
essive pronoun, as, an clailhoamn agam, my 
sword. {Emphatic form—agam-sa, agam- 
fhéin (pronouuced ''agam-fhia" in Skye over 
W. Isles and in N. Counties, ‘‘agam-fhian’’ in 
some places.:] we 

agamh,** -aimh, sm. Donbt, suspicion. 

tagan,** a. Precious, dear. à 

agarach, -aich, s.m. (agair) Pretender, claimant. 

—,-aidhe, a. Prone to plead, crave, or 
accuse. 2 Litigious. 3 Vindictive, quarrel- 
some. 

agarc,** -airt, sm. Revenge, quarrel. 

ugartach, -aiche, see agarach. . 

agartachd,* sf. Litigation, litigiousness. 

a,artaiche, comp. of a.agirtach. 

agartas, -ais, s.m. Plea, suit-at-law, prosecution. 
2 Claim. Agartas coguis, remorse; féin-agart- 
as, self-reproach, compunction; inntinn saor 
o fhéin-agartas, a mind free from self-reproach 

tagh, aigh, s.m. Battle, conflict. ~ 

agi, aigh, s.m. Joy, happiness, felicity. 2 
Success, prosperity, luck. Is fhearr àgh na 
ealdhain, good luck is better than a trade; 
bithudh aga aig na naoimh, the holy shail 
have joy; A thréin a b’fhearr àgh! thou hero 
who exc^lles: in success. 

àgh, a. Joyful. happy. 

agh, aighe, -ean, sf, Heifer, young cow. 2 
Hiud, fawn. 3** rarely Ox, bull, cow. Agh 
tbri bliadhna dh'aois, a heifer three years 
old; reamhar mar agh, fat ae a heifer; air 
toir nan agha ciar, an pursuit of the dusky 
fawns; lua‘threaizhe, the ashes of a heifer; 
oidnene Fnéill Evin theirear ''aignean"' ris 
na gainhna, on St. John’s eve the stirk is called 
a baier, 

agh,** aigh, s.m. Fear, astonishment, awe. 

aghach, a. Abounding in hinds, heifers, &c. 

azhaen, -aiche,a. Warlike. 2 Brave. 3 Pros- 
perous, fortunate, successful. 4 Couquering. 
5 Happy, joyous. 

&g1aip,* s.f. (oidheirp) Attempt, essay, trial. 

ayaa.beach,* a. Persevering, industrious, 

ag saineachd,* s.f. Industry, perseverance. 

agbaidh, -nean, s.f, Face, visage, couutenancoe, 
2 brow. 3 Surtace. 4 Reproach. Thug e 
an aghaidh orra, he reproached them, wiih- 
stood them to the face, face?" them; theirig 
(or gabh) air t* aghaidh, pass on, go forward; 
aghaidh ri aghaidh face to face; cuir an agh- 
aidh a’s fhearr à dh'fhaodas tu air,put the best 
Jace on it you can; as an agnaidh, outright; 
aghaidh na talmhainn, the face of the earth; 
' aun agai tha n &zhaidh ’g a iarraidh! what 
a, ace you have to askit ! 

aghsidk, (an aghaidh) prep. Against, in oppo- 
sion. An aghaldn na gaoithe, against the 
wil; anagaaidh mic au rign, against the 
kinj's sons; am aghaidh, against m^; etur "na 
a, naidh, oppose or chwart him; cuir ’u a b-a., 
oppose her; cnir 'n an d., oppose them; an a. a 
chéile, against each other, at war. 
[Governs bhe Genitive case.] 

a: lh.ch,v.a. Affront 

aghaid..cate, &. Opposed, opposing. 
lng, facing. 3 Coníronte 





2 Front- 


aibhe 





aghaidh riut, adv. Affronté, tn heraldry. 

aghaidh-sneachda, s.f. Face of snow. 

aghais, &.f. see athais. 

axhaiseach, a. see athaiseach. 

aghan, -ain, San. Proverb. Mar a tha an $- 
agnan ag radh, as th~ proverb says. 

faghnanaich,**s.m. Advocate, pleader. 

aghann, aighne, n.pi. aigheannan, & aghann- 
an, s.f. Large shallow iron pan, generally 
wich three small legs and iron lid, used for 
boiling potatoes, &c. 2**Goblet, skillet, small 
kettle or boiler. 

— — — -shilidh, s.f. Dripping-pan. 

— ——  -uisgiche, sf. Watering-can. 

aghar, AC s.m. Progeny. 

aghart, see adhart. 

aghartach, see adhartach. 

aghastar, -air, s.m. Horse’s halter. 

àxhmhaireachd, see aghmhorachd. 

àgumhor, -oire, a. Glorious, awful, magnificent. 
2 Pleasant. 3 Prosperous, fortunate, blessed. 
4 Auspicious. 5 Joyful, haopy. 6 Gold, brave. 
7 Renowned. Gu h-àghmhor, abarach, in a 
bold and brave manner; mu’n do bhoillsg an 
oe gu h-aghmhor, ere the light shone joy- 
Sully. 

àghmnorachd, s.f.ind. Prosperity, auspicious- 
ness. 

a ghnath, adv. Always. 

azhnas,** -ais, s.m. Pleading, argumentation. 

àgh'or, -oire, see àghmhor. 

aghradhaidh,** s.m. Expostulation, challeng- 

g. 

agrach,** a. Accusatory. 2 Pleading, craving. 
8 Inclined to accuse, plead, or crave. 

agradh, -aidh, s.n. Accusation. 2 Pleading, 
craving. 

, ord. sing. & pl. imp. of v. agair. 

agraidh, gen. sing. of agradh. 

Agrar, fut. pass. of v. agair. 

&guinn, aguinne, see againn. 

Tagsal,** a. Generous, noble. 

agus, conj. And. 2 as. Thus’ a’s mise, thou 
and J; tha e cheart cho math agus a biia e, tt 
is just as good as it was. "Us" hasgen?raily 
been supposed, of late years, to be a contrac- 
tion of agus, but the late Dr. Cameron of 
Brodick, always maintained that ‘‘is’ and 
not '"us''should be us-d as a mere copulat ve 
conjuction. Js couples words and pnrases 
only, and shouid never be preceded by à co:n- 
ma. Agus is nob only a mere copulatve con- 
junction, but also an emphatic copulative 
conj., aud snonld always be used after a com- 
ma. Nach truagn leat mi, agus mi am 
priosau ? do you not pity me, and L in prison? ; 
cho luath ’s is urrainr domh, as soon as 1 can; 
am bi thu cho math agus mo fhreagairt ? 
will you be so qood. as to answer me? Je ac 
cording to Windisch, is not an abbreviation 





of ajue. See “Is.” 
aha ! ahatint. Ahah! 
a h-uile, a. Every, all. 


fai, s.f. Controversy. 2 Cause. 8 Region, ter- 
ritory. 4 Inheritance of land, possession. 65 
Herd. 6 Cow. 

— s.f. Whiteness.(AC) 2 Sheep. 3 Swan. Cuir 
&staigh &n Ai, put in the sheep; chi mi ai air 
loca a’ mhuilinn, J seea swan on the mill loch. 

aingat,(CR) a. Impertinent.—4 rr&n. 

fiirgitir, sJ. Alphabet. 

-àio4, cermiaation of Dative Pl. of nouns, is 
still ussi tor monosyllabio and some dis- 
syllavic words with good taste, and it comes 
in well in poetry. 

taibh, s.f. Likeness. similitude, resemblance. 

taibhe !int. Haili ali bail! G 


albheall 10 aidichte 


aibheall, -ill, an, see eibheall. tion. 'S e an t-àicheadh math an dara pune 
aibhearsair, see aibhistear. &'s fhearr's an lagh, a stout denial is the seo 
aibheis, s.f. The sea, ocean. 2 Gulf. 8 Boast-| ond best point in law; cuir as àicheadh, deny, 
ing. 4 Emptiness. 5 Place full of fairies. 6| disavow. 
the air, atmosphere. 7AC Abyss. 8AC Place | aicheadaidh, fut. af. act. of v. àicheadh. 
or person in ruins or unkempt. An aibheis| aicheadh-chreidimh, s.m. Apostacy. 
uile làn bhòcain, the whole atmosphere Juli aichealiach, a. Able, potent, mighty, fierce. 
of goblins; ged a tha thu an diugh ad aibheis j aicheamhail,$ s. (ath+gabhail) Reprisal.. 
fhuair, though thou art to-day a cold ruin; rij aicheidh, | , Zen 
aodann aibheis, on the surface of the sea. Arben, fe 
aibheiseach, a. Vast, void, immense, ethereal, | t4ichili, a. Able, powerful. 2 Dexterous,handy. 
atmospherical. 2 Fullof ruins, likea ruin. |taichilleachd, sf. Strength. 2 Dexterity. 
aibheiseachadh, -aidh, a.m. Exaggeration, | aichmheil, see aichbheil. 





exaggerating, enurmity, incredibility. aichmheileach, see aichbheileach. 
aibheiseachd,* see aibheiseachadh. aicil, see faicill. 
aibheisear, see aibhistear. faicine,f{ 8.7. Race. 
&aibheisich* v.a. Exaggerate from various mo-| taicne,** s f. Nature. 

tives. aicre,** s f. Inheritance, patrimony. 
sibhghitir, see aibghitir. fail,** 4.2%. Piece, portion, morsel. 


aibhideach,** a. Great, monstrous, enormous. | tiidboheil,** a. Huge, enormous, vast. 

aibhist,* s.f. Old ruin. 2 Ruin, destruction. | aideachadh, -aidh, s. m. Confession, acknow= 
see aibheis. ledgeinent, avowal. Registration, as of a 

aibhistear, Jr, s.m. The Devil. 2 Destroyer.| letcer.Luchd-aideachaidh, communicants, pre 

aibhistearachd, s.f. Demonism, conduct of al  fessors. - 
devil. 2 Conduct of a destroyer, destructive- | aideachaidh, gen.sing. of aideachadh. 


ness. | aideachail, a. Affirmatory, confessing. 
aibhle,** see eibheall. aideachair,** s.m. Avoucher. 
aibbleag, see eibhleag. taidubhean,** s.m. Stranger, foreigner. 
aibhlitir, -ean, s.f. Alphabet faidhbheil, s. Wonder. 2 Boasting. 
aibhlitreach, a. Alphabetical, Ordugh aibh-|t—————-,** a. Huge, enormous, vast. 
litreach, alphabetical order. aidhbheileachd, s. J. Vastness, terriblenese, 
aibhne, gen.sing. of abhainn. hugeness. 
&ibhneach, a. Kluvial, full of rivers. ` | aidhbheis, see aibheis. 
aibhnean, } n.pl. of abhainn. Ri taobh nan | ————-—each, see aibheiseach. 
aibhnichean, aibhnichean, beside the streams | taidhblich, v.a. Aggrandize. 


faibhreann, s.m. Castrated goat. (eirionnach | raidh-bhrugh, a. Bewitching, fascinating. 
in Lochaber.) | taidhbhseach, a. Vast, capacious. 

aibhse, $.f. Spectre. 2 Sprite, diminutive | faidhbhsean,** -ain, sf. Spectre, phantom, 
creature. also taibhse. ; sprite. 

aibhseach, -iche, a. see aibheiseach. 2**Like|aidne,**5./  Monition. 2 House. 8 Fortress, 


& spectre or sprite. Taidheach,** Ach, Milch cow. 
aibhseachadh, see aibheiseachadh. — ———4d,* see aoidheachd. 
&ibhsich, see aibheisich. aidheam, sf. Joyous carol. 
faibid,** s.f. Habit. aidhean, For aighean, n.pl. of agh. 
aibidil, -ean, s.f. Alphabet. aidheann,-inn, see aghann. 
aibidealach,* a. Alphabetical. Ordugh a. al-|aidhear, -ir, see aighear. 2**Cracking of the 

ved eae order. Skin from exposure to the weather. 
aibirsidh, (from the old learning system, be-|————ach, see aighearach. 

ginning “A perse," A by itself.$) see aioidil.| —————achd, see aighearachd, 
aibisidh, om A, B, C, the first three letters | aidhle,** 4.7. Cooper’s adze. 

of the Alphabet.) see aibidil. aidhlinn, det. of adhal. 
fAibreann, see Abraon. t.idhime, sf. see uidheam. 
aice, s.f. Prox mity. 2 (faice) Lobster's hole, | faidhmhill, v.a. Spoil, destroy. 


crab hole. 13|| Band, tying. Taidhmhilleadh, sm. & pr. pare. Consuming. $ 
aice, prep.pron. With her, at her, on her, ei Confusion. 

her possession. 2 In herremembrance. Tha'! aidhiuhillte, pt. part. Consumed. 

duslach òir aice, she hath gold dust. Aice is! taiihmh;llteach, eich, s.m. Destroyer. 2 Spend- 

often used asa possessive pronoun, as, an| thrift. 3 Beast that steals from the pastures 

taigh aice,—an taigh a th'aice—Aer "apes. tofeed on the growing corn. 

the house she has. aidhne,** s.f. Advocate. Y v 

{Emphatic form—aice-se, aice-fhéin.] aidhseachadh, pr. part. of v. aidhsich. Envying. 
taice, adv. Near, close at hand. also taice. 1s iomadh neach a tha ' g am aidhseachad 
aicear,a. Angry, severe, cruel. an diugh nach do chuitdad riamh g’ am leas- 
aiceid, see acaid. achadh, mar a thubhairt am famhair ris an 
aiceideach, see acaideach. troich, many a man envies me to-day who never 
aichbheil, s./. Revenge, vengeance. Thoir) heped me one bit to grow, as the giant said te 

dhomh aichbheil, revenge me. the dwarf. 
aichbheileach, -liche, a. Revengeful, vindic-|aidhsich, pr. part. ag aidhseachadh, v.a. Envy. 
tive. fnll of vengeance. aidich, pr.part. ag aideachadh, v.a. Confess, 
aichbheileachd,** 3.f. Revengefulness, vindic-| «own, acknowledge. 2 Affirm, avow. Ag aid- 
tiveness. eachadh a chionta, confessing his sin; dh’ 
aichbheiliche,** s.m. Avenger. aidich e, he confessed ; chan aidich mi, T 
àicheadh, pr. part. àicheadh, v.a. Deny, refuse, ` will not confess. 
disavow, recant, renounce. Dh'àicheadh e a|aidicheam, 1p. sing. imp. of v. aidich. 2** Fog 
chreideamh, he renounced his religion ; àich-| aidichidh mi, 1 p. sing. fut. aff. of v. aidich. 
eadhaidh rise esan, 4 will deny him. aidichear, fut. pass. of v. aidich. 
àicheadh, -eidh,  & m. Denial, refusal, recanta- | aiGichte, pt. part. v. sidich. Confessed, owned 


aldichte 


a*knowledged, affirmed. 


aidmeach, gan. 
tidmvachadh, san, J ` weg Aideachadh. 


@idinheil, -e, -ean, s.f. Confession, profession, | 4 


persuasion. 2 Declara ivu, acknawledge- 

ment, Déóanaidlnnei a tha ea' leantuiun 3 

what persuasion does he follow? ; &ré.r bhnr 

n-aidmheil, according to your profession ; a'd- 

mheil na firiun, the acknowledgement of the 

truth. 

v.n. see aidich. 2 

aidmheileach, a. Of, or belonging toa confess- 
ion, or profession. 9 Declaratory. 3 Acquies- 
cent. 4 Forthcoming. Bithidh mise ail- 
mheileach dhuit-se, L wi be responsible to 
gov. 

&idinheileach,** s.m. Avoucher. 
-———d,* sf. Acquiesceuce, 
si ility. 3 Acknowledgement. 
&idmheilear, -eir, s.m. Confessor. 2 Professor. 

8 Declirer. 
&idmheiliche,* see aidmheileach. 
&iluuüeint,** sf. The Advent. 
aidmhich, see aidich. 





2 Respon- 





—— —— —te, see aidichte. 

aifir,** s.f. Blame, fault. 1 

aifrionn, -rinu or -riune, s. m. Mass in the! 
Church of Rome. 2 Chapel. ! 


tig, prep At, near, close by. 2 In possess- 
ion. 3 On account of. 4 For. 5 On. Is 
wor again sin, Z valwe that greatly ; tha déidh 
again air, 4 desire it or him ; tha cuiimiin’ ag- | 
am Air, 4 remember him; tha tasdan agam | 
air, he owes me a shilling; tha tasian sig’! 
orn, I owe him a shilling; chan "eil 
again air, J dislike him, I cannot help! 
tt ; chaidh agau air, I hav» av roue 
Rim; tha dòchas agam dheth I have hope 
én him or it ; tha grà Ih agam dia J love him ; 
tha truas aga.n rik, I pity hin ; chan "al 
omhail again dha, he 6 no concern to me; tha 
bàigh again ris, f feel kindly towards him; tha 
Guyhair again ris, Z expect him ; aig an taign. 
et home ; aig baile, at home; aig na dorsaith, | 
at the door» ; aig end ‘aigne, on account 
ef his excessice joy ` bha aig duine araidia di- 





11 


aighean 


Y as, An stoc aig Fionn, Fingal's 

orn. 

taigbheil,** see eagal. 

: each,** see eagalach. 

aige, prep. pron. (aig+e) At him or it, with 

im or it. in his possession, 2 His, its. [Em- 

phatic forins—aige-san, aige-fhéin.] 

faige, &. Brave, valiant. 

àigeach, s.m. see digeach. 

aigeachd, (CR) sf. Frolicsomeness.— A rran. 

aigeal, -eil, -un,s.m.(W. isles) see aigeann. Do 
bhreacan air uachdar an aigeil, thy plaid 
(Jloats) on the pool ; faochagan croma, ciar’ 
an aigeil, a’ glagadaich air a h-ürlar—i.e. air 
ùrlar a’ bhata.( from a description of the raging 
of the sea in a gale.) 

aigealach, -aich, «m. see aigeannach. 

aiyealan, n.pi. of aigeal. 

aigeallach, -aiche, o. see aigeannach. 

aigealladh,** -aidh, s.m. Speech, conversation, 
language. 2 Dialogne. Ag éisdeachd aigeal- 
laidh do bheóil, listening to thy speech. 


4igeallaiche, comp of aigealiach. Is tu ag 


aigeallaiche dhe’n triùir, thou art the most 
spirited of the three 


aizealiau,**s m. Breast-pim. 2 Jewel. 8 Ear- 
ring 4 Tassel. 5 Toy 
aigeann. -eina, s mm. Abyss. 2 Desp pool. 3 


Sea, ocean 4 Botten of an abyss. Thuit in’ 
aigne'san aigeann, my mind sank iato the 
ebyss ; na shnidne air au aigeano dhorch 
thiugh, si-ting o4 the dark mis y deep ; grunud 
an aigeinn, the bottom of the avyss. 
ságeauuumch,-aida, 8.24. Sounder of the deep. 2 
tsee aigueach. 
——,* Jy. Self-willed, beisterons female. 
—— —— — aiche, g. Of, or belonging to an abyss. 
2 Full of ai, sses. 3 s/e aigneach 4* Self- 
willed, stubuuru. mnlish, uncontrollable 
aigeanuach. az see aigneachd. 2 Stuhborn- 
ness, turbelexé disposition. 3¢{Courage. 
aigsanta,* @ Self-willed. 
aigeantach, -aiche, æ. see aigeannach. 
S3.f. Turbulent feinals. 
——4, . f. see aigeanvachd, and aig- 
eantas. 





O 


this mhac, a certain man had twe sous ; tha! aigeantas,* ais,s sa Gaiety. 2**Alacrity. 
dithis aige, ke has two; cha n 'eil mir aige, he) aigvich, gen. sing. of àigeach, for òigeach. 
has not a particle; tha'n t-àm againn faibh, it | aigeil, gen sing. of aigeal. 


ag line fur usto co ; bhainios aige a maca, he! 
had spent a month (a month had goue past | 
bim); bithidh mi aga! a thivtudh, j wil be 

with you in a minute; cha'n'eil thu azad fhéin, | 
you are not yourse f ; cha ghabn wi agad. J} 
wiil not engage with you; cum agad fnéii e, keep i 
$t yourself, | cha'n fhaic midadjmurfaic biodh | 
agal well then,be it so, I don't care if youdon't. 

Combined with the pers. pronounsthus :— 

d sing aga. Plur. againn, 


agad agaibh 
8 , 175. 
geg T. } aca, m. d E 


x Emphatic Forms. 
1 Sing. agam-sa, agam-fhéin, pl. againne, 
againn-fhéin. 


g Agad-«i, agad-fhéin, pl. agaibh-se, 
D aige-san. aige-fhé:n m. ; aice-se, aice 


-fhéin f. ; pl. aca-san, aca-fbéin, 
in. «t f. 

Aig entersi to composition with the pos- 
sessive pronounsthus, 'g ain, 'g ad, 'g ar, ’g 
ur, &c., before the Infin. Mood or a verbal 
Noun, as, 'G ain bhnaladh it. at mv strik- 
Ing) striking me; bha mi 'g am fhalach féin. 
d was hiting inyself. It is often used to give 
the signification of a genitive case to the noun 


agaibh-fhéin. : 
| 


aigeinn, see aigeann 

Suën, gen. sing. of àgh. 

àigh, 3. m. Happiness. 
4 Mettlesomeness. 5 Liberality €**Glori- 
ousness, glory. 7**Auspicionsness. An do 
thréigthu mi, a sholuis m'àigh? hast (how 
left me thou light of mu joy? meirshe Och 
Lochlainn an aigh, the standard nf the king of 
Lochlinn the fortunate ; sonas is àigh ort! 
may success did happiness aitend you ! 


2 Prosperity. 3 Joy. 


aige,** a. Happy. 2 Prosperous 3 Libera’. 
4 Auspicions. 6 Proud. 6 Mettlesome. 7 

Qlor‘ous. 
aigh,**s.m. Deer, Aigh 


uu choite réin, the 
deer of thine own weods. 

aigh-ban,}-ain, son Box 
(plict)— bas xem ere 
virens. Badge of many 
branches of Clan Chat- 
tau. 

aig e, gen. sing. of agh. 


ee 
XL Zine Re 


ee yag leg, a. Happy, joys 
frac S. 
e c aigheal, see aiugeal. 


aighean, n. pl. £ din. of 
agh  2**alacrity. 


8. Aigh-ban. aigbean, n. pl. of agh. 


C 2 


nighean 12 aj!-innisean 


Aighean siübhlach, the wandering deer. „bhinn, thy shteld like a rock 
wigheann, -ne, pl. aighnean, & algheannan,s.f | ailbhinneach, -eiche, a Flinty, stony. 2 Rocky. 
see aghanu. failcne,** 3. pl. Paving stones. 


aigheannach, -aich, s.m. Corn | taileneach,** -ich, s.m. Pavier. 

thistle (plant)—carduus ar- | àilde, s. f. see àilleachd. 

vensis. 2 Place where this- | aildeachd, see àilleachd. 

tles grow. aildiche, see àlainm. 
aigheannaich, gen. sing. of | taile,** s.f. Stone. 2 Behaviour, manners. 
aigheannach. ile, 8. m. The air. 2 Scent, smell 3 
„aighear, Ar, sm, Gladness,| Wind, breeze. strength of the breeze. àile 
mirth, d, gaiety, happi-| deagh t hołzidh, an odour of sweet smell; 
ness, felicity, festivity. trath chaidleas 's sg ghleann an t-àile, 
Tha aighear a’ bruchdadh] when the air prie [te stil.] in the valley ; 
"n a shùil, gladaess dursts| srdinean gun àile, noses without the sense 

from his eyes ; ceòl is aigh-| of smell; droch àile, a bad smell; tha'n 

ear, musicand mirth ;aigh-| t-àile fuar, the air is:cold. 

ear t’dige, the joy of thy|aile,* s.m. see ail. 

4. Aiheannach. youth. ——,0. see àilleach. 
aighearach, a. Glad, mirthful, joyful, gay, | ail-each,** eich, s. m. (lit. a stone horse) Stall- 

festive. 2 Odd. òglach aighearack, an edd} ion. 

Fellow. àileach, @. (àile) Airy, well-aired. 2**Atmos- 
d, s. E ind. Gladness, merriment,; pheric, of, or belonging to the atmosphere, 

mirthfulness, joyfulness, festivity. 2 Odd-; air, breath, or smell. 3**Savoury. Iongan- 

ness. 3**Alacrity. | tas àileach, an atmospheric phenomenon, 
aighne, gen. sing. of aghann. 2**Prophet. $3**;^ileach,** a. Causing marks or impressions. 








leader, àileachd, s,f. ind. see àileadh. 
taighneach, -niche, a. Liberal, generous. aileadh, -eidh. s. m. see ail. Aileadh.coise, @ 
faighnios, s.m. Pleading, reasoning, arguing. footstep. 
aigh-riomhach,** s.m. Belle. àileadh, eidh, s.m. see àile. 


aigilean, -ein, -an, s.m. Tassel. 2 Ear-ring. 3jàileadhach, a. Pneumatic. 


oy. aile-bheathail,** (Zit. vital air) Oxygen. 
aigileanach, a. Hung with tassels. 2 Gaudy, | àile-churach, Sre Am see curach-aile. 

eauish. ; àil-eathar, p » eathar-aile. 
aiginneach, àile-ghuail 8, .Ón. Gas. 
aigionnach, a. see aigeannach. àile-inheidh,** s. f. see meidh-àile. 
aigiontach, ——— ——— ——each,** a. Barometrical. 
aiglean,-ein, see aigilean. aileag, -eig, -an, 8.f. Hiccup. [Always prece- 
aigleanach, see aigileanach. ded by &rt. an.) Than aileag orm, J havethe 


aigne, s. J. Mind, temper, disposition. 2 Spirit,| hiccup. 
affection, thought. 3 (AC) The bird swift. 4 ach, a. Causing the hiccup, hiccuppy, re- 
(AC) Anything of unusually quick motion.| lating to the hiccup. 
Cho luath ri aigne nam ban baoth, as swift Ai, sf.  Hiccupping. 2**Vexing. 
as the thoughts of the foolish women. Is cian-,ailean, n.p:. of ail. 
ail m'aigne, sad is my mind ; lean mi le aigne | àilean, -ein, sm. Green, plain, meadow. 2 Es- 
neo-ghlic, I followed with unwise affection. planaile. 3 Oasis. Cath air an àilean réidh. 
aigneach, eiche, a. (aigne) Liberal. 2 Spiri-| a battle on the level plain. 
ted, lively, brisk. 3 Affectioned. 4 Of, or!aileanta, a. (àileadh) Fragrant, odorous. 2 
belonging to mind, temper, affection, or; Keen-scented. 3**Bodiless. +4**Atmospher- 
thought. 5**Gallant. ic, aérial. 
— ——d, s. f. ind.  Mettlesomeness, sprightli-| ailear, -eir, s.m. Porch. 
ness, magnanimity, cheerfulmess, courage. aileas,** a. Akin. 
aigneadh, -idh, -idhean, 8.1m. see signe. ,** -eis, a.m. Pleasant country. 
aignidh, gen. sing. of aigneadh. ailebeart,"*-beairt, Gaelic spelling of halbert. 
-all, termination of adjs., changes into -il -oil,|ai’leathan, see aimh-leathan. 
_cuil, as preceded by kindred vowels. ail-edlas, -ais, s.m. Pneumatics. 
àil, gen. sing. of al. 21see àill. àilgheas, -is, s.m. (ail+gheas) Pleasure, will. 
ail, s.m. Mark, impression, trace. 2* Scar.| 2 Power. 8 Pride, imperiousness. 4** De- 
3*Postage-stamp. Ail do choise, the trace orl sire, longing. àilgheas dhaoine, the pride of 
thy foot. men ; nach lùb air àilgheas na garbh ghaoith, 
fail, s.n. Mouth. 2 Rebuke. 3 Stone. 4 Re-| that will not bend at the pleasure of the rough 
quest. 5 Weapon. 6tRock. wind ; fearann gu'r n-àilgheas, land to your 
ailbh,** e, -ean, 8. f. Rock, Ifoundation, any-! will. 
thing hard, solid, rigid, or immoveable (Also| ————-ach, -aiche, a. Fastidious. 2 Proud, 
ailbhinn.) haughty, imperious, arrogant.  3** Wilful, 
ailbheach, -bhiche, see ailbhinneach. headstrong. 
ailbheag, eig, -an, 8.7. Rirg. 2 Ring of any achd,** see àilleasachd. 
coarse metal. Ailbheagan airgid, silver aiche, comp. of àilgheasach. 











rings ; e ru an ete ailghios, s.m, 
ach, a. Full of rings, like a ring, of or | ————ach, a. ; 
belonging to a ring. i ach sf. see ailgheas—., 
ailbheinn, s. E. see ailbhinn. — ———-aiche, 


ailbhinu, s.f. Flint, stone. 2 Rock, flinty | àilinde, (AC) comp of àlainn., 
rock. 3 Projection. 4 Precipice. An dedir|ailindeach, see àlainn. 
a’ silea ih 1nar bhoinne na h-ailbhinn, their !ailineachd, see àlainneachd. àilineachd mna 
tears dropping as water from a projecting rock;| na Gréige, the beauteousness of the woman of 
Ag imeavhd air au ailbhinn oillteil, walkia Greece ( Helen.)—A.C. 
onthe dreadful precipice ; do sgiath mar ail- | ail-innisean,** -ein, s.m. Anemoscope., 


silionta 
ailionta, see àileanta. 


18 


aimhealach 
aillis,** see aillse 3. 


ailis, -e, -ean, 8. Defect, fault, blemish. 2 Re- | àillne, s.f. ind. see àilleachd. 


roach. 
àill’, sf. see àille. f 
àill, s. f Desire, will, pleasure. Dé is àill 


leibh? what is your will! ; anni a b'àll 
leam, the thing that I would wish ; ma's àill 
leibh seo, if you desire or wish this ; an aill 
leat? do you wis" ; dean àille den éiginn, 
makea virtue of necessity. 

taill,** sf Rugged bank, rough steep. 2 Steep 
river bank, 3 Bridle. 4 Course. 5 Place, 
st-ad 6 Praise. - 

&ill air n-àill, adv. Willing or unwilling, nelens 
volens 

&ill-hhruach, -aich, e. f. Rock, rugged bank, 
rocky steep. 

aill-boruachach, a. Having steep or rocky banks. 

aill-bhil, s.f. Bridle-bit. 

àille, sr see àilleachd. 

, comp. of a. àlainn. Isàille leam seo na 
sin, I prefer this to that. 

dilleach, a. Keautiful, handsome, comely, fair. 

ailieachd, s f.ind. Beauty. beantifulness, hand- 
someness, comeliuess. 2 Sublimity. 3 Dignity. 
àilleachd thalmhaidh air cha bhi, no earthly 
beauty shall be round in him ; thà' nig i'n at- 
àilleachd, she came in her beauty ; bha a bs 
&ileachd gun choimeas, Aer beauty was un- 
equacded. 

éil.ead -eid. s.m. Degree of beauty. 

ailieag, -eig an, $. m. Jewel 2 Gewgaw. 3 
Pretty young maid Nach cuimhne leat an 
àilleag ? dost thou not remember the beauteous 
maid ? s 

&illeagan, -ain pl -ain & -ana, s.m. Little jew- 
el 2 Term ot affection for a young person. 
3 Pretty maid. 4 Toy. Soraidh slàn don 
àilleagan : farewell tothe pretty maid ! 


d n. pl. of àilleag. 


ailleagan, -&in, see faillean. 

&:lisa!achd stad, Bashfulness, modesty. 

ailiean,"* oi, sm. Causeway. 

wlleann,S -einn, s. f. Ele- 
campane,—inua Helen- 
‘tum. 2 Young beau. 8 
Minion 

àilleanta. a. Beautiful 
handsome, comely, deli- 
cte, ba;nful. 2 Having 
AU imposing appearance. 
8 Reserved. shy, distant. 

end, s.f. ind. Per- 
sonal beam y. 2 Delica- 
cy, bashfulness, modest 
reserve. Is i Ailleantachd 
vaise nam ban. delicacy 
ts the ornument of fe- 
males 

Ailleas, & f. 
2 Jewellery. 

~-ach, -aiche, a. 
proud. 

———achd,s.f.ind. Wilfuiness, pride. 

ailleig, gen. sing of ailleag. 

&ille,n, 8 m. Favourite. 2**gen.sing. of aillean. 

ailleinn, gen. sing. of aillea: n. 

aiilleort, à. (tail 6) High-rocked. 

&llghios, gm. see àilgheas. 

àulidü, a. Bright, resplendent. 2 Beantifnl, 
exquisite, fair. Lasair nan lochran àillidh, 
the fame of the resplendent lamps ` do'n òg- 
mhnavi a b’allidh leac, to the virgin of the 
Jairest cheek. 

taillin.** a. Another. 

atilionair, e. m. Caterer. 











6. Ailleann. 


see ailgheas. 


Wilful, 





head-strong, 


aillneachd, see àilleachd. 
aillse, sp Fairy. 2 Ghost. 3 Diminutive 
creature. 4| rarely Cancer, canker. 5 Delay. 
ach,** a. Like a fairy, of, or pertaining 
toa fairy 2 Spectral. 3**Ne-ligent. 
aillseachadh, -aidh, sm. see aibheiseachadh. 
aillseag, -eig,-an, 8.7. (aillse 3) Caterpillar. 
aillsicn, v.a. see aibheisich. 
Aillte,* s.f. see àilleachd. 
aillte, 8 f. High precipitous rock. 
Aillteachd, 8. f. ind. see àilleachd. 
aillteil, a. see oillteil. 
ailm, -e,-ean, s. f. tkim-tree, now leamhan. 
2 Letter “A.” 3 Fir-tree. 4 Hehn. 5 Science. 
failmeadh, -eidh, s.m. Prayer. 
ailmeay. -eig, -an,s. J. Elm. 2 Young or little 
elm-tree. 
an, &.pl. of ailmeag., 
ailmean, n.pl. of ailm. 
ailmeig, gen. sing. of ailineag. 
ailih, -e, -ean, 8. f. Flint stone. 2 Boundary- 
stone. 
àil-mheidh,** e, -ean, 8.f. Anemometer. 
ailnse, -ean, 8. f. Mistake, error. 2**Spectre. 
3**Spectral-looking Gerson. 
ailmseach, -eiche, a. Spectral, ghastly. 
ailn, s.f. (AC) Loch. Chi mi ai air ailn an 
eilein, I see a swan on the loch of the isand. 
ailne, comp. of a. àlainn. 
àilne, f xilléadhd 
aijneachd, 8./. see allleacha. 
àiluich, v.e. Beautify, adorn. 2 Accomplish. 
ailnichte, pt part. Adorned. 
ailp, gen. of alp. 
1—,** s.m. Protuberance. 2 Any gross lump. 
3 Mountain. 
i—,**a. White. 
Wäi SC a. Alpine. 
ailse, 
tailsin,|| \ 8S. Cancer. 
ailseach,** a. Cancerous. 
ailseag,** s.f. Caterpillar. 
ailt, s.f. see athailt. f2**House. 3t see ail. 
ailt, -e, €. Noble, stately. vrand, high. 2 Char- 
ming, beautiful. Aghaidh is àilte lìth, a face 
of the most beautiful colour. 
àilte, comp. of ailt. 
ailteacn, see fàilteach. 
üilteuchadh, (»uth'd) see fàilteachadh. 
ailteaciid, sf. ind. see àilleachd. Barrachd 
airt'àilteachd, superiority over thy handsome-. 
ness. 
failtear,** s.m. Carpenter. 
aim-, privative particle or prefix, 
priv. 
aimbeairt, (for aimbeirt) gen sing. of aimbeart. 
aimbeart, -eirt, 8... Poverty, want, indigerce. 
2 Calamity. 8 Mischief. Cridhe thal an aim- 
beirt, a generous heart iu poverty. 
ach, a. Poor, needy, indigent, necessi- 
tous. 2 Calamitous. 3 Mischievous. Tha 
mi aimheartach, J am indigent. 
as, -ais, 8.m. Same meanings as aim- 
beart. 
aimcheist, see imcheist. 
-—each, sve imcneisteach. 
aimeas,-eis, see amas. 
aimeaszmudh, seo ain vith. 
aimhdheoin, see aindeòin. 
aiinhengan,** see aigea'm. 
aimheal, -eil, s.m. Vexasion. grief. 2 Dismay. 
3 U. easiness, trouble, sorrow. 4** Repent- 
co, compunction, fear. Ko aimheal is fo 
sgios, vezed and wearied. 
ach, -aiche, a. Vexing, uneasy, vexee- 





see am, an, 








aimhealach 


tious. 2**Repentant. 





tion. 

&imhealaich,* v.n. Gall, pique, vex. Air'aimh- 
leachadh, galled, vexed. 

aimhealtach, see aimhealach. 

faimhean,** a. Pleasant, agreeable, smooth. 

aimhfheoil, see ainfhedil. 

&imhgheur, a. Edgeless, blunt. 

aimbghlic, a. Foolish, unwise. 

aimhghliocas, -ais, s.n. Folly. 

aimhi, see amaidh. 

àimhinn,* sf. see àmhuinn., 

àimhinnich,* see àmhuinnich. Å 

aimhleas, -eis, s.m. Hurt, harm, misehief, dis- 
aster. 2 Danger. 3 Injury. 5 Ruin, m'sfor- 
tune. 5 Perverseness. 
tion. B'esincar t'aimhleis, that would be 
your ruination ; ag iarraidh m'aimhleis, bent 
on my destruction; a’ labhairt aimhleis, utter- 
ing perverseness ; luchd aimhleis, wufortunate 
p^ le ; ni thu t'aimhleas, thou wilt harm thy- 
se 


aimhleasach, -aiche, a. Hurtful. 2 Unfortun- 
ate. 3 Mischievous. 4 Ruinous. 5 Foolish. 
6 Imprudent. 7 Destructive. Nithe aimh- 
leasach, mischievous things. 

&imhleasachd, s. J. ind. Condition or state of 
being unfortunate. 2 Mischievousn ss. 3 
Ruinousness. 4 Imprudence. 5 Foolishness. 

&imhleasaiche, comp. of a. aimhleasach. 

aimhleasg, a. Lazy,:indolent, inactive, drowsy, 
sluggish. " 

aimhieathan, -aine, a. Narrow, straight, tight. 
Is aimhleathan an t-slighe, narrew is the way. 

&imhleathanachd,* s.f.ind. Narrowness, Strait- 
ness, tightness 

eimhleisge,** s. f. Laziness, indolence, inac- 
tivity, drowsiness, sluggishness. 

aimhne, (for aibhne) gen.sing. of abhainn. 

aimhneach, -eiche, see aibhneach, 

aimhneart, -eirt, see ainneart. 

—ach, see ainneartach. 

—aiche, see ainneartaiche. 

—mhor, see ainneartmhor. 

aimhneirt, see ainneirt. 

aimhuichean (for aibhnichean) pl. of abhainn. 

aimhreadh, -eidh, s. m. ({am+réidh) Distur- 
bance, disagreement, confusion. 

——, a. Wrong, disturbed, disagreeing. 
Tha seo air aimhreadh, this is wrong ; tha thu 
'g am chur air aimhreadh, you are putting me 
wrong ; cuireamaid an cainnt air aimhreadh, 
let us confound their language. 

aimbreidh, gen.sing. of aimhreadh. 

faimbreithe, spl.  Defiles, passes, straits. 
fastnesses. 2 Forests. 

taimhreis, a. Difficult, arduous. 








14 


aincheart 
taiminn,** a. Pleasant, agrecable, smooth. 


achd,* sJ.ind. The greatest mortifica- | aimlisg, -e, -ean, s... Confriion, disorder, cas 


lam ty. Isa.e, tt it confusion. 
each, a. Confusion. 2 ('nnsing co fue 
sion. 3 Of, or perta-ning to confusion, 4 Mig 
chievous. 5 Quirrelsome. 
aimrii, a. Bar;en unproductive. 
eAch,* s. J. Barren wo nau, 
cachd,* s. f. ini. Baxr.nnesa, 
aimriox,** sm. E ro. 
aiinseach, see ain: is ach. 
&unsgth,a. Misch evous. 2 Impure, bawdy. 
8 linpious, profane. 
—eachd, a&./.ind. Mischievousness. 2 Im- 
purity. 3 Profanity, imp.ety. Le tuairisgeul 
s le o, with slander and impurity. 











6 Folly. 7 Destruc-|aimsichte, a. Bold, daring, r-sointe. 


aims:dh, (for amaisidh. fut.isd. of v. amais. 

aimsir, -e & -each, pl.-ean, *. . Time. 2 Season. 
3 Weather. A réir na h-ainisire 
a bbitneas ann, according ta the weather we 
mau huve ; a. chaillionnach, stormy weather ; 
a. bhreagb, fine weather ; a. a gheamhraidh, 
the winter season ; a. au earraich, the spring 
geason ; a. a0 tsamhraidh, the -vmmer season; 
a. an fhoxharaidh, the harvest season; a. foga- 
araidh, harvest weather; an @. seo, this weath- 
er. 

eil, a. Temporal, worldly. 2 Seasonable. 
Tha na nithe a chithear aimaireil, the things- 
which are seen are temporal, 

ailusiurrtiia, see aimsireil. 

ainsith,-e, an, em. (tain + -mis, of eirmis + 
ith) Mischance. 2 The missing of an aim, 

being unfortuuate. 

ain-, intens. & priv. particle, prefixed to words 
and corresponding with English -un, or -in. 

àin, -e, s.f. Heat, heat of noon. 2 Light. Ain 
anla, broad day-light. 

fain, s. f. Water. 

fain, a. Honourable, praiseworthy, respectable. 

3 e T'uirghiol ain, thy respectful 

sech, 

Wan a. Manifold, abundant. 

———,**s.m. Drone bee. 2 Much rain, 
3* see ainfhiach. 

ainbheart,** -bheirt, 8. f. Misdeed. 

tainbheil, s. f. Impudence, rudeness, imperti- 
nentlanguage. 2 Stinginess. 

t each, a. Impudent, rude. 2 Stingy. 

ainbheus, -&, -an, s.m. Immorality, dishonesty, 
want of virtue. 

—- —&ach, aiche, @ Immoral, dishonest, 
vicious. 
tainbhfeile, 

ainbhfheas, see ainfhios. 
fainbüfheileach, a. see ainbheileach. 
ainbhfhedil, see ainfheoil. 








see ainbheil. 


aimhreit, -e, -ean, s. J. Confusion, disorder, ` ainbhfbiach, eich, an, see ainfhiach. 


‘disagreement, contention, disturbance. 
each, -eiche, a. Quarrelsome, litigious, 

contentious. 2 Of, or belonging toa quarrel 
or disturbance. 3 Entangled. Maille ri 
mnaoi aimhreitich, along with a quarrelsome 
woman. 

aimhreiteachd,* s. f. ind. Degree of disorder, 
confusion, or quarrelsomeness. 

&inihreith, see aimhreit. 

aimhreitich, v.a. Coníound, entangle, 
through other. Entwineas thread. 

faimhriar, s.m. Mismanagement. 

ainhriochd, s.m. Disguise, concealment. 

—ach, a. Assuming a false figure. 

aimid, 8.f. see amaid. 

each, see amaideach. 

eachd, s.f. see amaideachd. 

aimideag, see amaideag. 

&imisichte, see aimsichte. 


put 














tainbhfhiosach, e. Rude, ignorant, headstrong, 
resentful. 

fainbhidh,** s. f. Rainy weather. 

ainbhios,* see ainfhios. 


ainbhith, see ainmhidh. 

-— — ——e&ch, -eiche, a. Stormy, tempestuous. 
2 Violent, passionate. see onfhadhach. 

ainbith, a. (tan-rbith, un-world-like) Odd, 
extraordinary. 

taincheard, -cheirde, s.m. Buffoon, ingenious 


fellow, imposter. 2 Buffoonery, low jesting. 

———-—ach, -aiche, a. Jocose, humorous, 
jesting, buffoon-like, merry. 

- , see aincheard. 

aincheardacb. a. **Like a buffoon, of, or be- 
longing to a buffoon. or buffoonery. 2 In- 
genious. 

aincbeart,** a. Unjust, iniquitous. 

— —————,*9* .cheirt, m. Prank, trick. 2 Im 








TT 


aincheart 


justice. 

aincheas, -eis, see aincheist. 

aincheirde, gen.sing. of aincheard. 

aincheist, s.m. Danger, jeopardy, dilemma. 
2 Perplexity, doubt. 3 Pnzzle, riddle. 

——each, a. Donbttul, puzzling. 2 Of, or 
pertaining to doubt or perplexity. 3 Injeo- 
pardy, doubt, or danger. 

&inchiall,** -chéill, s. f. Peevishness. 
wardness. 3 Testiness. 4 Madness. 

t ach, -aiche, a. Peevish. 2 Forward. 
8 Testy. 4 Mad. 

ainchis, -e, s. f. Curse, rage, fury. 

ainchliste, a. Slow, tedious. 

ftainchliüà, s.m. Peevish person. 

&inchrionailt, s.f. Acuteness, discernment, | 
sagacity. 

ainchrionna, d. Acute, sagacious. 

faincidh,** s. /. Doubt. 

faincis,** s. /. Skin, hide. 

aindealbh, s.m. Unseemly figure, 2 Distorted | 
picture. | 











——— ach, -aiche, a. Unseemly, deformed 

faindear, see ainnir. 

aindeas, -eise, a. Unprepared. 2 Awkward, 
not clever, not ready-handed. 

aindeas,** s.m. Adversity 

faindeise, s. E Affliction, calamity, awkward- 
Ress. 

aindeòin, $./. Reluctance. 2 Compuision, 
force. 3 Defiance. Co dhiùbh is devin leat; 
no 's aindeòin, whether it be your will or not; | 
g’ ad’ aindeoin in spite of you. 

aindednach, a. Reluctant, unwilling. Chaidh: 
e dhachaidh gu h-aindeonach, he went home | 
unwillingly. ! 

—-d, s.f. Unwillingness, reluctance, | 

obstinacy. 2 Compulsion. 

aindeiseil, -seala, a. Unpropitious, unprepared. 

aincessealachd, s. f. Vant of preparation. ; 
2 want of luck. 

faindhiarraidh,** a. Angry. 

ain-liadhach, -aich, s.m Atheist. 2 Ungodly 
person. 

&ain-diadhachd, s. f. ind. Ungodliness, profane- 
‘ness, iniquity, impiety. 

ain-diadhaidh, a. Profane, ungodly, wicked, | 
impious, irreligious. 

ain-diadhaidheachd, 

ain-diadhail, a. see ain-diadhaidh. 

ain-diadhalachd, see ain-diadhachd. 

ain-dileas, a. False, unfaithful, faithless. 

ain-dilseachd, e rt ad Faithlessness. 2 Un- 
friendliness. 

ain-disleachd, see ain-dilseachd. 

aindith,** s.f.ind. Extreme poverty. 

ain-diuid, e, $. /. Boldness, obstinacy, imper- 
tinence. 

—each, -eiche, a. Obdurate, obstinate, 
petulant. 

ain-dlighe, s.m. Injustice, unlawfulness, unjust 
law. 2 Trespass. 3 Usury. 

ain-dligheach, -eiche, a. Lawless,unlawful, ille- 
gal,transgressing, unjust, undutiful. 

————, -ich,s.m. Transgressor. 

——d, 3.f. ind. Unlawfuluess, practice 
of injustice. 

ain-dreann,*s. m. Fretfulness. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Fretful, peevish 

— —— —Achd, s.f.ind. Fretfulness, peevish- 
ness, 

aine,** s.f. ind. Delight, joy, pleasure. 
Music, harmony. 

faine,s. 7. Experience. 2 Good-will. 3 Agil- 
ity, expedition. 4 Platter. 

èine, (AC) s. f. Fire. Bhruich mi e ri àine 
caoire, I toested it (o a fire uf red-hot embers. 























2 


P o SND ctt 
—— HÓ—— — à M  —nDÍa 


15 


see ain-diadhachd. | 


ain-fhiighach 


Also see ain. 

aine,* see adhaand ae. 

aineach, a. Imperative (i. mood in Grammar) 
— Forbes’ G. Gram. 

aineadach, -eiche, a. Vexing, galling. 

aincadas, -ais, 8m. Vexation. 

aineal, see aineol. 

ainealsch, see aineolach. 


2 For-! aineamh, -eimh, s.m. Flaw, blemish, fault, 


injury, defect. Ceilidh seirc aineimh, charity 
conceils Faults ; dà reithe gun aineamh, two 
rams without blemish. 

aineiuhach, -aiche, a. Faulty, blemished, 
maimed, having defects or injuries. 2 Caus- 
ing defects or injuries. 

aineainhag, -aig, see ainneamhag. 

aincanitsiig, Gen. sing. of aineamhag. 

àincan, pl of adha or ae. Os cionn nan àinean, 
abone the livers. 

aineart, s.m. see ainneart. 

à'ueartaich, -e, s.f. (ainich) Yawning. 

ain'eu., -eis, w.m. see ainteas. 

aineas, -eis, sf. (an+theas) Passion, joy. 2 
Fury, frenzy. 3 Cruelty. 4 Bravery. Duth- 
aich gun aineas, a friendly country. 

t.ch,-aiche,a@ Passionate, furious, enra- 
ged, raging, frantic. 2 Cruel. 8 Brave. 4 

'" Hardy. Mar stuadhan aineasach, like furious 
billowy. 

———acnil, s. f. ind. Furiousness, passionate- 
ness, frenzy, fnry. 

taineasgair,a see ainsheasgair. 

aiuéfeachd, s f. ind. Insufficiency. 

aineil, gen.sing. of aineal. 

ainemmh, gen. sing. of aineamh. 

alneis, * og aineas. 

taineogail. s.f. Astonishment. 2 Stupor,torpor. 

aineol, -oil, s.m. Stranger, foreigner. 2 Guest. 
8 Unseynaintance. Ann an tir m'aineoil, in 
the country where lam unacquainted; a’ dol air 
aiucoi, going where not known, wandering a- 
broad ` chan fhaic aineol c’n lear no on 
fhasach, a stranger from sea or wilderness 
will not behold ; is trom geun bà air a h-ain- 
eol, deep is the low of a cow ona strange pas- 
ture. 

——-—,"*4. Strange, foreign, ignorant. 

ach, -aiche, a. Ignorant, unintelligent, 

rude, unlearned. Aineolach air seo, ignorant 

of thie. 

aiche, comp of aineolach. 

aineolas, -ais, £. f. Ignorance, want of know- 
ledge, nescience, illiterateness. Is tróm an 
t-eallaen an t-aineolas, ignorance is a heavy 
burden ` am bhur n-aineolais, the time of your 
ignorance. 

tainer,** a. Proud. 2 Great. 8 Cruel. 

aiu-fheasach, @. Sensnous, lewd, lustful. 

ainfheich, gen. sing. of ainfhiach. 

ainthedil,-fhedla, s.f. (aimh+fedil) Proud flesh, 
c rrupt flesh. 

aiufheéla, gen. sing.of ainfhedil. 

ainfhiach, -fheich, -fhiachan, s m. Debt, obliga- 
tion. Fo ainfhiach dhuit-sa, under obligation 
to you. 

ainu-fhior,--a, a. Untrue. 

ainfhios, -a, s.m. Ignorance. 
dbnit, unknown to you. 











t 
Air ainfhios 





--ach, -aiche, a. Ignorant, illiterate. 2 
unintelligent. 
ainfhiosrach, -aiche, a. Ignorant, illiterate, 


unintelligent. 
aiufhiosrachd, s.f. Ignorance, illiterateness. 
a n-fhirinn, -ean, 3.f. Untruth. 
ain-fhiagh, a. see ain-fhiüghach. 
ach, -aiche, a. Worthless. 2 Insig 
nificant, centemptible. 





ain-fhidghachd 16 ainmich 





achd, s. f. Unworthiness. 

4ain-fhuail, s.f. Chamber-pot. 

aingeachd, see aingidheachd. 

aingeal, -il, pl. -il, -gle, -glean, -glich,(AQ) 
s.m. Angel. 2 Messenger. 3 Fire. 4 Light. 
5 Sunshine. 

——ach,a. Angelic, of, or pertaining to an 

angel. 2 Of, or pertaining to fire. 

ach, s.m. see aingealachd. : 

achd, [| s. f. ind. Numbness, torpidness, 
chillness. 

ainzealag,?-eig, 5. E Wood angelica. 
nam buadha. 

aingealail,** see aingealach. 
ingealta, a. Malicious, vindictive. 2 Perverse, 
wicked, headstrong, froward. 

—chd, s. f. ind. (aingidh) Frowardness, 
maliguity, perverseness, wickedness. 
gabhail tlachd an aingealtachd, taking plea- 
sure in wickedness : aingealtachd ’n a chridhe, 
frowardness in his heart. 

aingealtas, -ais, see aingealtachd. 

Talugels, s. f. Curse. n 

ainghean, ein, s.m. Excessive love. 2 Excess- 
iye greed or avarice. 

--—ach, a. Exceedingly attached. 2 Ex- 
cessively greedy or avaricious. 

ainghearradh, -aidh, s.m. Short cut. 

ain-ghniomh, s.m. Bad deed. 

ain-ghniomnhach, e. Facinorous. 
atrocious, detestably bad. 

aingidh, -e, a. Wicked, impious, vicious, bad. 
2 Perverse, mischievous. 3 Cross, ill-na- 
tured. : J 

aingidheachd, s.f.ind. Iniquity, sin, evil, 
wickedness, viciousness. 2 Perverseness. 
Wrath. A. a’ bhaile, the wickedness of the city; 
a. ur deanadais, the evil of your doings 

aingil, s.m., pl. of aingeal. 

&ingle,-an, see aingeal. 

aingiich,(AC) pl. of aingeal. 

ainghdh, a. Angelic. 

————each, a. see ainglidh. 

—eachd,** s. f. Angelicalness. 

&inglionta, a. see ainglidh. 

ain-iarmartach, -aiche, a. Most furious. 

àinich, e, s. f. Panting, breathing hard. 

ainich, see aithnich. 

ainid, a. Vexing, galling. 

each, -eiche, a. see ainid. 

ain-iochd, see an-iochd. 

———— mhoireachd, see an-iochdmhoireachd. 

———mhor, see an-iochdmhor. 

&in-iomad, -aid, s.f. Too much. 

achd, s. f. Superfluity, superabundance. 

ain-iomadaidh, o, Superfluous, unnecessary. 
2 Exuberant. 

ain-iosal, a. Haughty, imperious. 





-= 








gee lus 


- 








2 Wicked, 








ae 





&inirich, see eanraich. 
ainis, 8. f. Anise. 
&in-iàl, see an-iuül. 


fainle,** a. Fair, comely, well-featured. 

ainle, s. f. Wild cat. (?)2 Green-fly. 

fainleachd, s.f. Comeliness. 

tainleag, -eig, s.f. Snare. 2 Sting. 

————-, -eig, (for fainleag) Swallow, see 
gobhlan-gaoithe. , 

— dhubh, s. f. Swift (bird) see gobhlan 


—— — — -mhara, $.f. Swift (bird) see gobh- 
lan mór. 2**Black martin. 

———— -mhonaidh, s.f. Alpine swift (bird) 
see gobhlan-monaidh. 

—— — mhór, s.f. Swift (bird) see gobhlan 
mor. 

¢ainlean, v.a. Persecute, pursue. 

ainleanmhuinn, s. f. Persecution. 





mór. 





-——ach, -aiche, a. Highly injurious. 

ainm, -e, pl. -ean, -eannan, sn. Name. 2 Sub- 
stantive noun. 3 Character. An t-aium gun 
antairbhe, the name without the profit; is 
fhasa deagh ainm a chall na 'chosnadh, a good 
name is easier lost than won ; c'ainm a th'ort ? 
what is your name ? ciod is ainm do seo, or e 
ainm th’air seo ? what is the name of this? ; 
duine d'am b'ainm Aonghas, a man named 
Angus ` Maighistir——c’ainm a th'air ? Afr. 
——what's his name 1 

ainm-chlar, -àir, -an, s.m. Catalogue. 2 Index. 

ainmeachadh, -aidh, s.m. Naming, appointing. 
2 Mentioning. 3 Nominating. 4 Nomination. 
Aga—, pr. part. of ainmich. 

ainmeachail,** a. Appellative. 

ainmeachair,** s.m. Assigner. 

ainmeachas, -ais, sm. Mere naming, nothing 
but the name. 

ainmealachd, s. f. ind. Celebrity, fame, renown, 
notoriety. 

ainmeanach, -aich, s.m. Nominative (case in 
grammar.) 2 Nominator. 3 see ainmeanaiche. 

ainueanaiche, s.n. Denomiuator. 

ainmear, s.m. Substantive or noun in grammar. 

ain-measarrach.** -aiche, @. see ana-m—. 

ain-measarrachd,** s. f. ind. see ana-m—. 


ain-measarradh, see ana-measarradh. 
' ainmeic, 


! ainmeig, ) adv. see ainmig. 


ainmeil,-e, a. Celebrated, renowned, famed, 
famous. 2**Namely. Dh'fhàs iad sin ’n an 
daoine ainmeil, those became men of renown ; 
gu h-ainmeil, especially, famously. 
eachd,** s. f. ind. see ainmealachd. 
ain-méin,-e, 3. f. Pride, haughtiness, arro- 
gance, frowardness. 
each, -iche, a. Perverse, froward. 2 Il- 
liberal, churlish. 
eachd, s. f. ind. Perverseness, froward- 
ness. 2 Illiberality, churlishness. 
ain-mèinn, -e. see ain-msin. 
ain-mheas, -eis, s.m Reward, recompense, re- 
muneration. 
— —— —ach, -aiche, a. Proud-spirited. 2 Im- 
uu es huge. 
ain-mheasardha, 
ain-measarra, a. see ana-measarrach. 
ain-mheasardhachd, e € ind. 
ain-mheasardhas, -ais, 3.m. 
ain-niheasarrachd, s. f. ind. 
ain-mheasarras, -ais, 8.m. 
ain-mheid,** s. f. Wonder, rarity. 
ain-mhéin, see ain-mein. 
——neach, see ain-méineach. 
ain-mhiann, see ana-miann. 
-——ach, see ana-miannach. 
ainmhide, -ean, $.m. Rash fool, loquacious fool, 
babbler. 
-—achd, s.find. Rash folly. 
ainmhidh, -e, -ean, s.m. Brute, animal, beast. 
An ainmhidhean uile, fall their beasts. 
——each,** -eiche, a. Brutal, brutish 2 
Of, or belonging to a brute. 
eachd, s. f.ind. Brutality. brutish» 


ain-leas, -eis, 3m. Slander. 2**Difference. A 
**Mischief. 4**Theft. 
ain-leatrom, -uim,s. m. Oppression, injustice. 


see ana-measarre 
achd. 

















ness. 

ain-mhireach, -ich, see ana-bhiorach. 

ain-mhisneachd, s. f. ind. Pusillanimity. 

ain-miann, pl. -mianna, see ana-miann. 

anmic, see ainmig. 

ainmich, pr.part. ag ainmeachadh, v.a. Name, 
appoint, mention, fix upon, nominate. Ainm- 
ich do thuarasdal appoint your wages; ainmich 
coe siod, Menti n who yonder man is. 


ainmichte 


17 


air 


eegend 


ainmichte, pt.part. v. aimnich, Named. 

mu, adv (an+ minig) seldom, rarely, scarce- 
ly. Is aiumig a thig e. he s-Idom comes ; Wain- 
mig a leichi-l, his axe(equal) wae rare ; v'a n- 
mig bha nio bhuillean fann, seldom were my 
bows weak. 

ainmigead,** ed, s.m. Rareness, scaàrceness. 
9 Jucrease in scarceness. A’ dol an ainmig- 
esd, getting scarcer and scarcer. 

ainm-lite,** +. f. Cata:ogue, index. 

alsum'nic, see aimee. 

ainwnichte, see ainmichte. 

ainmnichthe, ean, 6.2. Assignee. 

fainn,** ainne, s. Circle. 2 Ring. 

ainndeonachadh, see aind.ónachd. 

tain. eadh,** -eidh, s.m. Patience. 

ainneal, -eil, s.m see aingeal. 

ta, see aingealta. 

ainneamh, -eimhe, a. Rare, scarce, curious. 2 
Curiously formed 3**Valua le. Crios aiun- 
neamh, a curious girdle ; is ainneamh a leith- 
id, his match is seldom met with. 

,* adv. Seldom. Is ainneamh a thig 

thu, you seldom cone. 

ach, see ainneamh, 

-————achd, s. f ind. Rareness, scarceness. 














6. Aimneamnug. 


ainneamhag, -aig, s./. Phoenix. 

ainneanta,** a. Dogmatic. 

ainneart, -eirt, s.m. (ain,ezcess - neart) Violence, 
force, oppression. Aiuneart air a’ choigreach, 
violence on the stranger ; luchd ainneirt, op- 
pressors. 

ach, -aiche, a. Oppressive, violent, ty- 

rannical, overbearing. 

achd, s f.ind. Practice of oppression. 

2 Force, violence. 

mhor, a. Feeble. 

&inneom, see aindeòin. 

ainngealta, see aingealta. 

&innichte, og Made patient. 2 Tamed. 

&innighte,* (ainneadh) see ainnichte. 

ainnir,-e,-ean, s.f. Virgin, maid. 2** Mar- 
riageable woman 3**Yonng woman. Ainuir 
fo bhròn, a maiden mourning; ainnir a cheud 
ghràidh, the maid of his first love. 

each, a. Like a beauty. 

ainnis, a. Poor,destitute, needy, abject. 

ainniseach, § Tha mi ainnis lom, J arn poor and 
naked. 

ainnis, s.f. Poverty. 2 Abjectness. 

ainniseachd, 3 Poor or needy person. 4** 
Desperateness. A’ slugadh an ainnis, swal- 
lowing up the needy. 

Ainniuigh,-ean, 8. an. Sigh, sob. 

ainnsteil, s.f. Disturbance, commotion. 2 
Disorder. 

ainreite, see aimhreit. 

ainriochd, sm. Miserable plight. 2 Pitiful 
condition. 3 Frightful bodily appcarance. 

-—ail a. Shapeless,ill-formed. 2 Disguised. 

&insearc, -eirc, 3. J. Hatred. 

















ainseircench, -aiche, a. Malignant, unfeeling, 
uncharitable, cruel. 

ainscirecaiachd, 8. f. ind. 
want of atfection. 

aluseirccil,-e, a. see ainseirceach. 

ains'ean,-ein, s.m. Fury. 2 Fright, terror. 3 
zad temper. Chaidh an t-«ach air ainsgean, 
the horse ran off in a fright. 

ainsgein, -e, sf. Snidden movement, s arting 


Uncharitableness, 





fit. 2 see ainszean. 
— ach, -aiche, a. Ill-tempered. 2 Furious, 
wild. 8 Apt io take frig: t, as a horse. 


ainsgian, 8.28. see aiusgeau. 
ain-sheasgair, a. Without favour or protection, 
destitute. 





———— eachd, s.f. Rudeness, violence. 
ain-sheirc,** s. f. Excessive hatred. 2 Cruelty. 
eil, a. Hating, a ominating. 2 Cruel. 

ain-spiorad, s.m. Evil spirit. 

ain-srianta, a. Unbridled, untamed. 2 Debauch- 
ed. 3 Ob. tinate. 

ain-sria-tacu,-aich, s.m. Libertine. 2 Debauch- 
ee. 

ain-sriantas,-ais, s. m. Libertinism. 2 State of 
being untamed, as a horse. 

ainteach,** aam. Religious abstainment from 
eating flesh. 

**a. Boastful, vain-glorious. 
ainteann, a. Bound, 2 Very stont. 3 Bold. 
ain-teas, -ei-, San, Excessive heat. 2 Inflama- 

tion. 3 Lupetuosity, keenness, violence of 
manner. 4 Ardour, tervour, zeal, enthusiasm. 


——ach, -aiche, a. Violently hot. 2 Fiery, 
impetuous. 
——-—achail, see ain-teasach. 


—-—achd, s.f.ind. Feverishness. 
ain-teasaigheachd, see ain-teasachd. 
ainteil, a. Preceptive, maudatory. 

ain-teist, -ean, s.m. False-witness. 2 Bad char- 
acter. 

—eanas, -ais, s.m. False testimonial, 
false certificate, unjust certificate. 

—— — —ea5, -eis, s.m. False testimony. 

.— — — eil, -e, a. I!l-famed, uncreditable. 

ain-teth, a. Scorching, exceedingly hot. 9 Ar- 
dent, vehement, eager. 2 Inflamed. Ain-teth 
chum air, ardent yor battle. 

aintheasachd, see ain-teasachd. 
laiuthinue, see athainte. 
aintighearn,-a, sm. Tyrant. 
overbearing rnler. 
achd, see aintighearnas. 

— ail, -e, a. Tyrannical. 2 Oppressive. 

——as, “àis. 8.?4. Tyranny. 2 Oppress- 
ion. 3 Domineer ng. 4 Despotism. 5**Ab- 
soluteuess. Am fuath a th'againn air a., the 
hatred we have of despotism 

ain-tioma. s. f. ind. Intrepidity, valour. 

ain-tion ail. -e, œ. Intrepid, valiaut. 

ain-tiomalachd, s. f. ind. Fearlessness, courage, 
boldness. bravery. 

ain-treun, -tréine, a. 
powerful. 

—— ——à8a,** ais, 8.3n. Great strangth. 

-air, termination of nouns, appearing also as 
-eir, -ir,-oir, and -uir, and signifying agent 
or doer. 

air, prep. On, upon. 2 Of, concerning. 3 For, 
on account of. 4 By. 5 With. 6 Also sig- 
nifying the same as if joined in fts first sense 
with the pers. pronoune. 7 On, an oath or 
assertion. 8 On, tpon, denoting time. 9 
With, accompanied by. 10 Claim of debt. 

The above are the meanings of air used as a 
simple preposition, but it has idiomatic nses 
almost without numberin various combing- 
tion with verbs and other parts of speech. 





2 Oppressor, 





Ungovernable. 2 Very 


air 


18 


air ball 


Sees, 


air (cont. )— 
Na'm faighinn am fear a tha air chall oirbh, 
tf 1L should find. the man that is lost PROM you, 
(if trans'ated here By you, it implies that 
"you" lost the man, which may not be true] 
theich e orin, he jled AWAY FROM me ; chluich 
e an cleas orm, he played the trick ON me; cheil 
e an gnothach orm. Ae hid the matter FROM me; 
gvàir e orm, he laughed AT me; ni mi sgeul 
ort, I will make a tale (inform) AGAINST you ; 
dh'ith earn-iasg oirnn, he ate our fish FOR 
(ON) us, [i.e. 1n spite of us, not to oblige us.] 
In these examples air translates differently | 
into English in every case, but the differences 
are caused by the English verbs, each of 
which requires its own preposition as a com- 
plement. or these under the various| 
meanings would hide from the learner the! 
fact that the Gaelic prep. has the same mean- | 
ing in each case—adversity, adverse circum- 
stances,mishap,disaster, trickery suffered, &c. 
Examples given by MacAlpine :— 
Iomradh air do gulivcas, a report of thy wis- 
dom ; air Leinn, on a mountain ; air sgàth, for 
the sake of ; air ainm, by name ; air bheagan, 
possessing little; air an aobhar sin, for that 
reason ; air mo shon-sa dheth, for my part, as 
Jar as I am concerned ; air éigin, with much 
ado, [with much difficulty, scarcely, “oes 
air à h-aon, for one, (thuit tri le Bran air a h- 
aon, Bran, for one, killed three] ; air seachran, 
astray ;air falbh, away, from home ; air uair- 
ibh, sometimes; tha eagal air, he is afraid ; tha 
acras air, he is hungry; air chor, 80 that ; air 
chor éigin, somehow or other ; duine air chor 
éigin, some person or other ; air meud 's gu 
bheil e, let it be ever so great ; Taira mheud "e 
gu'n tig dhiubh, however many of them come]; 
cha d’fhuair mi ni air, I got nothing for it ; dé 
tha a’ cur air? what is the matter with him 1 
Examples from Stewart's Gaelic Grammar ,: 
ON, UPON—air an lar, on the ground ; air an 
la sin, on that day. CLAIM OF DEBT—ioc 
dbomh na bheil agam ort ! pay me what thou 
owest ! cia meud a th’aig mo thighearn ort-sa? 
how much owest thou unto my lord t OaTH— 
air m'fhacal, upon my word ; air làimh t'ath- 
air's do sheanair. by the hand of your father 


and grandfather; [air na chunnaic thu riamh f 


na fosgail e, for the sake of all you evertsaw do 
"not Goen  1t.] (Thig air) SPEAK or 
TREAT OF—thig mo bheul air do cheartas is 
air do chliü, my mouth shall speak of thy jus- 
tice arul thy praise ; sin cùis air a bheil mi nis 
a’ teachd, that is a matter of which 1 am now 
to treat ; tog ort! rouse thyself! chaidh agam 
Sir, / prevailed over hin;'s ann orms’ a chaidh, 
it is I that was u orsted. Thug e am monadh 
air, he betook himself to the mountain. IN 
RESPECT OF—cha’n fhaca mi an samhuil air 
oleas, I never saw their like for badness ; air a 
lughad, however small it be. JOINED WITH, 
ACCOMPANIED BY—móran iaruinn air bheag 
faobhar, much iron with little edge ; oidhche 
‘pha mi ’n a theach air mhóran bìdh 's air 
bheagan aodaich, Z was a night in his house 
with plenty of food but scanty clothing; air 
le'h lannh, having but one hand. MEASURE, 
PIMENSION—dà throidh air àirde, two feet in 
height. ALTERNATI N—Olc air mhath leat e, 
whether you take tt well or ill. 
Examples from Armstrong :— 

Air cnoir, nobly, properly, as usual ['ruth- 
fully] ; air seo,upon this, then; air iomrall, a- 
stray ` air chuthach, mad; air neo, else, or 
els? ` air muin, on, upon, above , chaidh e air 
& muin, he had carnal connection with her ; 


bithidh sin air bhuil, that will come to pass. 

Addition l 
'Nuair a thig air duine thig air uile, this 
means that fortunes and misfortunes do not 
come singly, and is a Gaelic equivalentof 4t 
never rains but it pours ; tha a’ mhisg air, 
he is drunk ; cha’n 'eil air ach—, there tis no- 
thing forit but—. Chaidh e air chéilidh orra, 
he went to visit them; air torradh, ata funeral; 
air banais, at a wedding ; air a lughad is 
fheairrd, the smaller the better; bhae air mo 
mhuin gu'n &c., or bha e air m'aodann gu'n 
&c., he was always worrying me to de, gabh 
air, thrash him; éirich*air, belabour him ` éir- 
rich air an óran, sing the song well ; mór orm 
agus beag agam, very patrogizing to me and 
little thought o” by me. 
i=" Air , it may be stated, always signifies 
soinething of a very temporary duration. 
[Air governs the Dative case of nouns follow- 
ing it. Though it is said not to cause aspira- 
tion by rule, there are many instances in set 
phrases in which it does, as, air dheireadh, be- 
hind ; air thoiseach, before ;-air chionn, in rea- 
diness for, [air chionn dhomh bhi deas, by the 
time I was ready.] It may be observed that 
where it causes aspiration it cannot be 
translated upon,—tha i air chall, she is lost. 
The reason for this difference seems to be 
thatair in Modern Gaelic misrepresents the 
old prepositions ar and for. Ar meant 
before, against, beside, and it caused aspi- 
ration of the word following, because it 
formerly ended ina vowel (are orart.) For 
meant upon, and did not cause aspiration. 
This for is the air properof Modern Gaelic 

grammar.1] 

Examples given above in brackets, thus[ ] 
areadditions to those given by the authors 
mentioned. 

Combined with the personal pronouns thus ; 


1 Sing. orm, Piur. oirnm, 
2 ort, oirbh, 
: iod. orra, m. & Jf. 
Emphatic forms. 
1 Sing. Gg orm-fhéin, pl. oirnne, oirnn- 
fhéin 


2 Sing. ort-sa, ort-fhéin, pl. oirbh-se, oirbh- 
fhéin 


3 Sing. (m.) air-san, air-fhéin ; (f.) oirre-se, 
oirre-fhéin, D. m. & f. orra-san 
orra-fhéin. d 

air, prep. pron. On him, on it. 2 Upon him, 
upon it. 3 In his possession. 4 On him as 
a duty. Tha 'aodach air, his clothes are on 
him ; cha d'fhuair mi ni air, I got WC e) in 
his possession ; tha e air ri phàigheadh, he ts 
bound to pay ; chaidh agam air, I got the better 
of him, I managed to do it. 

àir, gen. sing. of ar. : 

air, v.a. Plough, till, cultivate. 2 Number, 
count. Iadsan a dh'àireas euceart, they who 
plough UD 

air achd, adv. So that. 

air a chor sin, adv. In that state, in that man- 
ner 

air adhart, adv. Forward. 

air a h-uile cor, adv. At all events. 

air àird, adv. In order, in train. 

air alt's, adv. Sothat. f : 

air a’ mhionaid, adv. This moment, immedi- 
ately. 

air SCH sin, adv. Therefore. 

air an uair, adv. Presently, instantly. 

air athais, adv. Slowly. 

air ball, adv. Immediately, on the spot. 


air barr 


air barr, adv. Atop. 

air beulaobh, prep. (tbeulaibh, dat. pl of beul) 
Before, in front of. 

tàirbhe, sf. Ribs. 2 Story. 
Drot, 4 Produce. 

fairbheach, a. Ribbed, furrowed. 

dirvheart, -virt, s.m. Meaning. 2 Leading idea 
3 Leading. 4 Practising. 

——ach, -airhe, a. Sagacious. 

air bhoil, adv. Mad, crazy. 

à rbbhó'n dé, adv. The day before yesterday. 

air blio'n raoir, adv. The night before last. 

air bho'n uiridh, adv. The year before last. 

a r uhórd, adv. Boarded, as a boarder. 

air bhraise, adv. Agog. 

airbhinneach, -eiche, a. Honourable. 
erable. 

airobr», s. E Multitude, host. 2 Army, legion. 

air bord, adv. On board, as of a ship. 

àirc, -e, -ean, s. /. Ark. 2 Large chest. 3 Gran- 
ary. Stad an àirc, the ark rested. 

airc, -e, s. f. Distress, affliction, difficulty,trou- 
ble, poverty, strait, hardship. Saoi'n a nire, 
a heroin gistresa ; 's mairg a shìneadh laimh 
na h-airce do chridhe na circe, woe t» him who 
stretches poverty’s hand to the hen-hearted 
(cowardly); aran na h-airce, br ad of affiction; 
tha mian aire, Z amina strait. 

fairc,** -e, s. J. Cork-tree. 2 Sow. 3 Lizard. 
Aire luachrach, a lizard. 

#——each,** a. Ingenious. 2 Shifty. 

&irceach, -eiche, a. Indigent, poor. 

—----——, -eich, s. f. Indigent person. 

fairceadh,** -eidh, s. m. Earnest penny. 

airveann, a. Certain, positive. 

as, -ais, s.m. Certainty, positiveness. 

airceas, -ais, s.m. Scarcity. 2 Poverty, indi- 
gence. 3 Straitness. 4 Sorrow, distress, 
trouble. 3 Pain. 6 Difficulty. 7 Restraint. 
8**Maturity. Guu airceas mealaidh sibh, ye 
shall enjoy without restraint or without trouble. 

—— ——-ach,a@. Sorrowful. 2% Troublous. 3 
Cansing sorrow or pain. 

aircei!, -e, @ see airceach. 

air chall, adv. Astray, lost. 

air chàrn, adv Outlawed. 

airchealla, see airchealladh 

airchealladh, -aidh, s.m. Sacrilege, theft. 

&irchill, s. f. Keeping. 

&ir chionn, adv. To the end that. 2 Forthe use 
or purpose of. Air chioun daibh a bhi deas, 
by the time they were ready. 

airchiosach, -aiche, a. Greedy, glattonous. 

airchis, s. f. Complaint. 2** pledge. 3** Meeting. 

air chòir, adv. Right, well. Cua d'fhuair e 
oibreachadh air choir, Ae did . ot get a proper 
chance of working. 

air chor éigin, adv. Somehow or other. 

air chruaidh,(AC) adv. (cruaidh, stone used as 
an anchor) At anchor. 

air chuairt, adv. Sojourning. 

sir chùl adv. Behind. 

air chuthach, adv. Mad, crazy. 

aircill, v.a. Liein wait. 2 Listen secretly. 

airciseach, -eiche, a. Difficult. 2 Strait. 3 Hun- 


8 Emolument, 





2 Ven- 





gry. 

aircleach, -eich, s.m. Cripple, any disabled or 
slovenly person. An dat, air muin an airc- 
leich, the blind on the back of the cripple. 

airc luachrach, see dearc-luachrach. 

air cùlaobh, adv. (tcùlaibh, dat. pl. of cùl) Be- 
hind, at the back of. C 

àird, gen. sing. of ard. 

àird-, a. Often pretixed to words whose first 
vowel is small, but ‘‘ard-’’ when the first vow- 
el i» broad, having the effect of an intensitive 
particle, as English arch- in arch-enemy. 

dird, -a -ean, sf. Quarter of the heavens, 


19 


— 


eegen RD a t aita e, NUDO ET BP Ut APUD 





| aird-thoir, 


aireach 





“airt,” or point of the compass,cardinal point 
2 Heaven. 3 Condition, st ite. 4 Preparation. 
5 hnproveunent. 6 Order. ` 711 Happiness, 
comfort. 5ffDevice, Expedient. 
Dé an airda dh'fhàg thu air? in what condi- 
tion did yon leave him 1; cuir àird air, prepare: 
ogach àird, fron every quarter ` gu'n deanadh 
e àird air a chur 'am charaibh, that he would 
devise a plan to put mein p asexxion of it; thàin- 
ig iad as gach aird, they cam» from every quar- 
ter; dheanadh e àird, he would make prepa -a- 
tion; an àird, aloft, upwards; annus na h-aird- 
ibh, on high, in heaven; an àird müóir, in high 
condition. 

aird-deas, -e.deas, s.f. The South, the south 
point. Gaoth na h-airde-leas. the xonth wind; 
a dh'ionnsuidh na h-airde-deas, tu the South. 
[Always preceded by the article. ] 

àird-an-ear, -d'-an-ear, s.,£ The East, the east 
point. Gaoth na h-aird'-An-ear, the east wind, 
a dh'ionnsuidh na h.aird'-an-ear, tothe Kast. 
[Always preceded by he article.) 

àird-an-iar, -d'-an-iar, 8. f. The West, the west 
point. Gaoth ua h-àird' -an-iar, the west wind; 
a dh'ionnsuidh na h-aird'-an-iar, to the West 
[Always preceded by the article. } 

àirde, s. f. ind. Height, altitude, ewinence,high 
E highness, excellence. 2 Promontory. 

é an àird' atha e? what is his stature ? ; 

airde nam beann, the height of the mountains: 
bha a’ ghrian 'u a h-àirde, the sun wax at its 
height; ged éirich 'àirde, though his excellence 
should mount. 

airde, comp. of a. ard. 

àirdeachd, 8. /. ind. Highness, greatness, qua- 
lity, excellency. 

àirdead, -eid, sam. Degree of highness or greate 


ness. 

àirdealachd, s. f. ind. Ingenious contrivance. 

airdeanna, $. pl. Constellations. 

airdeil, -e, à. Inventive. contriving, ingenious. 

air deireadh, adv. . ` Last 

fairden,l e Symptom. 

àirde'n lain, 8. f. High-water, full tide. 

àirdhe, s. f. Wave. 2 Sign. 

air dheadh, conj. Otherwise, or else. 

air dheireadh, adv. " Behind.. 

àird inbh-, s.f. ind. see ard inbhe. 

airdleag,** See airleag. 

air do. conj. As. Air dhomh bhi teàrnadh, as I 
was coming down; air dhomh a thogail (in the 
past sense) after I had lifted it. 

air dòigh, adv. In order. 

aird-reachd, s.m. Supreme law. 2 Synod. 

làirdreim, s. J. High style, magnificence. 
Flights in poetry. 

aird-righ, see àrd-rìgh. 

see àird-an-ear. 

aird-tuath, -e-tuath, s..f. The North. the north 
point. Gaoth na h-àirde-tuath, the north wind; 
a dh'ionnsuidh na h-airde-tuath, to the North. 
(Always preceded by the article.) 

aire, s.f. ind. Notice, heed, attention. 2 Regard. 
8 Caution, watching, watchfulness, observa- 
tion. 4 Mind, intention, thoughts, design. 
Thug iad aire dhomh, they gave me th ir at- 
tention; fo aire, under observation, in custody; 
gun aire dhomh, unknown to me ` without my 
notice; thoir an aire, take care; àit' aire, obser- 
vatory; taigh aire, (also taigh faire) observa- 
to y, & house where a corpse is or where vigils 
are held over a corpse, (late-wake); aire leagta 
air saoghail dhorcha, his thoughts fixed on 
worlds unknown; thoir an aire dhomh, attend 
to me. 

aireach, -eiche, a. Attentive. “2 Cautions, cir- 
ciumsp°ct. 8 Subtle. 4 rarely violent, hos 
tile. 5** see aireachail. 





àireach 20 airleag 
aiicach, Ach, s.m. Cattieman. 2 Grazier. 3)#Ir ghlens, adv. Ready. 2 In tune. 


LDairyinan, —4** Suepnerd., 
There is confusion i Gaelic between “air- 
tech’ and Old frisn **airc(cn)"—froiu which 
"airidn'', worthy. Abe bó-aire, cow-lord, 
was the free tenant of aucient Ireland. 
*aireach"" owes its long vowel to a coniusiou 
with àraich, vear.t 

aireach, (WY. isles u. see aithreach. 

air avb, 8m. tshield. 2+ Watch, guard. 
Watchman. 

ada, -aidh, s.m. 

guard. 

ail,-e, a. Attentive, watchful, obser- 
vaut, circumspect, applicative, aware. 2** 
Soa et, 8**;a-ey hostile, violent. 

àireachas, -ai+, sin. Pastoral life. 2 Tending 
eaitie. 3 Office of a herdsman. 4 Summer 
pasture for back cattle. 5** Watenfulness. 


3** 


Attention, on one’s 





air eagal gu, conj. Lest. 
taireai,t s. Bert. 
taireniuch,** a. Feeble. 


àireamh, -eimh, 8. f. Number, quantity. 2 
Numbering, nnineration, account. Gann an 
àireauih, Jew in number”. 

aireainh, pr.pt. àireamh, t.d. Number, count, 
compute. CÓ à dh'àirmheas duslac. [acoib ? 
who can count the dust of Jacob 1 

ach. -aich, s.m. Accouutant. 2 Num- 

erator. 3 Numeral. 

ach, a. Numerical. 

—archail,** a. Arithmetical. 

acud, a.f.ind. Nniubering, numeration, 

computation. % Arithmetic. 

—aich, v.a. see à reamh. 

————air,** s.m. Arivüunetician. 
ant. 

—— ——Aár,** fut, pass. of v àireamh. 

daircachd. sf. see a.reamhachd. 

—— —íhear, -inir, see àireamhair. 

-tomlials,1t s.f. 

















2 Acconnt- 














matics, 
airean, -ein, -eanan, s. m.  Ploughman. 2 
Goadsman. 
ach. $ a. Agricultural. 
ach:l,* s.f. ind. Agriculture. 
faireannach,** -aich, gau. Beginning. 
jairear,** Jr, san, Food. 2 Satisfaction, 
choice. 8 Harbour, bay. 
fairearra,** a. Pleasant, satisfactory. 
&ireusg,** -eisg, 8... Apple of tbe eye. 2 


Vision, sight. 
air éiginn, adv. With difficulty. 
aire-ionad,** am, Observatory. 
air fad, prep. Yhrougn, throughout. 2 Among. 
3 During. Mharbhadh iad air fad, they were 
ali killed. 
air falbh, adv. 
air falbh ! inf. 
air falbnay,** adv. 
air fasgadn, adv. A-eeward. 
air fea:lh, adv. Throughout. 2 Among. 
During. [Governs the Genitive case.] 
air 'fhad, adv. (dit. on its length) Leugthwise. 
tairtid, see oirfeid. 
T each, -eiche, a. 


Away, gone. 
Avaunt ! 
A-foot. 


$ 


see oirfeideach, a. 














1 each, ich, «.1n. ss » 8. 
[x J see oirfeideachd. 
A1, 


air fògradh, adv. In exile. 

air fuaraih, ade. A-head, a-windward, a-hold. 

tairg,** s.m. prince. 

airgead, (31M) see airgiod. 

air ghaol, prep. for tne love of, on accountof. 

airghewuiladh, -aidh, san, Cause of woe. 

airghean, -ein, -eanna, 8.m.  Bridle-rein. 2 
Sywptom. Airgieanna bàis, the symptoms 
9) death. 


airghir,** s. f. Cow-calf. 


e rege EE e 


Mensuration, mathe-| | 


air guràdh, adv. For the love of, ou account of. 

air ghrau, adv. On ball bearings, as a cycie. 

airgiod, -id, x34. Silver. 2 Money. 3 Riches, 
uouey iu geueral of whatever kind. 'Segaol 
an airgid Tréauih. gach uilc, the love of money 
is the root of all evil; uaii eadair airgid,a silver 
watch; cha robh mi gun airgiod, Z was not 
without money. For compound words see 
below. 

ach, -aiche,@. Abounding in silver or 

money, rich, siivery. 

-aiseig, -id-, $.m. Ferry-money. 

-beo, -id-, 5.3. Quicksilver, mercury. 

-cayailte, -1d-, s.m. Hearth-imuavy. 

-caorach,(CR)-id-, sm. slate i «uond., 

——— —  - eunu,(J M) ad- 5.5. Reward odered 
for the head of a revel or outlaw. - 

-cinn, -id-, s.m. Poll-tax. 

-geal, -id-ghil, s.m. Silver money. 

- -lasaid, -iu-, $.m. Lent money, money 

given on loan. 

-làunbe, -id-, sm. Ready-money. 

—— —- -luachra,§ -id-, s.m. (lit. siiver rush) 
Meadow-sweet. see crios Chuchuiaiun. 

——— — -réidh,** -id-, 3.93. Interest of money. 

-ruadh, -id-, s.m. Copper mouey. 

-b invein, -id-, sm. Hearth-mouuey. 

———-—— -tvite, -id-, s.m. e e 

EE -ullaimh, -id-, 8m. Ready money. 

purgne, |? s.m. Robbery, pillage, pl 

tairgueadh, j 9 obbery, pillage, plunder. 

airit, see araidh. 

airidh, s. J. ind. Merit, desert, worth. Ismath 
au a. e, he richly deservesit; isolcan a. e, it 
ts G pity. i 

airidh, a. Worthy, deserving, excellent. 2 

Famous. 3 Fit, meet, suitable. Cna’n airidh 

nii air, 4 ain not worthy of tt; is ro airiuh thu 

air mudh, thou art very wort^y of praise; 

da. air aichreachas, meet sor repenianes. 

Airilu, a gu. GD, d -uean, s.J. Sum- 
mer residence for herdsmen and cattle. 
2 Hill pasture. 3 Level green amoug hills. 
4§ Wild plum, see plumbai: tiadhain. 
Kotha airidhe, or taiga airidhe, the sheil- 
ing; àiridh duamh, à pasiure jor oxen, 

airiih,** sm. Green grove. 2 Place where 
osiers grow. 

wir agp a. Lovely. 2 Deserving. 8$ Ami- 
able. 

airidh-mhagaidh, a. Ridiculous, worthy of de- 
rision. 

tairigh, see àraidh. 2**s.m.Prince, ruler. 

airilleach, eich, s.m. (taireal) Sleepy person. 

tairiilean,** ein, s.m. Party, faction. 








—— 











— 











air ionadan, ado. Adrift. 

air iourall, 

air ionndrainn, j adv. Astray. 

fairis,** sr Firebrand. 2 Charcoal. 3 


Knowledge. 
——,s. f. & v. æ. see aithris. 
———each, -ich, -icheaa, see aithriseach. 
Jairiseau,** -ein, s.m. Appointment, order. 
air lagh, adv. Ready. 2 Cocked up. 3 Sirung, 
as a DOW. 

tairle,** s. f. Advice. 

tairleac,** v. Borrow. 2 Leud. see airleag. 

airleacach,** a. Ready or willing to lend. 2 
Ready to burrow. 3 Of, or pertaining to a 
loan. see airleagach. 

tairleacadh,** -aida, s.m. Borrowing. 2 Lend- 
ing. see airleagadh. 

fairleach,** Ach, aan. Skirmish, rencontre. 

&irleag, -eig, s. f. High flight. 2 Project. 
Faucy, whim. 

airleag, -eig, $. f. 
toss, fling, jostle. 

- v.a. Borrow. 


Jerk, sudden pull, shore, 
2: Strait, want. 
2 Lend. 





&irleagach 





airleagach, a. Realy or willing to lend, 2 Ready 
to b -rrow. 5 Of, or pertainiug to à luain. 

àirneagach, a, Fiighty, fanciful, whimsical. 

airleazadh, -aidu, -aidhean, s.m. Borrowing. 
g Lending. 

girleas, -ei., s.m. 

airivig, -e, 8.J. Strait. 
am ina strait. 

&irleigeach,* a. Urgent. 

air leth, adv. Separately, apart. 

wirlich, see fairtiich. 

, ichean, m. 

arlig, see airlich. 

airlis, see airleas. 
air los, prep. For the purpose of. 

airm, n.p.. of arm. (gen. pl. arm) Arms, Wea- 
pous. 2 Armour. 3 Place. Guu airm, without 
arms; a.rin àlainn, beauteous armour; ball 
airu, G weapon. 

—— -ehrios, -is, s.m. Military shoulder-belt. 

—— -eheard, s.n. Armourer. 

—— -cheardacn, -aich, s.m. Armourer’s smithy. 

fairmeart,** -eirt, s.m. Order. 2 Custom. 

wir mbagaran, adv. On all fours. 

àirinheaduh, Sp. sing. & pl. imper. of v. àireamh. 

àirmhear, fut. pass. of v. àireamh. 

air mhearaichiun,** adv. lusane. 

&irmhich, v.d. see àireamh. 

Airinhidh, jut. aj. act. of v. àireamh. 

fairmbidh,** s.n. Vow, promise. 

air mbodh, adv. So that, in sucha manner 
that. 

faicmid.**s, f. Honour, worship, reverence. 2 
Custom. % Swan. 

sirmis, see eirmis. 

each, see eirmiseach. 

eachd, see eirmiseachd. 

airm-lann, -lainn, s.m. see arm-lann. 

&izinbxnnuir,** .m. Naval aris, navy. 

airui-neimhmneach, s.pl. Poisoned arms. 

@irniseach, see eiruiiseach. 

, see eirmiseachd. 

airin-theine, s.pl. Fire-arms. 

airm-thbilgidh, s.pl. Missive weapons. 

&ir muin, prep. On the back, mounted on. 2 
On thetop orsummit. 3** On, upon, above. 
Airamnuin, on his back, upon him; air a 
muin, on her. 

air mullach, adv. A-top. 

airudval, (AE) s.m. Stag. 

àirne, s.f. Sloe, wild plum, damascene— 
D: UNUS spinosa. 

airne (for àirnean) see àra. 

airneach, a. Kidueyed. 2 Valiant. 3 Full of 
sloes. 

àirneach, Ach, s.m. 
Secd of shrubs. 

àirneag, -eig, -an, s.f., dim. of àirne. Preas àir- 
ucag, a loe bush. 

ach, -wicae, dq. Full of sloes. 2 Like a 
sloe. 3 Of, or belouzing to a slov. Preasa., 
a bush loaded with sloes, also a sloe bush. 
airueagaibh, dat. pl. of àirneag. 

fairneamh,** -eimh, s.m. Grinding stone. 2 
lione. 

airnean,** -ein,s.m. Watching at night. 

airneau, 8., pl. of ara. Tha m'àirnean ’g am 
theagasg, my reina teach me. 

airneas,** -cis, s.m. Watchtulness. 

ach,** a. Watchful. 2 Nephritic. 

&irreig, gen. sing. of àirneag, 

àirneis, s. J. ind. Household furniture or stuff. 
2 Cattle, stock. 3 Moveables. 4 Accoutre- 
ments. 5**Assortment. Am measg an air- 
neis Téin, in the midst of their own stuff ; àir- 
neis taighe, household furniture. 

each, -eiche, a. belonging to furniture. 

-iarruiun, sf.  Iumpleiuenis, tools, 


Earnest, pledgo. 
Tha mi "pn airleig, I 


Lender. 














Murrain in cattle. 12** 











21 


airtine 





R 

, 7. Airne. 

àirneisich, v.a. Furnish. 2 Equip. 

air neo, adv. Else, otherwise. Air neo an t 
sleagh mu bheil do làmh, otherwise the spear 
your hand grasps. 

àirnibh, dat. pl. of àirne. 

airnmheadh, (AF) s.m. Herd of cattle. 

airn-sgrüdach,**a. Antinephritic. 

air-aan, Emphat. form of prep. pron. air. 

airse,**s. f. Arch, vault. 

air seachran, adv. Astray. 

air sgàth, prep. For the sake of. 

tairsge,** s. f. Contemplation, musing. 

air sgeul, adv. Found. not lost, 

air sheól, adv. So that, in suca manner, 

airsid,* er, Unanimity. 

—— —each, -diche, a. Unanimous, harmonious, 
agreeing. 

eachd, s.f. Unanimity, harmony, agree- 

inent, concord. 

air siüdan, adv. Adrift. 

airsneag, ** -eig, s. f. Arsenic. 

airsneal, eil, s.n. see airtneal. 

ach, see airtnealach. 
achd,* see airtnealachd. 

air son, prep. For, on account of. 2 By reason 
of. 3 Instead of. [Governs the Genitive case. ] 
Air a son, or her; air an son, for them; air 
son anihuachd, by reason of the cold; tha 
iad ag ullachadh ar son na seilge, they are 
preparing for the hunting ; tua mi fada 'n ad 
chomaia airson mara ghabh thu ris na thu- 
bhairt mi, Jam. much ovliged to you for (in 
respect uf ) the attention you paid to what L 
said; air sou nam irean, for the sake of the 
righteous. 

air son gu, adv. 

air son sin, adv. 
stand.ug. 

airsteal, see airtneal. 

—ach, see airtnealach. 

airc, gen. sing. of art. 

airteagal, ail, s.n. Article. 

airteal, see airtueal, 

uch, see airtnealach. 


airtean, } see artan. 


airtein, 
air thoiseach, adv. Foremost, in the van. 2 
** A-head. 


&irtine, see artan. 





Because that. 


Because of that, notwith- 








airtneal 


airtneal, -eil, ¢.m. Weariiexs. fatigue. 2 Sad- 
ness, langour, depression of spirits, 
tress, sorrow. 3 Ncrait, «difficulty. Spiorad 
airtneil, the spirit of heaviness; co a dh'inus- 
eas a. uà Féinne? who can tell tne sorrows of 
the Fingalians t 

ach, -aiche, a. Weary. 2 Depressed, 
sad, melancholy, troubled. 3 Vexing. 4 
Causing sadness. "lir a., a weary land. 

air tir, adv, On land. 

air tòir sir, prep. After, in pursuit of. 

air traigh gdv. Ashore. 

air tis,.dv. Firs, foremost. 

air nairiva, adv. Occasionally, sometimes, 

air uainhann,** adv. Aghast. 

ais, adv. Back, backwards This word is only 
nsed in composition. Air t’ais ! stand back! 
thàinig e air 'ais, he returned; tnàiniz i aira 
h-ais, she returned; bheir mi iad air an ais, J 
will bring them back. Air ià's air ais, for- 
wards and backwards —Heay country.—A.G. 

fais, s.m. Hill. 2 stronghold. 3 Covert. 4 
Shingles to cover houses. 5 Dependence. 6 
Loan. 6 Cart, waggon., 7** Money. 

ais,(AC) s.m. Milk. 2 Milk preparation. 8 
Dainty, delicacy, nectar, ambrosia. 4 Wis- 
dom. ais na wna sìthe, the wisdom of the 
Jairy woman. 

ais-adhlaic,** va. Disinter. 

taisc,** -e, s. f. Request, petition. 2 Damage. 
3 Trespass. 4 Reproach. 

ais-cheumnaich, v.n. Retire, withdraw. 





aisde, prep. pron. Out of her, out of it. [Em- 
phatic forms, aisde-se, aisde-fhéin.] Earb- 


aidh e aisde, he will trust in her. 

taisde,** s.f. Poem. 2 Ingenuity. 

aisdeach,** Ach, s.5. Gay diverting fellow. 

———-,** -iche, a. Mimic. 

— —— —àn,** s.pl. Sports, diversions, pastimes, 

ais-dhealradh, -aidh, s.m. Catoptrics. 

aisdigheachd,** s.f. Jest. 

tais-dreoir, s.m. ‘raveller. 

faisdridh, s. J. Translation, digression. 

aisead, -eid, $.f. Delivery, child-birth. 
see aiseid., Ag a—, pr.pt. of arseid. 

aiseadadh, -aidn, s.m. db pr part., see aisead. 

aiseag, -eig, -an, 8m. Ferry. 2**Deliveranc.:. 
8**Heturn. 4**Vomit. ' ear aiseig, a Jerry- 
man; fear an a8iseig, the ferryman; ihuair e 
an t-aiseag a nas aiuh, he got over the ferry 
free; tha’n droch dhuine a’ gabhail an aiseig 
air oidhche dhorcha gheainhrailh agus a 
bhata briste, the wicked man crosses the ferry 
on a dark winter night and his boat broken— 
a saying only fully ME gp by such as 
have had experience of Hebridean ferries in 
winter time. Ag a—, pr. part. of v. aisig. 

aiseal, -eil & aisle, n.pl. aislean, $.f. see aisil. 

aiseal, -eil, s.n. Joliity, fun, merriment. 2 
(AG) Ass,—Suth’d. see asal. Ri h-aiseal, 
merry-making. 

ach, -aiche, a. Jolly, funny, merry. 2 
Of, or pertaining to fun. 

aisean, aisne, pl. aisnean [& aisnichean] 8. f. 
Rib. Aon d'a aisnibh, one of his ribs; an ais- 
ean athug e o'n duine, the rib he took from 
the man. 

aisearan, -ain, s.m. Weanling. 

aiseid, pr. part. ag aisead, & aiseadadh, v. n. 
Be delivered. v.a. Bear. Tha i air a h-ais- 
ead, she is delivered. 

aiseid, s.f. Salver, plate. 

aiseil, gen. sing. of aiseal. 

aiseirich, pr. pt. ais-eirigh, v.n. Rise again, as 
in the resurrection. 

aiseirigh, 8J. Resurrection, second rising. 
A. nam marbh, the resurrection of the dead; 


Sen 





22 


dıs- | aisg, -e, -ean, 8. f. 


aisridh e 


na h-aiseirigh, the day of resurrection. 

Reyuest. 2 Spot, blemish, 
3 uift, love token or piedge. A LAG) Leane 
ness in cattle. ‘Tha 'bhó air an aisg, the cow 
is but seint and bone ; gu dé tha sin ach an 
aisg? what is there but the frume 1 

alsgeir, -e, s. f. Rocky mountain. 2 Ridge of 
high mouutains. 

taisgidh, s. f. Present, gift. 
gaidh,” free, grutis. 

aisig, pr. part. aiseag, v.a. Restore, deliver, 
give back, 2 Ferry over. Aisigidh e, he will 
restore; aisig dhomh gairdeachas do shlàinte, 
re-tore unto me the joy of thy salvation. 

aisig, 5. f. see aiseag. 

aisigear, fut. pass. of v. aisig. 

aisiyidh, fut. aff. a. of v. aisig. 

aisigte, pt. pari. of v. aisig. Restored, deliver- 
ed. 2 Ferried over. 

aisil, ale, -slean, s. f. Axle-tree. 2 Axis. Tar- 
rang aisle, a lynch-pin ; aisil na carpaid. the 
axve-tree of the chariot; aislean nan rotu, the 
,azle-trees of the wheecs. 

aisinn, 8. f. see aisne. 2 see aisling. 

aisinneacn, -aiche, a. Costal. 

ais-innis,** v.a.d n. Renearse, narrate. 2 
Say or tellover again, repeat. 

ais-innleachd, pl. dan, s.f. Wicked contri- 
vance or invention. 2 Destructive artiüce. 

—— — ach, -aiche, a@ Cunning, crafty, 
plotting, mischievous. An combairlibh ais- 
innleachdach, in crafty counsels. 

ais-inuseadh, -sidh, s.m. Telling, rehearsing, 
repeating. Ag a—, pr. part. of v. aisanuis. 

ais-innsear, fut.pass. of v. ais-innis. 

ais-innsidh, fut. «ff. a. — ,, 

aisiol, 8. f. see aisil. 

taision,** s.m. Relic. 2 Diadem. 

siyir, sre, -srean, 8. f. Passage, pass, path, de» 

e. 

aisith, s.J. ind. Strife, contention, discord, 
wrangling, disturbance. Sivl-vhuiridh e ai- 
sith, he will sow discord. 

aislear, -eir, s.m. Spring-tide. 

ais-léine, pl. -léiutean, s. f. Death-shroud. 

aisleir, gen. sing. of aislear. 

aisleth, see as leth. 

aisling, -e, pl. -e & -ean, 8. f. Dream, reverie, 
visiun. Mhosgail e o aisling au laoch, he a- 
wokethe hero rom his dream; chunnaic e ais- 
ling, he saw a vision; a. chounain, a (aec.vioug 
dream; a. ihaoin, an empty drean. 

each, a. Dreainy, visionary, of, or relating 

to a dream. 

, &m. see aislingiche. 

aislingean, m. pl. of aisiing. 

aislingiche, -ean, s.m. Dreamer, visionary. 
Than t-aislingiche seo a’ teacud, this dreamer 
is coming. 

aisling-chonnain, s. J. Lascivious dream. 

aislinn, see aisling. 

each, -aiche, u. see aislingeach. 

aislinniche, see aislingiche. 

aisne, gen. sing. of aisean. 

aisneacn, a. Kibbed. 2 Having large or strong 
ribs. 3 Of, or belonging to a rib. 

aisneas, see aisneis. 

aisneis, -e, -ean, s.f. fRehearsing, tattle. 2 
m M) Very exaggerated account of any inci- 

ent. 

aisnichean, n.pl. of aisean. 

ais-drdugh, s.3aq. Counterinand. 

ais-orduich, v.a. Countermand. 

aisre, sve aisridh. 

aisreamnach,**.a. Mutual. 

aisridh, EP Abode. 2 Receptacle. 3 Hill. 
4 Path. A. nam ban, the abode of women, @ 


Hence “a nas- 





3? 








aisridh 


seraglio; an ruadha., the red path. 

&ls-sith, see aisith. 

&iste, see aisde. 

Aisteach, Ach, -ichean, $s. m. 
fellow. 

$aisteidh, s.f. Hatches of a ship. 

ait, -e, a. Glad, joyful, cheerful. Z*Odd, funny. 
òlach ait, an odd fellow. 

ait, see àite. 

ait’-adhlaic, s.m. Burying-place. 

ait’-aire, $.m. Observatory. 

+ait-cheas, s. f. Warrior’s concubine. 

&it-chiomach, -aich, -aichean, s.m. Petitioner. | 

—————-——-, -aiche, a. Causing laughter or; 
merriment. 

&ite, comp. of ait. 

èite, n.pl.| -ean &] -eachan, dat. pl.-tibh & -ach- 
aibh] s.m. Piace, spot. 2Part, region. A.- 
suidhe, a seat; Càite? where t 

—— -comhnuidh, £. m. Dwelling-rLlace. 2 Dwell- 
ing, abode. Thog sinn àite-còmhnuidh do’n 
mhnaoi, we built a house for tre dame. 

àiteach, Ach, pi. -eacha & -eachan, s.n. Agri- 
culture. 2 lnhabitant. 3 Habitation, dwell- | 
ing. Tha àitich Innse-torrain fo ghéilt, the in- | 
habitants of Innwtore are in terror; air neul 
am bheil an àiteach fuar, on a cloud is their 
cold habitation. Ag a—, pr. part. of v. àitich. 
Inhabiting. 2 Cultivating. 3** Placing. Ag 
àiteach an fhearainn, cultivating the land. 

faiteach,** a. Anxious, careful. 

àiteachadh, -aidh, s.m. & pr. part. of v. àitich, 
see àiteach. 

aiteachadh, see aideachadh. 

àiteachail,* a. Agricultural. 

àiteachan, -ain, 8.2m. dim. of àite. Little place. 

àiteachas, -ais, 8.7n. Colony. 2 Inhabiting, 
dwelling. 3 Cultivation. 

àiteachd, s. f. ind. Agriculture. 
dation. 

àiteag, eig, -an, 8. f. Shy girl. 2 Coquette. 

ach, -aiche, a. Indifferent, scornful. 2 
ER shy. Ainnird. a shy maid. 

aiteal, -eil, s.m. Juniper, see aitionn. 2 Colour, 
gloss. 3 Glimpse, transient view. 4 Breeze. 
5 Very small portion or quantity of anything. 
6**Music. 7**Light, gleam of light. Fhuair 
mi aiteal dheth, / got a glimpse of him; aiteal 
mine, a sprinkling of meal; a. an Earraich, 
the fanning breeze of Spring, a. an oir, the 
tinge of gold; gun aiteal o reul air sail, on 
the deep without starlight. 

ach, -aiche,a. see aitionnach. 2 Bright, 

shining, luminous. 3 Breezy, in siighi 

breezes. 4 In glimpses. 

achd,** s. f. Breeziness. 

aiteam, -eim. an. d f. People, folks, persons. 
2 Tribe. 3* Wicked people— Hebrides. 4 Gen- 
eration. Is beannaichte an a., blessed are 
the people; a. chathach, a warlike people. 

aiteamh, pr. pa't. ag aiteamh, v.n. Thaw. Tha 
e ag aiteamh, it is thawing. 

, -eimh, s.m. Thaw, fresh weather. Tha | 
an là ris an aiteamh, it ts thawing; a. va 
gaoithe tuath air an t-sueacida—tuilleadh a 
chur ’n a cheanu, the north wind's way of 
thawing the snow is to add more to it (often 
used in the sense of people trying to make a 
thing better and invariably ma ing it worse.) 

, -eimh, s.n. Convincing proof, de- 
monstration. 2 Argument. 
aiteann, s.m. Juniper, see aitionn. 2**Furze(?) 
——— —&ch, s.m. da. see aitionnach. 
Aitear, -eir, -an, ¢.m. Husbandman. 
achd, s. f. see àiteachd. 
aiteas, -eis, s.m. Joy, gladness, blythesome- 
mess. 2 Laughter. 3 Fun. 4 Comfort. 5*| 





Gay direrting 


2 Accommo- 

















aithis 

Odduess. T’aiteas, your oddness ; a. an sùil 

Ghorm-àlaiun, gladness in the eye of Gormal- 

ine; a chuireas aiteas orm, that will make 

me giai; a. Bir na sléibhtibh uaine, joy 

on the green mountains; cuirm chum, aiteis, @ 

Jeast for laughter. 

alteas, -eis, san. Dwelling-place. 

aiteasach,** -aiche, a. Glad, joyful. 

aite-cuinuimh, 8.24. Focus. 

aitely, gen. sing. of aiteag. 

aiteil,  ,, e aiteal. 

aitgheal, -ghile, a. Bright, joyous. 

uitn,* (for ath) Kiln. Aith aoil, a lime-kiln 

taith,** s.m. Hill. 2 Skirmish.——a. Keen, 
sharp. 2 Anxious. 

aith-, iterative purticle and prefiz. Eqivalent to 
Latin and English re-. Thus generally writ- 
teu when used before a small vowel, but ath- 
before a broad vowel. 

aith-vheas, -chise, s.f. Whore, bawd. 

aith-chreideamh,** 8.m. Apostacy. 

aith-chuimir, see ath-chuimir. 

taithe, s.f. Revenge. a.** Keen. 

aitheach, -ich, s.m. False assertion, lie. 2 Sow, 
boar. 3 see athach. 

——, a. Swinish. 2 see athach. 

aitheadh,** -hidh, s.m. Elf-shot. 2 Stealing 
away or retirıng privately. 

aitheal, see aingeal. 

aitheamh, -eimh, pl. -eamhan [contr. aithean**] 
Fathom. Fichead aitheamh, twenty fathoms. 

-———-aich,* v.a. Fathom. 

àithean, n.pl. of àine. 

aithearnach, -aich, s. f. 

aitheas, -eis, see aithis. 

taitheasg,** -eisg, 8. J. Admonition, advice. 

altheimh, gen. sing. of aitheamh. 

aith-éisdeachd, s. f. Appeal. 

aitheornach, -aich, s. f. Land ploughed for a 
second crop. 2 Land where barley has been 
the last crop. 

aithghearr, -a & -ghiorra, a. Short, concise, 
brief. 2 Quick, instantaneous. 38*Short-tem- 
pered. Tha e aithghearr, he is short-tempered; 
sgaoil sinn cho aithghearr, we dispersed so 
svon; an aithghearr, in a short time; gu h- 
aitughearr, soon. 

aithghvarr, s.m. see aithghearradh. 

aiuh-grieàrr, pr.pt. -ghearradh, v.a. Cut again. 
2 Subdivide. 3 Shorten, curtail, abridge. 

aithghearrachadh, -aidh, s.m. Abbreviacion, 

abridgement, abstract. 

—achd, s. f. Briefness, shortness. 





see aitheornach. 





—ad,** -aid, s.n. Contraction. 
— adh, -aidh, s.m. Abbreviation, 
contraction. 2 Short way. 3 Short time. 


aith-ghearradh, pr. pt. of aith-gheàrr. Short- 
ening. 2 Cutting again. 

— ———-—aichte, pt. part. Abridged, shorten- 
ed, abbreviated. 

aithghin, see ath-ghin. 

——— ——eamhuinn, s.m. see ath-gh—. 

—————e, see athghinte. 

faithid,** san, Viper, snake. 

t van,** ein, s.m. Any venomous reptile. 
2 Littie beast. 

aithine, see aithinne. 

aithiune, -ean, & -nntean s.n. Fire-brand. 2 
Charcoal. Mar a. as an losgadh, like a fire- 
brand from the burning. 

aithir, see nathair. 

aithis, -e, -ean, s. 7. Check. 2 Affront, abuse, 
3 Fit means to do evil~-Jslay. 4 Scandal, re- 
proach. 5 Blaming, upbraiding. 6 Rebuke. 
7 Blemish, fault. 8 see athais. Na gabn té 
air bith mar mhnani, ach té air am Di aulis 
agad, take no woman for a wife in whom you 





i 


aithis 24 aitidh 


cannot find a faw—N.G.P. | aithninn (for aithnichinn) 1 ver. sing. past subj 
taithis,** Reproach, rebuke, abuse, affront. ; of ai-hnicù. Dh'a. I woula know. 
———each, ach, -ichean, s.m. Abuser, reviler, | aithnisg,* s.f. Nickname. 

abusive person. 2** see alaaiseavh. àithnte, see àitune. 





vach, -eiche, à. Keproacuful, reviling, re- | aithre, s.m.ind. Repentance. 
butting, scandalous. 2 see athaiseach. i-ean, s.m. , d' 7.) Ox. 2 Bull. 3 Cow. 
eàcuadüu, alil, 82A. Defamation, abuse. ach, -eiche, @ Rente t, sorry. 2 Giv- 














aitnisy, -e, -ean, s. f. Report, intelligence. ing cause for regret. t5** $20 aighear ci. 
@liuisieh, see a.nalsich. Is a. (aighearach) ieinn do bhuailu, swe ave 
aiculis,* via.  linitàce, niimic. surprised ut your prow-ss; is d. av hearaci) g 1 
——-—,-0G,-ean, S.E Disgrace, reproach. 2| t-oglach tnu, you are a droll feliow; chu a o. 

Mimicry. leam, L have no cause to regret; b'a. iel» an 

cach, -siche, a. Reproachful, disgrace-| Tighcarn, it repented the Lord. 

ful. 2 liuitative. ——,** -ich, s.m. Farmer. see àireach. 

aitumieal, -eil, see aimheal. ——a,_ see aithriche. 
—ach, à. see aimnealach. ————-&áchag,-aig, -an, &.f. Female penitent. 

faitnuiheas,*^ s.m. Ebbinyg of the sea. — ———-—Aàil, a. Penitent, repentant. 


àitun, pr.pt.ag aitune & àithneadh, v.a. Com- | aithreachais, gen. sing. of aithreachas. 
maud, euarge, order, bid, direct, enjoin. Cha | aichreachan, am, au, s.m. Penitent. 
'n aitun iad, tey shali not order ; du àithn an | aitnreachas, -ais, s.m. Kepentauce, penitence, 


. Tighearn, the Lord commanded. regret. Dean (ur gabh) a., repent; ni (or gaini- 
&ithz,* s. /. Circle. àicunan la, broad day-light.| aida) mia., 4 wil? repent; gun a. cha vhi dawn- 
altilacuear, se» aithnichear. auas, without repentunce there shail nut ùe jor- 


&iwine, pl. àitinte, aitheanta, & -tan,s. f.Com-1  givenesa. 
mand, cummandment, order, injunction, |aithrea hd,** s. f. ind. Ancestry. A chavida 
uandate, direction, charge. 2 rarely store.| cumaibh an cuiimuüune ur n-a., ever keep your 
3**Aphorism. Thug mi àithnedhuit, Z order-| ancestry in mind. 


ed you; m'àitheanta, my commandments. aithreas, ; 

aithne, 8. f. Knowledge,discernment, acquaint- | aithri, d dm 
ance. Chan eil aithn’ agam air, Ihave no |&itüriche, n. pl. of athair. Fathers., &u- 
knowledge of him. aiunrichean cestors. 





ach,* a. Discerning, 2 Considerate, at-,aithrichibh, dat.pl. of athair. 
tentive. Tha i gléa., she is very considerate, |taitnrith,* 8. J. Repentance, sadness, tears, 
ach,-ich, pl. -ichean,& -ichinn, s.m. Stran-| Sorrow. 
ger. Guest, visitor. Leis nach dragh aith- each,** a. Repentant, sad, sorrow- 
n chean, by whom guests were not counted a | ful. 
trouble. aithrin, s. f. Sharp point. 2 Conflict. 3**Sat- 
ach,* s.m. Wood-rush, wild leek. irizing tongue. 
——avhadh, -aidh, s.m. Knowing, recogni-| taithrine,** s. f. Calf. ` 
tion, discerning. 2 What is discernible. 3) aithris,-e,-eun, 8. J. Recital, rehearsal, re- 
Slight degree. Cuir a. an taobhseoe, putit! port, narration. 2 see atharrais. 3 "f'radi- 
a sight degree (“kenning”) thisway. Aga—,| tion, tale. Ag a—, pr.part. of v. aithris. 
pr. part. of v. aithnich. Ag a. gliocais, know- | — —— Pr. pt. ag aithris &-eadh, v.a. Reh arse, 
ing wisdom declare, report, narrate, tell, repeat. 2 see 
achail, a. Intelligent, discerning. atharrais, Agus dh'aithris e na nithe sin uile 
aithneachd, s. f. ind. Knowledge, discernment.| ‘nan éisdeachd, and he told all those things in 
2 Recognition. 3*Humanity. their hearing; sgeul ri aithris, o iale to tell ; 
-—ail, -e, v. Recognising, knowing. 2| @ithrisibh-se agus aithrisidn siune, report 
Familiar. 3 Kind. you, and we wi 4 report. 
aithneadail,ft -e, a. see aithneachdail. — -bheuiain, s. 7. Mimicry, meckery, lu- 
aithneanas,** -ais, 8m. Knowledge, percep-| dierous gesticulation. 
tion. each, Ach, -ichean, s.m.  Kelater, narra- 
aithne-chuiseach, a. Casuistical. tor, reciter. 2 Talebearer. 3 Tautologist. 


d, s.f. Casuistry. 4 Imitator. 




















aithne-chuisiche, s.m. Casuist. each, -eiche, a. Widely celebrated. 2 Re- 
tituneadail, see aithneachdail. peating. 3 Tautological. 4 ‘Traditionary. 6$ 
aithneadair, -e, -ean, s.m. One who knows, orl Amitative. "T 
is conversant with, learned man. eaehd, ** ert Frequent repetition, tau- 
aithneadh, -eidh, 8.m. Commanding, ordering,| tolosy. e 
enjoining, charging. Ag à—, pr. part. of v.|———eadh, -eidh, s.m. Tautology, act of re- 
aithn. peating, repetition. Ag a—, pr. pt. of aithris. 
taitnneamsa, (for taithnicheamsa) I know. ear, -eir, 8. — near ings as aith- 
aithneil, -e, a. Knowing. 2(AG)Polite. — —Àiche, s.m. riseach. 
aitun’ghinn, (for [dh’Jaithnichinn) v. I would 
KHOW, 
aithnich, pr.part. ag aithneachadh, v.a. Know, 
recoguise. 2 Feel. 3 Discern, perceive. 4** 
ifave sexual intercourse. Cha d’aithnich mi 
urua e, I did not feel its effect on me. 
&ithnichean,** ein, s.m. Stranger, visitor, ac- 
quaintance. 
aithuicoear, fut.pass. of v. aithnich. 
aivanichidh, fut. af. act. of v. aithnich. 
aituuichte, a. d pt. part. of v. aithnich. Known, 
recognised. 2 Plain, manifest. 3(AG) Ex- 
ceedingly. Dean aithnichte, make known; 
a. fuar, very cold, 











aithris-leabhar,** s.m. Coinmon-place book, 
note-book, day-book. 

àitich, pr.pt. ag àiteachadh, v.a. £ n. Inhabit, 
dwell, settle. 2 Cultivate, till, improve. 3 
**Place. 4 Anchor, as a ship. 5**Give place 
to. 6**Accommodate. Gach neach a dit aic- 
ich colann riamh, every one that ever dwett «n 
a body; dh’ailich an long, the ship anc^ored; 
ag àiteachadh an fbearaiun, cultivating the 
land. e 

aitich, see aidich. 

aitichte, pt. part. ot àitich. Inhabited, settled. 
2 Placed. Tìr a., an inhabited lanl. 

aitidh, -e, @ Moist, damp, we ‘Tha t'aodaeb 


aitidh 
aiidh, your clothes are damp. 
ea Iri, a. f. ind. Muistness, dampness, 
wetness. 
g@itnu, e E tnd. see aiteam. 
people. 
ai ol, al, see aitionn. 
anina, g'n. sing. of a:tionn. 
isi nn,-inn, s». Juciyer(plant)-—juntperus 
cornmunis. Badge ot Clan Guna -(AG); of 
the Murrays, Russ.s, Mac- 
t.eods, & Athole Higuland- 
ers.3 





ach,a@ Abounding in, 
or partaining to Juniper. 
————,** sn 
9 LJ . 
where junipers grow. 2 
Quantiiy of juniper bush- 








es. 

aitreabh, -cibh, -an,  8.m. 
Abude, buiiding, dwelling. 
2 Steading stt Houses. 
Generally understood ia W. Isles to mean 
large buildings. Thog e æ. mnór. he built 
luige buiddin.s; aitreavh thaighoun, @ num- 
ber of attached houses, AS an exhibition. 
Taigh agus a., mansion-hous2 und premises ; 
theid ana. sìos, their building will decay. 

faitrea th, v.n. Dwell. 

ach, -aiche, a. Habitable. 2 Of, or 

pertainivrg to an abode. 3 Domestic. 
——— ah, -aich, n. pl. -aichean, s.m. TIn- 
habitant. 2 Tenant. 3 Lodger. 4 Farmer. 
— — ail, -aile, a. Full of policy. 2 Domestic. 

aitreabhan, n». pi. of aitreabh. — 

ai.reabh-nochdaidh, -eibh, s.m. Exhibition. 

aitreabhia, pt. pari. Inhabited. 

aireach,-eich, see aitreabhach. 

aitreamh, see aitreabh. 

—— ——a&ch, see aitreabhach. s 

al, àil, sm. Brood, young of any kind. 2 Gen- 
eration. A’ solar dheare d'a cuid àil, gather- 
ing berries for h-r young; àl stiallach, speck- 
led offspring; an t-à! a ta ri teachi. the genera- 
tion tu curee; trata taig au sedd r guu thios 
air àl, when the hunter comes unexpectediy on a 
covey; A mhuc agus a h-àl, the sow and her 
liiter. 

tàl, sm. (& f.) Rock. 2 Stone. 3 Fear. 4(AC) 
Auyvling hard, solid, rigid, or immoveable. 
see tail 1, s. 


9. A t Uso. 


àl,** àil, s.m. Nurture. 2 Food. 
f—,** v.a. Nurse. 2 Praise. 
a là adv. By day. 


tala **-ai, s.n. Trout. 2 Wound. 
àlach, -4ich, -ean, s.m. Levy, set, tribe, crew. 2 


Met, or bauk of oars. 3 Metof nails. 4 Ac- 
tivity. 5 Alacrity. 6**Request. 7 see Al. 
àlach ràmh, a bank of oars. 

, €. Of, or belonging toa brood. 2 Pro- 





lific. 

s A } see ealachainn 

alwhagacb, see ealachagach. 

àiacht,] 8. Pregnancy. 

&ia:-huin, see eala:hainn. 

talad,} s. Wound. 

alah, -aidh, s.m. Nursing. +2 Wisdom, skill, 
craft. t5**Malice. +:**Lie. 

---——, -ai the, @ Speckled, variegated. 

alag, -aige, 8.J. *Hard task. 2 see aileag. 

raich, v.a. Bear, produce, bring forth. 2 Mul- 
tiply. 3$ Nourish, nurse. 4 Commence, fall 
to. 5 Attack. 6 Adopt.  Dh'àlaich iad air, 
they attacked him; is luat: a dn'àataicn iad, 
how soon. they have rauliiplied. 

alaiun. -e & ailne [AC -aluinnde, ailindeach, 
&,ldiche, & a.linde] a. Beautiful, exceed- 


25 


Place |a leas, adv. 


allda 


inglv fair. 2 Itandsome, elegant. 3 Glorious, 

4**Wh.te. 5**isright, clear. 6**Amiable. 

ea.lil, s. f. Beauty. 2 Whiteness. 
Brighvuess, clearness, 4**Amiableness. 
alaire, s.f. {Brood mn.are. 2 see falair. 

a làthair, adv. Present, at hand. 2 In exis- 
tence, alive. hae 'làtnair,Ae is present, he 
is alive; thor a làthair a chéil’ iad, bring 
them Jace to face ; ma bhitheas mi a làthair, 

ł AREAS E 

alb,** ailb, s.m. Eminence, height.—a.White. 

ald, uild, see allt. iP ee . 

| aldan see alltan. 

see alltanach. 

Need. Cha rnigear leas, there is 
no need; cha ruig thu leas, you need not. 

a leth taobh, dv. Apart, aside. 

taliad,** -aid, s.m. Cause, reason. 

talga,** a. Noble, great. 

+——chd,** s. f. Nobleness, greatness, nobility. 

all-, pre/iz, Over. 

tall,** aill, san, Horse. 





3 


, -ain, 
ach, 





2 Rock, cliff. 3 Great 


hall. 4 Generation. 5 Rave. 

tall,**a@ White. 2 Foreign. 3 Great, pro- 
digious, 

alla, see alladh. 


see allaidh. 

Wandering. 2 Deviation. 3 

4 Fatigue. 

— — —A«h, -aiche, a. Wandering. 

fallabsair, s.m. Echo. 

tfailaohar, 4. Strauge, wild, savage. 

a rt -alche, a. Wild, savage, untame- 
&ble. 


——, à. Wulu, tierce. 
allaban, -ain, 8.75. 
Aberr .tion. 








, -aich, s.m. Savage, barbarian. 

——d, sf. Barbarity, cruelty. ` 

allabhuadhacn, -aiche, a. see alibuuadhach. 

alla-ched, s.m.ind ‘Troubled mist. 

aliadh, -aidh, s.m. Excellence, fame, greatness. 
2 Renowa, applause. 3 Report. 4 Defama- 
tion, libel. Droch a., a bad report; daach 
a., & good report; a. Dua.ohidh, the jume of 
David; thug va bhriathrau gu’n rovh i a’ tog- 
ail ailaith air, he declared that she waslaugi- 
day at him. 

allu-guloir, sf. Gibberish, jargon, vain-glory, 
gascona ling. 

alla-ghioracu, æ. Inclined to utter jargon. 
Vain-giorious, boast.ul 

ailaidn, -v pl ailla, & ailaiih a. Savage, wild, 
ferocious, terrioie. 2 Proud, haugnty. 3 
** Boisterous. 4**Beauteous. Beathaichean 
aliaidh, wild beasts. 

allaidh, (AF) see madadh-allaidlh. 

aliail, a. Noble, illustrious, excellent. celebra- 
ted. 2 Glorions. 3 beíamatory, detracting. 
Daoine q., ili «strious nn. 

eacad, sJ.  Nobieness, excellency, il- 

allamaireach, see ailmharach. 
lustr.ousuess. 2 Gloriousness. 3 Ronown. 

alla-m .adadn, -aidh, see inadadh-ailaidh. 
Chual’ au t-a. an fhuaim, tre wotf heard the 
sound. 

aliamharach, -aich, see allmharach. 

————- , See alliuhavachd. 

alla Mhoire,(AC) for alis Muoire. 

allanta, a. Ferocious. see allaidh. 

fallas,ff s.m. see fallus. 

allas Co:luun Chille, (AC) (lit. St. Columba’s 
glory) st. John's wort, see eala bhuidhe. 

allas Mhoire,§ sm. St. John's wurt, see eala 
bhuidhe. 

allbhuadhach, -aiche, a. Triumphant, conquer- 
ing, Victorious. 
-— — ,** -aich, s.m.  Prince's hall. 

fullenur, sm. Transposition. 

allda, see allaidh. 





2 





— 





D 


all-ghort 


fall-ghort, see ubhal-zhort. 

allmhadadh, see niadadh-alliidh. 

allmhaidh, see allaidh. Armailt a., a terrible 
army. 

alimhara, see allmharach. 

allmharach, -aiche, a. (ail-, beyond + uir, sea.) 
Foreign, strange, transmarine, exotic. 2 see 
allabharrach. 

————-—, -uich, sm. Strauger, foreiguer, 
alien, 2 One froin beyond the seas. 3 For- 

eigu foe. 4see a labharrach. Iarmad nan all- 
mharach, the remnant o” the strangers; luing- 
eas nan allmharach. the ileet of the s-a-borne 


foe 

——achd, s.f. State of being foreign. 2 
see allabharrachd. 

allmharrach, see allmharach. 

tallod,** adv. Formerly, of old. 

alloil, see allail. 

--——eachd, see allaileachd. 

allonta, Same meanings as allail. 

———chd, - A allaileachd. 

tallraon,** -raoin, s.m. Foreign exp dition. 

allsachail, a. Prone to respite, worthy of res- 
ite. 

allsachd, s.f. Respite, reprieve, suspension. 

allsadh, see abhsadh. 

allsaich, v.a. Suspend, respite, reprieve. 2 
Jerk. 2 Irvan to one side. 

alisga, s. Shudder. 

allsgach, a. lerrible. 

&llsmuain, sf. Great buoy, float. 

ailaporag, see abhsporag. 

allt, uillt, s.m. Mountain stream, rill, brook. 
2 *Riyer witn precipiiqus banks. Bruach an 
uillt, the bank of the brook; thréig torman nan 
allt,the murmur of the brooks has subsided; ag 
aomadh thar au uillt, bending over the stream. 

allta. a. Fierce, savage, wild. 2 Strange, 
foreign. Beathaich a. na machrach, the wild 
beasts of the field; mar leòghann a., like a 
ferc lion. 

—chd, s.f.ind. Savageness. 

alltadh,** see allta. 

alltan, n. pl. of allt. 

, ca, -an, (dim. of allt) s.m. Little brook, 

streamlet. Drochaid air gach alltan, a bridge 

over every streamlet. 

ach,** a. Abounding in rivulets. 3 Of, 
or belonging to a rivulet. 

all-tapadh,tt -aidh, s.m. Mishap. 

alltas,** -ais, s.m. Wildness, savageness, 

alluidh, see allaidh. B’a. do shüil, fierce was 
thine eye ; dh'aom e air a sgéith umha a., Ae 
bowed over his beauteous brazen shield. 

alluigb, see allaidh. 

falluin,** a. Fair, handsome. 

allum, (AF) s.m. Hiud. 

alm, ailm, 8.m. Alum. 

falmachadh,** a. Charitable. 

almadh, -aidh, s.m. Tincture of alum. 

almon,?-oin, s.m. Almond—amydalis communis 

aloe,§ s.m. Aloe (plant)—daloe. 

a los, adv. & prep. About, intending, in order 
to. A losdol dhachaidh, about going home; a 
los falbh, with the intention of going. 

alos, ois, s.m. Aloe, see aloe. 

alp, ailp, & a sf. Height, eminence. 42 
Mountain. also talb 

—, v.a. Ingraft, join closely together. 2*In- 
dent. 3*Dovetail, in joinery. 

alpadh, -aidh, s.m. Ingrafting, joining closely 
together. 2 Dovetailing. Ag a—, pr.pt. of v 








alp. 
alt, Sie altan, s.m. Joint, joining. 2 Condi |— 


tion, state, order, method. 2**Articulation. 


26 


altaich 


will try another method for it; airva b-uile 
alt, at all events; ea lar tint na lüirich, be- 








` 
10. aloe. 


tween the joints of the harness. 

falt,** uilt, s.m. Nursing, rearing, feeding. 

talt, uilt, s.m. Section of a book. 2 Time. 

¢—-,** uilt, ëm, Leap. 2 Valley. 3 High place, 
eminence, hill. 4 Exaltation. 

altach, a. Articular, jointed. 

»** -aich, -aicheau, s.m. see altachadh 2. 

altachadh, -aidh. -ean, s.m. Articulation of 
the joints. 2 Grace before or after meat. 3 
**Salute, act of aluting. 4**Bracing, as of 
the joints. 5**Moving, budging. A. beatha, 
welcoming, saluting ;'s ann do'n làimh ghlain 
bu chòir a., it is the clean hand that should 
salute «one rogue should not accuse another.) 
Ag &—, pr. pt. of v. altaich.  Saluting, 
thanking. 2 Bracing, as of the joints. 3 Mo- 
ving, budging. 

-beatha, s.m. Salutation, greeting, 

welcome. 

-cadail, (AC) s.m. Sleeping prayer 
—prayer before retiring at night. 








As an alt, out of joint; ni sinn alt eile air, we|altaicb, pr. pt. ag altachadh, v.a. Salute. 2 


altaich ?7 





Thank. 3 Relax the joints. 4 Brace. 5 More, 
budge. 6 Join, knot. 7**A«sk after one's wei- 
fare. 8(AC) Nurture, nourish, bring up. Dh’ 
altaich iad beath' a chéile, they asked for each 
other's welfare. 

altaich, gen. sing. of altach. 

—e, sce altachadh. 

——ean, n.pl. of altach. 

ear, fut.pass. of altaich. 

idh, Tt af aer, ,, ., 

te, pt.part. of altaich, Knotted. 

altail,** a. Arthritic, articular. e 

altair, -air & altarach, a.pl. -raivhean, &-raiche, 
sf. Altar. Fa chomhair na h-altarach, oppo- 
site the altar ; adhaircean na h-altarach, tke 
horns of the altar. 

altan, n pl. of alt. 

-——-, -ain, dim. of alt. ; 

altanach,) s.m Knot grass, see glà'neach bheag. 

alt-cheangal, -ail, s.m. Articulation, inoscula- 

B WA of the bones. 

alt-eucail, st, d "e. 

&lt-gha!ar, Ch "Seege 

alt-iabhairt, s.n. Articulation. 

&lt-iüthaid , s.m. Pith-joint. Sud mar a thagh- 
adh Fionna chi, —an t-a.J4. fad’ o'n cbeann, 
thus would Fingal choose his hound—the pith- 
joint far from head.—N.G.P. 

alt.ihorach.l, s.f.n./. Articulation. 

altrach, ( for altarach) gen. sing. of altair. 

, “aicn, -aichean,s.m.  l'osterer, one who 














fosters. 2 Nurse. Ban-atirach, & female 
nur se. 
altradn,**-aidh, s.m. Foster-r. 
altraiche,**-ean, s.m. see altrach. 


altram, see alirn'm. 

alirauas,** see altruin. 

altrap, -aip, s.m. Acc dent, mishap. 

aliruim, pr.part. ag altrumadu. pa, Nurse, 
nourisil, maintain, educate, foster, cnerish, 

altrum, -uim, s.m. Fostering, nourishing,nurs- 
ing, rearing. 

ach,** a. Fostering, rearing, educating. 

&ltrumachadh, -aidh, s.m. Same meanings as 
altrum. Ag a—, pr.part. of altrum dei. 

altrum dh, -ailh, s.m. Same mean:ugs as al- 
trum. 

altrumaich, pr. part. ag altrumachadh, v.a. 
Sa.ns meanings as altruim. 

altrumaidh, mt aj. act. of altrui. 

altrumain, gen. si. & n. pl. of altruman. 

altruman, -ain, Nursling. 2**Ch.-f. Seachd 
altrumain aig loch Lain, seven chiefs at the 
laké ef Lanno. 

altrumas, -ais, s.m. Nursing. Leanabh air a 
chur aira., a child sent a-nursina. 

alt-shligeach, -eiche, a. Crustaceous. like shells. 

— d s.f.ind. Crustaceousness. 

alt-thinneas,** san. Arthrisis. 

altuchaih, see altacnadh. 

altuich, see altaich. 

falughain,** s.f. Pott-r’sclay. 

&luinn,-e, & àilne, a. see élainn. 

le, see aiainn. 

— ——eachd, sf.ind. see àlainneachd. 

am, pos¢.pron. Their. Am fearg, their wrath; am 
màthair, their mather;am v ainn», their milk ; 
am pàisd, their child. [Ued before words 
words beginning with B, F, M, or P, which 
are not aspirated. ‘The other lettars are pre- 
ceded by on ` 

am, dat art. ( Vom. sing. nasc.) The. (Used be- 
fore words beginning with B,F.M, or P.] Am 
baile, the town; am fear, the nian: am moir- 
ear, the lord or laird; am pais:l, the child. 

am, interr. particle. (Used instead of an before 
B,F,M,or P.] Am buailthu ? will you strike ? 








| amadan-léigh, 


amaideachd 


aS o en 

am, ( for mo) poss.pron. My. Annam thaigh, 
(often written “am thaigh”) in my house. 

am-, privative prefiz. Labiaiised form of an-. 
am, ( equivalent to anns am) Lagain' am bi na 
neòinein, deUs where daisies are. 

am, prep. In. |Used for an before a word 
beginning with D, F, M, or P.] Am baile, in 
a town; am buthaibh, in tents ; am meadh- 
on, in the middle; am mearachd, in error. [see 
ann an.j 

Am, ama, amannan, s.m. Time in goneral, past 
or present. 2 Sea on. 3 Conven.ence. 'S e 
seo ant-am, this is the time; am fear a ni 
‘obair’n a h-àm bithi ln e 'na leth thàmh, he 
that executes his task in due time shall be 
half at rest; gabh ain air sin, watch an oppor- 
tunity to do that; àn 'sam bith, any time; tha 
'n t-din ann, it is /u/l. time; am ioinchuidh, fit 
time; a: àn ua h-oidhche, in the night-time; 
an àn js an an-ain. in season and out 
of season ` àm na cuireachd, ceithir-.à-deug 
roimh Bhealltuinn is ceithir-la-deng 'n a déidh 
sowing- ime, d fortnight before May-day and 
@ fortnight after; na b-àmanna seo, these 
times ; àm o avis, olden times; 's anam at the 
time, in the meantime; Am ai geamhraidh, 
the winter season; àm an t-sainhraidn, the sum- 
MET èrsa, 

fam, a. Soft, moist, damp. 

taina ,** Ai s.m. Hame of horse’s collar. 

amach,** -aich. -a:chean, sp Vulture. 3 Any 
ravenons bird. 

a mach, adv. Qut. 2 Ont of. Thig a mach, come 
out; a mach air a chéile, at variance. [A mach 
includes the idea of motion to or from, but @ 
muigh siguifies resting outside. "Mach 's a 
steach, out and in, impiies motion to and from 
a a | 

amad,-aid, see amadan. 

ama,luiu, gen. sing. & n. pl. of amadan. 

amalan,-ain, n. pl. -ain, & -ana, 8.5. Fool. 
Cha tuig an t-ninadan seo. the fool shall not 
understand this; ui e ama lain, he will make 
Soo. 

amadanach, -aiche, a. Foolish, like a fool, 
Avudann a., a joolish expression of countenunce, 

——d, 8.f. ind. Foolishness, conduct of 
a foul. 

amadau-Dé, AC)x.m. Butterfly, see Jearbudan- 
dé. 2 Also applietl to foolish children. 

see dearbadan-eé. 





11 Amadan-mointich. 
ama1dan-móintich, x m. Dovterel (bird)—ehara- 
drius morinellus.* 


amadanta,** a. Foolish. 

amail** a. Foolish. silly. 

, Ef, Folly, silliness. 9 Foolish woman. 

each, -eiche, a. Foolish. Aodann a., æ 
foolish expression of countenance. ` Gu h-am- 
aideach, foolishly. 

—— —eachd, s.f.ind. Foolishness, folly, silli- 


ness. D2 








amaideag 


amaideag, -eig, -an, s.f. Foolish woman. 
àmail,-o, a. Seasonable, timely, in time. 2 
'l'emporal. 
anail, -e, -ean, 8.f. Evil, mischief. 2 Hinder- 
ance. Ai eur a. orm, hindsring me. 
tamail, adv. see amhnil. 
amail, pr.pt. ag 4mal & amaladh, v a. Hinder, 
revent, stop, interrupt. 2 Kntangle, clog. 
h’amail thu an Don, you have entangled the 
net. 
-—each, -eiche, a. Impedimental, obstructive, 
cloggy. 
-——idh, fut. aff. a. of amail. 
amailist, see aimlisg. 
amaill, gen. sing. of ainall. 2 v.a.& 8. see amail. 
&main-fheithe, (AF) s. Amphibious animal. 
&mair, gen. sing. of amar. 
amais, pr.pt. amas & amasadh, v.n. Hit, mark, 
aim, chance. 2 Find.  Aunais seo, hit this > 
an d'a.thu air? did you find it ! is sona an 
duine a dh’amaiseas air gliocas, happy is the 
man that finds wisdom. [Should be used in 
reference tothings and he lower animals only 
though sometimes met with otherwise. Use 
coinnich in reference to puede] 
ewd, lustful. 


ceach,** -eiche,a. Wanton, 
ceachd,** s.f. Wantonness. lewdness. 





Gu h-a , wantonly. 








sure aim. 

idh, fut.af. act. of amais. 

amal, -ail, $.m. seo amail. Ag a—, pr. part. of 
amail. 2 see amall. 

amalach, a. see amaileach. 2**Curled. 

àmalachd,* s.f. Seasonableness, timeousness. 

amaladh,-uidh, -aidhean, s.m.Stop, impediment, 
hinderance, interruption, 2 Dovetail. 3 Balk. 
4 Entangiing, entwining. Ag a—,pr.pt. of am- 
ail. Hindering, impeding,stopping. Tha thu 
'g am a., you are hindering me. 

àm-àireamh, -eimh, s.m. Chronology. 

amall, -aill, gan. Swingle-tree 2 Muzzle-bar. 
$**Curb. 4** Yoke 








12. k uail. 

PARTS OF A SWINGLE-TREE :— 

Muiseal, bridle of plough. 

An t-amall, swingle-tree. 

An greallag ceannarach, land or nigh 
side small swingl^-tree. 

An greallag meadhonach, middle swing- 
Le-tree. 

An greallag clais, an greallag sgriob, 
Jurrow small swingle-tree. 
Beairt-tharruing, trace-chains. 
Liüdain, levers. 

An l'üdan ceangail, connecting lever. 
z së (inneachan dùbailte, double short 
Un». 

Only two horses are generally used in the 
ploughiu the Highlands, but as three are 
Sometimes employed for subsoiling, &c., it 
has been thought advisable to give an illus- 
tration of a swingle-tree for 8 horses, so that 


(00-300 oO A WH 


28 


each, -eiche, a. Hitting well, taking a |. 





amb 





used, “the middle swingle-tree’’ (No. 4) ia 
wanting, and the compensating levera para- 
tus Nos. 7,8, and 9) is dispensed wiih. In 
such vases the other parts retain the names 
given above. 
tainan,** -ain, 
amanna 


see abhainn. 


amanuan, bn, pi. of am. 


àmanta, d. see àmail. 
chd, s.f. ind. Seasonableness. 

amar, -air,n.pl.-an & amraieb ean, s.m. Trough. 
2 Channel. 3**Ditch. 4 Mill«lam. 5 Mod. 
6**Ma ger. Amar na h-aibhne, the bei of the 
river , à. caol, a narrow channel ; dh'ihaluth- 
aich i a soitheach "aan amar, she emptied her 
vessel in the trough. 

12mar,** air, s.m. Chain, cable. 

amarach, -tiche, a. Channelled. 

amaraich.** s.f. Scurvy-grass. 

amaran,** .ain, s.m.. Distress. 2 Bungler. 

amar-aoil, -ain-, -an-, 8.m. Iod. 

--——- -baistidh, s.m. Baptismal font. 

-brüthaidh, sm. Wine-press, pressing 
vat. 

amarcach,** a. Fond of. 

amar-fuail, s.m Chamber-pot, urinal. 

amar-fuinidh, s.m. Baking-trough. 

amar-inüin, -air-m-, air-ir-, s.m. Chamber-pot. 
'S tric a bha na loingeis mhór a’ crionadh is 
na h-amair-mhuin a’ seóla.lh, often have large 
ships been rotting while the little pots are float- 
ing.—N.G.P. 

amarlaich, a. Blustering, careless. 

amarlaid,* sf.  Blustering female, 
woman. 

— ———each,* -aiche, a. 





careless. 


see amarlaich. 





13. sdAmur-uisge. 
amar-uisge, -air-, -àu-, s.m. Aqueduet. 


amas, -ais, s.m. Hitting, aiming, marking. 
2 Finding. 3 Chance.  Chaill thu t'amas, 
you have lost your power of hitting. Ag 
&—, pr.pt. of amais. Is tearc iadsan a thaag 
amas: oirre, few there be that find it. 

amasadh, -aidh, sm. Same meanings as amas. 
Ag a—, pr.pt. of amais. 

amasgaidh, See amasguidh. 

amasguidh,-e, @ Profane. 2 Helter-skelter. 
8 Mischievous. 4 Impure, obscene. Each 
a., a horse inclined to shy. 

———--—eachd, s. f. Profaneness. 2 Impurity. 

am bheil? v. Is? are? Used also subjunc- 
tively—is, are. see bi. 

am bitheantas, adv. Habitually. 

am bun, prep. Waiting on, near to. 

a measg, see am measg. 

ametist, 8. J. Amethist. 

am fad, adv. Afar. 

am fagus, adv. Near, at hand. 

am feadh, adv. While. 

am feasd, adv. Forever. Cha tig e am feasd, 
he shail never come ; an do sguir a ghràs am 
feasd ? has his grace ceased for ever } 

am fochair, adv. Alongside. 


that the name of any part may be found if|am follais, adv. Above-boar:l, publicly. openly, 


required, When swingle-tree for 2 horses is| amb, aimhe, a. Raw, crude. 2. Unsodden. un» 


amh 


amhnas 





boile.l,unroasted 8 Unskilful. 4 Bad naughty. 
5 Dull, lifeless. 6 Unripe. 7 Bitter, sour. 
7 Chilly. Feòil amh, raw flesh ; na ithibh 
dbeth amh, eat not ef it rac. 

amh,** s.m. Fool, simpleton. 2 Dwarf. 13 
Water, fi Ocean. seefàbh. 15 Denial. 

—, aimh, see tah. 

àmh, àimh, see aa. 

tainh,** see amhuil. 

faimuhach,** -aich, s.m. 
abhag. 

&ihach, -aich,-aichean,s. f. Neck. G’ ar w 
&mhach, wp te our necks ; bri-idh tn 'sinhach, 
thou shalt break its neck; tha rud eiginn 'n am 
amhaich, something hess‘uck an my throat. 

**a. Likeadwarf. 2 Like a fool. 

d. 8. f. ind. Rawness. 2. Gloominess, 
sulkiuess. 3 Insipidity. 4 Conduct of a fool 
or simmleton. 

a&mhad.**-aid, et, Rawness, crudeness. Air 
a., /owever raw. 

amhadh. -aidh, sm. Turn. Thuge a. aira 
cheann a dh'amharc air, Ae turned his head 
to look atit. 

amhailh,-e,a. Sour, sulky, surly. 2 Gloomy, 
as weather. 

eachd, see amhachd. 














amhail. adv. see amhuil. 
2 s. Evil, miscnief. 
¢amhailt,** sert Death. 


àmLajllteach, see amhnilteach. 

amhain,* sn. Entanglement by the neck. 2 
Lying on the back without power of motion, 
as a horse. 

,* a. Entangled by the neck. 2 Un 
able to rise after falling, as a horse. 

a mhàin, adv. Only, alone. Cha’n ea mhàin, 
not only. 

&mhainn, gen. sing. aimhne, amhna & amhann, 
n. pl. aimhne & aimhnichean, see abhainn. 

2————— each, see abhainneaeh. 

amhairc, pr.pt. ag amharc, v.n. 
behold. 3 Observe, regard. A, thairis, 
overl ok, take no notice of; am fear nach 
amhairc roimhe aimhaircilh e 'n a dhéidh, 
he that wili na look before hiin must look after 
him-—i.e.look before you leap ; amhaircidh 
mi oirbh, / will have respect unto you. 

& moairz! int. Woe! 

amhall,** -aill, s.m. Visit. 

amiüaliach, -aiche, see aimhea'ach. 

amhaltas,-ais, see aimheal. 

&mban, see a bhàn. 

*tinhaatas,** -ais, 8.m. 
Good luck. 

tamhaon,** s. Twins. 

ambar, see amar. 12** Music. 

ambkarag,} -aig.3. f. Cherlock, wild mustard. 
see marag bhuiihe. 2** Sweet marjoram. 
see oragan. 

ambar.:, -airc, 3.24. Seeing, viewing. 2 Vizzy 
or sight on a gun. 3 View, sigh , observation. 
4 Behokling. 5 Inspectiaz. 6 Look, appear- 
ance. +7** Fault. Is bochd an t-ainharc a 
th'air / what a miserable appearanc: he has ! 
"Sang, in view a’ dolasan a.. getting out 
of sight. Ag &—, pr.pt. of amhairc. (SE 
ing, viewing, observing, inspecting, behold- 


ing. 
ach, -aiche, a. Perceptive. 2 Watch- 
ful, vigilant. 3 Considerate, humane. Bha 
sin a. uaith, that was very consid»rateof him. 
aiche, -ean, s.m. Spectator. 
amharcenoll,** $. Aptyongs. 
&mharra, a. Sour-teinpered. 
Amhartan. -ain, 3.2. 
Qus, Z** Lucky person. 





Look. ?2See, 


Royalprivilege. 2 
2 -PlInrality. 





Valture. 2 (AF) see 





Fortune, luck, prosper- j ainhnarach, -aiche, a. 


—— ————ach, -aiche, 
prosperons. F 
amhirtanachd, e, £. Good fortune, course of 
gool fortune, prosperity. 
amharus, -uis, 5.251, Suspicion, doubt, distrust. 
Is mór wa., I very much suspect ` tha, gun: 
a., yes, must undoubtedly; fo a. umaibh, im. 
doubt «bout you; am bi thusa gun o ad 
righ ? wilt thou indeed be a king 1 
—aco, -aiche, a. Distrustful, doubtful, 
suspicious. 2 Ambignous.  Deasboireachd 
&., doubtful disputation. 
: achadh, -aidh, s.m. Mistrusting, doubt- 
ing. Ag a—, pr pt. of amharusaich. 
; achd, s./.ind. Distrustfulness, suspic- 
lousness, douvtfulness, apprehensiveness. 2, 
** Ambiguity. 
aich, pr.pt. ag amharusachadh, v.a.& n. 
Doubt, suspect, mistrust. 
amhas, -ais,-an, 8.5m. Wild ungovernable man. 
2 Madman. 3 Wild beast. 4 stall for cattle. 
5 **Dull, stupid person. 
acn, -aiche, a. Wild, ungovernable. £ 
Like a madwan. 3 Dull, stupid. 
———a!, -aig, -an, &,f. Silly woman. 
tainhasan, ** -ain, s.m. Sentry. 
ainnasan, 72. pl. of ambas. 
amhcha, 8.f. Cravat. 
&iulidadh,** -aidh s.m. Permission, permit. 
a mheud, adv. Inasmuch. 
ambthorian, -ain, s.m. Luck. 2 Misfortune. 
àmhghair, eh. Sina. of àmhghar. 
àmhghar, -air, -an, s.m. Affliction. tribulation, 
anguish, trouble, surrow, distress, adversity, 
calamity. Dh'a:nhairc e air m'à., ue looked 
on my afKiction ; ain tharruingeas ar n-d. gu 
ceann, atime which shall draw our troubl-s 
to a close. 
-————ach, -aiche,a. Afflicted, sorely trou-. 
bled, distressed. 2 Calamérous. 
-—— ———aiche,** s.m. Distressed person, 
who has long been in distress. 
x , cump. of àmhgharach. 
famhlabhair,** a. Mute, dumb, speechless. 
amhlach, a. see amlach 2**Vora:ious. 
&inhla:ih, -aidh,, sm. Duplicate, copy, tran- 
script. 2**Voracity. 


a. Lucky, fortunate, 





one 


 &inhla4;-mhara, -aig-,-an, &.f. Storm-petrel(bird) 


sea luaircag. 

amhlaich, v.a. Tangle. 

amhla dh, adv. see amhluidh. 

amhlair, -e, -ean, s.m. Dull, stupid or ig- 
norant person. 2 Fool, idiot. 3**Chang- 
ling. 4 Driveller. 5**Brutish man. 

each, -reiche, a. Foolish, like an idiot. 
2 Brutal. 3 Boorish. 

each, s./.ind. Foolishness, trifling con- 

du t, fooling away one’s time. 2 Brutality, 
8 Boori-üuness. 

amhlaisg, s./. Bad beer, tiplush. 

——-.——each, -geich, s.m. Brewer of bad beer. 

, -geiche, a. Insipid or weak, as 








bad beer. 

amhlar, -air,-an, s-e amhlair. 

amhluadh, -aid1, -ailhean, ¢.m. Confusion. 9 
Troubie. 3 Dismay, asto ishment. Is amh- 
luadh e, i£ ts confusion ` air an a. chendna, 
in lise manu", 

amhluai lh, gen. sing. of amhInadh. 

auhlnilh, adv. As, like as, in like manner, re- 
sembling, so. A. mar shruth a rnitheas bras, 
like ag aatream that runas amain 5; vi h-a. sin 
a bhios na daoine peacach, not so shall be the 
wickad, 

amhnag, see abhnag. 

Shameless, impudent, 

tamhnas, -ais, s.m. Shamelessness, impudence.: 





amhra 30 anabasach 

tainhra, -ai, s.m. Dream. 2 Poem. 3 Sword- | -an, dim. termination of sinzular nouns. Balg, 
Lo a bag, balgan, alittle bag; cnoc, o hill. 
tamhra,** a. Great, noble, zood. 2 Dark. enocan, a little hill. 1 

acp o -aidh, s.m. Mourning, wailing,|-an, bres termination of nouns. 
lainentation. an, Gef. art. m. The. [Used 1 Before palatals 
amhran, ( for fabhran) n.pl. of fabhra. in the nominative singular. 2 Before inguals 
` aan, An, see ora. 1n nom., rect and dat. sing & Before a 
amhrath, -aith, s.m. Misfortune. vowel in the gen., and dat, sing. 4 Before fA 


amhsainn, see amüsan. 

amhsan, -ain, s.n. Ganuet, solan goose, see 
sülaire. 

amhsgaoileadh, -lidh, s.m. Flux, diarrhoea, 
looseness. 

àmhtha, see àth. 

amhuil, adv. As. like as, eyen as, such as, in 
like manner, resembling. 4. mar Nimrod 


iu the gen., and dat. sing. It takes "t-" be. 
fore vowels in the nom. sing, ani before [A 
followed by a vowel or 4, n, r, in th: gen. and 
dat.sing.] An cu, the doz; angniomh, the 
ded ; an t-each, the horse ; an t-eun, the bird; 
an lion, the net; an t-sluaigh, of the p*ovle ; 
toil an athar, the father’s will ; auns an t- 
saoghal, in the world. 


an sealgair, even às Nimrod the hunter; Ia —. def. art. fem. The. (Used Before æ lingual 


a. mar sin à bhitheas na peacaich, even so 
shall sinners be; a. tonn air tràizh, like a wave 
on the shore ` a. mar seo, even like this, just 
like this ; a. sin, in like munner ; a. mar an 
duine seo, just like this man. 

amhuil,* s.f. Attention, regard. see umh- 
ail. Na biodh a. agad dha, never mind him 
air an a. cheudna, in like manner. 

t ,** v. Spoil, plunder. 

amhuil sin,** adv. So, in like manner. 

amhuilt,f -e, -ean, s./. Antic, odd, fanciful, or 
wild gesticulation, buffoonery. 2 Odd appear- 
ance. 3 Stratagem, deceit, trick. 

——each, -eich, sm. Antic, buffoon, harle- 
quin. 2 Ntrategist, cunning fellow. 

—— — each, eiche, a Ludicrous, old, 2 Dea- 
ceitful, stratagetical, 3 (JM) Pretending. 
tricky. 4 Wicked. i 

———-eachd, see amhuilt. 

ear, see amhuilteach. 

— — —earaehd, see auhuilt. 

amhuinn, aimhne, aimhnaichean, see ahhaiin. 

àmhuinn,-e,-ean, s.f. Oven. 2 Furuace. 4. 
dheataich, a furnace of smoke. 

—ich, v.a. Stew, seethe, 

amhultas, -ais, see aimheal. 

amhusg, see amhas. 

famlabar,| a. Dumb. 

amlach, -aiche, a. Curled, having ringlets, 2 
Flowing, as bair. 

amladh, -aidh, s.m. see amaladh. 

amlag, -aig, -an, s.f. Curl, ringlet. 

ach, -aiche,@. Forming ringlets. 2 Cur 
led, tressy, full of ringlets. o, cleachdach, 
curled and tressy. 

—-—aich, va. Curl, make into ringlets. 

amlubach, -aiche, a. Curling. 

am maireach, adv. To-morrow. 

am measg, prep. Among, amongst. 

amon, -oin, s.m. Almond, see almon. 

Tampal, s.m. Hunger, 

amraiche, -ean, s.m. [€ f.] One that works 
about troughs. 2 'Iruil. 

—-—an, pl. of amar. 

amraidh, sf. Cupboard,''press."' 2**A'monry. 

a muigh, adv. Out, without, the outsiile. Air 
an taobh a muigh, on the outside; tha ea 
muigh, he is outside; tha "m fuacht a muigh 














"aa staigh an diugh, the cold is outside and in- 


side to-day. ^ see note on ‘‘a mach." 

amuis, see amais. 

tamus,**-uis, s.m. Ambush, surprise. 2 Sudden 
onset, 3 Leisure. 

&musach, -aich, s.m. One who keeps his ap- 
pointment. 
— —, a. Of, or pertaining to an ambush. 

amusadh, -aidh, see amasadh. 

&n, prep. In. 

&n-, negative prefix, 
joyless, distressful, 


Not, un. An-aoibhinn, 


in ihe nom., and dative singular. 2 Baiure a 
vowel, or f^ in the nom. aud d st. sing. It 
takes''t-" in the nom. and dativ» sing. of 
nouns begiuning with s, followel by a 
=) or l, n, r. | An doimhne mhór, the great 


The article is often used in Gaelic in casas 
where it is absent in English, as—k Whar 
a noun is followed by s-o, siod, or sin, as An 
cù seo, tis dog ; am bealach sin, that brach. 
2 Before the nam.sof some couutries, ag 
Anns an Eadailt, in [ta/y; anns au Faran? 
in France. - 

an ? interr. particle, An tu esan? art thou he ? an. 
cù do sh 'irbiiseach? is thy servant a doy! 

an, poss. pron. Their. An cuid, their property. 
(Changes into am before B, RM. or DI 

an, rel.pron. Whom, which, that. Leis an d" 
fhàg mi e, with whom I lert it; leis au dr 
fhalbh e, witk whom he went. Contracted zo 
aiter a vowel, as, o'n d'thàinig e, from whom 
he ET [Changes into am before B, F, M, 
or P. 

an, expl-tive particle, placed before all verbs, 
exceptiug those beginning with B, F, M, or P 
whichtake am, Gus an abair iad, till they 
say. 

an-, intensitive particle as in an-bhruid, tyranny. 

tan,** s.m. Element. 2 Principle. 3 Water. 4 
Falsehood. 5 Planet. 


jan, a. see aon, 

fan,**a. Still. 2 Pleasant. 8 Pure. 4 Noble. 
5 True. 6 Swift. 

fana,** e, Riches. 2 Fair weather. 3 Silver 
cup. 


&na-, neg. pref. Not, un.. 

an-abaich, -e, o. Unripe. 2 Premature, abom 
tive. 3 Raw. Torrachas anabaich, an un- 
timely birth. 

————vachid, s.7.% Unripeness, crudity, ime 

- ead,-eid,s/ $ maturity, abortiveness. 

an-abaidh, see an-abaich. 

ana-baisteach, -aich, n.pl. -aiche, s.m. Anabap- 








tist. 
,€4. Anabaptist. 
anaban, see anabarr. 
&uabarr, A, 8.1. Excess, superfluity.  2** 
Rioting. 3**Atrocity. 


ich, -aiche, a. Exceeding, excussiv3. 2 
Redundant, superfluous. 3 Desperate. in- 
disp»nsable. 4** Shocking, terrible. Meud- 
aichidh mi thu gu h-anabarrach, J will in- 
crease you rece -dinjyly. Ù vimetime. used as an 
adver) a. fireanta, over much righteous; a. 
aingidh, desperately wick d. 

—————«chd, s.f.ind. see anabarr. 

t3, see anabarr. 

anabas, -ais, sm. Unripeness. 2 Refuse, dregs, 
ott-scouriug. 

aca, -aiche, a 





2. Dreggy. 3 





Unripe. 


anabasach 


Muddy. : 

—achd, s.f.ind. State of being full of dregs. 
2 Muddiness. "me 

&na-beachd,** s./. Strange faucy 2 Wild idea. 
8 Ambition. e 

ail, -e,a. Haughty. 2 Inattentive. 3 
Not recollecting. 4 Unpuuctual, 5** Fanci- 
ful, wild, chimer:cal. 6 Am ditions. 

ana-beachdalachd, s/.tnd. Dignity, grandeur of 
mind, haughtiness, 2 Fancifulness, wildness, 
$ Ambition. 

anabharr, see anabarr. : 

ana-bheus, -a, -an, s.m. Immorality. 

—--Ach, a. Immoral. 

ana-bhatha th, -aidh,s m. Deluge, inundation. 
2 Melancholy drowning 

ana:bhiorach, -aich, s.m. Centipede. 2] Whit- 
low, (preceded by article an. ] ' 

,** a. Very sharp, very pointed. 

anabbuil,* sf. see an-bhuil. 

ana-bith,tt a. Huge. 2 Extraordinary. 

anablach, -aich, s.m. Offal. 2 Coarse flesh. 

anablas, -ais, s.m.  Insipidity, tastelessness, 2 
Bad taste. 
your eloquence. 

ana-blasda, a. Insipid,tasteless, 2 Of bad taste. 
Deoch a., an insipid drink, 

















81 


4A.t’uirighioll, the insipidity of 


ana-cuimse 


ana-chaoin, v.n. Lament, deplore to excess. 

——eadh, -nidh, s.m. Excessive weeping, 
wailing. 

fanachrach,** a. Full of pity, compassionate. 

tanachdrach, see anshocrach. 

fanac.radh, -aidh, s.m. Wretch, object of pity. 

fanachras, -ais, s.m. Pity, compassion. 

ana-chruas,** -ais, s.m. Extreme avarice. 

ana-chüirtear,** s.m. Anti-courtier. 

ana-chürain,** -aim, 3273. Care, anxiety. 

-——ach,** -aiche, a. Anxious, solicitous. 
Gu h-a., over-anziously. 

ana-cinnte, sf. Uncertainty. 

ach, -eiche, a. Uncertain, unsure. 

anacladh,** -aidh, em. Preserving, preserva- 
tion. 2 Delivering, deliverauce. Àg a—, 
pr.pt. of anacsil, Preserving, saving, secur- 
ing, protecting. 

ana-cleach.,* v.a. Discontinue the practice of. 

eed ,** s.f. Inexperience. Is wor t'ana- 

oleachd, great ts your inexperience. 

aih, -aidh, -aidheau, s.m. Inex- 
perience. 2 Want of practice. 3 Bad custom 
or habit. 4**Desuetude. 

ana-cleachdainn, see ana-cleachdadh. 

ana-oleas, -eis, -easan, 3.1m. Bad or wicked deed. 

ana-cuaimbadh,** enn, Ludigestion. 























ana-blasdachd, s.f.ind. Same meanings as ana- | ara-cneasda, a. Uncharitable, unfeeling. 2 


blas. 
ana-brais, s.f. Lust. 
an-abuich, see an-abaich. 
—eachd, see an-abaicheachd. 
an-abuichead, see an-&baichead. 
an-abuidh, see an-aha:ech, 
-—eachd, see au-abaichead. 
ana-biirt, e, 3.f. Mad easg, fury. 
*anae,** -aic, sA, Wound, 
anacail, -e,s.f. Quietness, tranquility. 2 Pre. 
servation, safety, 
, pr.pt. anacladh, v.a. 
2 Deliver, save, preserve. 
age. 








Defend, protect. 
3 Secure. 4 Man- 





ana-cainnt, -0, 8.f. Abuse. 2 Ribaldry. 3 
Blasphemy. 
———— —each, -eiche, a. Reproachful. 2 Abns- 


ive. 3 Pronetoribaldry, 4 Blaspnemous. Gu 
h-ana-caiunteach, abusively. 

anacair, see anshocair. 

anacrach,(AG) a. (au-shocair) Painful. 

ana-caith,* v.a. Squander, waste, be profuse 
or prodigal, 

— —erch, -eiche, -ichean, s.m. Spendthrift, 
prodigal, squauderer, 

vath, -eilh, see ana-caitheamh, 

—————eamh, -eimh, sm. Extravagance, pro- 
digality, waste. 2 see ana-caitheach. 3ttPro- 
fusion. 4 Riot. 
riot. 

——teach, -tiche, a. Extravagant, waste- 
ful, prodigal. 

—— ——.———., -iche, -an, see ana-caitheach. 

—-——tiche, see ana-caitheach, 2 comp. of 
ana-caithteach. 

anacal, -ail, s.m. Quiet person. 2 Healthfulness. 

amacaladh, see anacladh. 

anaceart, -eirte, a. Unjust, partial. iniquitous, 
unfair, Guiomh a., «n unjust de-d. 

-———-,, $. see ana-ceartas. 

A3, -ais, 8.1. In justice, iniquity, unfair- 

ness, partiality, injury. 

ana-caist, -e, sf. Difficulty dilemma. 2 Puzzle, 
riddle. 

fanach.** -aich, s.m. Path, 2 Washing, cleans- 
ing. 3 Aager. 

f———ain,** «f. Danger, peril, hazard, crisis. 
2 Misfortune. 

fanachau,** -ain, s.m. 
way. 2 Imrruder 





*. thaobh a., on account of 





Dishonest. 3 Inhuman, cruel. 4 Daugerous, 
5 Froward, perverse, 6 Barbarous, savage. 
Le beula., with a perverse mauth. 
——ehd, sfiind. Unfeelingness. 
humanity, cruelty. 3 Perverseness, 

&ana-coireach, sve neo-choireach 

ana-cothrom, -cim, sf. Injustice, unfairness, 
hardship. 2 Violeuce, oppression. 3 Disal- 
vantage. Luchd ana-cochroim, opp essors 
"Ana-cothrom"' is aiways uscd in the W. 
Isles as applicable to people wpro are receiv- 
ing injustice, uot bo those wüo are d ing 
injustice. It is generally used to signify 
$0108 uatnral dis ivautage.—J.M. 

—--ach, -aiche, a. Unjust, unfair. 2 
Violent, opprossive. Gu h-a., oppressive.y. 
auacrach,* @ Sick, unwell. 

anua-creileach, -ich s. d -eiche, a. see ana-creid- 
mheach. 

ana-creideamh, -eimh, s.m. Infidelity, unbelief, 
scepticism, atheisin. 

ana-creidinheach, -inhich, 8.m. Sceptic, infidel, 
unbeliever. 

————.—— ——,-eiche, @. Sceptical, unbe- 
lieving, atheistical, irreligious. Bean a., an 
unhelieving wife. 

apa-crìosd, -a, s.m. Antichrist. Thig an t-g.. 
Antichrist will come. 

—achd, 3.f.ind. Paganism, heathenism, 
intidelity, irreligion. 

~-ail, -aile, a. Unchristian, anti-christ- 

2 Inhuman, cruel, barbarous. 

—alachd, see ana-criosdachd. 

—uidh, -ean, s.n. Intidel, pagan, hea- 
then, one not a christian. 

———-—-nidheachd, see ana-criosdachd. 

aua-cruas, -als, 4.71. Avarice, covetousness. 

ana-cruinn, -e@. Not round. 

aua-cnibheas, -eis, sm. Immensity, infinity. 
2 Excess. 3 Incredible thing. 

ana-cuibheasach, -eiche, a. Imuioderate,excess- 
ive. Used also adverbially as—a. aingidh, 
desp»raiely wicked. 

—— dr see ana-cuibheas. 

ana-eunimhne, s. f. ind. Forgetfulness, negli- 
gence. 


2 In- 


ian. 








ach, -aivhe, a. 
tive, negligent. 


Forgetful, inatten- 


Que who keaps in the} ana-cui winen,* v. a. Forget, neglect. 


ana-ciuinse, vf. Vastness, immensity, 2 Dha- 


ana-cuimse 8 





nioderateness, in:vinperance. Fear na h-ana- 
cuimse, an intemnerate man. 
ach, -siche, a. Vast, immense. 2 
Immoderate, intemperate. Gu h-a., tamod- 
erately. 
—achd, 3.f.ind. Immensen2ss. 2 Im- 
mModerateisss, intenrperance. 
ana-cuimsich,* v.a. Exagzerate, make exorbi- 
tant. 
ana-cul,** s.f. Lean condition of boly. Is 
buileach à chat thu gu n-a., how very lean 
you have beenne ! 
wh, -aiche, a. Lea", thin, slender. 2 
Til-luvking. 3 l1ll-cluthe i. 
ana-ciram, aim s m. Negligence, carelessness. 
—--ach, -aichs, a. Negligent, carelzss, 
ana-gairios, see aua-goireas. 
-—ach, see ana-goireas ich. 


d, see aua-zoire&sacnd. 
U 























ana-gealtacn, -aiche, a.  Peariess, lutrepid. 

anu-zé.lilh,-e,«. Haze, monstrous. 

ana-géilt. s.f. Coara o, bravery. 

an-agn, -àigh, sem. Misforbn te. 

an-aghaidh, s.f.ind. Confusion of countenaace. 
An-agh vdh ort ! may shame befall you ! 

an a;haidü, prep. Aga nst, in opposition. Aa 
aghaidu na ganithe, ag cust the wind. [Gov- 
erus the Geuitive case. | 

ana-gheur,ff-e ire, a. Blunt. 

&ana-ghlais,** s.f. Out wash. 

ana-zh'as, -ais, see eanghntas, 

Ana-güeur, -éire, a. Blunt, oviuse. : 

ana-yhleus, s.m. ttState of being unprepared. 
2 Disorder. 3 Mischief. 

-—— ba, a. Unprepared. 2 Discordant. 3 
Spiritless. 

&na-ghlic, see neo-ghlic. 

ana-ghiiocas, -ais, 8.m. Imprudence, indiscre- 
tion, foolishuess. 

ana-ghloir, -e, $f. Bad language. 

Sach, -eiche, a. Reproachful, scurri- 
lous, shameful, ’ 

ana-ghlonnach, -aiche, æ. E mnowned for val- 
our. 2 Famous, celebrated. 

anagnnàth, -than 1a, s.m. Bad custom,irregular 
habit, innovation. 

—ach, -aiche, a Unusual, not custom- 

ary, irrezular. 

—aich, v.a. see mi-gunàthaich. 

——auna, n.pl. of any yhauatn. Bad cus- 

toms. 

















—8, -aiths, sm. Bad customs, irregula- 
rity, innovation. 
&na-znrinn, -e, a. 

2 Unkind. 
anagladh, see anacladh. 
ana-glaodh, -aoidh, s.m Loud shout. 
ana-gleusta, a. see ana-ghleusda. 
ana-glic, see ana-ghlic. 
ana-gliocas, ses arna-guliocas. 
&na-gnàth,-a, see ana-ghnàth. 
ach, see aua-ghuathach. 
&na-gnéitheil, -e, a, Pernicious, mischievous, 
2 Destructive. 
ana-goireas, 8m Inconvenience. 
want of moderation. Chaidh e gu h-a., 
went to excess. 
-— —&ch, -aiche, a. Inconvenient, incom- 
modious. 2*Very needíul, requisite, 3**Ex- 
cessive, immo-lerata. 
-—ackd, s.. ind. Incom:nodiousness, 2 
Excessiveness, 1nmoderateness. 
an-azrach, -aich?, a. Quarrelso:n». 2 Petulaut. 
ana-gràdn,-àidh, s.a. Doting love. 
——ach, -aiche, a. Loving excessively, 
&nail, ge». analach & anaile, n. p? anailean, 
sf. Breath. 2 Brvusze, air. 3 Haat, Aa 





Incoinpact, inelegant, 





2 Excess, 
he 











9 


a 


an-amnharnea 





soroiu, the breath of his nostrils; a. na bta- 

tha, the breath o life; a. na gaoithe, he 

breath of the unnd ; a. nan speur, the breath of 

the skies (wind) ; leiz Vanad, gabh tva., ret, 

tate your breath ; ieigibh ur n-a., rest yotr- 

selves ; is blàth a. na màthar, warm is 

the mother's breat; is a. atharrachadh 
ceaird, change of work is a rest. 

ana4im, gen.sing. of auam. 

an-aimsir, -e, -ean, 8.7. Unmeet time. 2 Unfa- 

vourable weather. 3 Tempest. 

eil, -e, à. Untimely. 2 Unseasonable. 

anainn, -e, -ean, 8&.f. Top of a house or wall. 2 
Eaves. 

anaisg, SP, Fling, reproach. 

an àite, prep. ln place of, instead. An aite 
droighn» fàsaidh an giuthas, instead of the 
thorn shall grow the fir-tree. 

an-aire,-e, 6%. Necessiiy, compulsion. 

au àirl, ade, Upwards, froin beiow Gun éir- 
igh an àird a chwidn, never more to rise. 

airàrea:naba, a Iunuinerable. 

aanirt,** a. Soft, tender. 2 Mild, gentle, hu- 
mane. 

fan-aithne,** gm. Private man, obscure man. 

tau-aithuichte,** a. Unknown, obscure, unno- 
Led, 

anal, see anail. 

———a^h, g n.xing. of anail. 

aunaialeh, v.n. Breatue. 

a nat. adv. Hither, to this side, 
the other side. 

&n-à'u, 8.34. Unseasonableness. 

anain, amua, pl. an;iniu, à/vnanna, s.m. Soul 
spirit. 2 Mind. 3 Lite. b-oath. t Perm of 
Aifevtio:, love. 5  Uonrage. Teica air son 
t'auam, escipe for thy life; air m'anam, on 
my soul 318 wo bainuta. ’ad neoil, joyous ts 
thysouw in thy cloude. 

an-a naca,** a. Late, anseasouable. 
ànaegn, unsedsona Au. 

Aikeurichara, AU) s.m. see anam-chara. 

anamada ta, -aicüs, a. Lively, sprigitly, activa, 
naviag soul, life, or aniinal spirits. 

anata 34604, -6, -van, xf. D ing coavulsions. 

ananidail, -e, d. s336 ana‘nadathn. 

anamaia, ga. & voc. sing oi adima. 

ant, ala, < anan, s.m. Little soul. 2 Dar- 
liag, dvac soul. Aa t-anam truazh, the poor 
aou 

ana n vü-dé, 

&.13 1l Vuta, d. 
boll. 

anamantachd,** s.f. Liveliness. 

fana:n-eualla, 4. Biavo. 

anam-chari, see anam-charaid,) s.m. Bosom 

ana n-cnaraid, -chairdean, friend. ZAC 
Sout-frieud. A manor woman who says the 
d«ath-biessing over a dying person. 

ana-measarta. d. Lutealpuraty, iminod.rate. 2 
Lewil. 3** Vast huze. Caibueamh a., im- 
moderate exne.32. 

-—cud, s f.ind Intemperance, ima- 
moderateusss. 2 Vastness, prodigiouzaess. ¥ 
Liceutiou-ness, excess. 

ana-maasarrayih, see ana-moasarra. 

aua-ime:duidb,* a. Preinature, a »ortiva. 

ana-meidazachi,* 3.7. Prematurity, avortive- 
12333. 

A I&--:i nein, 

——. ——9ach, 


over, from 


Gu h-an- 


see denr5aian-dé. 
see anuinidach. 2 Courageous, 





see ain-mòiu. 

see ain-uléineach, 
aaa rä, ses ain-tnèin. 
anan fais,** s.m. Vegetative soul. 
eo —— fasumhor,** sm. " a 
*urvuüacu ** a. Liveiy, sprightly. 

taaan irin, ** s.m. Pauegyrist. 
an-aluuarus,-uis,-an, 8.7. xtreme distrust 


an-amharus 


or suspicion. Buailteach dh a., liable to eg: 
picion. 


trustfui 


ach, -aiche, Suspicious, mis- 

2 Jealous. 

&na-mhiann, see &ua-miaun. 

—ach, see aua-:niannach. 

ana-miór, S e an-mhór. 

An-am'irus, 388 AN-N Aarts. 

an-amarasach, ses an-ainuarusach. | 

&Dna-unann, -unen, sm. Svusuality, lust. 
Fear a.. sensvalist; ana-miaanau na fevia, the 
lusis of the flesh. 

i ok a. Sensual, lustful, carnal. 

Aihi-al.03arra, See ana-measarra. 

anamoch, see anmoch. , 

anam mothachuil,** s.m. Sensitive soul. 

-——— reusJnia,** s.m. Reasonable soul. 

&n-a bhach, -4iche,a. Oheeriess.joyless,gloomy, 
una mable. 4. gai solus do eniüil-sa, joy- 
less wi hout the light of thy song. 

àn-a»iooninn, a. Mournful, unhappy. Is a. 
daà-san ! woe unto him! 

an-&oiuuüinneact, s36 &l-avivhneach. 

&u-ao9!bhneaes, -eiche, a. Joyiess, mournful, 
unhappy. 

&n-a:nunieas, -eis, 4m. Woe, sadness, sorrow, 
grief, miscry, discemfori. - 

àn-4Oi3, -8, of. Nou-age, miuurity. 

an aonar,* adv. Four days nonce. (P) 

an-acl, a Very higan. 

a avidacn, d. Superlative in grammar. 

asari, -airt,-an, sm. Linen. A. grinn, fine 
linen; œ. bùird, table linen ; a. gealaichte, 
bleached l n'n ; a. glas, dowlass ; uw. canaich, 
fustian ; a. bàis, shroud. h 

, -aire,** sf. Draught causing death. 

anart, -airt, sm. Pride, disdain. 2 Contempt. 

ach, -4.cne, a. Disdainful, contemptuous. 
2 Indignant. 

&nasdolach, a. Intransitive in grammar. 

anasgar,G. +**Kestless. t2**{r sume. 3ftEx- 
cessive. 

auasgrachd, sr t**Restlessness. f2**Irksome- 
ness. 3ttKxcess. 

an asguida, adv. Gratis, freely, asa present. 

anasta, d. Sturimy. mm 

—--—chd, 2.f.ind. Shattering or ill-guiding | 
Of anytuing. 2 leurpestuous wea:ner. 3 Ex- 
posure t»:h* blast. 4ttfrouble, hardsiip. 

an-athacil, Ai, d. Bolid, courageous, fear- 
less. 2 Yierce. Gu h-aig anuach, ao-acdhach, 
in a joyous and fearless manner. - 

an atb-vidache, atv. To-inorrow's night. (dit. 
the next oignt 

2abarrach, see anabarrach. 

fanvhii-,** o Stameless, naughty. 

faabha:,** a. Proligious. 

&4O0liaun, see &ufaaan. 

&ubhar, 

&nüharr, 

Huolarrg, 

anbharrach, -aiche, see anabarrach. 

au-bhas, -ais, son. Sudilen death. 2 Shocking 
death. 3 Catastrophe. 

&u-uhàtaaln, see ana-bnathadh. 

au-bneus, see ain-bheus & ana-bheus. 

ana-bhivrach, a Very pointed or cone-shaped. 

ai-ohlas, see ana-bias. 

au-vhochd, a. Extremely poor. 

ainn, 8.m. MExtreins poverty. 2 Ex- 
treme misfortune. 

faubhrod,** -oid, s.m. Tyrant. 

au-vbruid, see an-bhruid. 

an-bhruid, -e, s.f. Tyranny. 

— — — —each, -ich, s.m. Tyrant. 

ith, v.a. Tyrannize. 

an-bhuil,-e, af. Confusion, dismay. 2 Mis- 
application, 8ttDainaze, abuse. 


a. 




















———A EE EE ve ———— 


| $8.0. See anabarr. 


a m 








— m= — —— 4 
—M M M — M HÀ M  (— $i X 


83 


an-doigh 


tanbhuinne, see anfhainne. 
-—vehd, see anflannachd, 
fanbraent,| s. Consumption. 
an-braise, see anabrais. 
an-bairte, see auabuirt. 
ai-Cainnt, see auacainnt. 
an cais,** uv. By and by. 
an caraibi, adv. Beside, near. 
an cas air,** adv. Destrous. 
he is very wesirous to haveit. 
an ceani, p ep. Ia the end,at the expiration of. 





Tha e an cas air, 





. wv. A-head. 
an cexuü a ;léille, adv. Together. 
an ceartair, edo. Just now. 


an céin, dv. Afar. 

tances,l| s. Ailnenut. 

an ceud, a. the tirst. see ceud. 

an-chaith, see ana-caith, 

&n-cninntesch, see aua-cinnteach. 

aua-chieac: tadh, see aua-cleachdadh. 

an-chleas, s38 ana-cleas. 

ao-chreidea un, see ana-creileamh. 

an-cOruas, -iis, see ana-cruas. 

an-cnt, (AF, lox. 

an-chüram,  seeana-cürain. 

an códhail, see an cóunhail. 

an coianea:nh, adv. Weli nizh, 2 To meet. 

an coinnea uaa’ chùil, adv. Backwards. 

an cómhna.da, adv. Always. 

an cuairt, adv. About. 

landaca,** -aich, s.m. Wrath, anger. 2 Evil. 

fandadh,** a. Just. 

fandagh,*" s.m. Sin. 

an dàil, prep. Against, asa foe. 2 Search- 
ing for, in the track of. 3ffi'o meet 

an dàil,£f adv, Near to. 

an-daua, -dàine, a. Presumptuous, fool-hardy. 
2** Impudent. 

—ehd, see andanadas. 

—das, -ais, s.m. Presumption, fool-har- 
diness. 2**Arrogance, iupudence. 

&n-daoine, $., pl. of an-duins. 

an dara cuid....no..... conj.  Either....or.. 

an dé, adv. Yesterday. Airc bho’n dé, the day 
before yesterday ; an diuga is an dé, to-day 
and yesterday. 

an deashaidh, see an dé din. 

an-dealbh, -a, -an, s.m. see aindealbh. 

an déila, prep. After, beh.nd. Fond of, 
Wi-ning for. An déidn seo, «fter this, after- 
wards; tua e 'n déidh oirre, Ae is fond of her. 

ac déidh laimhe,** adv. Afterwards. 92**Be. 
hindhand. 

an déigh, see an déidh. 

an déis, prep. see an déidh. 

an déis ft aiv. Afterwards. 

an-deisealacnd,tt s.f. see ain-deisealachd. 

an-deiseil,tt -e, @ see ain-deiseil. 

an-déistinn, -e, &.f. Squeamishness, 
ousness. 2 Loathsomeness. 

- each, a. Squeamish. 2 Loathsome. 

an-deurach,** a. Mournful, tearful, weeping 
excessively. 4 Causing excessive grief. 

an-diadhacn, -aich, see ain-diadhaidh. 

an-diadhachd, see ain-diadhaend. 

an-diadaalachd, see aiu-diadhachd. 

an-diadnaidu,-e, see ain-diadhbaidn. 

— — eachd, see aia-diadaach 1. 

an diugh, duv. ru-day. Thig e an diugh, Ae 
will come to-day. 

an-diighe, s.7. U adutifulness. 2**see ain-dlighe. 

-—&cn, -eiche, @ Unduuiul — 2** sce 
ain-dligheavh, 

an-docüas, -ais, s.m. Despair, despondency. 2 
**Presumption. $**3auguine expectation. 

——avis, -aiche, a. Wicnout hope. 2 Dis- 
trustful. 2**Presumptuous. 3**Sanguine. 

an-doigh, -e, -ean, s,f. bad condition, bad state 


(old spelling.) 








fastidi- 

















an-doigheil 


34 


angrach 


anddigheil,tt a. Unsystematic, badly appoint- | anfhainne, comp. of anfhann. 


ed. 2 Bad-tempered. 

an-dolas, sm. Excessive sadness, distress, un- 
happiness. 2 Disco:ufort. 

—ach, à. Sad, sorrowful. 2 Comfortless. 
3 Irksome. 

*tandras,** -ais, s.m. Fury, infernal divinity. 

an drisd,aev. Now, at present. An drasd’sa 
rithist, now and then. 

an dràsdaich, prov. for an dràsd. 

an dràsta, see an dràsd. 

tan-lrobhlasach,** -aich, s.m. Spendthrift. 

t —- d,** st, Extravagance, pro- 
digality. 


e En, a. Degenerate, 
an-dualachas, -ais, 
an-dualchas, -a.s, an-dichas. 
*andualirasc,** à. Catachresis. 
an-düchas, -ais, s.m. Degeneracy. 2 Meanness. 
——aci, -aich, a. Degenerate. 2 Unwor- 
thy, base. 3 Not hereditary. 
an-duine, pl. an-daoine, s.m. Wicked man. 2 
Insignificant person. 3 Decrepid person. 
fan-dul,** .uil, s.m.  Avidity. 2 Inordinate 
desire. 
an e? Isit? isit he? An i? ie it she? see v.is. 
an-eadargnaidh,** s.m. w.ranger. 
&n-eazal,-ail, s.n. Fearlessuess, 
**Astonishmeut, terror. 
ach,* a. Fearless. 2 Timid. 3 Formid- 
able, causing terror. 
an-ealainh, -aimhe, a. Indlolent, inactive. 2 In- 
expert. 
an-ealauta, a. Inexpert, unskilful. 
-—chd, see an-»alauntas. 
-—3s, -ais, s.m. Inexpertuess, unskilful- 
ness. 
&n-eanraisd, -e, s.f. Storm. 
an earar, adv. Twodays hence, day after to- 
morrow. 
an eararais, adv. 
an-earb,* v.a. 
dount, susp.-ct. 
an-earbsa, s.f.ind. Distrust, suspicion, jealousy, 
non-reliance. 
an-ear^sacl, -aiche, a. Distrustfn1, suspicious. 
2 Diffident. 3 Timorous. 4 Causing suspi- 
cion or distrust. 
—d, s.f. Distrustfulness, su.picious- 














boldness. 2 


Three days hence. 


Distrust, des air, mistrust, 





ness. 
an ear-thrath, see an earar. 
an-dassuidh, -e, a. Lazy, itle. 2Sluggish, slow. 
an-éibheiun, see an-é bhinn. 
an-éibhinn, -e, a. Woeful, sorrowful, wretched. 
2 Afflicted. 3tt Uncomfortable. 
~-each, see an-éibhiun. 
an-éibhneach, -eiche, a. see au-acibhneach, & 
an-éibhinn. 
an-éinhneas, -els, see an-aoibhneas. 
an-é.feachd, s.f. Iuefficacy, want of power. 
——— —.—Ach, -aiche, a. Inetfectual, weak. 
an-eireachdail, -e, a. Unhandsome, ungraceful. 
2 Ungenteel, unseemly. 
an-eircachdas, -ais, 8.2%. Uncomeliness. 2 Un- 
seeniliness, indece ‘cy. 
an éirig, prep. In return for, in ransom for. 
a fach, -Aiche, a. Overflowing. 
An'aih, -aidh, see onfhadh. 
ania lhàach, -aiche, see oníhadhach, 
tanífas,** -ais, s.m. Fear, terror. 
an-fhacal, -ail, san Reproach, taunt. 
word, improper expression. 
an-(had, a. Tuo long. 
anfhadh, see onfha:th. 
an-fliaidhidinn, gan. Impatience, restlessness. 
an-fa:idhidneach, a. Impatient, restless. 
au-fhaghidinn, see an-fhaidhidiun. 


2 Bad 


anfhainne s.f.ind. Feebleness, weak. 

anfhainneachd, f ness debility, decrepitude, 
uphealthiness, infirmity. 

anfhann, -ainne, a. Weak, feeble, tender. 2 Le- 
firm, de!.ilitated, decrepit, sickly. 3 Slen- 
der. 4 Pliant, not stiff. Suilean a., weak eyes, 

anfhannachadh, -aidh, s.m. Weakening, debi- 
litating, enfeebling. Ag a—, pr. pt. of v. an- 
fhannaich. 

E c us $.f.ind. Weakness, infirmity, de- 

ility. 

anfhaunasch, v.a. Enfeeble, weaken, debili- 
tate, enervate. 2 Make infirm. 

anfha naich'dh, fut. aff. act. of anfhannaich. 

an-fharsning,-e, a. Narrow,tight,circumscribed, 

an-fharsuingeachd, s.f. Narr »wness, tightness. 

an-fhéilid 1, -e, a. Inhospitable. 2 Loud, bois- 
terous. 3 Fierce. Le toirm a., with a boie- 
terows noise. 

an-fheoil, see ain-fhedil 

an-fhiachail, e, a. Mean, low, base. 2 Ungen- 
erous. 3ttWorthless. 

an-fhialaidh, see an-fhéi!idh. 

an-fhios, s.m. see ain-fliios. 

an-fhiosach, see ain-fhiosrach. 

an-fhiosraeh, -aiche, a. see ain-fhiosrach. 

an-fhiosrachd, s.7.ind. see ain-iniosrachd. 

an-fnirinn, see ain-fhirinn. 

tanfhocai^,** s.f. Danger, hazard. 

an-fhoirhbidinn, see an-iha'dninn. 

fan-fhoralamh,** -aimh, s.m. Constraint. $9 
Dauger. 

fan-fhorlan.** -ain, 8.m. Power. 2 Plunder- 
ing. 3 Oppression. 4 Storm. 

an-fhosgladh, -aidh, -ean, 8.35. Chasm. 2 Cleft, 
opening. 

an-fhuacad, -a, ëm.  Exce: sive cold. 

an-fhulangach, -aiche, a. EImpa:aent, restless. 
2 Uneasy. 

an-fhurachail, -e, @. 
tive. 

an-fhurachar, a. 

an-fhurachas, -ais, 
gard, neg'igence. 

an-/hnrachnras, see an-fhuracbas. 

an-fnuras, -ais, sn. Impatience. 

—————-—,** a. see an-fhurasda. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Impatient, fretful. 

2 Hasty. eager. 

an-fhuravla, a. Difficult. 

tan-fhusgais, s.f. Impatience, restlessness. 

fang,** aig, s.m. Renown. 2 Rank. 3 String. 
4 Twist. 

tangach.** a. Full of nails. 

angalih ** s.m. Gusset of a shirt. 

auganach,** -aich, s.n. Snare. 

angar,** -air, s.m. Stall for cattle. 

an Car, adv. Near, close by. 

an geall, adv. Wishing for, desirous. 

an-gathlannach, -aiche, a. Glitterinz, bright. 

an-ghlaodh,** s.m. Loud shout, pe cry. 

-—aich,** s.m. Continued loud shout- 


Unobservant, inatten- 


see an-fhurachail. 
&Tw. Inattention, disre 


ing. 

an-ghràdh, -àidh, s.m. Great attachment, ar 
dent love. 

—ach, -aiche, @ Very fond, ardently 





loved. 
——aiche,** s.m. Dotar.l. 
anglonn, a. Very powerful. 2 Brave. 





,-oinn, s.m. Adversity, distress. 2 
Danger. 3 Strength. 
—— ——ach, a. Verypowerfnl. 2 Brave. 3 
Adverse. 4 Dangerous. 


an-gnàth, see ana-ghnath. 
ach, see ana-ghnathach. 


angrach, Gaelicized form of angry.” 


an gradaig 


an gradaig, adv. <Anon. 

ane s.m. Man of rank. 2 Ruler. 3 
Nobility. s 

fanzrais,** s.m. Engine, machine. 

an-iarrtas, -aiy, s.m. Unreasonable demand. 
2 Mandate. - ; 

an-iochd, sJ. Cruelty, want of feeliug, rigour, 
oppression. Le h-an-iochd, with riyour. 
air,’ -6, -ean, s.m. Tyrant. 

ar, see an-iochdmhor. 

mhoire, comp. of an-iochdmhor. 

mhoireachd, * s... ind, Mercilessness, op- 

pression. : - 

mhor, -oire, a. Cruel, unkind, merci- 
less. 2**Imperious. Bhai a., she was cruel; 
creachadairean a., merciless plunerers. 

& uios, adv. Up, from below (towards one.) 2 
**From the East. Thig 4 nios an seo, come 
up here. e 

& nios, see a nis. 

an-iosal, Aale, a. see ain-lesal. 

anis, -e, s.f. Anise. D 

a nis, adv. Now, at this time. 
it now; a nis ma ta, now then. 

& nise, see a nis. 

faniudadh,** a. Depraved. ; 

faniuid,** sf. Error. 2 Depravity. 

an-iul, -ùil, s.m. Want of guidance or com- 
mand. 2 Bad instruction or gnidance. 3 
Error of judgineat. 4tfMisrule. 

&n-iülmhor, -oire, a. Void of conduct. 

an làimh, adv. In custody. 

anlamh, -aimh, -ean, see amhluadh. 

&n-làn, 

aichte, a. Incomplete. 

an-laoch, -aoich, s.m. Exasperated hero or 
warrior. 2**Bloody warrior. 311 Weak or in- 
ferior hero. Fo chasaibh nan anlaocn, under 
the feet of the bloody war iors. 

an-laoich, gen. & voc. sing. & n. pl. of an-laoch. 

an lorg, prep. ln consequence of. 2 In track 

f 

















Dean a nis e, do 





of. 

an-luchd, s.m. Grevious weight. 3 Overweight. | 
3 Oppressive burden. Fo an-luchd, oppressed. 

aich, v.a. Overload. 2 Surcharge. 

an’madaich, see anamad ich, 

an’wadail, see anamadail. 

an’man, see anainan 

aninanach, see anamanta. 

an'manta, see anamanta. 

anmaoin, s.f. Strife. 2 Great riches. 

an'neasarrà, see anameasarra. 

an'méin, s.f. see ainmeéin. 

aininéinneach, -eiche, see ainméineach. 

aumhainn,-e see anfhann. 

-—eachd, see anfhannachd. 

ich, see anfhannaich. 

an-mhaoin, see anmaoin. 

an’mhiann, see anainiann. 

—ach, see anainiannach. 

&n-mhodh, sam. Disrespect, incivility. 2 Rude- 
ness. 8 Bad breeding. 4 Bad habit. (Mi- 
mho:lh is a mere usual form.) 

———-—ail, see mi-inhodha.l. 

au-mhér, a. Very great, ex rbitant, exceed. 
ing, excessive. Sunas an-mliór, excessive joy. 

—— ————-aAch, a. Valiant, stout, brave. 

&nmhuinne, see anfhainne. 

-—achd, see anthannachd. 

aninhunn, -uinne, d. see anfhann. 

achadh, see anfhannachadh. 

achd, see anfhannachil. 

—— —— —&alch, see anfhannaich. 

&nmhurrach, -aiche, a. Valiant, brave, in- 
trepid. 2 Powerful. 

anmoch, -oiche, a. Late. 2 Unseasonable. Tha 
e anmoch, he or it is late. 




















85 


anniseachd 





,-0ich, s.m. Evening, night. 'S an a^i- 
moch, in the evening. Madadh-alluidh an 
anmoich, the evening wolf. 

anmoiche,** s./. Lateness. 

aunioicnead,** s.m. 

aumuinneach, -eiche, 

anmunnach, -aich, a. 
vivacious. 

fann,** s.m. Circle. 

ann, prep. In, within. 2 Therein, there. 3 
In existence, alive. Ann also expresses em- 

hasis, as, Is ann a tbachair e gu math dha, 
it has happened well to hin. Au liun a bh’ 
ann, the former race; ann o shean, in exis- 
tence of old; a th'ann, that exists, that is; am 
bheil thu ann ? are you there? an tua th’ 
ann, ? is it you that is there? ismi, (yes) it 
is | ; ann mo bheachd-sa, in my opinion; a 
chrochair tia thu ann! rascal that you are ! 
Combined with the personal pronouns thus : 


39 z e 
see ainméineach. 
Lively, brisk, vigorous, 


2 Revolution. 


I Sing. annam, iur. annainn, 
2 annad, annaibh. 
$ er c annta, m. ¢ f. 
Emphatic forms. 
1 Sing. annam-sa, annam-fhéin, pl. anu- 
ainne, annainn-fnéin. 
2 Sing. annad-sa, anuad-fhéin, pl. annaibh- 
se, annaibh-fhéin. 
$ Sing. (m.) ann-san, aun-fhéin, (/.) innte- 


se, innte-fhéin, pl. (m. d f.) annta- 
san, aunta-ihéin. 
ann, prep. pron. ln him, in it. C^a'n 'eil coire 
'sam bith anu, there is no fault in him œw ail ; 
chan 'eii ann ach crochair, keis but a rascal. 
Emphatic : ann-sau, aun-fhéin. 
tanuach,** a. Clean. 
annad, prep. pron. (ann+tu) In thee. 
tannadi,** -aidu, s.m. Delay. 
annag,** -aig, s.m. Evil. 3 Anger, displeasure. 
annaibh, prep.pron. (ann+sibh) In you. Cha 
'n eil ciall a., you have no judgment. 
fannaid, s. Church. 
annainn, prep. pron. (ann+sinn) In us. 2**In 
our power. “mphatic: annainne, annainn- 
fhéin 
annaladh, -aidh, am. Age, era. 2 Calendar. 
annam, prep. pron. (ann+mi) In me. 2**Iu my 
power. 
annamh, see ainnreamh. 
annawh,** -aimh, s.m. Wilderness. 
achd, see ainneamhachd. 
ann ain, prep. Redupiiation of ann, used be- 
fore a word beginning with B, F, M, or P, 
(only when not preceded by the ari.cle.) 
Aun am inonadh, ina hill; ann am botuil, 
in oot les. 
ann au, prep. Reduplication of ann, used be- 
fore a word beginning with a lingual or den- 
tal, (only when not preceded by the arti- 
cle) Annan toll, in a hole; ann an creagan, 
in rocks. 
annas, -ais, -An, 8.m. 
Change forthe better. 
ach, -aicue, a. Rare, unusual, strange. 
2 Dainty. 3 Desirable, delightful. Nithe 
Q., Gainiios, rarities. 
achd,* s.f. Rareness. 2 Novelty. 
annas-na-laimhe, -ais-, -an-, 8.m. Masterpiece. 
Annas do laimhe, your masterpiece. 
ann-athach, see an-athach. 
ann-dochas, see an-dóchas. 
— ach, see an-dòchasach. 
ann-doizh, see an-dòigh. 
ann-düchas, see an-dùchas. 
aun-ihacal,-ail, s.m. Word of course. 
auniseachd, see ainniseachd. 


Rarity. 2 Noveity. 8 














annlamh 





annlamh, see amhluadh 

anian, -ain, sm. Condiment. 2 Whatever is 
eaten witi bread, particularly dairy proiuce. 
3** Whatever food, as butcher’s Oto, butter, 
cneese, exgs,&c. is taxen at dinuer after broch, 
which forms the tirst course of a Scottish 
dinner. 

aur-laoch, see an-laoch. 

ann-luchd, see an-luchd. 

au nochd, odo. To-niyht, this night. Cha 
e'u nochd, he wiil not come to-night ; 
noch:l is an ravir, to-night and tast nigut. 

fannoil, see anoaii. 

annos, -0i3, sve annas. 

annrach, see ànraen. 

LL see anuradh 2. 

—(uch, -aich, see ànrachdach. 

annradh, -aidh, s.a. see anradh. 2 The high- 
est degree in poetry next to an odaonh. 3 
Boou. 4 **Petition. 

tanura fh. v. Grieve fleck, harass. 

aunraidiü,** s.m. QOliunp:oa. 

aunrara:h, see anradhach. 

&nnrath, see anrada. 

&nuradlh, -reidh, see an-riadh. 

anu-riza, stn. Lyrant. 

anus, prey. In, in the. Anns gach benl, in 
every mouth. [Used before the article an, 
and adj. guch.) Anns a’ banaile, in the town ; 
e. na miosan. in the months ; a. an arm, in the 
army;tha fad math a’ tighinn annsan là, the 
day is gro ciu pretty long. Often abbrevia- 
ted ’s, as ’san toiseach, in the beginning. 

&nnsa,** a. Dear, attached, beloved. 2 De- 
sirable, accevtable, 3 Glal. B'annsa leo 
sgur, they were glad to lesist; ged nach b'a. 
dui ant-ozanaea, though the youth was not 
dear to her; an caladn aigu a., the joyous 
wished for harbour. 

annsa, comp. of a. toizh. More dear, more be- 
loved. Is toigh leam thusa, ach is a. leam 
esan, [ love you, but he is more dear to mo ; có 
ix a. leat? whom do you like best? b'a. thusa 
Da deàrrsadh na gréiae, more acceptable wert 
thou than the suno-am. 

auns, see anusachd. 

cld, &. find. Love, affection, attachment, 

2 Person beloved. A thug rùn agus o, that 

besto wed great love and affection; is tu wa., 

thou art my beloved; a. Die, the beloved one of 

God. 

dh, -aidh, see annsachd. 

ann-si i, Emphat. form of prep pron. ann. 

annszairt,** -e, -ean, s.f. Shriek, loud cry. 

each, a. Shrieking. 
&nnu-3piorad, -aid, -an, s.m. Devil, demon. 


an 














anuta, prep.pron. (ann+iad) In them. Em- 
phatic : annia-san, annta-inéin. 

anuu-t:phearnas, see aintighearnas. 

ann-tiacad, see an-tlachd. eachd. 


-—mhoirenehd, see an-tlachdmhoir- 

-—ithor,* see an-tlachdmhor. 

&untoil, se antoil. 

anntroin, see antrou. 

-————-achadh, see antromachadh. 

-—aich, see antromaich. 

ann-truas, see untruas. 

an-obair, -vibce, s.f. [dle work. 2 Trifle. 

&n-oircheas, -is, sm. Want of pity. 

—ach, -wiche, a. Pitiless, merciless, 

a nois, see a nis. 

ànrach, -4ich*, sm. Wanderer, stranger. 2 
Weatüer-^5eaten person. 3 Distressed person. 
Tha dorus Fhinn don àaraca tial, “ioun’s 
door i8 opeu (liberal) to the wanderer ; is i do 
£hnü's do'n ànrach a ghrian, your counten- 
ance isus the sun to the weather-beaten stran- 











36 


an-shocraiche 





ger. 
,* a. see ànradhach. 
—— —d. s,f.i, d. Violent weeping. 
dach, -aich, s.m. Miserib:e wanderer. 
ànradh, -xidh, s.m. Storin, tempest. 2 Distress, 
misfortune, disorder. Mac Morna "ae 'm 
meadhon ànrailh, the son of Morni in the 
midst of a t-mpest ; theirgeadh mo dheòir 
na'nteirgeadh gach a., my tears would cease if 
every trouble were to vanish. 
ach, -aiche, a. Stormy. 
8 Wandering. 4 Disord-red. 
streaming, as hair on the wiud. 
thy disordzred hair. 
———ach, -aich, s.m. Distressed person. 
ànrailh, yen.sing. of ànradn. 
— ——-,** a. Distressful, sorrowful, sad. 
an ravir. adv. La-t night, lait evening. 
an-rath,** -with, s.m. see auraJdh. 
ach, see àuradhacn. 
an reid ir, see an raoir. 
an-riadh, -reidh, 8.m. Usury. extortion. 
an-riadnair.ff -e, -eau, 8m Usurer, 
an-riagnailt, sf. D.sorder coufnsion. 
mult, uproar, riot. 
met. 
——each, -tiche, a. Confused, disorder- 
ed. 2 Riotous, tumultu ^us. 
an-riar,tt-reir, sm. Wrong gratification. 
tanrodhach, see anradhach. 
faurodhaidh, see auradh. 
an roir, see an. raoir. 
an-sacaich, oo, Overload. 
ansamitlachd, tł «fiad. Iucomoarability. 
ansan, (for amhsa:) see sùlaire. 
an sas, adv. Iu custody. 2 Embedda34d, as a 








2 Distressed. 
5**Floatiny, 
T’thalt «., 





[ 2 Tu- 
3 Mi.rule, mismanage- 


thorn in one's flesh or a ueedle in cloth. 3 
** Hooked. 

an seo, adv. Here. 

an-sgaineadh, -eidh, s.m. Violent bursting. 2 


Chasm. 

an-sgainteach, -tiche, a. Apt to open in chasms, 
causing chasms. 2 Apt to burst. 

ansgairt, 8./. Loud shout, piercing shriek or 
cry. S'*Thicket of brambles. Phill sib. le'r 
n-ansgairt, you returned with your piercing 
shriecs. 

—,** v.n. Shriek aloud, cry. 

—each, -tiche, a. Uttering a loud shriek, 
shouting, shrieking. 2 Loud, pi:reing. 
an-sgeulaca, see aon-sgeulach. 
au-shamulachd, s.f. In -ouparability. 
an-shamhluichte, pt.part. inco.nparable, 
matched. 

an-spbannt, s.m. Greed, covetousness. 
——Ach, -aiche, a. Greedy, covetons. 
acn,** -aich, s.m. Greedy person. 
an-shaoghalta, d. Worhll'y-ninded, covetous. 
— —chd, s.f. Worldhnes, covetous- 








une 














ness. 

an-sheirc, sf. Dislike, hatred. 
kindness. better mi-she:re. 
cil, a. Hating. 2 Cruel. 
shcirceil. 

an-sheasgair,* a. Restless. 
——eachd,* s.f. Restlessness. 
ness. 3 Violence. 

an-shocair, pl. -cran, 8.f. Pai, distress,trouble, 
2 Uneasiness, restlessness. 3 Affliction, sick- 
ness. 


2 Cruelty, un- 
better mi- 





2 Rude- 








PO. see an-shocrach, 

an-shocrach, -aiche, a. Paiaful. 2 Distressing, 
diffienlt. 3 Uneasy, disqnieted. 4'*Ailliczed. 
Uair a., unsettled weather; sluagh a., an ajlict- 
ed people. 


d, see an-shocair. 
an-shocraiche, comp. of an-shocrach. 


— 





an-shdgh 
2 Ad- 


3 Un- 


&n-shógh,* s.m. Discoiufort, misery. 
versity. 8 Mischance. 

—ail, a. Miserable. 2 Adverse. 
fortunate. 

an-sinachdail,** a. Arbitrable. 

&1 SO, see aD seo. 

an-sriantachd,** s.f. see ain-sriantas. 

&n-stródh, -tródha, sf. Prodigality, extrava- 
ance. 

? —ail, a. Prodigal, extravaganc. Duine 
a,, a prodigal. 

au-struidh, sf. Prodigality wastefulness. 

,* v.a. Waste, squander, spend. 

-——eachadh, ** -aidh, s.m. Actof wast- 

ing or spending extravagantly. 4 

——eachd,** same meaning as an-struidh 

— —ear, -eir, -eau, 3.13. Waster, prodigal, 
spendthrift. 

an-struidneas,* -eis, 8&.4n. see an-struidheachd. 

— ach, -aiche, a. Prodigal, wasteiul. 
——achid,* see an-struidheachd. 

an t-, def. art. For examples see an. The t- 
originally formed a part of the article itself, 
but is now generally written separately. 

&n taice, adv. ln support of, in contact. 

an-thapaidh, -e, a. Siow, inactive. 2 Kffem- 
inate. 

&n-thrianaidiche,*" s.m. Unitarian. 
































au-tighearn, see ain-tighearn. . 
——ach, see ain-tighearnail. 
ail,  ,, 


——as, see ai 
an-tiorail, -e,a. Tempestuous. 
able. 
SÉ. 


ain-tioralachd, 
Discomfort. 
Dislike, displeasure, disgust, 
3 


an-tlachd, s m. 
dissatisfaction. 2 Rudeness, indecency. 
Nuisance. Saoro bhraid 's o a., free from 
theftand discontent. 

—mhoire, comp. of an-tlachdmhor. 
mhoireachd, $.f. Disgustfulness, un- 

pleasantness. 

mhor, -oire, d. Disgustiog, unplea- 
sant. 2 Causing discontent. 3 Unbandsome. 

antlas, -ais, s.m. Ludicrous trick, frolic. 2 
Cattle market. 

ach, -aiche, a. Froiicsome. 

ach, -aich, s.m. Frolicsome fellow. 

&n-togair,* v.a. Lust after. 

au-togar,** Air, s.m. Inordinate wish, unrea- 
sonable desire. 2 Ambition, 

&n-togarrach,** -aiche, a. Lustful, immoder- 
ately desirous. 2 Covetous. 

&n-togradb, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Criminal 
propensity, concupiscence. 2 Ambition. 

&n-toil, -e, sf. Self-will, unwiiliugness. 2 
Lust. 3**Ambition. Fear na h-antoile, the 
ambitious man; iomadh gné de dh'an-toilibh, 
many sorts ef lusts. 

——-each, -liche, a. Perverse, unwilling. 2 
**Lustful, inordinately desirous. 2**Ambiti- 
ous. 

——eachd, s.f.ind. Wilfulness, obstinacy. 

—— ———eil,-e, a. Wilíul, obstinate, perverse. 
Gn h-a., perversely. 

— — —ich, v.n. Lust after. 

an toir, adv. In pursuit. 

tantomhail,** s.f. Gluttony. 

t— tear,** -teir, -tearan, $.m. Glutton. 

an-torras,** -ais, 3.22%. Abortion. 

&i-torrach,** -oiche, a. Abortive. 

un tràth, adv. When, the time when. 

&n-tràth, -à, 3s.1. Unfavouravle weather, 
stormy weather, storin. 2 Wrong season. 
„a. see an-trathach. 

—ach, -aicne, a. Unseasonable, untimely. 





n-tighearnas. 
2 Uncomfort- 


Badness ofclimate. 2 




















87 


2 Abortive. 
an-tréibhdhireach, -eiche, a. Ins ncere. 
an-iréibhdhireas, -eis, s.m. T sincerity. 
an-trocair, SJ, Mercilessness, cruelty. 


&obhachd 


—each, -riche, a. Merciless, cruel. 
Fear a., a merciless man. 
—eachd, «s, f. ind. Unmercifulness, 


cruelty. 
an-trom, -uime, a. Grievous, burdensome. 
Oppressive. 3 Intoleradle. 4**Atrocious. 
—ach, see an-troin. 
acnadh, -aidh, sam. Act or circumstance 
of aggrieving, aggravating, or making heavy 
Qr p pu Ag a-, pr.part. of &ntrom- 
aich. 
—aich, -achadh v.a. Aggravate. 2 Ag- 
grieve. 3 Uppress. 4 Overload. Ag an-trom- 
achada do cuionta, agyravating your guilt. 
—aichear, fut.pass. of an-tromaica. 
——aichidh, fut. aff. a. of ,, E 
antruacanta, a. (an-, neg.) Pitiless, merciless. 
2**.an-, intens.) Compassionate, merciful. 
— —— ——ehd, AE, Want of compassion. 
antruas, -ais, s.m. (an-, neg.) Want of pity or 
sympathy. 2** (an-, intens.) Great pity, or 
s.mpathy. 
an-truime, comp. of an-trom. 











,* &.f. Oppression, tyranny. Luchd 
na h-an-truime, oppressors. 
an tus, adv. At first. 
an-uabhar, air, s.m. (an-, neg.) Affability, 


want of pride. 2** (an-, intens.) Excessive 

pride. Luchd an a., the excessively proud. 
an uachdar, (AH)adv. Above-water. 
an-uachdaran, -alu, s.m. Despot. 

achd, s.f. Despotism. 

an-uaibhreach, -eiche, a. (an-, neg.) Gentle, 

Bee, A kind. 2**,an-, intens.) Excessively 
proud. 

an-uaill, s.f. (an-, neg.) Humility. 2 Affa- 
bility. 8*.an-, intens.) Excessive pride. Air 
mhór a. is air bheag céille, excessively proud 
and senseless. 

an-uair, -e, 8.f. Storm, unfavourable weather. 
2** Mischief. 

an uair, adv. When. Often written and gen- 
erally pronounced ‘nuair. 

tanuais,** a. Fierce, baroarous. 

an-uaisle, 3 f.ind. Meanness, baseness. 

— ———, comp. of an-uasal. 

an-uallach, -aiche, a. (an-, neg.) Not haughty, 
humbie-minded. 2**(an-, intens.) Inditferent, 
airy, supercilious. 3**Ifaughty, proud. 

, “aich, s.m. Oppressive burden. 
Oppression. 3**tHardsiip. 

a nuas, adv. Down, downwards, from above, 
(towards one.) Thig a nuas an seo, come 
down here. 

an-uasal, a. Mean, ignoble, low. 2 Not proud, 
not dignified. 

anuinn, see anainn. 

an uiridh, adv. Last year. 

a null, adv. To tue other side. 
nall, thither and hither. 

an-tinhlachd,tt s.f.ind. Disobedience. 

a nunn, see anull, 

anur,** sm. Mean sorry person. 

an uraidn, see an uiridh. 

ao-, privative prefix, Not. Eqvivalent to Eng- 
in-, une, dis-. 

taobh, aoibh, s.m. Similitude. 

aobhach, -aiche, a. Joyous, glad, cheerful. 2 
Beautiful, pieasant, lovely. Ceud òganach 
Be "d hundred joyous youths; b’a. mise, I was 
gitad. 

aovuachi, s. find. 

| 2 Beauty. 


-— 














oe 


A null 's a 


2 Miscreant. 


Joyfulness, cheerfulness. 


aobhaiche 


&obhaiche, comp. of aobhach. 

aonhair, gen. sing. of aobhar. 

aobiiar, -air, -airean, s.m. Cause, reason. 2 
Subject, matter. A. bròin, a cause of grief ; 
chan 'eil a. gearain ann, there i$ no reason to 
complain; air an a. sin, for that re:son, there- 
Jore; a. cota, materials for making a coat; a. 
bhròg, materials for making shoes; gun o, 
without reason; is mór m'a., grear is my reason; 
thait iad ann an deagh a., they fell in a 
good cause; a. eagail, caus» of terror; a. gàire, 
a laughing-stock; a. guil, a cause for weeping. 

ach, -aiche, a, Casual. 2 Reasonable. 

3*Giving rise to. 

—— ———achd, s.f.ind. Causality. 

aobharrach, -aich, a.m. Elements. 2 Mater- 
jals. 8 Young persou. 4 Young beast of good 
or bad promise. Is math an t-a. an gainhaion 
sin, that stirk promises well; is cu an t-a. 
ciatach, you are a youth that promises well 
indeed, 

aobrainn, gen.sing. of aobrann. 

a0: rainnean, n.pl. of 

&obran, see aobrann. 

aobraun. -aino, pl. -ainnean, [**-anna & 
-àunan,] s.m. Ankle. 2**Aukle-bon ,ankle- 
joint. Gu ruig na h-aobranna, to the ankles; 
asara., out of the ankle-joint. 


avbranna, } n.pl. of aobrann., 


&obr:vinan, 

avbruun, -uinn, see aobrann, 

&oc, (AF) s.m. Flock of sheep. 

&o-coltach, see eu-coltach. 

—— , see eu-coltachd. 

&o-cosail, see eu-coltach. 

&o-cosalachd, see eu-coltas. 

av-coslach, see eu-coltaca. 

acdaci, -aich, -aichean, s.m. Cloth. 2 Clothes, 
dress. 3(AI1)Sails of a boat. Aodach ’sa’ 
bheairt, cloth in the loom; cuir ort t’acdach, 
piton your clothes; a. canaica, cotton cloth, 
calico; @ leapach, bed-clothes;a. lia, linen 
clo/h; a. olla, woollen cloch. 

adh, -aidh, Sat, Clothing, dressing, 

covertüg. 

&odaien, pr.pt. ag aodachadh, v.a. Clothe, 
dress, cover. 

, gen.sing. of aodach. 

—— —— ear, fut.pass. of av laich. 

———— idh, fut af. a. of avdaich, 

——— te, pt.pt. of avdaich. 

aolain:, gen.sing. of aodann. 

&udann, -ainn, n.pl. -ainnean, 8.f. Face, fore- 
heai, visage. 2 Suriace. 3 **Impudence. 
As al a., ecpressly, to the face, outrigit, in 
defiance ; an cron a bhitheas ‘san a, dann 
chan fhaodar a chleith, the blemish in the 
Jace cannot be hidden ; nach ann aige tha’n 
aod un ! what impudence the fellow has! r 
a. sléi ha’ leum aich, bounding on the, ace of 
the ili; clar au aodainn, the brow, forehead. 

&odannach, -aiche, a Aspected. 

-sréine, s.f. Frunt-stall of a bridle. 

&odanuan,-Ain, 8m. Little face. 2 Frontlet. 
3 Frontispiece. 

aodarinan, see eutroman. 

faodh,** 3m. Liver. 2 Kye. 
taodn,** s.f. Fire. 

&odhair, -ean, s.m. see aoghair. 
desolation, confiagration. 

————-eachd, see aoghaireachd. 

aodhairean, see aoghairean. 

taod'iar,** air, s.m. Worship. 
dia, we will worship hin. 
aodhlamaid, e, -ean, 

&odhnair,** -ean, 
owner. 2 Author. 








—— 











3 Sheep. 
+2** Fiery 


Bheir sinn a. 
see aoradh. 
see foghlumaicue. 

8.m. Gaelicized form of 


38 


aodünaireachd,** sr, (d. 
thorship. 

ao-ilion, 8. m. ind. 

ao-dìonach, -aicue, a. 

ao-dionachd,” s.f. 

ao-docha, @., cop. 

no-dòchas, -ais, s.m. 

ao-dochasach, -aicne, a. 

so-dochasachd, 8.7. ; 

&odrainain, gen.sing. of avtraman. 

aodruman, -ain, see aotroinan. 

aodunn, see aodann. 

aog, avig, 8sm. Death. 2 Ghost. 3 Spectre. 
4 Skeleton. Ista au t-aog duaichnidh, you are 
a miserable-looking sielecon; neul an aoig, tue 
colour of death; a’ dol aog, dying, getting use- 
l ss, becoming vapıd as liquor. see eug. 

a gachadh, see aogznachadh. 

aogauin, see aoga.l. 

&ugall, -e, a. Ghastly, death-like. 2 Deadly. 

aogaileachd,** s.f. Gnastiiness. 2 Ghos liness. 

aogais, See eugmhais. 

aogas, -ais, -ean, 8m. Countenance. 2 Image, 
likeness, resemblance, 3 Appearance. Ís 
cosmhuil 'aogas ri Diarmad, Ais form is like 
Dermot's; t'a. maiseach, thy lovely countenance 
a. do bharca, the likeness of thy vark. 

aogasach, -aiche, a. So»smly, decent, becoming. 
2 Pretty, comely, of goo'i appearance. 

aogasachd, sf. Seeiliness,comeii ,ess,decency. 

&ogasaiche, comp. of a gasach. 

aoga4suil,** -e,a. Seemly, comely, becoming. 
2 Of an imposing exterior. 

aogasg, -aisg, see aogas. 

aognair, -e, ean. 8.22. Shepherd, herdsman, 
Der. 8**Protector. Tae aeghairean of the 

ebrides, accordiug to Penuant, are farm 

serv nts who have the charge of cultivatiug 
a certain portion of laud and of overseeing 
the cattle it supports. They have grass for 2 
milch cows and 6 sheep, and also one tenth 
sheaf of the produce of the said ground, and 
as many potatoes as they choose to plant. 

aoghaireachd, s.f.ind. Snepherding. 

&ognairean, n.pi. of aoghair. 

wognachadh, -aidh, s.n. Becomiag lean or 
death-iike. 2 Withering, fadiug. Ag a—, 
pr.part. of aognaich. 

aognaich, pr.part. ag aognachadh, v.n. Become 
lean or pale, as death. 2 Wither, fade. 3 
**Distigure. Aognaichidh aogas nan aonach, 
the Jace of the hills shall grow pale. 

aognaich, v.a. E»naciate, wake lean or pale. 

a gnuidh, -e, a. Emaciated, frightful. 

augus, -uis, see aogas. 


aothbinn 





Ownership. 2 Au- 


see eu-d—. 


taoi. s.m. & f. Age 2 see aoigh,s.m. 3 Trade, 
handicraft. 4 Law, rule. 5 Cause. 6 Con- 
troversy. 7 Confederacy. 8 Compact. 9 
Flock of sheep. lu Sheep. ll Swan 12 The 
liver. 13 Possession. 14 Hill. 15 Place, 
region. 16 Ísiand. 17 Houour. ‘For the 
meanings uos. 5, 6, 10, 11, 13, and 15 see 
also tai. | 

ao.bh, -e, sf. Courteous civil look. 2*Cheerful 
countenauce. 3** Patrimony. Is fuar 


taigh mur bi a. air bean-an-taighe, coid is 
the house if the goodwife ve not cheerful. 

aoiuh, a. Pleasant, comely, joyous, courteous, 
cheerful, 

avibi! int. Huzza! 

aoipue,** s.f. Neatnese, elegance. 

avibheachd, s.f.ind. Cheerfulness 2 Politeness. 

aolbneal,-eil, see eibhle. 

ao.bhealaend,* see aoibheachd. 

&oibheil,* a. Kind, courteous, atfable. 2 Haud- 
some, coinely, beautiful. 

| avibhinn, -e, @ Pleasant, comely. 2 Joyful, 


aoibhinn 39 aois-dana 


glad. Oigridh a., pleasant or joyous youth ` aoilinneach, a. -ee facihuneach. 
mo ghaira., my joyful laugh. | 20ilseag, -eig, -àn, SP. Caterpiuar. 
"&uibniun, ** 8.7. Joy. A. dhuit, joy be with you. | aoilseagach,** a. Abounding in caterpillars. 
sbhinneach, see aoibhneach. | 2 Like 4 cacerpillar. 





bhle,** s.f. Sign, mark, omen, token. '&ointe, see aonta. 
| jbhlich,** v. Explain an omen. lavin, pr.p'. ag aonadh, v.a. Unite, join. Air 
"eiblhneach, -eiche e, Pleasant, cheerful, glad, | aonadh ris, joined to him. 
joyful, happy. agreeable. A’ toirt sgéil: aoiu, gen.sing. of aon. Làmh gach aoin, the 
aoibhnich, giving glad tidings. | hand of every one. 


bhneas, els, s.. Gladness joy. pleasure. | taom, 5f. Rush. 2 Honour. 3 see Aoine. 
A. ashlighe, thejey ef his way; ni t'atha,r /aviue, sf. Skill. 










a., thy father will rejoice. :tAvine, sf. Lriday,—now Di-haoine. 2 Fast. 
“aoibhneasach,** -aiche, a. Joyful, glad 2| Avime-na-Ceusia, Good Friday. 
` awing joy. | avineach,** a. Fasting. 

libhueici, gen. sing. of aoibhneach, | aoiueadh, -nidh, s.m. Steep promontory. 


avihneiche, comp. of H 

moie,** sf. Web. 2 Youth. 

avideach, -iche, a. Youtaful. 
ideag, -eig, s./. Hair lace, fillet. 


avibeagan, -ain,-an, see aonagail. 
&oin-flillte, @ see aon-fhillte. 
— ——achd, s.f.ind Singleness. 
&oin-inntiun, see &ou-inntiun. 





taui lean, ein, s.m. Leak. ——————e£ch, @. sve aon-inntinneach., 
froi teanach, -eiche, a. Leaky. 2 Yonthful  !aoin-sgeulach, see aon-sgeulach. 
auth, -v, &f. see aoibh. aoir, v.d. Satirize, lampoon. ?f1 Curse. 


idn, -e, pl. -ean &-eanna, s.m. see aoigh. | avir,-e.-ean, s.f. Satire, lampoon, ribaldry, 
goidheach, -eiche, a. er raillery. 24¢Curse. 
aal beach -eich, 23A. ; E @oir, -e -ean, sm. Sheet or bolt-rope of a sail. 





ineachd, Fear gealtach 'sau @., a timorous person 
Ineachdach, ich holdiny the sheet (i.e. a cause of danger.) 
heil, E SOIR. aoir,** Contraction of aoghair. 
lhealachd j 2oireachas, “iis, see avireadh. 
ri-dion, A&oireachd, s f.ind. Lampooning, satirizing. 
«lìonach, see ao-d—, 1 2* Libel. 
-&oi-dionacnd, | aoireadh, -ridh, -ridheen, s.m. Lampooning, 
aoz, gen.siug. of aog. | satirizing. 2**Uoruer of a sail. 3tiCursing. 


h, -e, -eun & -eanna, &.m. Stranger, guest, aoireannan, ( for aoghairean) pl. of aoghair. 
Traveller. 2**Skilful person.  f2**Hero. aoiridh, ut of o of v. aoir. 

oigh, Tt -e, -ean, St, see aoibh. | aoirneaga.ch, see aonagaich. 
beach, SS -eicb, s.m. Guest, stranger. 2jaoirneagan,* see aonagai. "Go ’na fhuil, 

". Hospitable person. weltering in has blood. 

"soigheach, see aoigheil 2t+Begzgary. &oirneagain,* see aonagail. 

~ CHAIRS s.f.ind. Entertainment, lodging,|aois, -e, s.f. Age. 2 Old age. 3 Antiquity. 
hospi ality. 2 see aoibheachd. Air aoigh-| Dó'n aoisathathu? what is your age? is 
eachd, enjoying hospitality ; thug iad ol mairgadh’iarradh an aoise! pity him that 
"huinn, they lodged or entertained us; a.| wishes extreme old age ! air son 'aoise, for its 
Mbutsein, sidvhad, siithad, a bhean-an-| antiquity ; iarguinn na h-aoise, the evil effects 
aigne, chan eil thu a’ gabhail sion, the| of old age; bha Noah coig ceud bliadhna dh’ 

thurl’s hospital ty, help yourself goodwife,| aois, N. was 500 years old ; aun an lan aois, 
E re not taking anythin» (the churlish host| in full age ; 'nuair a thig thu gu h-aois; when 
mstead of attending to the guest isattending | you come to age ; tha m'aois fo dhòruinn, my 

—— to his own wife) ; a. Thormaid mhóir, fuirich, | old age te sorrowful; aois leisgein, ceithir tich- 
fuiricn, tha a’ chearc 'sa' chliabh agus ail ead ri muir-traigh, is tri fichead ri muir-làn, 
“bhean’sa’ chladach, big Norman's hospita'ity | is gann fichead ’n uair bhios a’ ghealach 
"the hen sinthe creel and the wife 's at the| lèn, the sluggard’s age, eighty at low-water, 

| "shore, (this ineant a wholesome diet of eggs| sixty at high-water, and scarcely twenty when 

and shell-fis:, and illustrates well that true there's a full moon. (At low-water, while the 
Highland hospitality which gladly share. its | sea-ware is being gathered for manure, the 
all, however little that may be, with a sluggard is as feeble as a man of eighty, 
stranger.) at oign-Wwater, when less difficult work is 
geeenacn, -aich, s.m. Sorner, one who] engaged in, ne is a tittle livelier, but still 
taxes the hospira!iwy of his friends too much. { incapableof much exertion, but when night 
ighealachi, see avizheachd. comes, especially if there should be moon. 
heil, -eala,a see avo'bheil. ? Hospitable,} light, ne is as lively as a young fellow of 
cheertul. An gasan a., the hospitable strip- | twenty, and probably walks many wiles on 
li courting errgiüds.) 

a01s,8,/.p4. People, community of any parti- 
ciar kind, designated by i.s adjacent. Aois- 
ciùil, musicians. 

&ois-dàua,** s. pl. Bards, poets. 2 Rehearsers 
cf anci nt poetry. 3 Genealogists. 4 
Soothsayera. The aois-ddna were in high 
esteem throughout the Highlands. No late as 
the en. of the 1;th. enturg they sat in the 
sreath or circle among the nobies and chiefs 
of families. They took the preference of the 
ollasnh or doctor 1n medivine, After the ex: 
tinction of the Druids, they wer- brought in 
to preserve the genealogy of families, and to 
repeat genealogical traditions at the success. 






ighean, n.pl.of aoigh. 
adil, gen.sing. of aol. 
Ll, ** er The mouth. 
Jlbhinn,** s.f. Sinall flock. 
ilbhreo ** eum. Lime kiln. 
lesch, Sr eich, 8.m. Gazing-stock. 2 see 
aolach. 
Aaoileanach,** ec oileanach. 
ao lann, -inn, s.f. see fa ileann. 
Boileann,** a. Fine, excell nt, charming. 
RoiWansachd,** e.r Beauty. 
@eieanta** a. Beautiful, charming. Oigh 
IW nhinn a., a cheerful heautevus maid. 
@uilitin, gen. siny. of .20ileanu. 







anan 


aois-dana 


ion of every chieftain. They had great in. 
fleence over all the powerful men of their 
time. Their persons, their houses, their 
villages, were sacred. Whatever they asked 
was given them; not always, however, out 
of respect, but from fear of their satire, which 
frequently followed a denial af their requests. 
They lost by degrees, throngh thei own ius 
solerce and importunity, all the respect 
which their order had so long enjoyed, and 
consequently all their wonted pronts and 
privileges. Martin says “They shut their 
door and windows for a day's time, and lay 
on their backs in darkness with a stone (pop 
their belly, and plaids abont trer beads and 
eyes, and thus they pumped their brains for 
rhetorical encoiniuiis."" 

1ois:dànachd,** s. f. Employment of rehearsing 
ancient poetry. 2 Bardisin. 3 Genealogical 
tradition 

iois-dhlighe,11 s.f. Primogenitureship. 

àoisid, see faoisid. 

iois-liath, a. Hoary, aged. 

wl, aoil, s.m. Lime. Aol gun bhathadh, guick. 
lime ; ath-aoil, a lime kiln. 

aol, pr.pt. ag aola‘th, v.a. Lime, plaster or cover 
with lime. z** Manure land with lime. 

avlach, -aich, s.m. Dung, manure. 2 Mire. 8 
**Dross, rub.bi h. Bithidh iad 'nan aolach, 
they shall beas dung. 

aolachadh,** .aidh, s.m. Process of mavuring 
with hime. Ag a—, pr.pt. of aolaich. 

aoladair, .e, -ean, 8.m. Plasterer, one who 
works among lime, lime burner. . 

aoladaireachd, s.,f. Occupation of a plasterer, 
plastering, working among lime. 

aoladh, -aidh, s.m. Luring. plastering. 

aolaich, v.a. Lime, m:nure with lime, cover 
with lime. 2};Compest, 

Taolain.fi see oil: an. 

$——-—ahh, see oileanaich. 

* aiche see oileanaiche, 

aulais, -e, sf. Indolence, sloti: fulness, slug zish- 
less. 

-—— deach, -diche, a. 
gish. 

colam, see forhlum. 

uclar, a. (aolimhor) Atonnding in lime, limy. 

aul bed, s.m. Qui. klime. 

aol-chlach, «iche, »./. see clach-aoil. 

aolmann, -ainn, s.m. Ointwent. 

wol-phia-da, s.m. Lom -plasi er. 

aol-shùiin, -ùirre, s.m. Lime-kiln. 

aol-tathaidh, aoil-, sm. Mortar. 

aol-thaigh, see oil-thaivh. 

aol-disge, s.m.ind.  Lime-water. 
wash. 

aom, pr.pt. ag aomadh. v.a. & n. Incline, bow, 
bend, droop. 2 Yield. 3 Lean. 4 Persuade. 
5 Dispose. 6 Fall. 7*Buige, project’, 8*Be 
seduced by. 9** esc nd 10**Pass by. 11**De- 
cay. Dà'aom i lcis, she was seduced by him ; 
aomaibh ur cluas, incline your ear ; tha’m 
balla ag aomadh, the wall is bulging ` dh'a. e 
a thriall, he bent his way ; aoma.dh an ait- 
reabh, their buildings sal decay ; an t-àm a 
dh'aom, the time that has passed, the past. 

aoma, see aomadh. 

aomach,* a. Inclining, tending, bendivg. 

aomachbadh, see aoinadh, 

aomachd,* see aomadh. 

aomachdail, -e, a. Tending to incline or bend. 

aomadh, Srd. sing. d: pl. of aom. A.e, let him 
bend. 

aomadh, -aidh, s.m. Inclination, act of inclin- 
ing, bending, or drooping. 2 Yield:nz. 3 
Leaning. 4 Persuading. 5 Disposing. 6 Fall- 
ing. 7 Bulging. 8*Teudency, aptitude. 9 





Lazy, indolent. 2 Sing- 


2 White- 


40 


aonaich 

Declivity. 10**Descending, passing iy. i.** 
Surface of the ssa. Ag a—, pr pi. oi aon. 
A cheann tir aomadh, his ba drooping; 
dubhach air aomadh na cé ge sorrowful en 
the slope of the rock; ag aomadh air a ghlùn, 
bending on his knee; an t-a., the downfuil, 

aomaich, v.a. Incline, dr, see acm. 

aomaidh, gen, sing. of aomadh. 2 fut. af. a. of 
aom. 

aomar, fut. pass. of aom. 


taomilleadh, see *aidhmbilleadh. 

Aomíta, pt.pt. Inclined, bent, bulged, 

aon, aon, a. One. 2 Alone. 3 Same. 4 Only. 
5 Ace. [Aspirates noun following except 


one beginning with D, T, or S.] Aon bhes.:, 
one woman; aon eile,one other; aon 'sam bhith, 
anyone; gun aon eile, without any other; bith- 
idb sibhse mar mise aon ja, you shall be aa 
I am (one day) seme day or other ; aon 
seach aon, neither one nor the other—cha toigh 
leam aon seach aon dhiubh, Z like neither one 
nor the other, used in a negative sense only— 
AH; aon seach aon, one from another—aith- 
nichidh e aon seach aon dhiubh, he will know 
one from another of them ; m'aon chearc, my 
only hen; is aon mie, tt is all the same ; is csan 
an t-aon duiue air son sin, Ae i3 the best man 
in the world for that; ’s e fhèin an t-uon 
duine, it ts he himself that rules the roast, i.e. 
he i8 cook, mate, and steward; tri laithean 
bha e'na aon (aonar), three days he was all 
alone; gach aon, everyone ; a lion aon is aun, 
one by one ; mar aon, united, hand in hand; 
gun aon duine, without a single individual; 
anns an aon taigh rinne, în the same bouge 
with ws; 'san aon luing, tn the same sh:p; 
do dh'aon seach a ché!le, to one more tian 
the other; aon a thainig a steach, an indi- 
vidual that came in; tha mac an t-aon aca, 
they have a son eah. 

tavon, aoin, s.m. Country. 

taon, a. Exceilent. 2 Noble. 3 Illustrious. 

aona, @ An r-cong is nsed with deug in 
compound nunibers, hut des not aspirate its 
rou, An aona is nsed cefore a feminine 
noun. An t-a&0rA bord deng, the 11th. table, 

taonac.$i s.m. Tin, lead. 

aonach, -aich, -a'chean, 8.9. 
height. 2 Heath, moor. 3 Desert place. 4 
*Mecting. 5ft rair, great assembly. 6* 
provincial Green piain near the shore on 
a stony bottom (3 machair has a sandy bot- 
tom.) 7**rarety kir. 8**Priuce. 9**Market. 
t10** Galloping. 113¢ Panting for breath. 
Ceum do theachd air au a., thy coming (ihe 
step of thine approach) on the heath; a’ siu- 
bhal nan aonach ciar, travelling the dusky 
plains; a. na Samhna, the Martinmas fair. 

aonac! adh, -aidh, sim. Uniting, reconciling. 
2 Assenting. 3 Galloping, hand-gallop. 5 
Swift running. Ag a—, pr.pt. of aonaich. 

aonachail,t¢ -e, Mountainous. 

aonachd, 8f. Un'ty. 2 Concord. 3 Sameness. 
4 Unanüunuity. A. an Spioraid, the unity of 
the Spirit ; comhna'dh a ghabhail cuideachd 
ann an a., to dwetl iogether in unity. 

aonadh, -aidh, Ag a—, pr.pt. of aoin. 

aon-adharcach, -aich, sm. Unicorn. 

— —- , 9. Unicorned, having one horn. 

aonagaich, pr pt. ag aonagail, v.n. Wallow, 
welter. A.thn fldin, wallow thyself; aon- 
agaichibh sibh fhein, wallow yourselves. 

aonagail, sf.ind. Wallowing, welcering, roll- 
ing on the ground. Aga—, pr.pt. of aonagaich, 

aonaan, see aonaga'l. 

&onalch, pr.pt.ag aonachadh, v.g. Unite. re- 
eoncile. 2 Assent. 3 Side with. Aonaich mo 
chridhe. unite my iwart 


Hill, steep, 





aonaichear 


aonaichear, fut. pass. of aonaich. 

a naichith, fut. aff. a. of aonaich. 

aonaichte, pt.pt. United recorcil d. Gàidh- 
eil ao aichte cruadhaichte, wnited hardy 
Highlai men. ' 

aonairt, see aonagail. 

aouai , see iüuais. 

aonar, -air, 5.21. One person 2f¢tUnity, alone- 
ness. 

aonar, a. Alone, solitary. 2 Singular in gram- 
mar. Duine 'na aonar, a man all alone, a 
ginanlar man; ‘na aonar ‘sa thonadh, a/one 
en the hill; cha'n 'e.lthu ‘ad aouar mar sin, 
you are not alun like that ; rim e seo "na aou- 
ar, he did this alone 

aonarach, -aiche, a. 
saken. 

aonarachd. s.f.imd. Desolation, solitariness. 2 
Singularity. ’ 

aonaran, -ain, ranan, s.m. Recinse, herut, 
solitary person. 2 Forsaken person, ascc..c. 
Aonaran liath nan creag, the grey-heuded her 
mit of the rocks. 

&onaranach, see aonarach. 

———————à, see aonarachd. 

taonardha, see sorar, a. 

aon-bharail * art, Unaninity. 

i&on-bheaunach, -aich, sf. Unicorn. 
Unicorned. 

& n-bheichd, &.f. Ununimity, agreeing in de- 
agn or opinion. 

aon-ohith, s.f.ind. Co-essentiality. 2 Co-sub- 
stantiality. 

each, @. Co-esseutial. 


Desolate, solitary, for- 


2 Co-substan- 





(gal. 
aou-vhasach, 4€. One-footed. 2 Single-stem- 
med, as an herb. 
———_ 3 -aich, 
see feamainn dubh. 
&son-chathaireach, -eich, -chan, &m. 
citizen. 


s.m. Serrat d seaweed, 
Fellow- 


————-—, &, Of, or pertaining to, the 

same city. 2** Having one city. Luchd a., 
fello:r-citizens, 

&on-choltachff-aiche, a. Con-sonous. 

aemchridhe, s.m. Unanimity. 

———— ———ach, a. Unaniwous. 2 One-hearted. 
Gu h-aon-ghuthach aon-chr.dheacn, with one 
voice and «ne heart. 

faon-c1u, (AF: sm. see onchu. 

souda, a. Singular, particular. 

, 8.89. see aonta. 

aondachd, $./. see aontachd. 

&ondadh,-aidh, see aonta. 

aen-dathach. «. Of one colonr. 

xor-dealbhuch, «€. Uniform. 2 Similar, $3 
Consistent. 

aon-deug, a. Eleven. Bha aon-deug aun, there 
were eleven; aon fhear deng. 1 men; aon 
chlach dheug, i1 stones. a h-aov-deug, eleven. 

aon-lhearc,) sf. Tho herb Paris—paris quad- 
rifolia. 

aon-fheachd, «dv. "Together. at once. 

aou-fhillte, a. Single, consisting of one fold or 

plait. 2 Simple, innoceit. 3 Fo lish. 4 Cam- 

did, honest, sincere. A’ deanainh an duine 
a. glic, making the simple wise; na daoine 
&., the innocent. 

—ac d. sf. Singleness of mind. 2 Sim- 

lieity, siucerity, candour.  8**Foolishness. 
e a., with simplioty. 

aon-fhlath, -aith, -aitnean, s.m. Monarch. 

aon-fhlathach, a. Monarchial. 

aon-fhlathachd, s.f.ind. Monarchy. 
aon-fhlathachdail, see aon-fhlathach. 
aon-fhuaimneach,t{ a. Consonous. 

sf. Consonan'vess. 














41 















aonsuírt 






"td 


^4 
i ss? 
SW 
M ett 
Sé / e YY, WHA 
/ b BC E 
A 
e 


4, 






14. Aon-dhearc. 


aon-fhuirm, Gaelicized form of ‘‘one form.” 

aon-ghin, s.m. Only begotten one. Mar a. mie, 
like an only begotten son, e, cloinne, my 
only begotten child. 

aon-ghnéitheach, a. Homogeneous 

—d, s.f.ind. H nmogeneousness. 

&on-ghràdh, s.m. (£ f.) Beloved object. M'a., 
my vest beloved. 

aon-ghuthach, -airhe, a. Having one voice or 
vote. 2 Consonous. 3 Symphonious. 

aon-inntinn, gr, One mind, one accord. Le h- 
a., with one accord. 

aon-inntinneach, a. Unanimots, 
Gn h-&., unanimously. 

————-—4d, sfiind. Unanimousness. 

aon-inhae, -m ic, s.m. Only son. Thuit e air 
aodann 'aoin-mhic, he feil en the face of his 
only son. 

tamir hadh, a. 





consentient. 





see aona. 


aon-mha‘de, s.m.ind. Simultaneous pull in row- 


ing, fuaim an aon-mia'de. 
aon-inkarvadh, -aidh, s.m. Monopoly. 
&on-mharsanta,* s.m. Monopolizer. 


] —————-—chd,* see aon-mhargadh. 


&on-mhéinn,ff ert One mind. 

&onràcan, see aonragan. 

— ————&ch, see aonraganach. 

aonrachd, see aonarachd. 

aonraci:iach, see aonarach. 

aonrachdan, see &onragan. 

aonragan, -ain, s.m. Solitarv person, recluse. 
2 Widower. $**Orphan. 4**Deserted person. 

aonraganach,-aiche, a. Solitary. 2 Of, or 
belonging to, a recluse. 

aonrarvanachd, s.f.ind. Solitariness. 2 Condi- 
tion of a recuse or deserted person. 

faonvais, a f. Tempest. 

aonranach. a. see aonarach. 

aonranachd. see aonrachd. 

aon-reiceadair,tf s.m. Monopolizer, 

a0n-r'gh. pl. Ae & -rea ^, 8m. Monarch. 

aon-sea‘lhach,$t a. Co-significative. 

aon-sgeulach, -aiche, a. Harmonious, unani- 
mous. 

aonsgoch. sm. Swallow-wort or celandine. 
see an ceann ruadh. 

&on-slo?"neadh, -eidh, s.m. One surname 

laonsurt,** sf. Wallowing, weltering. 


RK ° 


sonta i 





Lease. 2 License. 3 Vote. 4 
Admission, 5 Assent, acquiescence, consent. 
6** 5acnelor, Tha mi’tvirt a. do na tha thu 
agvàaüh. 7 agree with what you say. 

autbtach,-eiche, a. Acc. ding to, conniving at. 
2 Ready to yield. 

aontachadi, -a.dh, s.m. Consenting, welding. 
acceding, reconciliation, acquiescence, ad- 
mission, unanimity, agreement, abetting. 
Ag a—, pr.pt. of -X— A 

Aont&chsair, eir. s.m. Subscriber. 2*Accessory. 

aontachd, sf. Consent, unanimity, agreement, 
admission. 2**State of being particular or 
singular. 

acntaith, see aonta. 

aontaich, pr. pari. ag aortachadh, v.n. Con- 
sent, agree, accede, acquiesce, admit, yield. 
2**Abet, take part or side with. Dh'aontaich 
i leis, she yielded to him; a. leis, take his part; 
tua mj ag aontacliadh gu'm bheil, J admit that 
it is ; thug i air aontachadh, she constrained 
him to yield ; na aontaich thusa leo, consent 
not thou to them ; aoutaichidh sinn leibh, we 
will conset unto you ; ma dh'aontaicheas tu 
aon uair, if you consent once. 

aontaiche,** -ean, s.m. Abettor, conniver. 

aontaichear, fut.pass. of aontaich. 

aontaichidh, fut. aff. a. of aontaich. 
aontaichte, pt. part. of aontaich. 

&on-taigheachd, see aon-caigheadas. 

&on-taigheadas, -ais, s.m. Co-habitiog, living 
under one roof. 

aon-taigheas, see aon-taigheadas. 

aontainn, see aonta. 

faontanach, see aonarach. 


aonta, 8.m. 


&on-tlachd, 8.m. Sole source of joy, only belov- 


ed. 2 Favourite, 

aon-toil, -e, $./. Unanimity, agreement. 

aor, pr. part. ag aoradh, v.a. Worship, adore. 
2**Join. 3**Adhere. Aoraibhse gu ceart, 
worship in sincerity. 

T-—, s.m. Curse. 

aorabh, -aibh, s.m. Constitution, mental or 
bodily. 
disease in his constitution. 

aorach, -aiche, a. Devout, religious, reverent, 
wee y pious. 

&orachail, a. Devotional. 
vot ional duties. 

aoradair,-ean, s.m. Worshipper, adorer. 
Foul-mouthed bard. 


Dleasnasan &., de- 


21 


aoradh, -aidh, s.m. Worship, adoration, deyo- 


tion. 2 Joining. 3 Adhering. Ag a 


worshipping him; a. téin-thoileil, will-wor- 


ship ; thoir a., worship. 


of aor. 

aoridhail,** a. Adorable. 

&oradha!achd, sf.ind.  Adorableness, 

aoraidh, gen.sing. of aoradh, 

jfaoram, "mt, af, a. of aor. I wil worship. 

&ornagaich, see aonagaich. 

aornagail, see aonagail. 

&ornagan, 8& dv. see aonagail. 

&oruibn, see aorabh. 

faos,** s.m. Community, set of people. 2 
Fire. 3 Sun. 4 God. 

taos, -ois, s.f. Age. 

aosail, 99 » 99 , 

&osalachd, see aosmhoireachd. 

&osar, see aosnihor. 

&os-chiabh, an, s.f. Aged locks, hoary hair. 
C'uim’ am bheil t'a. snitheach P why are thine 
aged, locks moist 1 

&os-chrann,-ainn, SI Aged tree, trunk. <A. 
briste, an aged broken trunk. 

aos-chrith, s.m. Tremor of age. A. air mo 
cheann, the tremor of age on my head. 


Ag a—, pr. part. 


42 





Tha galar "na aorabh, there is @ 


ar 





aos-chritheach, e, Trembling with age. 


aosda, a. Old, aged, ancient. An déidh dhomh 
fàs a., after 1 have become old ; a bnàrda a. 
nan linn a thréig t ye aged bards of by-gone 
m anns na h-a. tha gliocas, in the aged 
there i8 wisdom. 
aosdachd, s.t. Agedness, antiquity. 
aos-dana, 8m. see aois-dana. 
aos-danachd, see aois-dànachd. 
aos-deanta, 8.m. Mechanic. 
aosd-shuil, ep, Aged eye. 
aos-larach,** -aich, s.. Aged site. 2 Aged 
ruin. An e an torr seo t'a.P is this hillock 
thine aged seat 1 
aos-liath, a. Grey-headed, old. Aos-liath, lag, 
aged and weak. 
aosmhoire, comp. of aosmhor. 
aosmhoireachd, s.f.ind. Properties of old age. 
2 Great age, antiquity, agedness. 
aosmhor, -oire, à. Aged, old, ancient. 
-0ir, 8$. m. Aged person. Tuigse nan 
a., the understanding of the aged. 
faos-teas, s. Summer. 
taoth, s.m. Bell. 2 Crown. 
-——, a. Small. 
+-——achd, sJ. Ringing of bells, chime of bells, 
+-——adh, a. Clean, pure. 
aotrom, -uime, a. Light, not heavy. 2 Giddy, 
agog. Creutair a., a giddy creature. 
achadh, -aidh, s.m. Alleviation, light- 
ening. 2 Respite, as of fever. 3 Abatement, 
as of rain. Ag a—, pr.pt. of aotromaich. Tha 
'n t-uisg’ ag a., the rain ts abating ; fhuair e 
a. œn fhiabhrus, he get a slight respite from 
the fever. 
——-achd, s.f.ind. Lightness. 
—aich, pr. pt. ag aotromachadh, Ge 
Lighten. 2 Alleviate. 3 Abate. 
aotrumuaicha:r, fut. pass. of aotromaich. 
aotromaichidh, fut. aff. a. of aotromaich. 
aotrumaichte, pt.pt. of aotromaich. 
sor -ain, 8.m. Bladder. 2 Any light 
thing. 
aoironas, ais, sm. Lightness. 2 Delirium. 
aotruime, comp. of aotrom. 
aotruimid, s.f. Lightness. 
—————, comp. of aotrom. Isa. thu e, you 
are the lighter of it. 
fap,** a. Fit, proper, ripe. 
ap, -a, 8.m. 2 Mimic. 3 Shameless wo- 
man. +4** Any little creature. A’ giùlan 
apa, carrying apes. 
apach, a. Like an ape, abounding in apes. 
apag, -aig, -an,3.f. Little ape. 2 Prating wo 
man. 
fapaich, see abuich. 
apainn,** 8. f. Abbey lands. 
aparan, -ain, s.m. Apron. 2(AH)Inner stem 
and stern postsof a boat. 
alch, v.a. Cover with an apron. 
——-aichte, a. d pt. part. of aparain. 
proned. 
aparr,* -a, a. Expert.  211Quick, nimble. 
aparran, see aparan. 
aparsaig, 8.f. Transposed form of knapsack. 
app, see ap. 
apricoc,} 8.m. Apricot—prunus armeniaca. 
ar, poss. pron. Our. Ar fearann, our land; ar 
còmhstri ri daimht, our batile with strangers. 
[Takes n- hetore a word begiuning with a 
vowel, as, arn-each, our horse; ar n-athair, 
our father. ] 
ar, prep. see air. 
-ar, termination of verbs used impersonally, as 
Gluaisear leam, J will move. 
ar, see ar leam. 
ar, (Ali), 8.2. Deadwood in stern of boat. Pre 








Ae 


ar 





ceded by the article an t-.] 


tar.a. Slow. ' 

țar am. Bond, tie. chaiu. 2 Guiding, con- 
ducting. 3 wf. Land, earth. 

far, V. see arsa. 

—, see ara. 

ar, s.m.ind. Ploughing, ti'lage, agriculture, 
Ag a—, pr.pt. of ar. Tha e ris ar, he ts 

ughiny. 
a» ger A ag ar, v.a. Plough, till, cultivate. 


Bha na daimh ag ar. the oxen were ploughing; | 


ar ineadhonach, second ploug ing; iatsaua 
diràras euceart, they that ptough iniquity. 
èr, air, San, Battle, slaughter 2 field of 
battle Dan an air, the s ng of battle; na 
fulaing ar nan Criosdaidh, permit not the 
slaughter of the Christians ; tuagh chum air, a 
battle 
asleep on this field af battle. 


‘3 


-aze ; dithis 'nan cadal’san ar seo, two | àraig.11 -e, -ean, 8. 
| taraigh,** s.pl. 


arbharrachd 


gentleman's clothes given as a perquisite to 
servants. 2 Wealth iu clothing.’’) 

araichd, s. m. Fit or deserving object. 

araichd.il,* see araiceil. 

araichdiu, -e,-ean s.m. Dim. of araichd. 

àraid, see àraidh. 

araideach, -eiche, @. Joyous, glad, elated, ele- 
vated. 

àraidh, @. Certain. 2 Particular, pecu- 
liar, special. 3 Proper, expedient. 4 Worthy, 

enerous. 65 Liberal, hospitable. Duine 

araidh, a certain man ; gu h-àraidh (adv.) eg, 
pecially, particularly ; gnothach à., an impor- 
tant affair. 

Sil -ean,$.m. Hero. 2 Cautioner. 

eachd,* s.f. Importance. Particulari y, 

peculiarity, singularity. 

Present. 

Reins of a bridle. 








er, (AC  [? seaciid car—CR} —Théid e seach? ar; taraill, a. ‘the other. 


air bear-an-tuisne, ke wall ge seven times 
round the howsew: te, 

*ara,** arai, sm. Conference. 2 Bier. 3 Page 
4 Charioteer. 

tara, n.pl. of ar, slaughter. 

ava, -ann, & -ainn pl. àirnean [& àran] s.f. Kid- 
ney. 2 Reiu. An dà àra, the two kidneys 
geir nan ara, kidney suet. 

taraba, prep. For the sake of. 

arabhaig, -e,-an, see arrabhaig. 

àrach, a Slaughtering. 

àrach, -aich, -aichean, sJ. Fieid of’ battle, 
piain. ’Nalaidhe'san àraich, outstretched on 
the Latilefieid ; nach seachnadh te 'dheóin an 
CH who would not willingly shun the battle- 
wid. 

ys ,-Bich, s.m. Tie, bond, or collar on a 
beast, stall-tie for a cow. 2 Restraint. 3 
see atharrach. 4** Authority. 5**Strength. 
6** Fishing ware.  7** Bier. 8** Gallows. 
9 Miikman. 

tarach, -aich, ëm. Ploughshare. ?tfUtensils 
tor sien ing. 

arach, -aich. s.m. Nursing, rearing, training. 
2 Maintenance. 3 Strength, power. 4 Au- 
thority. 5 See àireach. 

arachail,tt-e, a. Nutrimental. 

arachair,** sm. Insurer. 

àrachas, -ais, Gan, In-urauce. 2 Mansion, 
dwelling. Fear àrachais, an insurer ` outh 
aracuais, an insurance ofice ; taigh fo àrach- 
as, a house insured. 

&r:cias,** s.m. Sirength, might. 

arachd, see arracnd. 2f see àros. 

ach, see arrachdach. 

arachdas, see araciuas. 

faracul -uil, son. Coll, grotto 

farad.** a. Strong, brave. 

tarad, -aid, s.m. see iaradh. 

taradain, s.m. Desk. 2 Pulpit. 

ara lair Sam, Agricalturist. 
Tiller of the ground. 

fàradh,** -aidh, -aidhean, 8.m. see ara. 2 see 
fàradh. 

țara-fnlusga, 4.32. Running of the reins. 

aragarradh,** -aidh, san, Avandoument. 2 
Pre-cience, secret anticipation, 

aragarraich,** v.a. Forebode. 

aragrad., -aidh, see aragarradh. 

ar&iceil. -e, a. Valiant. 2 Precious. Gnothaich 
a.. a precious or an inportaat affair. 

araicn, pr.part. ag arva‘n, v.a. Kear, briny up, 
educate. 2 Maintain, support. Is mairg a 
du'àraich thu! pity him that reared you ! 

&raich. gen. sing. of drach. 2 see làraich. 

&raichd, -e,-ean, sm. Present, gift, donation. 





É 
d 


i tarau, sain, s.m. 


2 Ploughman. 3| 


arain, gen. sing. of aran. 

8i'alun, see ara, 

àrair,** -e, -ean, Slaughterer, warrior. see àr- 
adair. 

aralach,*-aiche, a. Finical. 

—d,* sf  Niceness. 

ar-a-mach, mm. Rebeliion, insurrection, muting 
2 Treason. Rinn iad a., they haze reheiled. 

arau, n.pl. of ara. 2 for fàraidhean, (livtders) 

Familiar conversation, dis- 





course, dialogue. 
aran, -ain, s.m. Bread, loaf. 2 Livelihood, sus- 
teuance. A tha ’enmail b arain riut, who gives 
you your livelihos’; cha bhi thu guu aran, 
you shall not want a livelirvod ; grein arain, 
a piece of bread. 
aranach,** -aich, s.m. Pantry. 
, See arannachssréine. 
——— —,0. Full of bread. 2**Alimentai. 
aranaid,* see aranailt. 
aranailt, sf. Bread basket. 2 Pauuier. 
Arü-co.rce, Oat-bread, oat-cake. 
aran-cruitlineachd, Wheaten bread. 
arau-doun, brown bread. 27tGinger-bread. 
&ran-eórna, Barley-bread. 
arin-ignn,ff-ainn, -ac, e.m. 
aran latbatl, Daily bread. 
aran-uulis, Sweetbread. 2 Ginger-bread. 
arannach-sréine, 8.5». Bridle-reiu. 
ara i-peasrach, Pease bread. 
arau-seugaill, Rye-bread. 
aran taisbeanta, Shewbread. 
árann, see ara. 


Syead-room., 


i taroid,** s.f. Cover, table-cioth. 


araon, adv. ‘Together. 2 Koth. 3 As one, 
Blieir au Tigbearna solas d' au süàilinh a., the 
Lord will enlijhten the eyes of beth; a. thus’ 
agus esan, both of you. 

ar’ar, see arbhar. 

-——-ach, see arbharach. 

aras, see àros, 

—acn, see arosack. 

farasg, -aisg, -an a.m. Word, 

tarba, conj. Nevertheless. 

f-——, s.m. Chariot. 

arbhach, -aiche, o. Destructive, slaughtering. 

arbhadh, -aidh, Destruction. slauglitering. 

arbhaitichte, a. Arable, pro:lucing corn. 

arbhar, -air, s.m. Corn, growing or in sheaf. 2 
**rarely nost, army. Pailteas arbhair, plenty 
of corn ; deasaicuidh tu a., thou shalt pre- 
pare corn. 

ach,** -aiche, a. Abounding in coru, 
of, or belouging to, coru crops. 2 Fertile. 
acbd,** s.f. Embattling, as au army, 

forming into line. 


2(AH) Boon, godsend. (* says “a lady's or) arbharrachd,* see arbharachd. 


E2 


&rbhartachaan 


arbhartachadh, -aidh, s.m. Dispossessing, act 


of ejecting from lands. 

arbhartaich, pr. part. ag arbhartachadh, v. a. 
Dispossess, confiscate, disinherit. 2 Forfeit. 

te, a. & pt. part. of arbhartaich. 
Expelled, ejected from lands. 2 Confiscated. 
Am fearann a., the confiscated estates. 

arbhraigneach, -nich, s.m. Snare. 

àrbhuidhe, see orbhuidh. 

fare, s.m. Sow. 2 Sucking pig. 3 Lizard. 4 
Body. 5 Dwarf. 6 (AF) Bear. 7 (AF) Stag, 
hind. 8 Collection. 9 Hero. 

tare, 8f. Bee. 2 Wasp. 3 Impost, tax. 4 
Femen. 

Gre, IT a, -ainn, s.f. Vulva vaccines. 

arc, àirc, see àirc. 








arc, -an, $.m. Speciesof fungus on decayed 


timber. 

arc, airce, 8.f. Cork. Crann airce, cork tree. 

àrca, s.m. Buoy. 2 see àrc. 

arcain, gen. sing. of àrcan. 

àrcan, -ain, 38.m. Cork, stopple. Arcan 
buideil, a bottle cork or stopple ; arcan bar- 
aile, a bung; crann arcain, a cork-tree. 

arcan, 8.7. see uircein. 2 see arc. 

arcanach, -eiche, a. Full of corks. 

arcan-luachrach, -ain-, see dearc-luachrach. 

arc-aoghair, s.m. Bear’s guard or herdsman. 

tar-cheana, adv. Henceforth. 

fa:-choin, 8.m. see àr-chü. 

fàr-chà, -choin, m. pl. -coin, dat. pl. -conaibh, 
s.m. Chained dog, fierce dog. 2 Mastiff. 
Bloodhound. 

tarchuisg, -e, -ean, s&,f. Experiment. 

tarciseach, a. Ravenous. 

arc-luachrach, see dearc-luachrach. 

tarcmhue, -muice, 8.m. Male pig. 

arcuinn, -e, s.f. Cow's udder. 

tar-cul, adv. Behind. {air cul) 

TArd,** Aird, see Art. 

ard, àirde, n.pl.-a, a. High,lofty, 2 Mighty.great, 
noble, eminent, excellent, supreme. 3 Proud. 
4** Loud. Is esau a’s àirde, he is the tallest; 
beinn ard, a lofty hill; fuil ard nan saoi, the 
nobls blood of heroes; sealladh ard, a proud 
look; fear a b'àirde guth, the man of loudest 
voice. Ard- answers to arch- as a prefix in 
English. Before an adj. as a prefix it sup- 
plics the place of an adv., as ard-shona, st- 
premely happy ; ard-éibhneach, ecstatic. 

ard, àird, n.pl. àird [& àrda; dat. pl. -aibh,s.m. 
see airde. 2 Chief, eminent person. Uaigh 
an àird, the chief’s grave. 

arda, n pl. of àrd, a. & s. Choimh-fhreagair na 
creagan àrda, the lofty rocks re-echoed. 

ard-abhcaid,ft -e, -ean s.f. Master jest. 

àrdachadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of raising, exalting, 
or heightening. 2 Advancement, promotion, 
honour, prefer:znent. 3* Augmentation, in- 
crease. 4 Praise. Ag &—,pr.pt.of àrdaich. 
A. tuarasdail, increase of salary; à. nan arma- 
din, the promotion of fools; °g a à. féin, exalt- 
ing himself. When a person is delirious in 
sickness, it is said “tha àrdachadh air"—JM 

àrdachair,** s.m. Aggrandizer. 

ardaich, pr. part. ag àrdachadh, v.a. Exalt, ex- 
tol, elevate, raise aloft, heighten, promote. 
2*Increase. A i, exalt her; ardaich a thuar- 
asdal, increase his salary. 

àrdaichear, fut. pass. of àr.laich. 

àrdaichidh, fut. of a. of àrdaich. 

ard-aigne, sm.  Magrnanimity, greatness of 

mind. 2 Bravery. 3**Ambition. 

————ach, -eiche, a. Magnanimous, high- 

minded. 2 Brave. 3**Ambitious. 4*Nettle- 

some, 

érdail, a. 


— 


Cardinal (numbers in gram.) 


u 


ard-chis 


ardain, gen. sing. of àrdan. 

àrd-aingeal, -gil, pl. -gil, -gle, -glean, s.m 

. Archangel. 

&rd-aingealach,[f -aiche, a. Archangelic. 

ard-aithrichean, n.pl. of àrd-athair. 

tard-allata, a. High-famed. 

r -ais,3.m. High aim or mark, ambi 
ion. 

ard-amhailt, see ard-abhcaid. 

àrdan, -ain, s.m. Pride, haughtiness. 2 Anger, 
wrath. 3 Height, eminence, hillock. 4 a 
pl. of ard, s. 'Na shuidhe air ardan, st- 
ting on an eminence; uabhar is àrdan, pride 
and arrogance; an droch dhuine "na Ardan 
borb, the wicked man in his fierce pride; èrd- 
an gruaidh, pride of face ; tha m'àrdan 'nad 
chliù, my pride is in thy fame; dh'at àrdan 
"og chrìdhe, proud wrath swelled in his heart. 

ach, -aiche, a. Proud, haughty. 9 Prone 

to take offence. 3 Arrogant. 4 Elated. Spior- 

ad à., a haughty spirit. 

achd, st Haughtiness, proudness, arro- 
gance. Uaill is à., pride and haughtiness. 

tàrdanair s.f. (ard+onoir) High honour. 

tardarc, -aire, s.m. Blazon. 2 Armorial beare 
ings. 

ard-aoibhneach, a. Very joyful, exulting. 

ard-athair, ar, -thraichean, s.m. Patriarch. 

ard-bhaile, pl. -ltean, dat. pl. -tibh, s.m. City, 
metropolis. Esana ghlacas à., he that takes 
a city. 


o M M 








3 | àrd-bsailtean, n. pl. of àrd-bhaile. 


ard-bhan-diue, 8.f. Archduchess. 
àrd-bheachd,1] s.f.ind, Elevation of sentiment. 
àrd-bheann, gen. pl. of ard-bheinn. 
àrd-bheinn, -e, p? n. -bheanntan, gen. -bheann, 
dat. -bheanntai.h, sj. Pinnacle. 2 Moun- 
tain. Ait mar iolair nan ard-bheann, joyous 
as the mountain eagle. 
ard-bhlath, s.m. Height of flourish, prime 2 
Flower, blossom. Thai 'n à. a h-aimsir, she 
18 in the prime ef life. 
ard-bhreitheamh, -eimh, -na, 8.m. 
judge. 2 Chief justice, chancellor. 
ard-bhuachaill, e, -ean, s.m. Head shepherd. 
àrd-bhüirdeasach,** s.m. Burgomaster. 
àrd-bhurgair, (àrd + Eng. burgher.) 
àrd-chabrach, -aiche, a. High-branched. 
ard-chantair, -e, -ean, s.m. Arch-chanter. 
ard-chath,** em, General engagement, pitched 
battle. 2 ‘Thick of the battle. Gaoir an àrd- 
chath, the din of the pitched battle. 
air, -thrach, -thraichean, gf. Metro- 
polis, chief city, archbishop’s see. 2 Throne. 
ard-cheann, 8.24. Superior, ruler, head. Ard- 
cheann na h-eaglais, the head of the church. 


àrd-cheann -chinn-, s.m. Chief general. 


-— -airm, 
abhard, see àrd-cheannard. 
ach, -aiche, @. Proud, haughty. 
lofty. 2 Insolent, arrogant, 
-——ard, -aird, -ardan, $.m. Supreme 
head, chief, superior. 
ard-cheannas, -ais, s.m. Superiority, pre-em- 
inence, supremacy. 2 Dominion, command. 
A. anns gach uile., pre-eminence in all things. 
àrd-cheann-fheachd1] s.m. Generalissimo. 
àrd-cheannsal, see àrd-cheanuas. 
àrd-cheum, -chéim, s.m. Strut. 2 Bound. 3 
Lofty gait. 4**Prancing. 
— — — —Ach, -aiche, a, High-bounding. 
àrd-cheumnachadh, -aidh, s.m. Strutting. 2 
Bounding. 3 Walking proudly. 4**Prancing. 
Ag à—, pr. pt. of ard-cheumnaich. 
ard-chenmnaich,** v.g. Strut. 2 Bound, 3 
Walk proudly. 4 Prance. 
ard-chis,fi sf. Tribute. 


Supreme 





ard-chlachair 
ard-chiachair, -e, -ean, s.m. Architect. 3 Mas- 


ter mason. 
eachd, s.f. Architecture. 2 Busi- 
ness of a master mason. 
&rd-chliu, s.m. High fame. 
ard-chnoc-faire, -cbnuic-faire, s.m. Great bea- 
con 2 S once. 
&rd-cholaisde, -ean, s.m. University, college. 
àrd-chomas, -ais, s.m. Discretionary or despot- 
ac power. 
eretionary power. 
——— ———ach, a. Having discretionary or 
despotic power. 2 Supreme, unlimited. 
Ard-chomhairle, at Parliament. 2 Supreme 
council. 3 Synod. A. Bhreatuinn, the Brit- 





wh Parliament; ball na h-A., a member of 


Parliament. 
ach, -eiche, s.m. Chief coun- 

sellor. 2 Consul. 3**Chancellor. 
ard-chomhairliche, see àrd-chomhairleach. 
ard-chrann, (AH) s.m. Topmast. 
ard-chreagach, -aiche, «. High rocked, rugged. 
àrd-chuan, -chuain, -chuantan, s.an. The high 

sea. 
Ard-chüiseach, -eiche, a. Sublime, noble, lofty. 
&rd-chnminhachd, an, sf. Supreme power. 2 

High power. 3 State, office. 4 Authority. 5 

Absoluteness. 


and authority. 
a:-dhamh, -dhaimh, s.m. Ploughing ox. 
ard-dhruidh, s.m. Arch-druid, He was cho- 
sen by a plurality of voices from the worthi- 
est and most learned of the ordcr. He was 
deemed infallible. He was referred to in 
ali cases of controversy, and from his judg- 
ment there was no appeal. He was the 
Kee of the general assemblies of the 
ruids, and had the casting vote. His aid 
and friendship were much valued and confi- 
ded in. [see note on ‘‘Coimhdhe "'] 
ard-dorus, -uis, -orsan, sm. Lintel. 
avd-eaglais,** «f. Cathedral. 
ard-ealantachd,!{t s.f.ind. Masterliness. 
&rd-easbuidheachd, see àrd-easbnigeachd. 
&rd-easbuig,-e, -ean. s.m. Archbishop. 
each, a. Archepiscopal, like, or per- 
taining to an archbishop. 
———— ——eachd, £f. Archbishopric. 
ard-fhaclach, -aiche, a. Lofty in speech. 
arc-fhaidh, -e, --an, s.m. Chief prophet. 
ard-fheamanach,** -aich, s.m. High steward. 
— d, &f. High stewardship. 
ard fhear-gionach,(AF) s.m. Asp. 
.—— —— -gnoi haich,tt s.m. Attorney. 
———— -rimh (AF) Asp. 
ard-fheasgar, -air, sm. Late at even, towards 
night. 
Ard-fhé:ll, st Great festival or solemnity. A. 
na h-Eadailt, the Carnival. 
àrd-fhiosachd, s f.ind. Prophesying, predicting. 
ard-fhlaitheachd, see àrd-fhlaitheas. 
ard-fhlaitheas, -ais, s.m. Supreme dominion. 
ard-fhlath, -aith, -an, s.m. Monarch, prince, 
chief, archduke. 
ard-fhoclach, see ard-fhaclach. 
ard-fhoghlum, -uim, sm. High learning. 
Ard-fhrithealachadh,** s.m. Archdeaconry. 
ard-fhrithealachd, see ard-fhrithealachadh. 
ard-fhrithealachair, see a l-fhrit healaiche. 
Ard-fhrithealai he,** s.m. Archdeacon. 
ard-fnuaim, $.f. Loud „oise, murmur. 
-—neach, -eiche, a. Sounding, murmur- 
ing, making a loud noise. 
ard-fhuaimnich, s.f. Any loud noise, contin- 
ued loud noise. 
ard-ghairm, -zhairme, gt Loud shout. 2 High 
ing. Duais na h-ard-ghairme, the reward 








Thug e a. dhomh, he gave me dis- ; 


ach, -aiche, «. High in dignity : 





45 Ard-mhorair 


of the high calling. 
ard-ghaisgealachd, ft $.f. Chivalry. 
ard-:havir, -e, 8.f Loud noise or cry. 
tard-ghaois, -eau, s.f. Liberal art. 
+———__ear, 8.5. Master of arts. 
ard-ghaoth, -ghao the, s.f. High wind. 

— ach, -aiche, a. Windy, stormy, blow- 
ing loudly. A bhuilg-shéididh à., Ais low cy 
blowing bellows. 

àrd-ghlan, -aine, a. Illustrious, conspicuous. 

àrd-ghlaodh, -aoidh, s.m. Loud cry, sc'eam. 

tàrd-ghleadhraich, sf. Any loud noise, a rat- 
ting noise. 

tàrd-ghlaidh, s.m.pl. Famous deeds. 

ard-ghioir, -e, sm. Bombast, loud speaking, 
lofty style, boasting, vain-zlory. 

—each -ei-he. e. Banbastic, inclined 
to speak loud, boasting, vaiv-glorious. 

ard-ghlonn, -an, s.m. Noble exploit. 

-—ach, -aiche, a. Renowned for brav- 
ery, celebrated, famed. 

ard-ghniomh, pl. -arra, -artha, & -arran, 8.m. 
Lotte deed, feat, achieveinent. A. an righ, 
the exploit of the king. 

aran, n. pl. of àrd- hniomh. 

ard-ghul, -ghuil, s.m. Loud weeping, howling. 
Tha e ri àrd-ghul, Re is weepin: aloud. 

ard-ghuth, gan. Loud voice, 2 Lud ery, shout. 

———-—avh, -aiche, a. Clamorous, loud. 2 
Shouting loudly. 

àr-lhamh, see àr-damh. 

ar-dhith, -e. s.m. War havoc. 

àrd-iarla, sm. First earl. 

àrd-inbhe, -ean, s.f. Dignity, eminence, high 
rank. Oirdheirceasard-inbhe, the excetience 
of dignity. 

————-ach, -eiche, a. Eminent. 














2 High ın 
office. 

——achd, s.f. Eminence, dignity, rank, 
àrd-inntinn, &.f.ind. Haughtiness, arrogance, 











pride. 2 High spirit. 

each, -eiche, a. Haughty, arro- 
gant, proud, vain. Na bi à, be not high- 
minded. 





——eachd, sf.ind. Haughtiness, pride, 
conceit, vanity. A. 'nur measg, pride among- 


you. 

àrd-iolach, -aich, s.f. Loud shout, acclamation. 
Le h-ard-iolach, with a loud shout. 

àrd-iuchar,11-air, -chraichean, s.f. Master-key. 

ard-labhar, see ard-labhrach. 

àrd-labhrach, -aiche, a. Luudvoiced. 2 Elo- 
quent, sublime (in speaking.) a. a’ chinn, 
the tongue. 

ard-leumach, -aiche, a. High bounding. 

ard-leumannach, see ard-leumach. 

àrd-losradh, -aidh, s.m. Extreme burning. 2 
Extreme heat. 3 Inftamn:ation. Le h-ard- 
losgadh, with extreme burning. 

ard-luathghair, s.f. Triumphant exclamation. 

ard-mhailgheach, a. Beetle-vrowed. 

ard-mhaighstireachd, s.f. Supreme anthority. 

ard-mhalaideach,ft -eiche. a. Beetle-Lrowed. 

ard-mhacr-righ, s.m. Herald, pursuivant. 

àrd-mharaiche, sm. Admiral. Pricmh à., lord> 
high admiral. 

ard-mhath, -aith, s.m. Supreme good. 

ard-mheanmnach, -aiche, a. Magnanimous,high 
mettled. 

àrd-mhiann,** s.m. & f. Aspiration. 

ard-mbilidh, -ean, s.m. Heroic chief. 

ard-inhol, v.a. Extol highly, magniiy, praise, 
land, celebrate. 

àrd-mholadh, -aidh, gan. Praise. 
pt. of àrd-mhol, 

ard-mholta, a. d ml. part. 
meguified. 2 Celebrzted. 

ard-mhorair, -ean, 8.m. Admiral 2 Lord Pre- 


Ag à—, pr. 
Highly extolled, 


ard-mhorair 


Court of Session. 
ard-mhorfhear, 
àrd-mhormhaor, 
àrd-1nhuiuveach, -eiche, a. 
àrdoch, -oich, see fa:doch. 
ràrdog. see òrdag. 
àrd-ollamh, -aimh, e m. Chief professor or doc- 

tor 2% Principal of a university. 3 aiis- 

toriographer royal. 
ardorus, seé ard-dorus. 
ardrach, -aich, Sr. E:ght-oared galley. 
ard-rainhach, see ardrach. 
ard-rath, -a, s.m. Sunshine of prosperity. 
ürd-reacudas, -ais, s.m. General assembly. 2 

Synod. 3 Convention. 
ard-reim,** s. Rant. 
àrd-riaghladh, -aidh, s m. Supreme rule. 
ard-riaghailt, -e, 8.7. Supreme rule. 
àrd-righ, pl. -re, &-rean, s.m. Supreme king, 

God. 2 Monarch. 3. Emperor. 
ardroch, see ardrach. 
ard-sgeimhleir,** -ean, 6. am. Curious person. 
àrd-sgoil, -e, -ean, 8.7. Academy, college, high 

school. 2* see ard-sguilearachd. i 

éideann, Edinburyh University. 
—ear, Ap, -ean, 
versity or academy. 2 Migh-school boy. 3 
*Philosopner. 4 Excellent scholar. 


see ard-mhorair. 
High-maned. 








education. 

à d-sgoil mhaighstir, -irean, 8.m. 
an academy or high-school. ? Professor. 

ard-shagart, -airt, -ean, 8.m. High priest. 

ach. D a. Pontifical. 

achd, s.f.ind. High 
primateship. 

àrd-sheanadh, -aidh, s.m. General asseml:ly. 2 
Supreme council. 3 Parliament, Ard-shean- 
adh Eaglais na h-Alba, The General Assen- 
bly of he Chursh of Scotland. 

ard-sheanair, -ean s.m. Member of a general 
assembly, 2 ofasenate, or 8 of any snpreme 
council. 

ard-sheanalair, -e, -ean, 3.m. Generalissimo. 2 
Supreme commander. 

àrd-:neol, sm. Topsail. 

ard-shodan,** -ain, sm. Ecstasy. 

ard-shona, a. Supremely blest, or 2 happy. 

—— ———— 8, -ais, $.m. Supreme bliss. 2 Perfect 
happiness. A. mo chridhe, the supreme bliss 
of my heart. 

ard-shubhas, see ard-shonas. 

ard-shuidhear, -ir,-ean, s.m. President. 

ard-shunntach, -aiche, a. 
high spirits, mirthful, gay. 

ard-theud,tt s.f. Master-string. 

àrd-thighearna, -an, s.m. Supreme lord. 

—— m S, -ais, 8.m. 

















power. 

————-——— il, e. Lordly, proud, haughty. 

àrd-thonnach, -aiche, a. Hign-waved. 

ard-threith, gen. sing. of ard-thriath. 

ard-thriath, -threith, s.m. Supreme chief or 
ruler. 2 Hero. A. na cruinne-cé, Supreme 
Ruler of the universe. 

ard-uachdaran, -ain, San. Chief ruler,sovereign. 

_ achd, 3./f. ind.  Chiefrule, su- 
preme authority. 

àrd-uaislean, s.pl. Nobles, nobility. 2 Princes. 
8 Gentry. Tair air ard-uaislibh, contempt 
on princes. 

ard-uaislich,{{ v.a. Nobilitate. 

arduchadh, see ardachadh. 

&rd-üghdarras, -ais, 3m. Chief authority, dis- 
cretionary power. 
full authority. 





46 
sident. A. an t-seisein, Lord President of the| àrduien, see àrdaich. 


a. Dhun- | targlorach, 


8.1n. Student at a uni-| targnadh, -aidh, s.m. Robbery. 


-—achd,* &.f.índ. Philosophy. 2 Choice| targthoir, -e, -ean, s.m. Destroyer. 


Master at] targu.n, v. 


priesthood, | t 


Highly cheerful, in| àrlas, -ais, -an, 
‘tarleag, -eig, see airleag. 


Fhuair mi à., I received | armachd,.s.f.ind. Armour. 


armachd 
—- — - 
arduichear, 
arduichidh, \ see àrdai h——, 
arduichte, 


ar-ear, -ir, 8.m. better aradair. 

ar-ear, -ir, ëm. (ar+fear) Hera 

fareile, atv Other. 

a réir, prep. According to. 

a réir sin, adv. According to that. 

ar fcadh, prep. see feadh. 

ar-fhaich, -e, -ean, s.f. Field of battle. 

farfud, see air feadh. 

arfuntaich, pr.pt. ag arfuntachadh, v.e. Dise 
inhcrit, dispossess. 2 Forfeit. 

arfuntachadh, -aidh, s.m. Disinheriting, 2 

Forfeited. Na h-oighe 


Forfeiting 
arfuut.cichte, pt.part. 
reachdan a., the forfeited estates. 


targ, s.m. Chainpiou. 2 Chief, commander. 
3 Learning. 4 Ark, ship. ta.** White, 
argair,** s.&. Plunderer. 2 Destroyer. 





, v.8. Keep, herd. 

Targam, see airg, v. 

argarrach, -aich, seo agarach. 

see àrd-glilorach. 

targnach, -aich, s.m. Robber—.e. Lond,mighty. 

2**Prey. 3 
Ingenuity. 

fargnoir, see argnach. 

2 Plun- 


Lay waste. s.f. Argument. 

7----—te, a. Argumentative. 

avguinu, v.g. Argue, dispute, wrangle. 

— — —, s.f. Argument. 

— ——— -iomlan, 8 f. Syllogism. 

each, a. Dialectical. 
eachd,** sf. Argumentation. 
ear,** ëm, Discusser. 

—— ———iche.** g.m. Arguer. 

argumaid,** s. f. ind. Argument, motive, rea- 
son. Le h-argumaidibh, with urgsuments. 

——-each,** ga. Argumentative. 

——————ich * v.n. Argue, reason, 2 Foil. 

—————— -ribidh, s.f. Dilemma. 

farigh,** s.pl. Chiefs. 

farinn,** 8 f. Friendship. 

a ris, adv. see a rithist. 

a rithis, adv. Again. 2 Second time, another 
time. (Lu some parts of the Southern High- 
lands tbey say & rithistich.) 

tarladh, s.m. Kindling. 

ariain, see earlain. 

arias, -ais, see airleas. 

see farlus. 


derer. 








—ach. see àirleagach. 


ar leam, v defect. Methinks, methought, 
Supreme rule or|ar leom, 


see ar leam. 

arlogh, -oigh, Cartage of corn. Féisd anar- 
loigh, the harvest feast, harvest home. 

arm, v.a. Oilorgrease wool, 2 see armaich. 

arm, airm, dat.pl. armaibh, s.m. Weapon. 2 
Army. 3 pl. Arms, armour. Sgian, arm a 
bu mhianu leis, the knife, a weapon he was fond 
of ;thae’san arm, he is in the army ; chaidh 
e do'n arm, he joined the army; fo trmaibh, 
armed, under arms. 

+——,s.m. Origin, root, stock. 2 Father, God. 

arma, for airm. 

armach, -aiche, a. Armed. 2 Covered with ^r 
mour, mailed. 8 Warlike. Gach gaisgeach 
a., every armed hero. 

armach,* -aich, s.m. Armed person. 2 Warrior. 
Labhair an dubh a., thedark warrior spoke. 

2 Arms, 3 Feats 


of arms. Nighiad an a., they washed their 


armachd 


4? 


arrais 





armour ` a. an t-soluis, the armour of light. 

&rmadair.** a.m. Armourer. 

&riadh, -aidh, s.m. Oil or butter for anoint- 
ing wool. 2 Act of auointing wool. Ag 
a. na h-olainn, anointing the wool. 

arma‘ch, v.a. Arm, gird on arms, clothe with 
armour Armaichibh sibh féin,urm yourselves. 

e, s.m Armeurer. 

ith, futag.a of armaich. 

te, pt.part. of armaich, 

armail.** sJ. Arms, weapons, armour, 2 
Armoury. —&. Armed. 

t, -ailte, s.m. Anny. Ann ane, inan 

army; a. naim breacan, the Hiyh and Army. 

teach, -eiche, a. Trained to artus. 2 Of, 
or belouging to, an army. 3 Having great 
arniies, 

faru.ain, see àrmunn. 

farmair, -e, sf. Reproof, 

————,** g.m. Ariniger, 

——————e, see amraidn. 

fannalta, see armaichte. 

arin ralh, -aidh, s.m. Reproof, scold, check, 

arm-chaismeachd, s.f.ind, Alarm of battle, 

arm-clieard,^* sam, Armourer. 

&rum.clhlegsach, -aiche, a. Exercised in mar- 
tial feats, 

arrchliseacb, -eiche,@ Expert in battle. 2 
Alert. active. 

tAru-cliosal], s.m. Satan, the Devil. 

arin-chrenchdach, -aiche, o, Inflicting wounds. 

&rm-co:se, sm. Infantry. 

tarmed, s.m. Primitive ancestor. 

far:u-eineach, a. Destructive in war. 
like. 3 Sanguinary. 

arm-ghille, gan. Armour-bearer, 

àrmhach, -aiche, a. Destructive. 

¢——__, 8. f. Slaughter. 

ar-mhagh, -aighe, s.m. Field of slaughter or 
battle. 

tarinhaigh, s.m. Buzzard. 

fàr-mhiannach ** a. Sanguinary. 2 Warlike. 

*armhind, 3./. Respect, reverence. 

arin-lann, -na, -ainn, gan. Armoury, magazine, 
military depót, citadel. 

arm-leonach, -aiche, à. see arm-chreuchdach. 

arin-cilean, -ein, s.m. Military discipline, drill- 
ing. 

farmora;ch, sm nl. Maritime people. 
Arnnoricans—rLatives of Brittany.) 

arm-righ, s.m.  King-at-arms. 

armta, a. Armed, oiled as wool. 

arm-thaigh, sam. see arm-thaisg. 

arm-thaisg, 8.f. Armoury, military magazine. 
arm-thasgaidh, see arm-thaisg. 

farmnrtbor, s.m. Armoury. 

tarm-thur, see arm-thor. 

farmuinn, v.a. bless, rev re. 

, gen. sing. of àrmunn. 

tarmuint, see armuinn. 

armuinte, pt. part. of armuinn. 

àrmunn, -uinn, 5.?». Hero, warrior. 2 Chief, 
brave man, chieftain, chief of a clan. 8 
Officer. Air slios an àrmuinn, on the wurrior’s 
side ; sùil mheallach an àrmuinn, the winning 
eye of the hero. 

farn, airn, 3m. Judge. 

tèn, 8.f. see ara. 

tarna, prep. (or air na) After his or its. 

arrach, see eàrnach. 

Tf -rbailh, sf. Bord, surety. 2 Band. 

arna Moire (AC \—fer ara, lit. kidneys of Mary. 
A square thick Atlantic nut sometimes found 
indented in the forra of a cross. 

farnu:dh, a. Fierce, impetuous. 

aroch, a. Straight, upright. 

















(lit. 














; sich, sf. Little hamlet, village. 2! 


Summer grazing. 
sce ar-thaich, 

Àrois, gen. sing. of àros. 

faroll** -o:li, sm Great slaughter. 
wany, great deal. 

àros, "pis, An, san. House, abode, palace, hab- 
itation. 2** Settlement, apartment. An 
loisgear à. na: Fiann? shall the habitation. 
of the Fingalians be burnt ? àros nan loug, the. 
abule of ships. 

——ach, -aicne, a Habitable. 2 Abounding 
in houses or dwellings, of or belonging to a, 
house. $**Having many apart: ents. 

—-ach, -aich, -aieiiean, s.m. Inhabitant. 2 
Lodger. 3 Resident householder. 

arpag, -aig, -an, 8 f. Harpy, any ravenous crea-. 
ture. 2 Great black-beaked gull, see fars- 
pach. 3.AF) Snake, adder. 4* Triangular 
cake.—IJslay. 

ach, -aache, a. Ravenous, grasping. 

arphuntachadh, see arfuntachadh. 

arphuntaich, see artuntaich. 

tarr, s.a. Stag, hind. 


3 Residence, dwelling. 4. 


2 Great 





tarra, -ai, s.m. Treachery. 2 Pledge. 
arraban, -ain, s.m. Distress, wen Anxiety. 
sach,tt a. Sorrowful. 


arrabhaig, -e, -ean, $f. Strife, quarrel, discord. 
arra-bhalach, -aich, s.m. Traitor, treacherous 


fellow, 2*Eavesdropper. A. garg, u fierce 
traitor. 
arrach, -aich, sm. Runt. 2**Minim. 3 see 
arrachd. 
arrachar, -air, s.m. Rowing. 2 Steering. 
2 War-|arrachd. -an, 6 2. Spectre, apparition. 2 Pig- 
my, dwarf, mannikin. 3**Centaur. Uaill 


'sau o, pride in the dwarf. 
—————8, see arrachdach. 
ach, -aiche, a. Spectral, unworldly. 2 
Dwarfi-h, diminutive. 3 see arraiceach. 
ail, aile, a. see arrachdach. 
an, -ain, dim. of arrachd. 2 Fairy. 
as,** -ais, s.m. ¢tDignity. 2 Dwarfish- 
ness. št Strength, manliness, 
arra-cholas, -ais, 8.m. Power. 
arra-chogaidh, s.m. s.m. ‘The hound that first 
winds or conies up with the deer. 
tarradh, -aidh, s.m. Armament. 2 Merchan- 
dise. 3 Ornament. 
arraghaideach, -aiche, @. 
2 lule. 
arra-giloir, -e. 8.f Prattle, garrulity, idle talk. 
-——each, -eiche, a. Garrulous, given to 
prattle, nonsensical. 
arraiceach, -iche, a. Large, ample, able-hodied. 
2 Maul 3 Magravimous. 4 Courageous. 
bf Kffec'url. Mach a. treasdach, a large 
thorouy? -p ting horse. 
arraiceas, -eis, sm, 3 Power, strength, man- 


Negligent, careless, 





liness. 
&arraiceil,-eile, o, see arraiceach. 
arraichdeach, see arraiceach. 


arraichdean, s.m.pl. Jewels, precious things. 

arraichdeil,-eiie, «. see arraiceach. 

arraid, sf. Wandering, error. 2 Vice. 3 Man 
sunk invice. 4*Toiling in vain. 

,** v.a. Corrupt, deprave, make vicious. 

àrraid, a. see àraidh. 

arra deach, -eiche, a. Erratic, irregular, wan- 
deriug. 2*Wilting to no purpose. 

arraidh, a. see àraidh. 

ii , 8m pl. Evil actions, misconduct. 

arraidh,** a. Generous, liberal. 2 Hospitable. 

alraiug, -ean, sm. Stitch, couvulsions. 

tarrais,** v.n. Arrive at, reach. 

urrais.( AC) a. Evil, wicked. s. Demon. 

—,** &.f. Joy, pleasure, 2 Streaming, run- 

nins. 











arral 


ooo naam 
arral, -ail, s.m. Foolish pride, fastidionsness. | 


2 ttInsolence. | 
-———ach, -aiche, a. Disdainful, squeamish, in- 
solently nice, fastidious. 
¢arroch, v.a. Govern, command. s 
arronach, -aiche, a. Becoming, fit, suitable. 2: 
Decent. | 
,8 J. Fitness, suitableness, 2 De- 
centness. 
tarronaich, v.n. Fit, suit. 
—e, comp. of arronach. 
arronta. a. Bold, brave, daring. 2 Confident. 
3 High-spirited. 4 Suitable. 6 Competent, 
Ttilutrepid. 8ftStout. Fior-dheas a., truly 





active and bold. 
————chd, 8f. Boldness, bravery. 2 Con- 
fidence. 


farruig, see araichd. 

farruiseach, a Obvious. 

&rrusg, -uisg, 3m. Awkwardness, 2 Indecency. 

ars’, see arsa. 

arsa, v.defect. Said, quoth. | The a of the Gaelic 
really belongs to the pronoun, ''sé'' or ‘si’ — 
ar sé, said he ; ar sì, said she.) This verb is 
never used with propriety, except iu express- 
ions corresponding to said I, said he, &c. 













In the order of syntax, the nom. case never |- 


precedes this verb, not even by poetical li- 
cense ; this forms the distinction between it 
and the correspouding thubhairt. It is right 
to say *duine athubnairt sin," wrong to say 
*duine ar-a sin," à man who said ther. Ars’ 
an ceannaiche, saith the buyer: ars’ òighean 
nan aodann gràdhach, said the maids of the 
lovely visages. 

àrsachd, better àrsaidheachd. 

arsadair,* see àrsair. 

arsadh, -aidh, 3m. Antiquity, age. 

arsaich,** v.a. Antiquate. 

àrsaidh, a. Old, superannuated, uld-fazh‘oned, 
ancient, antique. 

~ ,** ean, s.m. One who relates tra (rs, 

àrsaidheachd, gr. Antiquity. 2 Antiquariaaisin. 

àrsaidhear, -eir, -an, &.m. see àrsair. 
-—achd, see arsaireacud. 

àrsair, s.m. Antiquary. 

-eachd. 8.f. Antiquarianism. 

ar-sainhraidh,** 3.m. Fallow ground. 

arsannach,ft -aich, s.m. Guest. 

àr:antach, à Old, antique, ancient. 2 Old. 
fashioned. 3 Fond of the study of antiquities. 

arseap,* see arctreud. 

arsfhear, see arsair. 

arsoaig, -e, 3.f. Arsenie. 

arsneal, see airtneal. 

- ach, -aiche, see airtnealach. 

&rson, seo air son. 

arspag,fl et, Great black-beaked gull. 

Ama 

àrsuidh, SS: 
+arsnigh, } see àrsaidh. 
+Art, airt, s.m. God. 

tart, airt, sm. Bear. 2 Flesh. 3 Limb, joint. 
——, a. see tartach. 

art, airt, s». Stone. 2 House. 8 Tent. 
Tarruing art, a loadstone ; gach réile-art, 
every shining pebble. 

tartach, -aich s.m. Quarry. 2 Stony gronnd. 

———,-aiche, a. tNoble, great, worthy, illus- 
trious, exalted. 2 Stony. 

&rtan,** -ain, s.m. Little stone, pebble. 

artarach,** -aich, s.m. Sbip’s boat. 

tart-chaileir, sf. Qu'rry. 

farthrach,-aich, em. Boat, wherry. 2 Ship. 

tarthraich, v.a. Navigate. 2 Enlarge. 


- ie i See fairtlich. 
, 











` D 


48 


asaibh 

tartragham, v.a. I do make. 

artreud, e an. Transposed furm of Eng retreat. 

ari-theine, $.m. (ht. fire stone) Flint. 

&ruinu,-e,-ean, &.f. see arn. 2 Forest, pre» 
ds. 





. perly a deer-forest 3ttBoun 
&rus, see aros. 
farusg, -uisg, sm. Neck. 


&rusg, see arrusg. 

as, prep. Outof, from out. [48 drope the & 
when followed by a consonant.) & taigh 
Bà daorsa, out of the house of bolage.; as a 
chéile, loosened, asunder ; as A" mhaciair, out 
of the field; an ann & Tuatha tna si ba 
are you from the North? thug i sgreuc” asda, 
she gave a shriek ; tha sinn vs na geasan aice , 
we are free from her spells ` spiou as a vinnm 
e, eradicate it ; thug iad an car asam, they 
cheated me; tha iad as mo déch, they are 
after me; as an Eadailt, from Italy ; tha iad 
ag iomairt á lamhan a cnéile, they under- 
stand one another, there is collusiun hetween 
them (lit. trey are each playing out of the 
ether's hand); thubhairt iad e á beula chéile, 
they said it simultaneously. 
Coiabined with the personal pronouns thus: 


1 Sing. asam, Plur. asainn, 
= asad, asaibh, 
AS, 7n. 
R aiste, f. } asta, m. & f. 


Emphatic forms. 
1 Sing. asam-sa. as:un-fhéin ; 
asainn-fiiéin, 
2 Sing. asad-sa, «sad-fhéin ; pl. asajbh-se, asa 
aibh-fuéin. 
8 Sing. (m.^as-san, as-fhéin; ( f.) aiste-se, ais. 
te-fhéin ; pl. asta-san, asta-f'iéin. 
as, prep. pron. aste Out of him or it. 2 From 
him or it. [£mphatic—aa-san, a«-fhéin.] 
Tha m: inór as, Z am proud of him; cha d'thng 
mi ni sam bith as, I took nothing out; dubn 
as, blot out; tna 'n solus air dolas, the light 
has gone out ; cuir asda, destroy him or it; 
chaidh as da, he perished; chaidh e as, he 
escaped, ; leiz as, let go; leig as e, let him or it 
go; cia es? udu.) whence? cia as a thàinig 
sibh? cia as duibh? where did you come 
from ? chuir an t-eagal as da, fear deprived 
him of his senses, or killed him. 
fas, 8.f. sve asal. 
tas, ais, s.m. Milk. 2 Beer, ale. 
fas, v.a. Kindle, asa fire. 2**Do. 38**Make. 


pl. asainne, 


fas, v. defect. see is. 
as,tpriv. part. Not, uns. 
a’s, prep. (anns) In. (Generally used when 


speaking of the seasons as—a's t-Earrach, in 
the Spring ; a’s t-samhraidh, as t-fhoghar, 
in the summer, in the autumn. "Asa geamh- 
radh” is not used for in the winter.) 

a’s, conj. see agus. 

a’s, sign of the Ist. comparative in Gaelic 
when translated by the superlative in Eng. 
(a, rel. pron.+v. is.) Oigh a’s gile làmh, 
maid of the fairest hands; fear a’s léithe colg, 
a man of the greyest hair. 

tasa, see fasa. 

+——ch, -aich, sm. Shoemaker. l 

WR a. Shod. 2 Milky, watery. 3 Like beer 
or ale. 

as a chéile, adv. Asunder. 

as a thall, ado Mad. (Out of his senses.) 

asad, prep.pron. (as+tu) Out of thee, from 
thee, in thee, on thee. [Emphatic : asad- 
sa, asad-fhéin.] Tha mi ag earbsadh asad, 
I trust in you. - 

tasadh, adi, s.m. Anchoring, resting, settling. 
asaal-sa, Amphatic of asad, 

&sa.bh, prep. pron. (as+sibh) Out of you, from 


asaibh 49 aslonnadh 








you, n vou, on you. [ZE;npkatic: asaibh-se, | ascaoin, -e, 4. Harsh. 2 Inclement. 8 Un- 





assivu- ‘héin. ) kind. 4Stubborn. Caoin air ascacin, inside 
asaicute,** a. & pt. part. Shod. out. 
asaid, v. & 8. - see. aiseal. —— ——— , -e,8 f. Harshness. 2 Unkindness. 3 
asaidh, gs. stay. of asadh. Enmity. 4 Curse. 6 Kxcommu.ication. 6 
t , see fasadh. Iuciemeacy, Tionndadh a. na siue gu tlàths, 
f———, v.n., Rebel, revoit. turn to mildness the in lem ney of the binst. 
a aig, s f. see Asui"g. ————— , v.a. Curse. 2 Excommuuicate. 
asai., g-n.sing. of asai. ————-each, -eicae, a. Fierce. 2 Of. or be- 
——eay, (AF, sf. Stormy petrel, storm-finch,| longing to a curse, 3 Harsh. 4 inciewnent. 
a.aimoati. eachd, sf, "ag, Brucality, ferocity, 


axa.0,(AF) see asal. savageness, churiisnuess. 
&ninn,$.f. see àsuing. eadh,** -nidh, s.m. Act of cursing, or 
asainn. prep. pron. Out of us, from amongst us.| 2 excommunicating. 

(Emphatic: asainne, asainu-fhé;n.] —————— -eaglais ** s”, Excommunication, 2 
èsaiuueach, a. Well furuisbed. Cursing, comminerion. 

asair.§ can, s.m. Common tich, v.a. Curse. 2 Excommunirate, 
asarum—asarum europa- | ascart, -airt, s.m. Tow, coarse lint. Suath- 
um. wie ainn ascairt, a thread of tow. 
-——, v.a. see asairich. fascath, s.m. soldier, combatant. 

,-e,-ean, $.m. Shoe-|as-cbroub,(AF) s.m. Dry cow. 

maker. 2 Harness of &8|ascnadh,-aidh, see asgeadh, 

horse, equipags. — . | tascnaim, v.n. Leo, enter. 
asaireadh, sam. Decline, di- | tas-chu, -choin, s m. Water dog, eel, conger eel, 

sease of sheep. ascull, see asgali. 
asairich, D.O. Harness. asda, see asia. 
tasait,|| s.f. Parturition. j|asdail, s. Binding. 
tas-aitich,** Abandon, quit, asdar, -air, see astar. 

evacuate. 2 Put out off. ach, see astarach. 

place. 3 Eject. asdolach, o. "lrausitive in gram. 
Saal, -ail, s.f. Ass. A’ mar-|a seadh, see seadh. 

cachd air asail, riding on | a seo suas. adv. ilenceforth. 











15. Asair. Gn ass ; mac na h-asail,| as eugmnais, prep. Without. 
a donkey coit. asgacn, -aich, -aichean, ¢ m. Winnower. 
asalach,** -aiche, a. Asinine. asgaidn. s.f. Boon, presat. 


asam, prep. pron. (as+mi) Outof me, from |asgaill, gen. sing. of asgall. ) 
me, on me, in me. [Emphatic : asam-sa, as- |- each, -4icne, a. Axi lar, axillar”. 





am-fhéin.] asgailt, -e, -ean, s.f. Retreat, shelter. |Some- 
fasan, -ain, s.m. Staff. 2 see osan. 3 see| timescovfused with asgall.] 
ansa. —adv. There, then. asgain, pr.part, ag asgnadh, v.n. Ascend, 
as an aghaidh, adv. To the face. mount, climb. y 
fasantadh, -aidh, s.m. Mutiny, sedition, se- | asgair, -e, -eau, &.f. Chronicle, record. 
bellion. asgairt, see ascart. 
as aonais, see as eugmhais. asgal, -ail, see ascall. 
fasard, -aird, s.m. Debate. 2 Assertion. asgall, -aill, -ean, s.m. Bosom, breast, armpit. 
t--——ach, a. Litigious, quarrelsome. 2 Embrace. [Sometimes confused w iu aa, 
t-- —-aiz, s.m. Litigious person, disputant. gailt.] Thug mi do d’ æ., 2 gave to thy boven. 
&sarlacud,** s.f.ind, Conjuration, magic. 2 In-|asgan,-ain, Grig, merry creature. 2 Dwarf. 
toxication. 8 Anything beluw the natural size. 


fasgath,** see fascath. 


&sarlaigheachd, see asarlachd. 
asgnadh, -aidh, s.m. Climax in gram. 2t 


as a seo, adv. Hence, out of this y 
tas-bheanailt, 8.7. Exception. Mounting, climoing, ascending, 
asbhuain, s find. Stubble. A. an àite cón-|asgnag, see fasgnag. 

lach, stubble instead of straw. [In some asgnail, et, 

laces '*cónlach" means stubble too. | i asguill, see asgall. 
asbhuaineacn.** a. Having stubble, stubbly. | asgul, 
&sbauainicue,** s.m. Stubbler, creature tnat'fasguidh, see an asguidh. 

grazes among stubble. 2 Starveling. 3 in fauon,s.f. Crown. coronet. 





ridicule, a probationer of the Churen. ! as-innleachd, pl. an, Destructive artifice. 
fasc, aisc, -an, s.m. Snake, adder. 2 Newt. | ————--——ach, -aiche,a@. Plottirg mischief, 
tasca bh, -aich, s.m. Escape. | conspiring, contriving, mischievous. 
tasvaich, v.n. Escape. 8 8103, see sìos. 
ascaill, gen.sing. of ascall. las is as, adv. Altogether, out and out. 
fascaüm, v. I enquire, ask, beg. aslach, -aich, -aichean, see aslachadh. 


aslachadh. -aidh, s.m. Entreating, earnest 
acair, s.m. Apostrophe (’) in gram. supplication. 2 Conjurement. Aga-—, pr. 
&scaird, Gent. pt, of ascard for ascart. art. of aslaich. 
ascuirt, sf. Budding, sprouting. 2 gen.sing. | aslachair,** s.m. Asker, entreater. 
of ascart. laslachan, see achlasan. 
ascill, -aill, $.m. Loss. 2 Onset, attack. 3 ! asiadh,** -aidh, s.m. supplication, entreaty. 
Couference. 4 Flowing of the tide. 5 Man-|aslaich, v.a. Supplicate, beseech, request, en- 
gling. 6 Personal contempt. 7 Miscreant. | treat. Na’naslaicheadh tu, if thou wouldst 
8 Maaglel carcase, carrion. A. earraich, ` entreat. 
loss of cattle in spring; an t-a. a rion tàir ' aslaich, s.f. Bosom, breast, arinpit. Sgian as- 
oiran, the miscreant who has reviled us. ! laich, dirk; ‘na aslaich, in his bosom. 
—, sf. se» asgull. j aslounach, -aiche, d. Prono to tell, tattling. 
; 9. Mauglel. aslonnadh, -axlb, s.m. Discovery, telling. 


ascain, see awsgain. 








as loth ` 50 ach 














wers E D Be CEET, " 
ns Lob, prep. On behalf of, for the sake of. obair air gach crois alt tha na collainu as 
astach 1h, \ -— uigeacn, with a shaking to work upor each 

: Cod e E q a D D 2 
asluich, cross-joint that i8 in her weil-furnish»a (ith 
asna. see aisne. tools, machinery d&c.) body.—-Filidh nam 
fasnach, for aisnean, m. pl. of aisean. Beann. Duine à, a mun who hes a reat 
——_———ailh, see aslachadh. variety of tools or implements ready to hana. 
asnadh, see aisne. 2 see asgnadh. asning, -e, -ean, 8f. Appatatus, tools, imple- 
asnag, see fasgnag. meuts, instrumenta, uteasils. 

ach,** see fasgnagach. —each, eiche, a. Well furnished with im- 

&snaican, v. see aslaich, plements, tools, tackle, &c. 
as-Onoir, see eas-onoir. asuinn, see asainn. 
asp, -a, -an, sm. Asp. 2 Adder. àsuinn, see àsuing. 
aspaic, see asp. |as ur, adv. Anew, afresh. 2 Recentls, lately. 


aspainn, see asohuain. 'S cinnteach gu'n robh |at, s.m.ind. Swelling, tumour. 2 Protuber- 
ise làn iospaina isaspuinn, it is certain that| ance, prominence. At ban, o while sve ling. 
she was stujed full of sausages and tow.— at, ma aty agat. (& acadhj v.a. Swell, puff 


Duanaire p. 33. up, Decometumid. Tua m’aodano air at, 
asparag,} -aig, 8.7. Asparagus. see creamh na| my face is swollen, 

muice fadhaich. tata, simple pres ot B). 
asradh, -aidh, s.m. Harnessing. ata, see ad. 


àsran, -ain, -an, 8.5. l'orlorn object. 2 Desti-|atach, -aich, s.m. Request. 2 Fermentation. 
tute wanderer. 3 see ath-aodach. 

———ach, -aich, s. m. Stranger, guest, travel-| tatà 'd, v. (for tha iad) They are  Ni's millse 
ler, wayfaring taan, rover, rambler. na mil ata "d. sweeter are they than heney. 


fasrus. s.f. (aisir) Path, way, foot-path. aadh, -aidn, sm. Swellivg, tumour. Ag a—, 
yassain. s.m.pl. Plates. greaves. pr.pari. of at 

tas seadh, adv. Itis so, yes. ataich, v.n. Entreat, request. 

faasnai, see asbhuain. ataid, see atà'd. 


asta, prep.pron. (astiad) Out of them, from | &taig, -e, -ean, &./. Palisade, stake, palo. à 
them, in them, on them. [Emphatic : asta-| (CR) Hurdle, **lake"— wW. coast of Rusa. 
san, asta-(héin.] Tavaii,** a. Deal. 

a staigh, adv. In, within. (lit. in the house.) | tataim,v. (for tha mi) f am. 


Nee note on a mach. rAtàim, [I am] The name of God. 
astail, -e, ean, s.f. see fasdail. 2 s.m. Con-|tatainheaehd, sf. Redemption. 

temptible fellow. atal:n-e, emphatic form of atàim. 
astair, see astaraich. (Stam. s. rt, Furze, gorse, sec couasg. (attin) 
astal,** ail, s.m. Javelin, spear, pike, 2 Pike-|ataireachd, see atmhoirenchd 

staff. 3 Chip, lata. itatais, s.f. Woe. grief, lamentation. 


astar. -air, -an,s.m. Journey. 2 Space, distance. | tataiseach, a. Blasonhemous. 
3 Wav, path. — 4. mór, a great distance ; a.'atamich,* a. Fondling, indulgent, caressing, 
thrì ià.thean, a three days’ journey; a. math| lenient. partial. 
air falbh, a ood disiance array; fad air a., d.* af. Fondling, lenience, partiajity. 
far away, as a ship ; a' dol fo q., going und-r| Gunu a. do dhnine seach duine, wifhomt par- 
way, a’ gearradh a h-a., cutting her way;thug. tiality to anyone. 
o gu t., hesped ` aira. gu dian. journeying | atamaich,* v.a. Fondle, caress, indulge. 
with speed ; à, nam faobh, the path of spoils or ! tata:naid, v. (Jor tha sinn) We are, 
conavest ` chluinntea lh an saitraica d. cian, | ataa, -ain, s.m., dim. of at. Cap. 2 Garland. 
their tread was heard at a great distance; ag! tataoir, (for tha thu) Thou art. 
a. o'near, travelling from the East. jaar, (AC) see a*mhor. 
ach, -aiche, a. Journeying, travelling. 2! tatath-oi, ( for tha sinh) Yon are. 
Speedy, expeditious. at-ban,l| s.m. The white swelling. (Preceded 
—-—aich, v.n. Travel, journey, go. ?ttMarch.| bythe ariicle an t-.] 
—-aiche,  -traichean, s.m. Pedestrian, | at-bràzhad,l s.m. Quinsy. 
tatchiu. (for chi mi) I see, or shall seo. 

















traveller. 
air, s.m. Porter. at-chuisle, s.m. Aneurism, disease of the ar- 
——-—an, n.pl. of astar. | teries. 
anaiche,** gm. see astaraiche. i at-fhuachd, s.m. Chilblain. 


tastas, s.m. Spear, javelin. 2 Missile weapon.'ath, a. Next, again. An ath uair, the gett time, 
asta-sin, emphat. form of asta. ; or next hour; 'san a. dhorus, in the next door; 
a steach, adv. In, into. Chaidh iad a steach, | taghlaido bó a h-ath-bhuaile. œ cow will re- 
they went tn. See note on a mach. | sort to her fold acain (if the pasture be goo) ; 
as-tharruing, -e, -ean, 8./. Abstract. 2 Ex-| daa, ath-bhuailte, bold, twice beaten, «and 
traction, drawing out. | tryiug again); obair is ath obair. work und 
—-,** va. Abstract. 2 Extract. work again, ( work badly done at first); dhean- 
—-eadh, em. Abstracting. 2 Ex-; adh Fionn an ath chadal, F. would tuke @n- 
other sleep; gaoth an ath thionndaidh, the 











tracting. 
a stigh, see a staigh. | eddy-wind. 
astrachadh,** -aidh, s.m Travelling, journey- |ath-, prefiz, Repetition, corresponding with 
ing. Aga—, pr. part. uf astaraich. ; English res. 
astradh, -aidh, (AC) Fastness. Air a. a'|àth. sam md Ford, any part of a river that is 
ghlinne, in the fastness of the glen. fordable. ath nan sul, the corner of the eyes; 
astraichean,** n.pl. of astaraiche. aig athaibh Arnoin, at th» fords of Arnon ; is 
astranach,** -aich, see astaraiche. fheàrr tilleadh am meadhon an àth na bath- 


adh uile, better turn in the middle of the ford 
than drown yourself com»letely. 

ath, àtha, pl. an, & -annan, s.f. Kiln, 'N 
uair bha sinn ‘san ath le chéile, when we were 


@ snas, see suas. 
asuibh, see asaibh. 

asuig, see asuing. 

eacn, sce asuingeach. 'S crith gu h- 


— À— Á—— 





ath 


in the Kin together; air son mo chuid-sa dhe’n | 
ghraa savhadh an ath teine, Jor my part of the | 
rain let the kiln take Jive. 

atn. v.n. Flinch, shrink, hesitate. 2 Refuse. 3 
Plush. Na sedid acu athadh an cruaual, 
the heroes that would not flinch in time of 
hardship. 

tatha, see aimsir. 

athach, -aich, s.m. Giant, champion. 2 Mon- 
ster. 3 Yeowan, husbandman. Chunnaic 
sinn athaich, we saw yiun: s. 

,-Aiche, a. Bashiul, modest, timid. 2 
Monstrous, gigantic. 3 Clownish. 4 Sparing, 
pitying. Ogana h a., a basnful youth ; b’ 
a. an torc a mhill e, monsirous was the boar 
tha: d.stroyed him. 

, -aico, 3.m. Space. 2 Waves. 3 Blast. 
breeze. 4 Fermentation. 5 Desire, request. 

athadh, -aidh, s.m. Fear, cowardice, timidity. 
2 Modestv, bashfulness. 3 Reverence, hom- 
ace. 4 Shame. 65 Blush. 6 Daunt.  7** 
Gust or blast of wind Duine gun nàire gun 
a.. & man without shame or reverence of fare ; 
| eul an atna.dh agus an anmoisn, a2 the J AU 
0: “ear «..d la ness. 

atia:ch, gen. sing. & n. pl. of athach. 

vn. Abasi 

fathaile, a. f. Inatiention neglect. 

&ina:ilt, -e,-ean, San. DIArK, scar, 
lon. 9 Vescige, trace. see ail. 

each, -e che. a. Full of scars or marks, 
causing & scar or wark, of or pertaining to a 
scar. 

atha.a, gen. sing. of athan. 

ath-ainm, -e, pi. -ean, & -meannan, s.m. Nick- 
name. 

&:haiune, see aithinne. 

athaintean, pl. of athainne. ( for aith'nnt an.)| 

atnair, athar, pl. aithriche & -ean, s.m. Fatuer, 
ancestor. 

-ainmeach, a. Patronyni‘cal. 

-baistidh, sm. GodZa.Ler. 

———— -ceile, s.m. Father- n-lew. 

e, for aithrichean, aa. of at hair. 

¢——_eaz,** -e1ig, 8$. P. Vaternal aunt. 

ealachd, s. f. Fatheriiness. 2 Affection- 
ateness, kindness. 

——-—eil,-e, a. Fatherly, paternal. 

-faosaid, 8. am. Fatner confessor. 

ich, v.a. Adopt. *a:aer. 

-hath,§ atnar.. &c., om, Garden sage, | 

salvia oficinalis, **Movnta:n sage. 

-lus, -uis, s.m. Ground ivy. 

shlat thalmhainn. 

-mhaoin s.m. Patrimony. 

-mħhort, 8.1n. see a.-nihortadh & a.- | 

mhortair. | 

-mhortach, -aiche, a. Parricidal. 

-mhortadh, -aidh, s.m. Parricido (act.) | 

«mhortair, s.m. Parricide (person.) 

-neimh, see nathair-nimhe. 

-thalmhainn,§ s.m. Yarrow. 
chosgadh na fola. 

athais, s.f. Leisure, eass. 2 Personalty. 3 
sve aithis. A’ cheud a. a blitneas orm, the: 
Jirst opportunity J get ; em dad a., without 
any leisure ; am bheil tnu air t a. ? are you at | 
l-isure ? air t'a., aras! ! koldon! ! 

. 9.0. see ta this. I 

——eacu, -eiche, a. Slow, tardy. 2 see} 


a 


aithiseach. i 














impress- 





























see iadh- 























see lus 








eacn, -eich, -an, 8.m. Diiatory person. 2; 
see wichiseach. 
—— —eac.id, 8. f. ind. Slowness, laziness. 2**; 


Easiness. | 
———ell,** a. Anodyne. | 
;ch,* v.n. Get calmer, abate, as rain. 2 





61 


| athal 


atharrais 


ease. 3 seo aithis. 

ath-aitnris, v.a. Repeat, imitate. 

, ail, s.m. see adhal & aingeal. 

t-——. a. Deaf. 

athamanachd, see anmoch. 

athan, -ain, sm. Little iord, shallow part of 
river reaching from bank to bank. 

na, pl. of athan. è. lordain, the fords of 
Jordan. 

athan,? -ain, s.m. Colt’s-foov, see ciuas-liath. 

a thaobh, prep. Regarding, according. 

0 n s.m. Cast-off clo.hes. 2 New 
cloth. 

ath-aoil, s. f. Lime-kiln. 

athar, -air, sm. Sky, firmament. 








9 


d Atmos- 
phere, air, cloud. 3 Dregs of a disease. 4* 
vil effects of auything. Agus riun Dia an 
t-a., and God mad» the yirmament ; tha 'n t-a. 
dorch, the atmosphere ts dark or hazy ; a. na 
griuthaich, the evil effects of the measles; a. dil, 
the ee of a debauch; bithidh thu an athar 
sinri d bheò. yeu will feel the effects of that 
as long aà you live. 
, gen. sing. of athair. 
ae 


ach, a. ses atharail. 


achd, s. f. ind. Airiness. 

ag, -aig, an, 8.f. Aérial being. 

ail,-e, a. Ethereal, atinospheric, airy, 

aérial. 2 Glorious. 

ais,** s. f. Mimicry, mocking. 

crous gesticulation. 

-amhare, s.m. Aéroscopy, observation 
of the air. 

f———4dha, s.m. One's Native country. 

t dha, a. Fatherly. 

———edlas, s.m. Aéromancy, aérology, art of 
divining by the air. 

t gadh, -aidh, s.m. 
2 Adoption. 

t gaibh, s. f. Importunity, solicitation. 

athar-gneasachd,11f s. f. Aéromancy. 

&thar-:ü], -iùil, s. /. aéro.op , aéromancy. 

la, -an, £. f. Quey, heifer. 

¢——mbhactadh, s.m. Parricide. 

athar-mhéidh, -ean, s. f. Baromecer, aérometer. 

atharnaca, -aich, s.f. Second crop. 2 (AH) 
Ground from which potatoes or turnips have 
been lifted. 

2tt 


tatharrach, 4. 
Foreign. 

——, -aich, s.m. Stranger, alien. 2 Alter- 
ation, change. Nach fa.ceadh call an athar- 
raich, who would not see d stranger lose ; cha 
d' thainig a. riamh, another never came ; cha 
'ne math an a. à th’ air "aive, it is not the 
interest of another he has in view. Chan 'eil 
atharrach agad r’a dh»anamh, you have no 
alternative ; cha’n’eil wath 'na d., there is no 
good tna change ; cha robih thu riami air o, 
you were never otherwise ; cba'n 'eil a. air, 
there is no help for ii. 

—adh, -aidh, s.m. Change, alteration. 
2 Removal, flitting. 3 Version. 4 Another. 
Ag a—, pr. part. of atnarraich. Changing. al- 
tering, removing, flitting. A. giulain,an appo- 
site line of conduct ; is mór an t-e. a thàinig 
air, there is a great change in him. 

—ail, a. Changing. 2 Cuangeable, un- 
steady. 3 Alternative. 

&tharraich, pr.pt. ag atharrachadh,v.a.Change, 
alter. 2 Remove, flit. 3 Turn. 4 Budge. 5 
Translate. Dh’a. iad an aodach, they chang- 
ed their clothes; a shaor axus a dh'a. sinn, that 
delivered and translated us. 

————te, pr.pa L of asharraich 

atharrais, pr.pt. ag atharrais, v.a. Mimic, imi- 




















t 





2 Ludi- 











Sharp engagement. 








Strange, curious, droll. 





atharrais B2 a. Mh-ehomain 














tate. Aga. ormsa, mimicking me. retrieve. 
——————,** s. f. Mimicry, foolish repetition. : eadh, -idh, s.m. Regaining, re- 
Ag a—, e. "ar of atharrais. covering, repossessing. 
-———— -beulain, s.f. see aithris-bheulain. |ath-bhuille,** s.m. After-clap. 
athar: aiseach, -eiche, Mimical. fathcaoid, see acaid. 
atbarraiseil, -e, tia, Mimica ——vach, see acaideach. 
atharraisich, v.a. see atharrais. ath-chadal, Second sleep. Rudhadh shuas’sa 
at:ar-shedladair, s.m. Aéronaut. mhoch m^aduinn, dheanadh Fionn an ath- 
athar-shedladaireachd, s. f. ind. Aérostation. chadal, when there uas a rosy sky at dawn 
athar-thomhas, -ais, s.m. Aérometry. (sigu of bad weather) F. wouid take another 
——— -thir, -e, sf. One's native country. sleep. 
athas,** ais, s.m. Victory. ath-chagainn, pr. pt. ag ath-chagnadh, v.n. 
athbhach, -aich, s.m. Strength. Chew again, ruminate. 5 Chew the cud 
ath-hhàrr, -a, -an, s.m. Second crop, after | ath-chagnach, a. Cud-chewing. 2 Ruminating. 
erop. Ainmhidh a., an animal that chews the cud. 
athbbas, -ais, s.m. Second death. ath-chaguadh, -aidh, s.m. Chewing of the cud. 


atb-bheaehd, -an, s.m. Retrospect. 2 Second| 2 Rumination. 
thought, after-thought, consideration, recou- | ath-chairich, v.a. Repair, remend. 


sideration. ath-cbant, s.f. Granting of a charter. 2 Renew- 
aich, v.n. Look steadfastly or a sec-| al of a lease. 
ondtime. 2 Reconsider. ath-chaithte, «. Worn out, cast off. 


ath-bheothachadh, -aidh, s.». Reviving, rekind-|ath-chan ich, see ath-chningich. 

ling, refreshing, reanim^ting, quickening. [e cM s. f. Singing again. 

Rian do bhriathran tn’a., your words have re-i tathchaoin, -e, s f. Complaint. 

vived me. Ag a—, pr.pt. of ath-bheothaich. |ath-charamh, s.m. Repairing, second mending. 
ath-bheothachail, a. Reviving, quickening, re-| ath-chas, v.a. Rotwist. 

kindling. ath-cuasadaich, -e. s.f. Second coughing. 
ath-bheothaich, wm -achadh, v.a. Revive, re- | ath-chasaid, s.f. Second charge, second com- 

refresh, rekindle, reanimate, quicken, sharp-| plaint or accusation. 

en, excite. A. an gealbhan, rekindle the fire. | ath-ciasta, a. Retwisted. 2 Strongly twisted. 

——idh, /fut.af.a. of ath-bheothaich. | ath-cheangal, -ail. gau, Rebinding. 2 Renew- 

te, past pt. of alofan agreement, 





ath-bheum, -an, s.m. Second wound or hurt. |ath-cheannach, -aich, s.m. Repurchasing, re- 
ath-bhlas,** s.m. Aíter-taste. - demption. Ag a—, pr.pt. of ath-cheanuaich. 


ath-bhliadhna, s.f. Next year. 2 Second year.! Aga. na h-aimsir, redeeming the time. 
Mu'n tràth seo an ath-bhliadhna, about this | —ada, -aidh, s.m. Soe ath-chean- 
time nezt year. nach. í 

ath-bhliochd, s.f. Second milking, after-milk-;ath-cheannaich, pr zt, ag ath-cheannach [ & 
ing. 2*Second month after calving. Dhair-; -cheannaciach**] v.a. Redeem, repurc ise. 
eadh as a h-a. a’ bho, the cow was lined the —te, pl.vt. of ath-:heannaich. 














second month after calving. ath-cheannsaich,* va. Recoiuquer, subdue a 
ath-bhrachaidh,** et Malt-kiln. second time. 2 Retrieve. 
ath-bhreith, s. f. After-birth. 2 Second birth, | ath-cheasnachadh, -aidh, s.m. Re-examination. 

regeneration. 31ISecond judgment. ath-cheasnaicaà, pr.pt.ag « th-cheasnachadh,v.a. 
at-bhriathar, -air, s.m. Tautoiogy, repetition.| Re-examine. 

£**secondhand saying. tath-cheileabhras, s.m. Second farewell. 
atu-bhriathrach, -aiche, a. Tautolovical. ath-cheumnachadh, -aidh, s.m. Repacing. 2 

28, -als, s.m. "lautology. Recapitulation. 


ath-bhriathraiche, s.m. Tautolozist. 2**Onelath-cheumnaich, v.a. Repace. 2 Recapitulate. 
who uses secondband expressiuns. 3 One!ath-chlaon,* v.a. Relapse into error. 2 Devi.te 
vino repeats tediously. | «second time. 

tatt- bro, v.a. Resuscitate, reawaken. ———————nadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Further 

&th-Urrosnachadh, -Aidh, s.m. Rallying, rein-, error or offence. 2 Second deviation. 
sring with conrage. 2 Resuming of courage. | ath-chleamhnas, -ais, s.m. Connection by a 
Ag 4—, pr.part. of ath-bhrosnaich. Ag ar! second marriage. Is fuar cornunn an ath- 
n-a., rallying us. | chleamhnais, cold are the connections of a 

at:-b>rosnaich, pr.ot.ag ath-bhrosnachadh,v.a.! first mrrriage after a se‘ond. [see note vader 
Raliy, re-encourage. 2 Resume courage. “ath-chneach.”” j 

——— te, past pt. of ath-bhrosnaich. ath-chluich,** e, sf. After-gam». 

at 1-bhuail, pr.pt. ag ath-bhualadh, v.a. Strike! ath-chnamh, -a, s.m. Second digestion. 3 

or beat again. 2 Re-thrash. C’uime nach d'; Second concoction. 

a. thu do shleagh? why did you not restrike' ath-chneadh, -eidh, -neidhean, sf. Second 





uocr spear ? wound. Isléigh fear ao ath-chneidh, the man 
atb-bhuaile, see noteunder ath. of the first wound is surgeon (for a second—aih 
ath-.huailidh, fut.af.a. of ath-bhuail. signifying a second to come.) — 'Th'« sentence 
1«.th-bhuailt, adv. Again. and the one given under *'ath-ch'eanihnaa"* 


ath-bhuailte, past pi. of ath-bhuail. Sgrios; show that ''ath-" does not always signify 
a.. double destruction ; gu brata na pilliba a.,j agan, but sometimes first implying a second 
never come back reconquered; diva ath-' to come. 





bhu silte, bold, twice beat^n. d ‘ath-chog, v.n. Rebel. : i 
- -——~-ach, a. Restrixiny. 2 Reconquering. , ————adh, -aidh, s.m. Tasurrectiou, rebellion. 
ath-bhuain, v.a. Cut down or shear again. 'ath-choimbearan, -ain, s.m. Register. 


ath-bhualadh, -aidh, s.m. Second striking. 2 ath-choimhre, sf. Abridgment. - 
Recoaquering. 3 Repercussion. »t+Reaction. | ath-choisich, v.n. Repass, travel again retrace. 





&ih-biuannaich, v.a. Regain, recover. | ————te, pt.pe Repassed, ret aselled, 
— —————te, € a. Regained, recov-| retraced. a 
ered. 2 Restored. ath-chouiain. -e, ean, s.f. Second obligation. 


ath-bhuidhinn, oo. Regain, recover, repossess, 2 Recompense, requital, retaliation. 


ath-chomsir — 53 ath-gh'ante 








ath-chomair, -e, a. see ath-chuimir, repay. s 
tath-chomhairc, v.a. Shout again. ath-anioladh, -aidh, s.m. Remitai, repayment, 
ath-chomhairle, -an, 3... Second thought. 2| refu «ing, restitution. 2 Retaliation. Ag 
Second advice. &—, pr.pt. of ath-di io!. 
—— achadh, -aidh, s.m. Re-advis- , atii-diriolta, a. Requited, repaid, recompenused. 
ing, re-admonishing. —————ch. a. Meven;zeiul, vivdictivo. 


&th-chombhairlich, v.a. Re-advise, re-admonish. | ath-dhreacia.ih, -aidh, s.m. Shaping again, 
———— ———————te, pt. pt. Re-advised, re-ad-| remodelling. 


monished. ath-dhruid, v.a. Reshut, close again. 
fath-chomharaich, v.a. Ask. — — —-.—4e, pt. pt. of «th-daru d. 
&th-chomh.rraich,** s.a. Countermark. ath-diüblachadh, -aidh. sm. Eedoubling, re- 
ath-chosdas, -ais, 8.3. Afcercost. duplication. Ag a—, pr.pt. of ath-duublaicn. 
&tli-chràdb, -àidh, s.m. Sec nd pain or torment. | ath-dbublaich, v.a. Redonbie. 
ath-chre, s.m. Brick-kiln. ———————te, pt.pt. cf ath-dhablaica, 
Atb-chriadh, see ath-chre. ath-dhuin,* va. Reshut. 
ath-chronaich, v.a. Rebuke a second time. ath-dhurmanaich,** v.a. Remurinur. 


ath-chruachaidh,** -a-, -au-, -annan-, s.f. Dry-j&th-éisdeachd, see aith-éisdeachd. 
ing kiln. ath-fhas, v.n. Grow agai . 
atn-chruinneachadh, -aidh, s.m. Regathering, | —————,**-àis, s.m. After growth, second crop. 
reassembling. 2 Rallying. 3 Reuniting. ath-fhear,-fhir, sm. Anath-fliear, the next 
ath-chruinnich, r.a. Regather, reassemble. 2| or second man. 2 The next or second thing. 
Reunite. 3 Rally, as an ariny. ath-flieuchainn, -e, 8. f. Second trial, revisal. 
ear, fut. pass. of ath-chruinnich. | ath-fhuarachadh, -aidh, s.m. Recooling, act of 
te, pt. pt. Gathered again, reas-| cooling a second time. Ag a— pr.pt. of 














sembled. 2 Reunited. 3 Rallied. ath-fhuaraich. 
ath-chruth, s.m. Change of form. 2tt Second | ath-ihuaraich, v.n. Cool again, recool. 
form or appea ance. ———— — — te, pt pt. Recooled. 


ath-chruthachadh, s.m. Recreating. 2 Regen-!ath-fhuasgladh, -aidh, s.m. Redemption. 2 
eration. 3 Reformation. Ag a—, pr.pt.of| Ransom. 3 Release. 
ath-chruthaich. &th-gbabh, v.a. Retake,rerover, regain, resume. 
ath-chruthaich, v.a. Recreato. 2 Regenerate.; ————— ail, s.m. Resuming, recovering, re- 
8 Reform. 4 Reconstruct. taking, as of spoil. 
—— —————eur, fut.pass. of nth-chruthaich. —-—ta, pt. m Retaken, recovered, re- 
— —— —— — te, pt. pt. of ath-chruthaich. gained, resuined. 
ath-chuibhlich, v.a. Wheel back. 2 Revolve.!ath-ghairm, v.n. Callagain. 2 Repeat, echo, 
&th-chuimhne, s f. Recollection, remembrance, re-eclio. 





———achadh, -4idh, Remembrance, re- | ——-—-—, 5s.f. Echo. 
collection. Ag a—, pr.pt. of ath-chuimhnich. | ath-ghamhnach, -aich, -aichean, s. f. Cow that 
at'.-chuüinhnich, v.n. Recollect, remember, put| has been two years without a calf. 
in mind a second time, recall, ath-ghearr, -a, -iorra, a. 
ata-chuimir, -e, &. Brief. 2 Compendicus. ——, -iorra, s.m. 
t —————Àic, s. f. Rehearsal of a cause. —; v.d. 
ath-chuimrich,* v.a. Pare a second time, or achadh, -aidh, sm see aith—. 
minutely. —ad, -aid, s.m. 
athchuinge, -ean, $. f. (aih+cuinge) Prayer, —adh, -aidh, s.m. 
petitiou, request, entreaty. —————aich, v.a. / 
—ach, a. Supplicatory, entreating, of | —————-— &ichte, see aith-ghearraichte. 
or belonging to, a prayer or petition. ath-ghin, v.a. Regenerate, renew, produce A 











——— ———an, n. pl. of athchuinge. second time. 2 Recreate, renovate. 
————-———ar, see athchuingiche. ath-ghineamhuinn, £s. f. Regeneration. 2 Re- 
athchuingi h, v.a. Petition,supplicate, entreat. roduction. 
———— — —e, s.n. Petitioner, supplicant. ath-ghintinn, see ath-ghineamhuinn. 
fath-chuir, v.a. Banish. 2 Surrender. ath-ghinte, pt. pt. of ath-ghin. Regenerated. 
ath-chuiteachadh, -aidh, s.m. Recompense, 2 nepreduced. 
ath-chum, v.a. form or shape anew. 2 Deform, | ath-ghiorra, a.(for aith-ghiorra)see aith-ghearr. 
disfigure. Stt < eform. ———--—ich, see aith-ghearr. 
ath-chumadh, -aidh, s.n. Shaping or for.aing | ath-ghlac, v.a. Retake, resume. 2 Apprehend 
anew. 2 Deforming, disfiguring. a second time. 3 Catch again. 
fath-chumain, v.a. Deform. 2 Transform. -—— te," pt.pt. Retaken, 2 Re-apprehend- 
ath-chuinta. a. Formed or shaped anew. 2| ed. 3 Recaught. 
Deformed, mangled. &th-ghlan, v.a. Repolish, refine, recleanse. 2 
ath-chunn,* v.a  Eeshape, transform. Purify, strain. 
fath-chur, 8.m. Banishment, exile. 2 (AH)| —————adh, -aidh, s.m. Recleansing. 2 Re- 
Lastingness, oe property. fining, purifying. Ag a—, pr.pt. of ath- 
Ath-lhàn, -àin, s.m. Byeword, byename, nick-| ghlan. 





name. 2 Nee aghan. Bithidh tu a d’ a., thou 


—te,* a. & pt. part. Recleansed, repol- 
shalt be a hyeword. pt. P s repo 





-o SO e, eg 
ath-dhealbh,* v.a. Transform. ] 1. In adding the suffix te, the rule that con- 
— -— adh, -aich, 8.m. Transíormation, | sonants must come between vowe s of the same 

change of shape. metainorphosis. class is not in every case regarded, because in 


ath-dheanadach, c. itinerant, circumlocutory. | speech it is not conformed to. In the cuse of 
ath-dheanamh, -aimh, s.m. Doing over again. | Verbs of one syllable ending inl, n, r, or s, and 


ath-dhioghail, see a h-dhiol. i all those of more than one syllable? th» letter ù 
ath-dhioghaltach, see ath-d'iioltach. is introduced b»fore the tinal consonant to make 
atn-dhloghiadh, see ath-d ioladh. the spelling accord with the proamnceia,ion. tt 
ath-dhiol, 3 8.3. see ata-dirnioladh. ;is left out in other cases for the saine reason. 


Aach-diol, v.a. Requite, refund, recompense, | —M.M 


ath-ghlante 


ished, refined, purified, sconred, burnished. 
ath-ghlaodh, -aoidh, s.m. Second call. 

Sich, v.n. Cry again, re-echo. 

ath-ghnathach, a. Secondhand. 

ath-ghniomh, s.f. After doing, after act. 

ath-ghointe, a. Wounded again. 

ath-ghoirid. a. see aithghearr. 

——— _,* 8. f. Short road, way, or method. 

2** Short tune, moment. 

ath-ghradh,** s.m. After love. 

ath-iarr, v.a. Seek or search again. 2 Request. 

—aidh, s. f. Seeking again. 2 Request- 
ing. Aga—, pr.pt. of ath-iarr. 

————tas, -ais, sm. Request. 2 Second ask- 
ing or seeking. 3 Second order. 4 Repeti- 
tion as in prayer. 

ath-i b,,AG) Second eating. 2 ( tith or tioth) 
Corn damaged by c.«ttlé on a field b ‘fore it is 
cut. Croth air ang, cattle on ground bearing 
a second crop; cha’n 'eil nian sco ach a., there 
is nothing here but damaged corn. 

ath-ionnsuidh, 85.24. A{ter-attempt, second or 
repeated attempt. 

a thiota,tt auv. Quickly, immediately. 

ath-là, s.m Next day. 

tath-laghacth, s.m. Procrastination. 

ath-lahnusich, v.g. Handle again. 

&th-làiun, -aimh, s. f. Second hand. 








=o 





athlamh, see ealamh. 
ath-làn, s.m. Retilling. 2 Second full of a 
measure. 


ath làn-mara, s.m. Next high-tide, -reflux of 
the sea. 

ath-laoch, -aoich, s.n. Youth 
tit for battle. 

ath-lath, see ath-laoch. 

ath-lathachadh, -aitit, s m. Procrastination. 

ath-latha.ch, v.n. Procrasiinate, delay. 

&th-leagh, v.a. Reme!t. 

te,* pt.pt. Remelted. 

ath-leasachadh, -uidh, -ean, s.m. Reforming, 
mending, reiormation, ameudment, correct- 
ion, amelioration, improvement. 2 Second 
ta ofland. Ag a—, pr.pt. of ath-leas- 
ai h. 

ath-leasachair, -ean, $m. Reformer, correcter, 
2**Amender. 

ath-leasaich, v.a. Reform, amend, ameliorate, 
correct, improve. 2 Dung land again. 4.do 
chòmhradh agus do bheusan, amend your 
conversation and manners. 

ath-leasaiche, see ath-leasachair. 

ath-leasaichte, pt.pt. Reformed, amended, cor- 
rected, improved. 

ath-leithid. -e, s.f. Requital. 

ath-leuin, v.n. Rebound. spring or leap again. 

-—— ——, -eim, -an, -annan, 3.12%. Second leap. 

.— ———Aártaich, s, f. Rebounding. 2 Contin- 
ual jumping or bounding. 

ath-lion, v.a. Refill, replenish, recrnit, reflow. 

———adh, -aidh, s.m. Renliing, replenishing, 
roaguitiqg, reflowing. Aga—, pr.pt. of ath- 
ìon. 

tathlo, see ath-là. 

țathloimhe, 8. f. Dexterity. 

ath-loisg, v.a. Rebnrn, turn thoroughly. 

tathlowh, see ealamn. 

ath-lorg, -uirg, s. J. RPetracting. 

————aich, v.a. Retrace, trace over again. 

ath-losgadh, -aidh, s.m. second vurning, 
thorough burning. 

ath-luasganachd, s. f. Alternateness. 

ath-mhalairt, s. f. Re-exchange. 2 Second bar- 
gain. 


Champion. 2 








see ath-mhalairtich. 





——, Ü, 


L See note on page 58. | 








54 


ath-sgriobhte 


ath-mhalairtich, v.a. 2 Make 
& second agreement. 

-——— te, pt.pt. of ath-mhalairtich. 

ath-mha.in, s.f. Second advantage. 

ath-rohaolras, -ais, s.m. Shanie, 

ath-mheal, v.a. Re-enjoy. 

tuinn, $. P. Re-eujoyment. 
pr.pt. of atb-mheal, Re-enjoying. 

ath-mhogach, s. f. zo fath-muügach. 

ath-mhuinntireas, -ris, s.m. Second engage- 
ment with a master. 

Tathauhnnadh, gan, Admonition. 

tathnachd, 8. f. Burial, interment. 

&ta-neartachadh, -aidn, s.m. Restrengthening, 
recruiting, reinforcing, reinforcement. Ag 
&—, pr.pt. of ath neartaich. 

ath-neartucha:l, a. Strengthening, recruit- 
ing. Leigh.as a., a s:rengthening medicine. 

ath-neartaich, v.a. Reinforce, recruit, refresh, 
P strengthen, rencw. 

ath-nuadhachadh, -aidh, s.m. Renovation, re- 
novating, renewing. Ag a—, pr.pt. of ath- 
nuadhaich. A. bhur n-inntion, the renewal 
of your minds. 

ath-nuadhaich, v.a. Renew, renovate,  Ath- 
nuadhaichear a’ bhliadhna, the year shall be 
renewed. 

——te, pt.pt. of ath-nuadhaich. 

ur dd s. f. Work done again.  [ex. under 


Re-exchange. 








Ag &—, 


— 





ath. 

ath-oidhch’, adv. i.e. an ath-oidhche, to-mor- 
row night. 

att.- idheirp,** s. After-endeavour. 

ath-phill v.n. Return. 2 Turn again. 

——.———e&adh, -lidh, sm Return, returning, 
coming back. 2 Circulation. 8 AH) 1 eturn 
of a disease after cunvalescence. Bhitheadh 
'a. mar a’ ghrian, his retu: n would be like the 


sun. 

pl a see ath-philleadh. 

athraiche, , 

athraichean, pl. of athair. 

ath-: éiteachadh, -aidh, s.m. Reconciliation, re- 
concilement. 2 Atonement, expiation.  3** 
Second disentangling. 4**Seco-.d clearing or 
arranging. Ag a—, pr. pt. of ath-éitich. 

ath-réiteachail, a. Reconciliato:y, paciticatory. 

ath-réitich, v.a. Recuucile. 2 Ie-expiate, re- 
&toue. 3 Disentangle again. 4 Clear again. 
5 Rearrange. 

-——te, past pt. of ath-réitich, 

ath-roinn, v.a. Subdivide, divine again. 

,** 8. f. S .bdivision, second division. 

——— ———te, past pt. subdivided. 

ath-ruamhar, v.a. Redelve, dig “gain. 

ath-rualmhradh, -aidh, s.n. Second digging or 

: poly 4 ane a—, pr. pt. of atu-ruaiuhar. 
atn-rughadh, 

tath-ruizheadh, see atharrachadh. 

ath-sdiüir, see ath-stiuir. 

ath-sgal, s.m. Second squall. 2 Echo. 3 Skirl 
of the bagpipes. 4 Any loud avd shrill sound. 

ath-sgath, v.g. Reprune, lop again, cut down 
again. 

ath-sgeul, -edil, sm. Tale at second hand, 
second telling. 2 Repetition. Is tric nach 
tig ath-sgeul air an droch sgeul, bad news 
is seldom (not often) refuted. 

ath-sgios, -a, s.m. Second fatigue. 

ath-sgrìobh, v.g. Transcribe, copy. 2 Write 
again. A dh'a. daoine Heseciah, which the 
men of H. copied. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Transcript, tran- 
scribing, copy. Ag a—, pr. part of atn-sgriobh 

— — — ——Ajir, -e, -ean, s.m. Transcriber. 

——Aar, fut. pass. of ath-sgrìobh. 
———te,* past pt. — » 














ath-shaor 


ath-shaor, v.a. Redeliver. e 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Redelivering, rede- 

liverance, second redeeming. Ag a—, p7.pt. 

of ath-shaor. 

te,» past pt. of ath-shaor. 

ath-shaothracuail, a. Assiduous, diligent, con- 
stant in application. 

ath-sheaibbacnadh, -aidh, s.n. Re-inheriting, 
repossessing. 2 Heversion, re-investmcnt. 
Ag a—, pr. pt. of ath-shealbhaich. 

ath-shealbaaich, v.a. Reposses, re-inherit. 

te, pt. pt. oi atb-shealuhaich. 

&th-sheall, v.n. Reconsider, 2 Look again. 

ach, a. Looking back, retrospective. 

— — adn, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Second 
look. 2 Ketrospect. 3 Second sight, or view. 

vuiun, s. 7. Second looking or viewing. 
Ag &—, pr. pt. of ath-sheall. 

ath-sheiun, v.a. Sing again. 

&th-shlàinte, s. f. Convalescence. 

&ch, -eiche, a. Convalescent. 

&th-shnàmh, v.n. Reswim, swim again. 

—aidh, -aidh, sm. Reswimming, 

swimming back again. 

pt. pt. of ath-shnamh. 

fath-shuidheachadh, -aidh, s.m. Replanting, 
second settlement. 

ath-shuidhichte, pt.pt. Replanted, resettled. 

















——— 








————— a, 


ath-smaoin, see atu-smuain. 

` e rw 

ath-smaoinich, i 
&th-smaointeachadh, see ath-smuaint—. 


&th-smaointich, 

&th-smuain, -e, -tean, s.f. Second thought, 
after-thought. 

—teachadh, -aidh, s.m. Consideration, 
pondering, reflecting, reconsidering. Aga—, 
pr.pt.of ath-smuaiutich. 

—_—-—teachail,** a. Apt to reflect or con- 
siderate. 








tean, n. pl. of ath-smuain. . 
tich, v.a. Reconsider, ponder, medi- 
tate, reflect. 
&th-stiüir, v.g. Steer again. 2 Reconduct. 
atnte,^ a. & pt.pt. of at. Swelled, swollen. 
&th-thagh, v.a. Rechoose, make a second choice. 
2** Rerlect. 
S alh, -aidh, s.m. Re-electing, rechoos- 
g. 


——— ——ta, past pt. Re-elected, rechosen. 

ath-thalmhainn,(AÁF) see famh-thalmhainn. 

ath-theachd, s.m. Second coming. 2 Next ar- 
rival. 3 Second growth. 

ath-tneine, s.m. Second firing, or volley. ttsee 
aithinne. 

ath-theist, e, -ean, s.f. Second testimony. 

ath-theodh, v.g. Rewarm, warm again. 

ath-theodhadh, -aidh, s.m. Warming a second 
time. Ag a—, pr.pt. of ath-theddh. 

ath-thighiun, sf. Second coming. 

ati-thiil, v.a. see ath-phill. 

ath-thilleadh, -eidh, see ath-philleadh. 

&th-'hinneas-cloinne, $.4a. After-pains. 

&va-.aionndadh, -aidh, s.m. Second turning. 
2 Keturning à second time. 3 Causing to 
turn a second time, 4**Eddy. Gaothana., 
the wind of the eddy. 

——— ———, v.a. Return a second time. 

&th-tnionnsgain, v.a. Recommence, resume, re- 
devise. 

&th-tnionnsgnadh, -aidh, s.m. Recommencing, 
recomuiencement, resuming, redevising. 

ath-thodaar, -air, 8.m. Second crop arter a field | 
ha, been inanured by the folding of cattle or 
sheep. ?1fReinanuring. 33} second bleach- 











l|. See note on page 53. 


55 






aur 


in T eg land remaining two years un- 

illed. 

ath-thog, v.a. Rebuild, rear again, lift or take 
up again. 

ath-thogail, -thogalach, -thoglaichean, 8./. Re- 
building, second. raising, rearing or lifting. 

&th-thogte,* pt. pt. Pebu.lt. 

ath-thoiseachadh, -aidh, s.m. Recommencing, 
resuming. 

ath.thdisich. v.a. Recommence, resnnie. 

ath-threorachadh, -aidb, s.m. Recondicling, re- 
guiding. Ag &—, vr. pt. of ath-threóraich. 

ath-threoraich, v.a. Recorduct, raguide. 

ath-threóraichte, pt.pt. of ath-tr reoraich. 

atb-thruas, -ais, gan, Compassion. 

— — — —a&ách,tf-aiche, a. Compassionate. 

ath-thugh, s.m. Secondthateaing. 2 Second 
cover. 

—. ,v.a. Thatch agam. 2 Recover. 

ath-thughta, pt.pt. Thatched again. 

ath-thuisle, s. f. Second fall or stumble. 

ath-thuisleachadh, -aidh, s.m. Second stumbl- 
ing or slipping. 2 Relapse. Ag a—, pr. pt. 
of ath-thuislich. 

ath-thuislich, v.n. 
Relapse. 

ath-thuit, v.n. Fall again. 2 Relapse. 

ath-thuiteam,-eim, s.m. Second fall. 2 Relapse. 

ath-thulgadh,** s.m.  After-tossing (of waves) 

ath-uair, -e, -ean, sf. Next time. 2 Second 
time. 

ath-uamharra, a. Terrible, direful, abomin- 
able, odious, execrable, detestable, horrible. 

ath-uamharrachd, s. f. Abomination, detesta- 
tion, hatefulness, atrociousness. 

fath.uamharrtha, see ath-uamnarra, 

tath-uasgladh, see ath-fhnasgladb. 

a thubnradn, a. Above-citel. 

a thuilleadh, adv. More, moreover. 

tathuis, see athais. 

ath-ùrachadh, -aidh, s.m. Renewing, reviving, 
reireshing, reanimating, refresbnient, renew- 
al, reanimation. 2 Kegeneraiion. Ag a—, 
pr.pt. of ath-üraich. 

atb-üraich. ».a. Revive, refresh, renew, renot- 
ate. 2 Rerzenerate. 

ath-ùraicu: e, pt.pt. of ath-traich. 

fatlaige, s,.pl. Repeated praise. 

atmhoire, comp. of atinhor. 

atmhoireachd, s. f. Tendency to swell. 2 Tur- 
gidness. 3 Pride, vani yy. 4 Bombast, 6 
Boisterousness. 5 Fermentation. A. Ior- 
dain, the swelling of Jordan. 

atmhor, -oire, a. swelling. 2 Turgid. 3 Rag- 
ing. 4 Boisterous. 6 Lombastic. 

tatrach, see àrdrach. 

atruas, see ath-thruas. 

atruasach, see atü-thruasach. 

factaca, adv. (an taic) Hard by. 

atnigean, (for ataigean) m.pl. of ataig. 

atuingean, n pl. of atuian. 

atunu, -e, pl. -an [tié-nngean] s.f. Gate, 
wicket. 2 Palisade. 3 Rafter. 

atuinnean, pl. of atuin. 

fauer-coille, s.m. Capercailzie, 
coille. 

For words beginning with au, abh- or 

au-, amh: may be consulted, the diphtheng 
au not b.ing admissible in modern Gaelic 
orthography. It frequently occurs in old 
manuscripts, as well as in several writings of 
later date. 

faudnactt. (for bas) Death. 

faurs.m. Sce or. 





Fall or stumble again. 3 


see capull- 








B b 


b, Beith, birch-tree, the second letter of the | 
Gaelic alphabet now in use. It sounds some- ; 
what harder tian v, and soiter thau pin Eug- i 
lisn. When imme. iately folluwed by A, 16 
has an aspirated sound like vin Euglish, as 
bhuail, struck. At the end of a word or 
syilubie. how.ver, tne aspiration sometimes 
passes. in certain dialects, into the sound of 
the vowel u, as searbh, oitter; fiabnrus, 
E and beiore consonauts it is frequently 
flicndt. 

b’,** (for a bu) Who was, who were, which 
was, which were. 

b’, (bu) past ajf. of is. Used before an initial 
vowel or sh. B'uamhasacn an là, terrible 
was the day ; b'Íhearr t ainm na <lo ghnìomh, 
your nane was better than your deed; b'fhearr 
leam, I would prefer; b eo.acu mis’ air, 4 
knew him well. 

tha, a. Good, honest. 2**Simpie-minded, easy, 
foolish. 

bà, NGP) s.m. Simpleton. Is furasd’ am bà a 
wwheallada gun a lành a lomadh, the simple- 
ton may be deceived without veing robbed. 

ba bà! int. Alullaby. ba ba mo leanabh !; 
sleep sleep my child ! 

1ba,** v. now bath. | 

tba, s.m. see bas. | 

ba, gen. sing. and n. & dat. pl, of bó. An àite 
guth mauaich bithidh geui bà, tnstead of the 
voice of a monk there shall Ge the lowing of 
cows. 

tba’an, v. see buain. 

toa’ain,s.f. The cleansing of a cow after calv- 
ing. 2t~Matrix of a cow. 

bàp,** san, Babe. 

bab,11 -a, p- -an, & annan, s.m. Tuft, tassel. 2* 
Chilid’s excrement. 3,AG Stain. Bivhidh 
sin 'n a bhab air fhad 's is beò e, ihat wili be 
a stain on him as long as he lives; bib air a 
ch iù, a 8:ai" en h.s Jarne. 

babacn,* a. Filthy, abominable. 
tasselled. 

tràbach. a. Sweet, innocent. 

d, 3. f. Sweetness, innocence. 

babachd, s.f. Filthiness, abumiuation. 

babag, -aig,-an,s f. Tassel. 2 Fringe. 


?1tTufted, | 





8 


be 
bh. feadh ai bhaile. 


_bacan 





I wandered round the 
town in great puzzlement of mind. 
babnsgach, see bablisganta. 
babhsga re, see ballsgaire. 
babhsga:ita, a. Cowardly, aptto be frighten- 
ed. 2 Biustering. 
dee chd, 8. og 
false alarin. 
bàbLuin, gen. sina. of bàhhun, 
- each, see bàbhunach. 
babhun, -uin, pl. -uin & -ninean, &.m. Bulwark, 
rampart. 2 Tower. 3 Enclosure. 4 Fold 
where cattle ar» milked.  Brisidh iad a 
ba huin, they shail break her bulwarks ; thug- 
aibh fainear a bàá^huin bhrèagha, mark ye her 
beutiful bulwarks. 
—— —aeh, a. Having bulwarks, ramparts, 
&c., of, or pertaii.ug to bulwarks. &c. 
-cabhiaig, s.m. Fortification hastily 
constructed. 
fbablair, Gaelic spelling of babbler. 
tha:** s.m. Boat. 
bac. i cr a bacadh. & bacail, v.a. Inter- 
t, hinder, obstruct, oppose, stop, prevent. 
ame. Bac an aoibhneas, interrupt their 


Cowardice, fright from 





ru 
2 
joy. 
bac, -a & -aic, pl. -an, 8.1m. Stop, hinderance, 
restraint, delay, interruption. impediment. 
2 Hollow, pit, bend in the ground. 3 Thow] 
or pin in à boat's gunwale, ttfulcrum of an 
oar. 4fIfPiece of t mber on boat's gunwale to 
rotect jt from the friction of the oars. 5 
Notch of a spindle. 6 Crook. 7 Hook. 8 
Hingzofadoor. 9 :AF)Hog, pig. 1011Bog 
marsh. 11ft "rop, suppor:. 12ft{Spade, shove 
13** Barricade. 14 Saudbank.—Coll. 15 Hol 
low. Cuir baz air, Aind2r him; cogull ràmh 
air na bacaibh, the vartle of oars on the 
thowis ; bac na h-achlaise, the arm-pit ; bag 
na righe, the bend of the arın ; bac na h-ios- 
guid, the hough ; bac na crnachainn, the 
Launch. 
bacvach, -aiche. a. Lame. crippled, maimed, 
2 Rugged. 8**Cansing hinderance or delay. 
4 hilly. Duine t., a dame man; b, air aon 
chois, lame on one leg ; air a dhà chois, lame 
on bith his lega ; à te v., a rugged place. 
-——-——, -a‘ch, s.m. Lame person. 
bacadh. -Ailh, -aidhean s.m. Hinderance, ob- 
struction, delay, act of nindering or prevent- 
ing. 2**Cow dung. A’ b—. pr.pt. of bac. 
becag, -nig, -an, s.f. Little hollow. 2 Trip, 
fall, stumble. Cuir cas bacaig air, trip him. 
bacaich, v.a. Lame. 2 Stop, obstruct, oppose. 
—————e, 8. f. Lam: ness. 2 luperfection. 


t luster. 4**Sbort pieces of yarn. 5*Fili hy fe- | ——-——e, comp. of baca:h. 


male. 6tfBroom, besom. Babagan an or, 


golden tassels. 
babagacn,-aicne, a. Tasselled, fringed. 
bubaid,tt-e,-ean, ste bavag. 
eacu, see babagacu. 
„V (baig, gen. sing. of banag. 
tbaban, -ain, -an, $.m. baby. 





baoan, -ain, s.f. see babag. 2 m. pl. of bab. | 
i fbacaisesch, a. Hin ering, obstructive. 


| bacal, ail, -aian, s.n. Obstacle, stop, hindere 


baban,* -aiu, s.m. Bobb.a. 

ach, a. see babagach. 

fogbhachd, s.f. und. Innocence, childishness, 
sweetness. 

babuaid, et Tassel. 

each, a. 


sel. 
tbabiair, (Jor bha) see bi. 
babhd,* à.3a. Surmise, rumour. 2t¢f Quirk. 
ach,* a. Spread:ng a surmise or rumour. 
air,* 8m. Surniser.—4síuy. 
&ireachd, sr, *Spreadivg rumours. 2 
Puzzlemeni of wind.  Dh'fhalbh mi ’s a’ 

















| bacan, 


—ead, -eid, s.n. Degree of lameness. Tha 
e dol am b., he is vetting camer and lamer. 

— — —idn, fut. aff. a. oí bacaich. 

bacaid, s.f.j see bucaid. 2tt{Ash holder. 

bacaideach, a. Resisting. 

bavaidh, fut. af. a. of bac. 

bacail, -e, a. Obstructive, preclusive. 

bacail,tt pr. pi. of bac. 





ance, interruptica. 2** |howl. 13 rarely 
slave, prisouer. 
bacaladb, -aidh, s.n. Oven, bakebouse. 


Hung with tassels, like a tas- | Tbacalia, a. Bake :. 


iac-umail, v.a, Counteract. 
-ain, 8m. ttHindcrance. 2 Spin- 
dle notzh. 8 Crook, crooked staff. 4 Hook. 
5 Door-hinge. 6 Stake of any kind, especially 
a tether-stake. 7 Knoll. 8 Covering. 9 Cot- 
tage. 13 Balcony. An smeòrach air b., the 
mavis (perched) on a stake. 


bacan 


— — —— — 


bácan,(AG) pr. pt. Mocking. Tha ea’ b. air, he 


is mocking him.— Keay cuusriry. | 

bacunach, a. Full of stakes, 14°* Like & palis- 
ade. 3 Knoity. 4 Kuolly, uneven. 

bacan-doruis, s.m. Docr-hinge. 

bacar, fut. af. pass. of bac. 

bacas,** -ais, s.m. Captive, hostage. 

tbacastair, Gaelic spelling of ba.ter, an old 
turm of baker. 

¢——_——_eachd, sf.ind. Baking. 

fbacat, s.m. Captive. 

bac-bbord, -dird, s.m. 
side of a snip. 

tbacclam,|| **Lame-handed"' person. 

bach, -a, s.m. Drunkenness, revelling, rioting. 

then, v.a. Make drunk, revel. 

*bàcn, @. see buaidheach. 

*oach, s.m. Breach. 2 Violent&ttack. 3 Sur- 
prise. 4**Loving. 

tuncua.d. sf. Boss of a shield 

ba-rawli** v.a. Clip round, trim. 

baciair, -van, 8.4. Drunkard, reveller, rioter. 

ba haireachd, sJ. ind. Drinking, reveliing, 
riotug. 

buchal,f-ail, s.m. Curl. 

bachalit, -aill, sm. Shepherd’s crook. 2 Sta. 
3 Crozier. 4* Old shoeor slipper. 5 Rim of 
a cart. 6 Tennis-racket. B. aognaire, a 
shepherd’s staff ; b. sealgair, a hunter's staf. 
By virvue of an ancieni graut from an Kari 
of Argyll, a piece of land in ine isana of 
Lismore was neld on cond:tion that tie noi- 
der & pt aud toos care o tne crozier of M. 
M:iuag, Irom whom its church is named. 
licence Ha holde. is known as Baran a’ 
Lhacuaill. 

bachallach,** @. Like a staff, crook, or croz- 
ier. 2 Relating to a staff, crook, or crozier. 
š Provided witha rim, asa cart. 4 Curled, 
as nair. 5 Huving ringlets. 

bachanta, a. Clamorous, prating, garrulous. 

hacnautachd, sr. Clamorousness, garrulity. 

bachar, s.m. Beech ma t. 2 Acorn. 

bachar, s.m. Ceitic nard or lady's glove (plant) 
—vuleriana celtica. 

bàcharan, -aiu, see buacharan, 

b.chd, see bac. 

bachdach, see bacach. 

bachdaiche, see bacaiche. 

bachdan, see bacau. 

bàchil«nach,"* a. Noisy, tumultuous, conten- 
Gis. 

bachlach, -aiche, o. Curled, having ringlets, 
full of curls, 2**Bushyv,as bar, crispy. 8 
Throwing out twigs or shoots. 

bachlach,** ach, sam, Cud eller. 

bcn wehaih, -auth, sem. Crisping, curling, act 
ui lovming ringlets or curls, 

fb«chladh, s.m. Armful. 2 Cup, chalice. 8 
Head of a stick. 

Dbac..iag, -aig, -an, s.f. Shoot, asof a plant, es- 
peciatiy potato. 2 ‘Tender root, 8 Little curl, 
4 Head of a stai. +65 Lisp or halt in spe ch. 

bachiagach, -aiche,@. Curled, havirg curis ur 
riugiets, full of curls or ringlets. 2 like a 
eurlorring.et. 3 Bushy, as hair., 4 C.i:sp. 
Sit Having shoots, asa plant. Falt b., dual- 
ach, curled luxuriant hair. 

b cniaich, v.a. Curl, form into curls or rin slets. 

tbach-tubhra,t} s.f.p.. Pimples on the face. 

bacauid, see bucai:l. 

b choil,-e, a. Bacchanalian, 

bach-thinoeas,|} s.m. Sickness after drunkeii- 
bess, 2*''Su.fe.. 


b.ch-.h orm, s.f. 
bachuL, see bachali. 


Windward or weather 


Noise of revelry or of 


biích-.h oriman, s.m. drunkenness, 


57 


A ——— — o 


bagaid 


i b'chullach, see bachallach. 

bac-ian.h, ssm. Manacle, haud-eufr, 

bac-lamhach, @. Disabled in hand or arm. 2 
Preventing the free use of one’s Land or arm. 

bac-moine,t s.m. Peat-bank, turf-pit or bank, 

bad, (zor Diad) It wax thev. 

bad, v.a. Make into tufts or bunches, 2 Separ- 
ate, divide into small heaps. 3 Prune, 

bàd,**.àid, see bat, 

bad, -aid, -a, s.m. Tuft, cluster, bunch. 2 Top 
cluster, hair on the upper part. of the heat, 
3 Tuft of wool. 4 Th cket, cluinp of trees or 
shrubs. 5 Grove. 6 Flock. 7 Bagged gar- 
ment. 8 Plain. 9 Spot. lu**Wish. 11 Piece, 
portion. Bad fuilt, a tuft or hair ; L. chaur- 
ach, a Zock of sheep; anu am badaibh nam 
bonn, wnmediately ilit. in the inipression of 
the soles of the feet); ann am bannaibh a 
chéile, seizing each other's scuip-luks (pro- 
buoly a survival of ancient war custos.) 

fbàd, s. f. Wind. 

bauach, -aiche, a. Same meanings as badanach, 

badag, -aig,-an, s.f. Small burch, c.user or 
tuit. 2 Grove, &c. 3(AH) Besoin, gcnerally 
of heather. B. fhraoich, a heather brush. 

badag lus,* s.f. Anthology. 

bid-alan, (AC, s. Water-vole. 

vadau, n. pl. of bad. 

bidau, -ain, s.m. (dim. of bad) Small cluster 
or tuit. 2,.iw.egrove, &c. B. coilleat i. kzt 
of woud, clumpor grove ; gheàrr e na bauain, 
he cut down tne thickets. 

badanach. -aiche, a. Abounding in groves, 2 
Tufzy, tufted. 3 Bushy, clustered. 4 Sh igy. 
5 Like, or pertaining to, thickets, groves. c 6, 
An sobhrach a chinneas b., the p. em: ose that 
gi ows in tu, ts. 

badar-dlüth. -aius,s.m. Covert. 


bulan-mneasgain,$ San, Bog violet. {see 
wothan., ) 

tbadar, v. They were. 

ba, bk sm. Vulture, 2 Royston crow, 8 
Any raveuous bird. 

badh, -àidh, -aiuan, sm. see bàgh. 

bà.h. s.;. see bàidh, 

Ladhach, -aiche, a. Kind, friendly, loving. 

ba..hachd, er, Kindness, friendliness, 2 Ob- 
ligwtorivuess. 

bauhal, -ail,-an, s.m. Wandering. Cu badh- 


ail, a strange dog; aithneacuadh bó bacnail, 
no fàit’ a’ chruidh, the wandering co«'s wel- 
come, or the kine's salute. 
bathulach, -aiche, @ Wandering, given to 
Wauder. 
bidhan, see bibhun, 2 see bàghan. 
bauhar, see bàthar. 
badhar, -air,s.f. After-birth of a cow at calving, 
placentas of a cow. 
badhara :, -ain, -an, Helpless waidirer, 2 Une 
at, puny person, 3f} Helpless wan- 
ering, 
bauharaunich, s. J. Creeping or moviug slowly, 
bulhsgacn, -aiche, a. Easily ri heeaed, foolish. 
badhsgaire, -an, 8.m. Foolish inconsisient fel- 
| 
| 


low. 2 bBlusterer. 8t{Coward. 
badhsgaireachd, s. f. Incousister.cy. 2 Folly. 
8 Nonsensical talking, blustering. 4{fCow- 


ardice. 
badsadh, ** -aidh, s.m. Provision for a journey. 
bag, «Eng. bag.) 
bazach, -aiche, a. Corpulent bulky, belly:ng, 
unwieldy. 2**Warlike. S3jíiliyjht, neat. 
bajaich, v.a. & n. Make b_lticd or corpulent. 
2 Become corpulent 
agaiche, comp. of bacach. 
baga cherr, u. pl. of bag. 
bagaitu, -e, -van, s. fe Cluster, bunch, S of nuts 


bagaid - 


or grapes. 211Cod, husk. 3ffCrowd. 4* Cor- 
ulent female. Bagaidean searbha, sour clus- 


8. 

‘bagaideach, a. Full of clusters. 2 In bunches, 
8 Corpulent, overgrown, unsbapely. 411 
Husky. 

bagaideachd,t? s. f. Bunchiness, 

bagaidean, m pl. of bagaid. 

bagailt, see bagaid. ^ Bagailt ehnd bu taine 
plaosg, a cluster of thinnest shelled nuts. 

bagailteach, a. see bagaideach. 

bagair, pr. pt. a’ bagairt & bagradh, v.a. 
Threaten, denounce evil, terrify. [This verb 
is generally followed by the prep. air, as, 
bagramaid orra, let us threaten them. 

bagair, -ean, s.m. Glutton, epicure. 
pulent man. 

bagaireachd,s. f. Gluttony. 2 Threatening. 


bagairt., s.f. Threat, threatening. 2 Denounc- 
Cha téid plasd air b., no plaster is ap- 
A’ b-, pr. pt. of bagair.. 


ing. 
plied to a threat. 
Tha e'bagairt an uisge, it threat-ns rain ; a’ 
b. oirnn, threatening us ; a’ bagairt sgainidh, 
threatening to burst. 

bagairteachd,** s. f. Menace. 

Tbagaist, s. f. Gaelie form of baggage. 
bagaid. 

bagaisteach, a. Deriv. of Eng. baggage. 2** 
see bagaideach. 

bagan, see baizean. 

baganta, a. Warlike. 2 Plump, corpulent. 8 

eat, tidy. 4 Lively. An dreathan b., the 

plump wren. d 

bagantachd,* s.f. Corpulency. 

bagar, -air, -ain, 8.m. Threat. 

bagaradh, see bagradh. 

bagarrach, see bagrach. 

bagarrach, -aich, s.m. Threatener. 

bagarrachd, s.f. Threatening, habit of threat- 
ening. 


2** see 


bàgh, -àigh, -an,s.m. Bay. 2 Harbour 3 


Creek. 4 Estuary. 
bàgh, s.f. see bàidh. 
4bagh,ifs.m. Promise, bond, tie. 2 Strength, 
power, virtue. 3 Word. Battle. 
baghach, a. Abounding in, or pertaining to, 
bays, harbours, creeks, or estuaries. 
badhach. 8 Binding, obligatory. 
baghachd, see badhachd. 
tbaghadh,** -aidh, s.m. Fighting, quarrelling. 


baghair, -ean, s.m. see baoghaire & baodhaire. 


bà-ghamhna, see bd-g—. 

bàghan, -ain, s.m. Little harbour. 2 Creek. 3 
Koad for ships. 

baghan,-ain, s m. see bàbhun. 2 Church-yard. 

baghan,t -ain, s.m. Stomach. 

baghlach, see tbaoghalach. 

baghlachd, see baoghalachd. 

baghte,** s. Bait. 

bagrach, a. Threatening, menacious, prone to 
threaten. 2**Imminent. Is ian Aoine bhag- 
rach a ni "pn Sathurna deurach, the gloomy 
Friday makes the rainy Saturday. 

bagradh, aidh, s.m. Threatening, menacing, 

enouncing. A’ b—, pr. pt. of bagair. 

baguid, see bagaid. 

baguideach, a. sev bagaideach. 

baguilte, -an, s.m. see bagaid. 

baibeil,e, a. Addicted to fables, lying. 
Stammering. 8* see baibheil. 

baibeulachd, s. f. Habit of lying. 2{tSilly talk. 

baibh,* s.m. Terrible sight. 2 Incredible thing. 
3 Fairy. 4 Goblin. 

baibhealachd,* s, f. Enormity, exaggeration, 
terribleness. 

baibheil,*-e, a. Incredible, enormous, exag- 
gerated, terrible. Pris bh., an. exorbitant 


58 


2° Cor- 


2 see 


2tt 


baigeireachd 


price. 
baibheist,(AF) s. f. Toad, 
baibleach,** a. Profuse. 
baibleachd,** s. f. Profuseness. 
tbaic, -e, s. f. Turn, twist. 
baic, gen. sing. of bac. 

T——each, a. Twisted, having tnrns. 
fbaic-bheurla, s.f. Solecism, impropriety Za 
language. 

bàich, see bathaich. 

baic-labhradh, see baic-bheurla. 

tbaid, s.m. Sage, prophet, philosopher. 

baideal, -eiJ, -an, s.m. Pillar. 2 Fortress. 9 
Tower. 4 Cloud. 5 Ensign, standard. B. 
neóil, & pillar of cloud; mo bh. ard, my. 
high tower. 

baidealach, -aiche, @. Abounding in, or per- 
taining to, pillars, towers, or fortresses. 27$ 
Cloudy. 3łtSheeted, like cloudsor sails. A 
Bannered. Na siùil bh., the expansive sails. 

baidean, ein, -anan, 8$. Group. 2 Handful. 
3 Small flock of sheep or goats. 4** Little 
boat, yawl, pinnace. 

baideanach,tt a. Abounding in small flocks of 
goats or sheep. 

baideil, gen. sing. of baideal. 

bàidh, -e, s f. Kindness, benignity, humanity, 
mercy. 2 Hospitality. S Affection, love, at- 
tachment, fondness. 12 Wave. Dh'fheóraich 
ile b., she enquired affectionately; is mór a bh. 
ris, great is his partiality for him ; shéid os- 
nadh gun bk., @ wind blew without mercy ; 
ceann-uidhe nam mile b., the abiding-place of 
boundless hospitality. 

tbaidhe, s.f. Amity, alliance, gratitude. 9 
Compassion. 3 Predicting, prophesying. 


| baidheach, s.m. Companion, co-adjutor. 2 


Favonrite. 3 Champion. 

baidheach, -eiche, a. Friendly, kind, merciful, 
loving, attached. 2 Humane, hospitable, 
noble. 

baidheachas, -ais, s.m. Grace, friendship, fa- 
vour, kindness. 2 Humanity. 

+baidheal,** eil, s.m. Cow-stall. 

baidheachd, 8. J. Friendliness, kindness, 

baidhealachd, humanity, mercy. 2 Fond- 
ness, affection. 8**Hospitality. 4**Compan- 
ionship. 

bàidheil, a. Merciful, kind, humane. 2 Friend- 
ly, affectionate, loving, attached. 3 Favour- 
able. +4 Binding, obligatory. Cha bhi thu 
b., thou shalt not be favourable. 

baidne, gen. sing. of baidein. 

baidein, -dne, -dnean, s.m. Small group, cluse 
ter or flock. {see baidean.] 

baidreach,* a. see baidreavach. 

baidreach,* Ach, s.m. see baidreag. 

baidreag, -eig,-an, 8. Jf. Patched ragged gar- 
ment, rag. 

baidreagach, a. Ragged, patched. ` 

bàidse, s.m. Musician’s fee, especially ab a 
country wedding. 2 Voyage. 3 Enormous 
load or cargo.— West Highlands. 

baidsear,** s.m, Day-labourer. 

bàidsire,* s.m. Voyager, &dventurer. .— 

bàidsireachd,* s. f. ind. Adventuring, cruising, 
sea-faring life. À 

baigean, -ein, s.m. Little bag. 2 Little glut- 
ton. S Little corpulent person. B. léasaiche, 
a rennet bag. " 

baigeanach, a. Corpulent, bagged, bellied. 

baigeir, enn, Gaelic spelling of beggar. Peil- 
~ nam baigearan, a vebble, (lit. the beggar's 

ullet.) 
baigeireach, a. (beggar) Inclined to beg, needy, 


beggarly. ] 
baigeireachd, (beggar) s.f. Beggary. Air, 





enraged in beggary. 

fbaign,** v.a. Endear. 

Laigh, s.f. see bàidh. 

!aizheach, a. d: s. see baidheach, a. & 3. 

b4'gheil, a. see bàidheil. 

¢iaighein, s. 7. Chariot, waggon, dray. 

tbaighle, s.f. Fawn. 

bail, -e, s. f. Economy, thrift, management, 
carefulness. 12 Pla-e, residence. t3 Luck, 
prosperity. 14 Allowance from a mill to the 
peor, 5ttsling. Cha bhi bail air aran fuinte, 

aked bread 18 not spared ; am fear nach dean 

b. air beula’ bh'ilg, ni an t-‘ochdar ù. air 
féin, if ya don't spare the month of the bag, 
the bo‘tom rill spare itsslf. -- N.G.P. 

tbail, see b'àill. 

bai.bh, gen sing. of balbh. 

bailbhe, s. f. Dumbness, muteness, 

bai!bneachd, see bailbhe & balbhachd. 

bailbneay, -vig. -an, see meil heag. 

—————-—a&ch, a. see meilbheagach. 

¢bailc, a. Strong, bold, daring. 

baile, -e, -ean, s.f. Balk, rilge of earth be- 
tween two furrows. 2 Land-mark. 3 strip 


of corn-land left fallow ‘(see under *''lenm-|t 


ioci:d) 4ffCrust or hardness formed on the 
earth by the weather. 5 Flood, mountain 
torrent, ‘‘spate.’’ 6 Seasonabie rain, g-nial 
showers. 7 Shower that comes suddenly, 
tt»lunp of rain. 5**Lond noise. 9** Ligature. 
lüftDefia ice. 11fłStrait, hard-hip. 
Ca.f of the leg. 
sh«pen foot or ankle. 
notis? of the shields. 


baileeaca,-eich, s.m. Tall, erect man, stout! ^ailineanta.** a. 


man. Sat storm. 


59 


—————— TR I — M À— — a — a i— i À——MM— e M —Ó— —À —— € 


12t¢ | hbaillszeacn, 
13(AH) Twisted or mies-ibiilm,** e E Balm, balsam. — | 
B. nan sgiath, €he|uailmeach,** a. Balmy, abounding in, or made 


bainfheis 


bàilidh, see baillidh. 

-———eachd, see baillidheachd. 

fbailire, s.m. Slinger. 

bailisdeir, -e, -ean, s.m. Vain-glorious fellow. 
2 Man who taiks idly, blusterer, babbler. 

-—————each, a. Vaunting. 2 Inclined to talk 
idly, blustering. babb: ng. 

-————vavhd, s. f. Habit of talking idly, fool- 
ishly or blusteringly. 

b'àill. ("or ou àill) Would. B'àill leam, leat, 
leis, &c., J, thou, he, «&c. would; am bail 
leat nio mharbhadh ? wouldst thou kill me 1 
ciol a b'àill leibh ? what would you have } 
“Baill leich?” (a sloren/y pronunciation of 
the last) is often used as an equivalent of I 
beg uour pardon ? when one speaker has not 
understood a remark made by another and 
wishes it repeated. 

bailleag, -"ig, -an, s. f. Twig, spront. 2 Sucker. 

ach, -aiche, @ Full of, or like, sprouts, 

twigs, or suckers. 5 Slender. 3 Pliable. 4{f 
Cheerful, lively. 

thattlean, in, s.m. Boss, stud. 2 Little bub- 

ble. 8 Anything round. 

———ach, a. Bossy, studded. 

bailleartach, -aiche, o. see pailleartach. 

baillidh, s.m. Magistrate, ‘Dbvillie,’’ bailiff. 

neachd, s. f. Office of a town or coun- 

try magistrate. 2 Bailiwick, province, dis- 
trict. 

see boillsze2ch. 


of balm, balsamic. 
see hailmeach. 


bailt,** Gaelic spelling of belt. 92 gen. of balt. 


bailceach, a. Rainy, inundating, cansing a! biilte, n. pl. of bailtean. 


flo.d. 2 In -ea«»nable showers. 3 Balked, 


like a balk. 4ttstout, strong. ó1IRilgy. 
A’ Bhealitainn bh., rainy May. 
bailceanta, e. Defying, boastiul. 2tfStout, 


strong, 

bai!cire, (AH) s.m. Man with a mis-shaven foot 
or ankle. 

baile,-tean, s.m. Village, hamlet, town. 2 
Home. 3 Farin. t5¢{Clan, trite. Am bheil t’ 
athuir aig baile P is your father at bone ? 
an bail’ ud thall, yonder torn; fear a’ 
bhaile. the nrovrizter or tenat of the Jarm; 
tha buil’ aixe, he has a whol- farm. 

baileach, -ciche, a. Thrifty. econom ‘cal, frugal, 


careinl. 2 Excessive. 3 Thorough. complete. 
Gu b.. whelly, completely, thoroughly. [see 
pbuileacn. 

adh, &.m. see buileachadh. 


baileac,(AG) s.f. Ball, as of yarn. 
a bal! of worsted, 

baile-.i2ingnichte,tf s.m. For‘ ified town. 

àthcha,17 s.n. Country town. 

—— fearainn,:t s.m. Farm. 

—— -geamhraidh, m. Infield, the low 


grounds of a Highland farm.  27j Strath 
resiience. 

— -malairt, sn. Exchange. 

—— -margaidh, s.m. Market town. 2 Burgh. 


— mor, pl. bailtean móra, s.m. City, large 
town. 2 Metropolis. 

fbaileoz,-oig.-An, see bailleag. 

— puirt, -tean-, s.m. Seaport town. 

bailgeann, see bailg-fhioun. 

baiig-fhionn, a. Spotted, speckled, piebald. 2 
White-bellied. Na gabhair bh., the speckled 
(10018. 

bai'gueach, (AC) a White-bellied. Le laoigh 
bhreaca bhailgneach, with speckled white- 
bellied calves. 

bailich, v.a. see bhuilich. 2 Use badly.—Suth’d. 

tbhailich, see bvilici. 


B. snàtha, | t 


baiiteach,** e. Abonndiug in, or belonging to, 
towns or villages, civic. 

-——————As, -ais, &.m. Planting or founding 
towns. 2 Colonization. 3 Conntry township. 

bailteachas mär, 17 s.m. Afrected state, pride, 
hangitiness. 

bailtean, n. p7. of baile. 

bàim, gen. sing. of bàn. 

bainbh, s.m. Young pig. 

tainbh, pr. part. a’ Lainhheachd, 

—idlheachd,** ‘contr. bainupheachd) $./f. 

Piggishaess. 2 Pigsiag, furrow'ng. A’ b—, 
pr. pt. of bainbh. Tha a’ mhu: a’ teannadh 
ri b., the sow is about piaging. 

bainbhinn,** s, f. Suckling pig. 

fbàinchead, v.a. Antherize. 

*—— ———-—,** s. f. Authority, license. 

f——————Aach,** a. Authorizing. licensing. ` 

—— ———Aaichte,** pt. part. Authorized, li- 
censed. 

baind «wid, s. f. Female modesty, bashfulness, 
re-erve, delicacy. EKffeminacy. 

baiudea!aoh ** o Drizzly. 

ha‘n-dearg,tt a. Flesh-coloured. 

bain-dia, seo ban-dia. 

baindidh, -e, a. Mod st, feminine. 
ate. 3 Unissnniny. 

-— ———eachd, see baindeachd. 

bàine, s. f. Paleness, whiteness, fairness. 
sioladh a òh., :oncealiug his whit ness. 

bàine, comp. of ban. 

baineach, (AF) s.f. Mare. 

thaineachd, s.f. Woman slauchter. 

hàinead, 3. De'ree of whitene.s or fairness. 

t aineamhnil, a. see banail, 

ba/neasag, see baineasg. i 

bainea-g, -eisg, 8. f. ({vau+neas, white weasel) 
She-ferret. 

ach, a. Like a ferret, abounding in, 
or pertaining to, ferrets. 

bainfheis, see banais. 


v.a. Pig. 





2 Effemin- 


A* 





Fg 


bainfhirinsge 


kc Le 8.f. (ban-rfirionn) 
gender. 
fbaiufnreagradh, s.m. see bainn-fhreagradh. 
fbainfid, (buinidh iad They shall take. 
tbaing, adv. On a sudden. 
, ean, & f. Surprise, sudden attack. 
t hearachd, 8.f. Goddess. 
bàinidh, s..f. Fury, madness, rage. Tha e air 
b., he is raging, quite furious. 
bainionn, a. see boirionn. Na gabhair b., the 
she-goats. 
-— ———aách, see boirionnach. 
.-— ———aáchd, see boirionnachd. 
-—————as, see boirionnas. 
bainionta, a. see boireanta. 
bainis, -e, pl. bainnsean, see banais. 
bainisg, -ean, 8. f. Little old woman. 2 Female 
satirist. 3(AC) Singing naiad. 
eag, -eig, -eagin, dimin. of bainisg. 
————eil, a. Like an old woman. 
bàin-leus, see bàn-leus. 
bain-lighiche, -ean. s. f. see ban-lighiche. 
bainndidh, see baindidh. 
bainne, s.m. Milk, milky juice. 
Bó-bÀ., a milch-cow ; crodh-b. 
camhail-bh., milch-camels. 
bainne asal, asses’ milk. 
blàth, warm or fresh milk. 
binntichte, curdled milk. 
——— briste, e^ 
buaile, fold-milk. 
_ ~——— buidhe, milk yielded by a cow during 
$ first two days after calving. d 
chapull, mare 8 milk, kumiss. 
l cnàmha, fermentation of fresh and 
H butter-mi k, frothed with the loinid or 
t Jrothing-stick. 
chaorach, sheep's milk. 
ainhnaich, mik of a farrow cow( one 








*2 see boinne. 
milch-cattle ; 























wit 
milked.) 
see also below. 

ghobhar, goat’s milk. 








gyll &c., (better blàthaich.) 

lom, skimmed milk. 

maistridh, whipped cream or milk, 

frothed with the loinid. 

milis, sweet milk. 

muidhe,** butter-milk. 

na ciche, milk of the breast. 

na cipe, the milky juice of the mount- 

ain herb. 

nòis, beastings. 

reamhar, tt sheep’s milk boiled and 

curaled. 

tàig, (for boinne t—) rain-drop. 

ür, fresh milk. 

bainneach, -eiche, a. Milky, lacteal, like milk. 
2 Milk-producing, abounding in milk. A’ 
Bhealltuiun bR., milk-producing May. 

————as, 8.7. Milkiness. 

tbainnealach, -aich, see boinnealach. 

bainnear, a. Milky, abounding in milk. 

-———,* s.f. Fold for milking sheep &c. Lewis 

-————achd,** s.f. Milkiness. 

-—— ———daich.* see boinnealaich. 

bainneasay.** see baineasg. 

bainne-garahnaich,) s.m. (dit. the yearling’s 
milk—«siguiryiugthe scanty results yielded by 
sucking it) Red rattle in the Highlands, 
honeys'ckle in ireland. see uilleann and 
lus riabhach. 

bainne-gnalh»irjà) s.m. Lousewort, red rattle. 
see lus riabhach. 

bainu-fhreagradh, -aidh. $.m. Boud. 2 Stipu- 
lation. 
































60 
Common | bainnse, gen. sing. of banais. 


bàirigeadh 


bainnseach,tf a. Full of weddings. 2 Retired, 


desolate. 
—————,** sf. Field, sheep-walk, plain, 


solitary place. 
—— å, s£ Feasting, banquetting. 
tbainnseaghadh, s.m. Desolation, destruction. 
bainnsean, n. pl. of banais. 
bainnsich, v.a. Waste, consume. 
m eireag, -eig, -an, s.f. Femalesparrow- 
awk, 
—— — —— ——ach, &. Like, or pertaining to 
sparrow-hawks. 
bain-stitbhard, -aird, sf. see ban-s—. 
achd, s. f. ind. see ban-s—, 
bainteag,(AF) s. /. Small clam (fish.) 
tbain-teoladh,tt sg Female thief or secret 
criminal. 
baintighearna, -an, s.f. Lady. 2 Wife of a 
baronet or knight. 3 Gentlewoman. 








baintighearna hd, s. f: Ladyship. 


baintighearnas, -ais, 8.m. Ladyship. 2 Rule 
or sway of a lady. Thae fo bh., he is under 
petticoat government. 

bain-treabhach, see bantrach. 

bain-treabhachas, -ais, 8.m. see bantrachas, 

baintreach, see bantrach. 

baintreachas, see bautrachas. 

bair, -e, s. f. tBattle, strife. 2 Game, goal. 8 
Path, road. Beaten ms commonly applied 
to one opened through deep snow, hence, fear 
brisidh bàire, applied to à chieftain or leader 
in an arduous ene? 1 4(AC) Rutting. 
5t{Wheat. Chuiriad leth-bhàire shuas agus 
leth-bhaire shios a staigh orra, they beat them 
first before changing goals and then after,— 
Campbell’s Tales. Air magh na bàire, on the 
plain of battle ; ràinig iad a’ bh., they reached 
the goal; bhuidhinn iad b., they won a game. 


a year-old calf and still being tay s. f. Wave. 2 The sea. 


aircean, -ein, s.m. Ferret. 
baircean, s. pl. Cross-sticks or side timbers in 


a house, between the rafters. 


goirt, sour milk 2 Butter-milk—Ar-!tbairche, a. Strong, brave.—s.m, Battle. 


tbairchne, s.m. Fight by women. 

tbaircin, s. f. see baircean. 

baircinn, s.pl, see baircean. 

bairene,(AF) 8. f. Female cat. 2 White cat. 
àird, gen. sing. & n. pl. of bard. 

tbairdheis,** &.f. Point, tip, or end of any sharp 
instrument. 

—— —— — , v.n. Sharpen to a point. 

baireachd,(AC) s. f. Quarrelling, wrangling. 

fbairead, now biorraid. 

bàireadh, -eidh, see bàir. 

tbair-eatrom, a.  Light-headed. 
nimble, swift. 

tbaireise, s.m. Froth of water. 

bairgeanta, a. Strong, stout, sturdy. 2 Swift. 


2 Quick, 


tbairghean,** ein, s.m. Cake. 2 Floor. 3 
Plot of ground. 
fbair-ghin,** s.m. Begotten son. 
teach, a.  Begetting sons. —s.f. 


Woman that begets sons. 
tbairicean,** -ein, s.m. see baircean, 
bairich,** pr. part. a’ bairich, & a’ bairich- 

eadh, v. a. Low, bellow, roar. . 

—— ——, 3. f. ind. Lowing, bellowing, roaring 
of cattle. Ciod a’ bh. a th'ort ? what are ye 
bellowing at ? 

eadh,** -eidh, s.m. Lowing, bellowing, 
continued lowing or bellowing. 

-— idh, fut. af. a. of ' àirich. 

bàirig, pr. part. -eadh, v.a. Bestow, confer, 
grant, present, endow. i 

eadh, -eidh. sun. Bestowing, conferring, 

A’ b—, pr. part. of iaivig. 





bairighean 


fbairighean, s.m. Floor, flat of ground. 

tbairile, s. f. Helmet. 

bairill, see baraill. 

+biirin breac,tt s.m. Small cake offered to 
the moon at the autumnal equinox. 

*bairinn, s.f. Firebrand. 

bairisg, s. Fool. e T 

bàirleigeadh, -eidh, -leigean, see bàrnaigeadh. 

bàirlinu, s. €. Warning, summons of remova.. 
2 Rolling wave or sea, high sea, surge, bil- 
iow. 3(AH) Water flung back from an oar in 
hard rowing. 1 1 À 

aach, a. Summouing, warning to quit. 
9 Rolling, asa high sea. 3 en MET 

ich,v.a.Serve with swinmons of removal. 

thairn, v.a. Judge. 2**Assure, warrant. ` 

bàirneach, -ich, s. 7. Limpet. Chan fhaigh- 
inn ord air bairnich air, he was too many for 
ms ; b'e sin cead 'iarraidh ord a bhua:a 4h air 
bàirnich, requesting permission to uo sonwe- 
thing that no man can prevent, such as eating, 
breathing, de, 

fbàirneach, a. Perverse. 2 
Obstinate. 3 Fihal.. 

bàirneacnd, s. d Judging. 2 
Julvment, decision at law. 
3 Perverseness. 4 Fretfui- 
ness. At 

bairneag-cathan,(AF) s.f. Bar- 4 
varle. limpet.—Arran. 

fbàirnich, va. Fret. 2 Judge. 

¢bairridh-bhuaghbhail, s. /. 
Sounding horn. 

fbairrin, E.m. Mitre. 

ER WE wchean, e.f. I8 Bairveadh. 

-—————4l, 8. f. Scolding, raillery. 2 Satire. 

bàirseag, -eig, -an, 8f. (dim. of bà rseich.) 
Young scold. 2 Young shrew. 3**T'op of the 
windpipe. 

hairsich, v.a. Scold, rail. 

tbais, s. f. Water. 

bais, gen. sing. of bas. 

bais, gen. sing. of bas. 2 see bathais. 

tbaisc, a. Round. 

baisceall, -ill, s.m. Wild, ungovernable person. 
2**Mad person. $**Atteinpter. 

baisceanta, see basganta. 

baiscnailc, s.f. HK iddle, red earth. 

baischriadh, 

baiscmheall, -eill, 

biisl, see baist. 

bai«leadh, see baisteadh. 

baiseach, a. Having a large palm. 2 Smooth. 
4 see baoiseach. 

baiseaca, ach, sem. Heavy shower. 

,8.f. ind. Palmistry. 
-eil, s.m. Pride, arrogance, haughti- 








2 Satirize, lampoon 


Gm. Ball. 2 Round mass. 


¢baiseal, 
ness. 

baisealach, -aiche, a. Proud, arrogant. 

tbaisfhionn, a. Flesh-colvured, redlish. 

baisgeauta, a. see boillsgeanta. 

haisgeil,-e, o, see boillsgeil. 

baisin, sea basaidh. 

fbaisleach, s.m. Ox. 2 Plash of water, heavy 
rain. 3 Handful of anything. 4 Stone where 
women were wont to wasn. 

baist, v.a. Baptize. perform the ceremony of 
baptism. 2jfUunmerse. plunge in water. 3fti 
Dilute as strong li juora. 

baiste, pt. pt. of bhaist. j 

ach. -ich, -ichew:. aan, Baptist. $2 s. Jf. 








Rain. Na Baistich, the Baptists. 
ach, @ Baptismal, of, or pertaining to, 
bap.ixm. 





achail. a. sse haisteach, a. 
an, -idh, s.m. Baptism, act of baptizing. 





61 


baleach 


'G a bh., bactizing him ; tha e air a bA., he ig. 
baptized ; nisge beatha gun bh., whisky unre 
duced  muilach d» bhaistidh, y»ur forehead $ 
ó'tar fion os cionn do bhaistidh, wine wiil be 
drunk on the occasion of your baptism—said 
whea the chief had an heir born to him, 

baisteir, -van,s.m. Baptizer, baptist. 

baistiehe,** see baisteach, 8. 

baistidh, fut. aff. a. of baist. 

-—————— , a. Baptismal. Amar b., a baptismal 


font. 
tbaistidhe, s.m. pl. Drops from the eaves of a 
house, raia drops. 
bàite. pt. pt. of hàrh. Drowned. 2 Quenched, 
extinguished, ( 7j. overwheimed.) Tha ro? 
anam b. g1 cràiteach ann ain chom, my soul 
is overwhelmed grievously within ms. 
baiteach, -ich, s. f. Soft marshy ground.® 
baiteach, -eich, s.m. Farmer. 2 Cup. 3 Jug. 
baiteal, -eil, sm. Battle. 2 see baideal. 


ach, -aiche, a. Battalious. 2 see baid- 
ealach. 
baith, -e, 5. f. Folly. 2 Lure, decoy. 
baitheach, see bàthaich. 
bai his, see bathais. 


baithte, see bàite. 

+ba‘tin, s.m. pl. ( for bàtaichean) pl. of bata. 

thaitir, -e, -ean, 8.m,dim. of bata, Small stick. 

eachd, s.f. Beating with a stick. 

baitsear,** s.n. Charman. 

hàl.** ail, see ball. 

tbal, s.m. Lord. 2 The sun. see Beal. 

balach, -aich, s. m. Clown, peasant of the low- 
erclass. 2 Young man, fellow. 3 Srurdy 
fellow. 4 “Pam” or jack in cards. B. nà 
h-aimhreit, à quarreisome disorderly fellow. 

balachail, a. Clowaish, vulgar, clumsy, un- 
mai Je, 2 Boyish, puerile. 

balachain, gen. sing. of balachan. 

balachan, -aio,-an, sm. Boy. 2 Yonng boy. 
3 Little boy. 4tt Little clown. Maide bal- 
achain, a boy's sti. k. 


4——————4A3, -als, 8.m. Boyhood, adolescence, 


&ze s .cveeding childhood. 

tbulalh, s.m. Fighting. 2 Smell (boladh.) 

bilazam, see balgam. 

thulaighe, 8. f. Advantage. profit, thrift. 

fbalaist. s.f. Gaelic spelling of ballast and 
ba'ance. 

balaistich,** v.a. (Eug. ballast ) Ballast. 

balvuta,** s.m. Gaelic spelling of ballant, the 
seotch form of ballad. 

balantaiche,** s.m. Ballad-singer. 

balaoch, see balach. 

balardach.** a. Gorzeous. 

balbh, -aiibhe, o. Dumb, mnte. 2 Silent,quiet, 
at peace. Mar uisge b. a’ ghlinne, like thesia 
lent water of the valley ; mar bh. dhriùchd, 
like silent dew ; air son an duine bh., for the 
dum) man ` éiridh tonn air uisze bulbh, wave 
will rise on silent water—calm people when 
stirred may astonish. 

balbhachd, s. f. ind. Dumbness, muteness. 2 
Silenuc:. Marbh bk. na h-vidhche, the dead si- 
lence of irignt. 

*balbna!h. -aidh, s.m. Becoming mute. 

balohnz, -aig, -an. 8. f. Pebole, small stone. 

——— ch. a. Pebbly. 

balbnan, -ain, -an, s.m. Dumb person. Labh- 

2 


Sur um b., the dum spoke. 
acid, ar Duinbness, muteness. 

Dumb s25w, connmunication by mute signs, 
Ri b., communicating ideas by mute signs. 

balbh-thiuneas, s.m. Apoplexy. 

bale, aile, s.m. see bailc. 

f—-, a. see tbailc. 

balcach -aiche, a. Splay-footed. 2 see bailceach. 


batcai che 


balcaiche, s. f. Splay-foot. 2 Splay-foot edness. 


62 


ballach 
and the New Year. 


». A 3 D p 1 
baleanta, a. Stout, firm, stroug, muscular. Gu | balg- .eice,tt s.m. Fuzzbal!, sponge mushroom. 


b., firmly, stoutly. 

balc-chasach, a. see balcach. 

balenihor, -oire, a. Great, corpulent. 

balg, builg, s.m. Leather bag, budget, wallet, 
scrip, satchel. 2 Seed of an herb. 3 Boss of 
& shield. 4 Belly. 5 Womb. 6 Blister on the 
skin. 7 Air-tube of a cycle. 8 Quiver. 9 
Pair of bellows. Séid ain balg, blow the bel- 
lows ; á balg na mai tne, from the wom) of the 
morning; balg ri gréine, basking; is labhar 
na builg fhàs, noisy are the empty bags, NGP; 
arra-bhaly, an eyelid—J.M. 

fbalg,** s.m. Man of learning. 

balg, v.a. see balgaich. 


balg-abhrais, 3.m. Wool-bag. 2 Batch of wool. | 


balgach, -aiche, a. Full of bags or blisters. 
2 Like a bag or wallet. 3 Bellied, bulging, 
jutting. 4 Kuobby, massy. 

balvach,* s.f. Corpulent female. 2 The small 
pox. 3| Boil, bubo. [When having either 
of meanings 2 or 3, it is preceded by the ar- 
ticle ol A’ bhalgach Fhrangach, the French- 


poz. 

balgaich, v.a. Belly out, as a sail. 2 Stow in 
a bag or satchel. 3 Puff, blister, swell. 

balgair, -e, -ean, 8.5. Fox. 2 in contempt Cun- 
ning fellow. 3 Dog. 4 Imptudent person. 5 
Glutton. 6 Big-beiliel man. ase) Thief, 
rogue, robber. 8(AF) Otter. A bhalgair tha 
thu ann ! fox that thou art ! buail am balach 
air a charbad is buail am balgair air-an t- 
sròin, Ait the flunkey on the check and the dog 
= the nose ; balgair balaich, a wortiless fel- 
ow. 

———-each, -eiche, a. Currish. 

eachd, s. f.ind. Slyness, craftiness. 2 

Currishness. 

balgairean, n. pl. of balgair. 

balgam, -aim, s.m. Mouthful of any liquid,sip, 
gulp. B. bainne, a mouthful of milk. 

balgan, -ain, s.m. (dim. of balg) Little bag, 
satchel, wallet. 2 Little sack. 3 Little blis- 
ter. 4 Belly. 5 Calfoftheleg. 6 Tubercle. 
7 Middle part of the body, waist. 

balranach,tt a. Belonging to a small bag, 
blister, calf of the leg, &c. 

balgan-beice 











-beiceach,} see caochag. 
-beucan,* 

-iongrach, s.m. Cyst. 
-losyainn,} 38. 7. 





Truffe, tuber cibarium 
2 Subterraneous ball- 
like bodies, something 
like potatoes, found in 
Glenlyon. 
-péiteach, 8.m. see 
caochag. 
-séididh, s. m. 
Small pair of bellows. 
2 see caochag. 
-snamha, s.m. Air- 
bladder in fishes. 
-suain, **3.m. Sleeping-hag. Chuir iad 
am balgan-suain fo'n ceann, they have put the 
sleepy-bag under their heads (applied to a per- 
son who sleeps too much.) 
-uisge, s.m. Water-bubble. 2** Blister 
full of watery humour. 
balg-bannaig,(AC) s.m. Bannock-hag. 2 The 
sacred shrine in which the Host was carried. 
3 The bag in which the gifts of Christinas, 
Easter, and other sacred seasons were placed. 
It is now used to carry uie various kinds of 
food-stuffs given to. carollers at Christmas 











17. Balgan-losgainn. 











—— -bhonn, s.m. Pneumatic tyre of a cycle. 
—— -bhronnach, a. Swag-bellied. Balach 
beag ò., a swag-bellied little churl. 








Tm 


A Cy 


— 


18. Balg-bhuachair. 


balg-bhuachaill, s.m. see balg-bhuachair. 

balg-bhuachair,} builg-, s.m. Mushroom— 
— campestris. 2**Toad-stool, '*puddock-'* 
stool. 

balg-chasach, a. Bow-legged, bandy-legzed. 

balg-dhubh, -uibhe, a. Cloudy, dark, gloomy. 

balg dubh,§ s.m. Large fuzzhall. see beach. 

balg-iougrach, 3.m. Abscess 

halg-losgainn, builg-, see balgan-losgainn. 

baly-meadhoin,f} s.m. Waist. belly. 

balg-péiteach, s.n. Puffball. see caochag. 

balg-saisnead, see balg-shaizhde. 

oalg-sé.d.dh, s.m. Pair of bellows. 2 Puffball, 
see caochag. 

balg-shaigide, s.m. Quiver. 

balg-shuil, s.f. Large prominent eye. 

—————-each, a. Having large, round, pro» 
lu: nent eyes, 

baiz-smi'd, s m. Puffball, see caochag. 

balg-snamha,tf see balgan-snamua. 

haly-solair, -e, s.m. Magazine. 

balg-thional, sm. Wallet. 

balgum,-uim, -an, see balgam. 

toall, s.m. Skull. 

ball, buill, sm. Member, limb. 2 Member of 
a society. 3 Male iustrument of generation. 
4 Any part o° wale or female dress. 65 In- 
struinent, tool, implement. 6 Ball, globe. 7 
Football. 8 Dance. 8 Spot or plot of ground. 
10** Boss.  liff Stud, nail.  12**Bowl. 13 
Cable, rope. Tha ’n deagh bhallaodaich agad 
an sin,you have an excellent piece of dress there; 
do ’n bhacach lüth nam ball, strength of 
limbs to the lame ; vuill a’ Chomuinn Ghàid'i- 
lig, members of the Gaelic Society ; aghaidh 
gach buill ceangailt’ isfuasgailte, the end of 
each rope bound and runniny loose—as the ship’s 
tackling required ; thug iad aghaidh am buill 
isancaman air, they turned all their force 

ainst him—lit. turned their balls and shinty 
ubs on him. 

ball, (air ball) adv. Immediately, on the spot. 

balla, pl. -achan, s.m. Wall. 2 Bulwark. 3** 
Boss of a shield. 

balla-bacaidh, s.m. Wall of defence, bulwark. 

ball-àbhachais, s.m. | Gazing stock. 2 Laugh- 

ball-àbhachd, s. f. ing stock. 8 Object of 
mockery. 

ball-acfhuinn, s.m. Tool, instrument, tackling. 

ballach, -aiche, a. Spotted, speckled. 2 9'riped. 
3**Tartan. 4 Walled, mural. 5 Having lofty 
walls. 6 Bossy, studded. An sgiath bha!lach, 
the bossy shield ` bonaid bhallach, a spotted or 
tartan bonnet. 


ballachd 


ballachd, s. f. Piedness. 2(JM) Dirty trick. 
Rinn iad ballachd air, they play d a dirty 
trick on him. 

ballach-muir,(AF) s.m. Roex-fish. 

ball-acrach,* s.»». Cable. 

balla-lealachaidh,** s.m. Partition-wall. 

balladh, see balla. 

ballag, -aig, An. s. f. The cranium, skull. 2 
Egy-shell. 3 Neat little woman. 4 f. dimin. 
of ball. 

ballag-losgainn, see balgan-losgainn. 

ballaich, v.a. Spot, speckle. 2 Stain, discolour. 

——te, pt. part. Spotted. 

ballail, a. Parietal. 

bail-ai:nhleis, s.m. 
ment of mischief. 

ball-aimlisge, see ball-aimhleis. 

bailaire, ) Common cormorant. 

baliaire-bòthain, sgarbh. 

ball-airm, s.m. Weapon. 

ball-airneis, s.m. Piece of furniture. 

bailairt gen. sing. of ballart. 

bail-amhare, son. Spy-glass. 
a pair of spectacles. 


Unruly member, instru- 


see 


bailan, -ain, -an, s.m. Shell. 2 Covering. 3 


Bucket. 4 Tub. 5 Any wooden vessel, 6 
Teat. 7 Cupping-g'vss. 8**Churn, 9 Broom. 
10 Balsam. 11 1.5, trough. ttvat. 12(0M) 
Udder—Arran. A’ cur nam ballan, applying 
the cups ; ballan basmuinn, reviving bal- 
sam. 

ballan-bainne, s.m. Milk-tub. 

-binnteachaidh, s,m. Cheese-vat. 

-binntiche, s.m. see b—binnteachaidh. 
2(AC) Cheese-press. 

—— -blathaich, s.m. Butter-milk tub. 

——— -büirn, $5». Water-tub. 

-ioeshlaint, (AC) s.m. Vessel of healing 
in which, according to the old Gaelic tales, 
was kept the balsam for restoring to health 
and life those wounded or killed in battle. 

— nem, see balg-losgainn. 

——— -nigheachain, BE 

-nigheadaireachd, Sem. Washing-tub. 

-oir, (AF) s.m. (lit. gold spot) Wren. 

-seilcheig, s.m.  Snail-shell. 

-stiallach s.m. A kind of pillory, used of 
old in the Highlands, for punishing liars and 
petty offenders. , It was a sort of frame erec- 
ted ona pil.ar, to which the culprit was 
tigntly bound with a rope about the shoul- 
ders, by which he hung, exposed to the ridi- 
cue and maltreatment of passers by. 

4ballard, see ballart. 

ballart, -airt, s.m. Noisy boasting, fuss about 
one’s family. 2 Clamour, turbulence. Gun 
bhallart gun mhórchuis, without noise or 
boasting. 

——ach, -aiche, s. Noisy, turbulent, clam- 
orous, troublesome. 2 Boastful. 3**Conspic- 
uous. 


























achd, s. f. ind. Proclamation. 2 Noise, 
clamour. 

——————aáchadh,** -aidh, s.m. Proclamation. 
2 Act of proclaiming, bawling, or making a 


noise. 
adh,** -aidh, s.m. Pro lamation. 
aich, s. f. Loud noise. 2 Howling,shout- 
ing, hooting. Ciud a’ bh. a th'ort ? what 
are you howling at ? 
———aich, v.n.Proclaim. 2 Howl,shout,hoot. 
ball-bhreac, a. Varie:ated, chequered, spotted, 
EN A’ bheatha bhall-bureac, variegated 
ife ; mar neulaibh b., like spotted clouds, (cir- 
ro-cuinulus, ) 
ball-bhreachd, 
ball-Luird, 








see ball-bhreac. 
am. Butt, object of derision. 





Buill-amhare,, 





ball-sgot 


ball-büirte, see ball-büird. 

ba!l-cainb,* s.n. Hempen rone: 

ball-chrith, s. f. ind. Trembling. 2 Terror. $ 
Tremor of the limbs. 4 Trembling with ter- 
ror. 65**Chilliness. 

each, a. Tremb ing. 

ball-chruinn, «.  Round-limbed. 2 Round- 
spotted. 

ball-cluaise, s.m. Sheet (rope) of a sail. 

ball-cogaidh, s.m. Warlike instrument. 

ball-coise, 8. f. Football. 

ball-deise, sm. Instrument to which two per- 
sonshave aright. 2 Tool 8 Any useful in- 
strument or weapoa. 4 see ball-fearais. 

bali-dnearz, a, Griz:led. 2 Bay-coloured. Eich 
bhall-dhearg, bay horses. 








| ball-limeis, s.m. Ovject of contempt. 


ball-diomnair, s.m. Private member. 2ttUseful 
instrnmnent. Na buill-dhiomhair, the private 
mem rs. 


] ball-dobrain,|l s.m. Mole on the skin. 


ball-donais, s.m. Pettifogger. 

nall-dübh,* s m. Black spot. 2**Blot, blemish. 

ball-faaaid, see baii-fanoid. 

hall-fanoid, s.m.  Laughing-stock, object of 
derision. 

ball-faitheam,(AH) s.m. Bolt-rope. 

ballfaobhrach,**-aich, s.m. Sharp-edged in- 
strument. 

ball-fearais, s.m. Membrum virile. 

ball-fochaid,** s.m. Laughing-stock, object of 
derision. 

ball-zaoir,(AH) s.m. Object of disdain, object 
of universal reinark and gossip. 

ball-ghalar, -air, s.m. Plazue. 2 Gonorrhea. 

ball-zobhfa, 3.m. Golf-ball. 

ball-iomachair,** s.m. Support, prop. 2 Under- 
setter. 

ball-:oiaair, s.m. Foot-ball. 

ball-laiinhs, tt s.m. Haud-ball. 

ball-langais,(A H) s.m. Towing-rope. 

ball-laugastaiche, s.m. B Us 

bal-leithir,ff s.m. Leather ball. 

fball-loisgteach, s.m. Lobster. 

ball-magaidh, s.m. Laughing-stock, bject of 
derision. 


ball-maise, s.m. Ornament. 


ball-maslaidh,tt s.m. Object of derision. 

bal!-mosglaidh,** s.m. Instrument for sounding 
an alarm. 

ball-nasg,tf s.m. Joint. 2**Ligament connect- 
ing the bones at the joints to pravent disloca- 

ion. 

ball-oibre,** s.m. Tool to work with. 

ball-oir, see ballan-oir. 

bal elt $.m. Puddle, slough. 2 Miry 

ace. 

pe THEN ** 3.m. Ballot. 

ball-sampuill,* s.m. Example, specimen. 
Spectacle of shaine. 

ball-seirce, s.m. Beauty-spot. 

tballsg, s.m. Blot, spot, freckle. 

ballsgach,**a. Burlesque. Cainnt b., burlesque. 

ballsgair, -ean, s.m. Giddy, foolish person. 

-—————eachi, s. f. ind. Sallies of folly, any 
kind of silly ridiculous foily. 

ball-sgeig,** s.m. Laughing stock, object of de- 
rision. 

hall-sgéinthe, s.m.  Beauty-spot. 

ball-sgiath, -eithe, 3. f. Bossy shield. 
nain b., F.af bossy shields. 

ball-sgiorradh, -aidh, sm. Deed dona unexpec- 
tedly. 2**ieat. 

ball-sgiorrail, a. Performing unexpected deeds. 

ball-szóid, s.m. Rope. 2**3pot, blemish. St 


Blister, 
see ball-sgoid. i Se 


211 


Fionn 


ball-sgot, 


ball-sinnsearachd 





furniture. 2 Heir-loom. 
ball-spéil,* s.m. Hand-»all. 
ball-spors,* s.m. Laughing-stock. 
bal!-taghaidh.** s.m. Ballot. 


ball-tairgne, -uill-, s.m. Tackle. 2 Halli:rd. 


64 


ball-sinnsearachd, s.m. Old article of fanily | bana-chara, 


banats-mhagaidh 


, See bana-charaik 

bana-ch waid, -chairdean, sf. Female relative, 
kinswoman. 

bànach l, art Whiteness, paleness, fairness. 

banach lich, & f. Vaceination. (Preesded bg 
he ericie a.) 


ball-tamailt, s.m. Object of disgrace or reproach | bana-chowd, &. £ Female gipsy or tinker. 2 


Tha thu ad’ bliall-tàmailt, thou art an ob- 
ject of disgrace. 

ball-tarruiusg, ti pl. buill-, s.m. Tackle. 

ball-toirmiag, s.m. For^idde. tool or weapon. 
2 Obstruction. 3t Detestable ovject. 
Man to be avoided. 

balluich, v.a. see ballaich. 

fbalma, s.m. Baim. 


$———ich, v.a. Kmbalm. s 
+bal-seirc, sm. Carver at a prince's table. 2 
Master of ceremonies at high feasts. 3 Her- 


ald. 
balt, -uilt, -an, s.m. Welt of a shoe.. 2 Border, 
belt. 3 Selvidge ofcloth. Balt nan sul, the 
eyelids. 
baltach,a. Belted, welted, bordered. 
— — —Adh,** -aidh, sm. Skirting. 
1baltadh, pi. -aidhe, s.m. Welts, fetters, borders. 
baltaich. v.a. Welt, belt, border. 
bainhsgach.(AH) a. Restless. 2 Erratic. 
bainhsgaire(AH) s.m. Restless, unreliable fel- 


low 
ach'l,(AH) s. f. ind. Restlessness. 

2 Unreliability. 

tban, -ain, s.m. Copper. 2 Coppermine. 3 
Brass. 4ttFoot, pedestal. . 

bàn, -àine, a. White, pale, light in colonr, wan, 
fair, fair-haired. 2 Vacant, waste 3r[fTrue. 
Eich bhàna, white horses ; talamh b., waste 
ground. 

ban, -àin, s.m. Left-hand side of furrow in 
ploughing, as distinguished from th?' dear" 
(red) right-hand side. 2** Matrix of a cow. 
3(JM) Fallow ground. 

ban, gen, pl. of bean. 

ban- (female, she-.) A prepositive in compounds 
usually pronounced bana before labials (B, 
M,P) and palatals (C,G) ; but ban before lin- 
gnals (L, N, R ) dentals (D, T, S) aud lab- 
ial F. Fàidh, a prophet ` ban-fhàidh, a 
prophetess ` gaisgeach, a hero, bani-ghais- 
geach, æ heroine ; caraid, a relation, bana- 
charaid, a female relation. Ban must 
be prefixed in speaking of a female’s country, 
as, Bana-Ghàidheal, a Highland scvnan; Ban- 
Albannach, a Scotswoman; Ban-Fhrangach, 
a Frenchwoman ; Ban-Duitseach, a Dutchwo- 
man. 

bin-aba, -achan, 8. f. Abbess. 

bana-bharan, -ain, s. f. Baroness. 

bana-bhàrd, -dird, s. £ Poetess. 

: -—achd, s. f. Verses of a bardess. 

fbana-bhiocais, 8. f. Viscountess, 

bana-bhuachaille, -an, 8. f. Shepherdess. 
Female who tends sheep or cattie. 

bana-bhuachailleachd, a. J. Business or condi- 
tion of a shepherdess. 

bana-bhuidseach, -sich, -sichean, &. f. Witch, 
sorceress. 

bana-bhusdraich,** Witch sorceress. 

bànachadh, -aidh, ëm. Whitening, bleaching. 
2 Growing pale. 3 Laying waste. A’ b—, 
pr. part. of banaich. 

ban-achadh,tt -aidh, -nean, s.m Waste field. 

banachag, -aig, -ean, s./. Dairymaid., «ff 
Milker. 

banachaigeachd, s. 7. ind. Business of a dairy- 
maid, the making or preparing of dairy pro- 
duce, 2% Otfice of a dairymai'l. 

bana-channtair,** sm. Chantress. 








2 


incon sinpt, Mannerless female, 
bana-chéile, sea beau-ehdile. 


kana-cheileadair, ean, &./.Exeautrix. 2 Fe- 
male gnardian. 


4 JM) | bana-cueasaicke, s. f. Actress. 


bana-ch!^ó'in. see: bana-chliamhuinn. 

bana-ehlininbniun, s. f. Daughter-in-law. Ges 
sister-in-law, beother’s wi:e or a wife's sister, 
3ttAny female relation b: marriage. 

fbana-chliaraiehse, -ean, s, J. Songstrass. 

bina-chocaire, -ean, s. f. Female cook, cook 
mai i. 

bana-chòcaireachd., s. f. Bnsiness of a female. 
cook. 2 Handiwork of a female cook. Tha 
i ag iounsachadh oa b., she islearning cook-ry.. 

bana-choigle, s. f. Female goasip or companion. 

bana-choigreach, -rich, s.f. Female stranger, 
strauge woman. 

fbana-ch»interch, 8. f Waiting maid. 

bana-ch)mhdhalta, sf. Foster-sister. 

bana-chompanach, -aich, s. f. Fumale compan- 
ion. 

bana-chompanas, -ais, 8m. Female compan- 
ionship. Na dean b. rithe, do not. associate 
with her. 

+bin2-chonganta, (bean-chomhnuidh) Mid wife. 

ben wheuch,|] s. f. Small-pox. [Preceded by 
the article a.) 

ban-chra cneach, t$ -eiche, a. White or fair- 
skinned. 

bana-chriosdaidh, 8. J. Female Christian. 

bana-chr:itear, -e, -ean, 8./. Female harper, 
fem ile minstrel. 

bana-chiisleanaiche 8. f. Female performer om 
4 wind-instrument, female piper. 

baua-ch"u"iwdlair,* & J. Executrix. 
guardian. 

bana-churai!lh, s. f. Amazon. 

tbina lh, san. Wasting. 

ban-adh ultraiche, see ban-adhaltranach. 

ban-a ihaltranach, -aiche, & f. Adultress. 

bànag -aiz,-an,s. f. Grilse. 2 Anything white. 
a White-faced girl. 4** Cant term for a shil- 
ing. 

banag, -aiz, -an, 8. f. Smart little woman. 

baua-zhai:ze, s f Surprising feats of a female. 

bar i-3haisgeach, eich, 8.7. Heroine. 2 Fe- 
male warrior. 


2 Female 


‘pbana-vhoistidh, -ean, s f. God-mother. 


bana-ghridair, 8. /. Landlady of an ale-house 
orinu, 2 Female brewer. 3 Hostess. Cagar 
na b., the ale-wife's whisper (soon turns loud.) 

ban-aibhistear, -ir, -ean, s. f. She-devil. 

bànaich, v. a. & n. Whiten, make pale, bleach. 
2 Grow pale. 3**Make wasteor vacant. 

bàuaichs, -ean, s.m. ‘The outer of two plough- 
iug horses. 

bànaidh, a. Sallow, pale. 

banail,-e, a. Modest, womanly, feminine, de- 
licate. 2 Comely, elegant. A bhean bhan- 
ail, his modest wife. 

fbauailt, s.f. Nurse. 

banair, -2, -ean, see mainnir. 

ban-aireach. see banarach. 

banais, bainn e, pl. biinnsean, s.f. Wedding- 
feast. Fear na bvnnse, the bridegroom ; bean 
na bainnse, the bride; culaidh bainnse, @ 
wedding dress. 

baniisinhazaid,(JM) s. f. Mock wedding, 
[At one time coinuion in Uist.] 


banais-pheighinn 
birais-rheighinn,?$ s. f. Penuy wed ling. 


tbau.viteuch.** a. Serious, grave, sedate. 

banal, see bauail. 

banalachd. «. 7. Female modesty, behaviour 
b'onvming A famale. 

banalas, sue byoR!achl. 


banaltrach 1, 4 f, Narsing. 2 Business of a 


narse. Mich air bh.. ouf at nursing. 
banaltradh. -ailh, s. f. see banaltrum. 
binaltraich.* v.a. Nurse. 


ba altrnim,* t.a. Nurse. 

banaltrum, -nim, s f. Nurse. 

baaaltruma: hd, seo banaltrackd. 

b .waltrumas, 

ban-mhaighstir, -ean, 8. J. "Mistress. 
male who employs one or more servants. 
School-mistress. 

bana-mhaighstireas, -eis, s.m. Rule of a mis- 
tres. 

bana-mhalta, a. Sha:nefaced, modest, bashful. 

bana-r5hàltachd, s. f. Shamefacedness, bashful- 
ness, modesty. 

baua-mhareaiche. s. f. Female rider. 

bana-mhircair.** en buivainhareaiche. 

bana-whircus, tis, -uisean, x. f. Marchioness. 

ba .a-mharsauta.* s. f. Female merchant. 

bana-mheirleach, s..f Female thiet. 

bana-mhisgear. 3. P, Female drunkard. 

bana-inhorair,-ean, 38.7. Lady. 2 Wife of a 
lord or barouet. 3 Conntess. 

bana-mhorinhair, ses baua-mhorair. 

bana-mhortair, s. f. Murderess. 

bana-phriounsa, s. f. Princess. 

fban-ara, s. f- Mail-seryant. 

banarach, -aich, s. f. Dairvinail. milkmaid. 

banarachas, -ais, s.m. Office of a dairymaid or 
milkinaid. 

ban-asal, -ail, &.f. She-ass. 

banasgal, aee tban-gal. 

banas-taighe, s. f. Female occupations, house- 
wifery. 

banbh, bainbh, s.m. Land unploughed for a 
year. +2 Pig. 

baubhan, see banbh. 

ban-bhroilleach. a. White-bosomed. Comh- 
nuidh nam bau-bhroillvach òigh, the dwelli..y 
of the white-bosomed maids. 

ban-bhusdraich, see bana-b!iusdraich. 

banc, -ainc, -an, s.m. see baile. 

bane, -a, pi. -an, & -anna',«.m. Gaelic spelling 
of bank, (tai igh- réi tih. baile.) 

bancach, see bailceach. 

bancaid, see ban«aid. 

baneai , s.m. Gaelic spelling of banker. 

ban-chag, 

ban-charaid, see bana-ch—. 

ban-chèard, 

bueciëile, see bean-chéile. 

bau-cheileadair, 

ban-chliamhuinn, 

fban-chliaraiche, 

ban-chocaire, 

ban-chocaireachd 

ban-choigle, 

ban-choigreach, 

tban-chointeach, 

ban-chomhuhalta, 

ban-chompanach, 

ban-choinpanas, 

+ban-chonganta, 

ban-chraicueach, -eiche, a. White-skinned,fair- 
skinned. 

ban-chrnitear, see bana-chruitear. 

ban-chruthach, a. Pale-complexioned, pale, 
Walt. 

bav-chn, -choin, s.m. White dog. 
eus bero. 


9 Fe- 
8 


(asal boirionn.) 


+ see bana-ch—. 


21:1liustri- 


65 


ban-iasgair 

fbàn-chnir, s. f.ind. Sea-sickness where no 
eructation is produced. 

UP E see bana-ch—. 

ban-chradair, 

ban-churaidh, \ see bana-ch—. 

tbauda, a. Female, feminine, modest. 

bandachd, 8. f. contr. for baindeachd. 

ban:laiih, a. see baindidh. 

——-—eachd, see baindesch‘1, 

ban-dalta, -achan, 8. f. Fo-ter-diughter. 

ban-dalta-baistidh, s. 7. God-da: igater. 

bàa-dhearg, a Pink. 

ban-lia, gen.s. bain-dé, pl. -dée & -diathan, et 
Goddess, A’ bhan-dia a ni am bogha-frois, 
the go:ldess that forms the rainbow ` ach mar 
an ceudna gu'n cuirear teampull na ban-dé 
mó;re Diana an neo-phrìs, but also that the 
Salt, d the great goddess Diana should be 
^spi$ 

ban- di ^ bhol, -oil, s.f. Female devil, or fury. 

ban- iiùc, -an, sf. Duchess. 

ban-lra&o!dh, see ban-druidh. 

ban- iru dh, 's f. Enchaniress. sorceress, 

ba:-drüacair, see bana-mhisgear. 

ban- lubhairiche, sf. Dowager. 

toan-duileamhuin,{t s.f. Goddess. 

ban-éigueachadh, -aidh,** s.m. Rape 

ban-fha.dh, e, "ean, 8. f. Prophetess. Agus 
ghlae Miriam, a’ bhan-fhàidh, tiompan "ua 
làimh, and Miriam the prophetess took a tim- 
brel in her hand. 

tbin-fheadanach, -aiche, s.f. Female piper. 2 

Fe:nale who plays any wind instrument. 





bau-fuizheach. -iche, -ichean, sf. Female 
weaver. 2 Female who knits. [Pronounced 
bain*ach.) 


see ban-fhigheach. 
ban-; 'higheadaireachd, s.f.ind. Work or occu- 
pation of a female weaver. 
ba»-fhiosaiche, o sf. Fortune-teller. 3 
2 


Pronhetess. 3 Gipsy. 
ban-flilath, -aith, -ean, 8f.  Chief's wife. 
Ladies. 


Her. ine. Zero, 
btu- hluasg, $.m.ind. sve ban-fhluasgadh. 
ban-fhiuasgach, a. M-nstrual. 
ban-fhlaaszadh, -aidh, s.m. Menstrual courses, 


bau-fhi rheadair, 


ban-fhuadach, -aich, 8m. Fornication. 

d, s. f. ind. Rape. 2 Forcibly 
carrying off a woman. 

ban-fhuaighealachd, a f. Sewing, business of 
a sempstress or milliner, millinery. [Pro- 
nounced banalachd. 

ban-fhuaighealaiche, 
nii: liner. 








-ean, s. f. Sempstress, 

Pronounce | banalaiche. | 

baa-fhuineadair, s.f. Female baxer. 2 Fe- 
male cook. 

banz,* s.f.ind. Drum. A’ toirt fuaim 4 b., 
making a drum-beat masterly, 

tbang,It s.m. Nut. 2 The touch. 8 Hinder. 

4 Reaping. 

v.a. Bind, obtain a promise, 

bangadh, -aidh, s.m. Bindinz, promise, 

bangaid, Gaelic spelling of banquet. 

each,** a. Banqueting. 2 Fond of 

banqueting. 

sachd, 8.f.ind, Continued banqueting. 

ban-zha sgeach, see bana-ghaisgeach. 

fb3ughil, s.m. Female heroism. 

bà- -gheal, tt -ile, a. Milk-white, dead white. 

ban- shias, comp. bàin-ghlaise, a. Pale, wan, 
ashy (colour. ) 

ban-ghoistidh, 


ance. 








see bana-ghoistidh. 
ban-girüdair, see bana-ghrüdair. 
bàn-ghu« ach, -aich, s. f. ‘The small-pox. 
bür-i:ra, -iarlan, s. f. Countess. 

b Ln ist. Ab) s. f. Fem .leorspawning fish, 
-— ———-üir, -e, -ean, £. f. Fisherwoman. 


ban-ifrinneach 


woman. 

ban-iofarnach, see ban-ifrinneach. 

bau-iompair, tts. f. Empress. 

ban-iutharnach, s.J. see ban-ifrinneach. 

bar-aoch, laoich, s.f. Heroine. 2 Amazon. 
3 Virago. 

Yan-lé'gh, -e, -ean, 8. f. Female physician. 

ban-leogharn, s. f. Lioness. 

ban-leowuaon, see ban-leóv hann. 

bàn-leus, -leois, som. ‘Thin whit: cloud. 

ban-liehich, -e. -ean, s, f. Female doctor. 

fbàn-inhac s.m. Son-in-law. 

ban-mhaighstir, 

— eachd, 

EE eas, 

ban-mharcaiche, 

ban-mharcus, 

fbàu-imbathair, s. f. Mother-in-law. 

ban-mhorair, see bana-inhorair. 

ban-mhor.air, see bana-inlhortair. 

bann, bainne [& boinne] pl. bannan, banntan 
Lë boinn, 1 dat.pl. baunaibh&-taibh,s.m. Belt, 
girth, sasū. 2 Bond, bill. 3 Tie, key-stone. 
4 Hinge. 5 Band, as of a shirt or any article 
of clothing. 5**Band of men. 6 Band of music. 
7 Chain, fetter,cord. 8 Bann. 9**Interdict. 10 
Proclamation. 11 Sling. 12** Death. 13łł 
Ball. 14**Marching, journeying. 15 Brace 
in writing (-————) ` Bann an doruis, the 
door-hinge ; théid mis’ am bannaibh dhuit, J 
can assure you ; na boinn a b'àill leo iadhadh 
oirnn, the cords with which they would wish to 
surround u8 ; cuir boinn anns a’ bhalla, put 
key-stones in the wall; a ceangal bhann mu 
sguaban, binding sheaves; a’ fuaigheal bhann, 
sewing bands ; le bauntaibh daingeann, with 
firm bands ; bannan bhur cuinge, the bonds of 


your yoke. 

bann,* v.a. Bind, tie, band. 2 Fix with key- 
stones, Balla air & dheagh bhaunadh, a 
wall well secured with key-stones. 

bann,** a. High. 

tbaana, s.m.pl. Bani, troup. 


fbannach, a Activa 2 Expert. 3 Crafty. 411 
Actual. 





see bana-mh——., 


, 8m. Crafty person. 2in ridicule Fox. 
8 see b nnach. 

T-————d, s. f. Craftiness, deceit. 

bannag, ai, 8 f. New-year's gift. 2 Treat 
giveu to one on his first visit on New-year's 
day. 3 New-year's cake. 4tf Yule cake. 6 
Corn-fan. 5/AH) Ball used in shinty. Là 
nam bannag, the day before Christmas Day ; 
oidhche nam bannag, the night before Christ- 
mas ; Mo bh. ort ! a method of asking a New- 
year's cake; is mairg a rachadh air a bh., 
agus a theann-shàth aige-fhéin, 'twere piti- 
Jul to yo begging bannocks, with plenty of one’s 
own. 

Bannag,(AC) s.f.ind. The Eucharist. 

fbannair,1f 3m. Ingrafter. 

banval, -ail, -an, s.m. Assemblage. 2 Bad com- 
pany. 3 Troop, band,covey. 4 Crowd of wo- 
men. 5 Gathering, collection. Am b. uchd- 
ruadh, the red-breusted covey. 

ach, a. In companies, troops or crowds. 
as,** -ais, s.m. Associ tion. 

—— dannsaidh,** s.an. Ball. 

bann-amh'eaa,(AH) sr Neck-band of a shirt. 

ban-naomh, -naciinh, s.f. Female saint. 2 
Nun. 3 Saintly fem ilo. 

baunas, -ais, sm. Roof of the mouth. 





. 


66 


ban-ifrinneach, &. f. Fury, turbulent, raging | bann-bhràiehe, ** s.m. 


*an-seirbhisegch 


Cape. 

bann-céirde, -an-, s.m. Deed of Indentnre, 

bann-cheangail, v.g. Bind by bond, article, 

——— —— ———, bannan-, sm. Obligatory 
bond, cautionary bond. 

banndair, see banntair. 

banndalach, a. Foppish. e 


bann-duirn, bannan-, s.m. Wrist-band. B, 
' léine, the wrist-band of a shirt. 

ban-nigh, (AC) s.f. Water-w. aith. 
bann-iomlaid, s.m. Bill. 

baun-lành, a m. Cubit. 2 Handcuff. 32% 


Fathom. Ao bh., one cubit. 

bann-muineal,** s.m. Collar. 

tbannrach, 8.m. see banrach. 

tbanns.ch, -aich, -aichean, s.m. Arrow. 2 Any 
Sharp-pointed missile weapon. 

bann-sgriobbadh, s.m. Indenture. 

Tbann-shampla, s.m. Example. 

bann-saoirseach, see bann-saor. 

m aee &. Free by law, licensed, author- 
ized. 

sachd, s. € Condition of being free 
by law or bond, freedom from obligation. 

———— — 81 dh, -aidh, 3.m. Freedom or liberty 
sanctioned by law or bond, manumission. 

saich, v.a. License. inake tree, 

bann-seilbhe, s. f. Deed of infeitmont. 

bann-sorn, -oiru, s.m. Kind of griddle or 
baking stove. 

banntach, -aich, -aichean, s. f. Hinge. 2 Bond, 
obligatio... 

banntaich,** v.a. Article, bind. 

bauntnair,** -ean, s.m. Coveuanter, drawer up 
of bills or bonds, cuutractor. 

—eachd,** s.f. Covenant-making, cone 
federacy. 

bann-taisbeanaidh, s.m. Bond of appearance, 
bail-bond. 

bann-tarsuing, s.m. Bend tn herald- 
ry (representing a shoulder-belt.) 

banntrach, see bantrach. 

—————as, see bautrachas. 

ban-ogha. s. f.  Grand-daughter. 
Ban-ogha 'n ogha, the grand-son's$ 
grand-daughter; ban-ogha 'n iar 
ogha, (nighiun mhic, RK nighinn 19. B 
nighinn jan iar ogha), the great- ta nc d 
grand-son’s grand-daughter. Cn: 

ban-óglach, -aich,s. f. Female servant, maid- 
servant, hand-maiden. 2 Maiden. $3 Female 
slave. Do bhan-oglaich, thy maidens. 

banoglach, see ban-òglach. 

ban-oidhre, see ban-uighre. 

ban-oighre, -oighrean, 8. f. Heiress. 

achd, 8. f. Estate that goes to heirs 

feinale. 

ban-oirchisiche,** s.f. Benefactress. 

ban-oranaiche,** s. f. Chautress. 

ban-phrionnsa, see bana-phrionnsa. 

tbanrach, -aich, s.m. Fold for sheep, pen. 2 
Cow-house. 3f[Shift, smock. 

+banraich, v.a. Pen, shut up. 

ban-rilir, -e, -ean, s.f. Baroness, wife of a 
knight or baronet. 

ban-rizgh, 8. f. Queen. Màiri, ban-righ na h- 
Alba, Mary, Queen of Scotland; b. Bhreat- 
uinu, the Queen of Great Britain. 

ban-righinn, -righinnean, 8. f. Queen. Port 
na ban-righinn, Queensferry, tn the Firth of 
Forth, 

bànrinu, 

banscar, 

















¢ 


see ban-righinn. 
s»e banse:sr. 


baun-b'iiàghad, -ai t,-ean.(s.m. Cravat, neck-tie. | ban-sealgair, -e, -ean, 8. f. Huntress, 
2 (AH) Front band of a woollen or cotton | ban-sear, } (AF) s.f. Filly 
shirt, extending iron the neck downwards | ban-searrach, mi ‘ 
and containing the front button-holes, ban-scirbhiseach, s.f. Female servant. 


bansgal 


applied as a term of reproach. 2(AC) Un- 
married woman. 3 pe) Masculine woman, 
amazon. 4(AC) Whale, leviathan. 
—— ———, a. Etfeminate, woinanish. 

bausglach, see ban-oglach. 

bai-sgoth,** s.m. Son-in-law. 

ban-searraci, -aich, s.f. Mare-foal. i 

ban-siti, s. f. Female fairy. It wa: believed 
by the Highlanders of old that the wailings 
of this being were frequently heard before 
tne death or a chieftain. She seldom made 
her appexrance, but when she did, it was in 
a green aisle with dishevelled hair. 

baa-snior haiche, -ean, s. f. Spinster. 

Diu-solar.. 1¢,-ean, s. f. Cateress. 

tb ui-ploraz, -aig, -agan, $. 7. Sparrow-hawk. 

b.a-stiü hart, -airt, -a:, 4. f. Housekeeper. 

-——— achd, s. f. Otlics or business of a 
housekeeper. 

*tbauta. s.f. Niece. 

baa-talamh,tt-mbhainn, s.m. Lea ground. 

baa-tighearn, s.f. see baintighearna. 

———— ail, &. see baintighearnail (in 
appendix.) ¢ 

ba:it:ach, -aich, -aichean, s. f. Widow. 2 s.m. 
Widower. Do bh. mar eun tiamhaidh, thy 
widow lik*a lon ly bird; is ole a’ bhantrach a 
phìob, the buypipz is a poo widow (sugges ive 
of the improvidence of pipers) ; is b. i, she is 
@ widow; is b. e. he isa widower. à 

— ———43,-ais, s.m. Widowhood. 2 Living in 
widownood. 

f d, s. f. ind. Company of women. 

ban-traill, -e. enn, s. f. Feinale slave, bond- 
maid. 2 Maid-servant. Ceud-ghin na ban- 
traille, the first-born of the boud-maid. 

ban-t eabiach, see bantrach. 

bau-tuathanach, -aich, -ai:hean, s. f. Female 
who farms. 2 Farmer's wife. 3 Peasant’s 
wife. 

















as, -ais, s.m. Agriculture done 
bv, or un ler the direction of, a fe:nale. 

ban-tuathanaich, gen. sing. of ban-tuathanach. 

—————- ————-.8n, n. opi. of " A 

fbànughadh, s.m. Waxing pale. 

bio’, see baobh & baoth. 

baobach,* s.f. Panic, terrible fright. 
male easily frightened. 

— — —,* a. Panic-struck, terribly afraid. 

ba>bair,* -e, -eau, s.m. Panic-struck man. 2 
Man easily frightened. 

baobn, -aoibh, baobhan, s. f. Wizard. 2 Wicked 
mischievous female, who invokes a curse or 
some evil on others. 3 Foolish, disazreeable 
female. 4 She-spirit supposed to haunt rivers. 
Caineain agus aoiream a’ bh.a rinu an t-óran, 
let me satirize and lampoon the furious woman 
that made the song; eadara’ bhaobh is a’ 
b uarach, a dilemma —referring to tre super- 
sition that a blow from a ‘buarach renders 
childless ; gheibh baobh a guidhe ged nach 
fhaigü a h-anam tròcair, a wicked woman will 
get her wis thongh her soul get no mercy. 

achd, s. f. Conduct of a mischievous, fool- 

ish or wicked woman. 2**Croaking of a raven. 

ag, dimin. of baobh. 

aidh, see baonhail. - 

ail, -e,a. Wicked. 2 Savage, fierce, mad, 

will, furious. 3 Foolish. 4 Destructive. 

6** fearful. 6ttPertaining to a wizard or hag. 

Dearg nam feachd b., Dargo of destructive 

hosts ` bui lean trom, b., heavy fearful blo vs. 

aileacud, s. f. ind. Madness, willnoss, 

furiousness. 2 Destructiveness, direfulness. 

98**r"eariulness. 

alachd, see baobhaileachd. 


2 Fe- 




















07 
c € — HÀ —ÀÓ€—Ü—Àr(— ——— ————MMMÀ 
¢b insgal, -ail, Alan, s. f. Aged female, often 


baoisleachd 


anta, a. Elfish. 
baoth, see baoth. 
baodhail, a. see b oghalta. 
baodhaire, see baothaire. 
— ———-— achd, see baothaireachd. 
baodhaiste,tf s.m. Hardship, trouble. 9 
Rough usage or fatigue through bad weather. 
————-—Qwchadh, see badhalste. 
baodhaistich," v.e. Drench, give a miserable 
appearance. 2 Spoil one's clothes in bad 
weather.— Isles. 
baodhan, s.m. see baoghan, & baothan. 
——1ch, see baoghanach & baothanach. 
biodhanneca.(AF s.n. Elk, moose deer. 
tbhwdrod, sm. Scolding. 
bivgadh, -aidh, s.m. Sudden start. 
baogaid,* s. f. Whim, caprice. 
each,* a. Whimsical, capricious, odd, 
fanciful. 
each.* s. f. Fanciful, whimsical female. 
eachd.* st Whimsicality, fanciful- 
ness, od.tity, capriciousness. 
baogh, -avigh, see baobh. 
air, seo baothair. 
baozhal,-ail, s.m. Peril, danger. 2 Crisis. 8 
Matter of consequence frum its bad effects. 
4 AH) Lull in a storm. 65(AH) Favourable 
opportunity. Uisze-^eatha baoghal, whis- 
key four tunes distilled; fear an t-saoghail 
fhala, cha bhi b. chuige, nothing will cut 
short the lif: of the lony liver. 
ach, --iche,@ Wild, furious, destruc 








tive. 2 Perilous, dangerous. 3**Adventur- 
ous. Roimh na gaothaibh b., before the peril- 


ous winds; lag ri nair bh., weak inthe hour of 
danger ; is b. anı buille, perilous Ze the blow. 
achd, s. f. Danzer, hazard. 

————lan,-ain, s.m. Foolish fellow, cuddy, 
silly blockhead. 

lanachd, s. f. Behaviour of a stupid 
fellow, foolishness, stupidity. 

ta. o. Foolish, credulous, silly, idiot- 
ical, simple. Creididh an duine baoghalta, 
the simple shall believe. 

tachd, s.f. ind. Foolishness, 
lousness, silliness, simpleness, idiocy. 

baozhan, -ain, s.m. Anything bulky, or 2 
Jolly. 3 Calf. 4 Young fol. HKaoghan an 
cois gach bd, each cow followed by a calf. 

ach,** -aiche, a. Like acalf, of, or be- 
longing to, a calf. 

baoghlach, æ. see baoghalach. 

baoghla'r,** s m. Adventurer. 

baoghlan, -ain, see baoghallan. 

-— — ——Aáchd, see bavghallanachd. 

biograum,f-aim, s.m.  vlighty emotion. 

tuavil, s. f. Water. 2ttMadness. 

eag, 8. f. Blaeberry. 

baoireada, -aidh, s.m. Foolish talk. 

baois, 8.f. Concupiscence, lust. 2 Levity, idle 
talk. 3 Madness. 

-—vach, -siche, a. Lewd, lascivious, lustful, 
2 Giddy. 

-—eacnd, s. f. ind. Concupiseence, lust, las- 
civiousness, 2 Levity. 3 Madness. Luchd 
baoise vend, lewd p»ople. 

-——vid, see boiseil. 

baoisealachd, see baoiseachd. 

baoiseil, a. see baoiseach. 

baoisg, v.n. se boillsg. 

baoisge, see boillsz». 

bioisgeach, see boillsgeach. 

baoisgeadi, see boillsgeadh. 

haoiszeil, a. see boillszeil. 

baoisle.vch. -eich. s.m. House of revelry or riot. 
2 Brothel. 3 Frequenter of brothels. 

—d, see bavisuachd. 


credu- 





baoisteach 


baoisteach, see bici-leach. 

baoisteadb, see baoisleachd. 

baoit,* s. f. Giddy, foolish female. 
Bait. —Lewis. 

bioite, see baghte. 

baviteadh, (AH) 8.2. Spell of activity. 2 Act 
of making progress with a task or work. 

baviteag, -eige, s. J. see boiteag. 2 Bait for 


fishing. 

— ——— -dhrichda, s.f. Drandling. 

haoith, a. see baoth. 

baoithe, af Airiness, fool:'shaesa, giddiness, 
lightness, levity. 2 Youthful ess. 

,cump, of baoth. 

baol,* ëmm, Approximation, nearness in doing 
anything. 

baol* vn. Approach, or come near doing avy- 
thing. Cha bhaol e air, it will not come near 
it. 

baolach, see baoghalach. 

baolum, im, 3. m. Nearness. Théil mi 
'shealg, ìs gheibh mi balum ort, gar (ged) 
am mairbh, J shall go a-untin?, and will set 
near enough to master you aithough dead— 
Duanaire, p. 101. 

baor,(AC) s.m. (Pbeur) Sharp. Thig na baor, 
the sharp will :ome. 

tbaos, s.m. Fornication, lewdness, 
3 Frenzy. 

1—, a. Capricious, giddy. 

——ach,** a. Wanton, capricious. 

baosganta, -ainte, d. see babhsganta. . 

baosrach, -aich, 8m. Madness, fury. 

,-Biche, a, Mad, frantic. 

baosradh,** -aidh, s.m. Vanity. 

buoth, -aoithe, a. Foolish, simple, unwise, 
stupid. 2 Profane, wicked. 3 Wild, fierce. 
4 Careless, giddy, regardless, unstealy. 5** 
Dreadful, horrid. 6**Youthful. 7**Vast. 8 
**Soft. 9 **Useless. 10**Deaf. l1{{Mad. 
Baoth bheus, i»vmorality, folly; baota hreid- 
eamh, superstition ` baoth shùgradh, foolish 
and profane jesting ; baoth sinuain, a foolish 
thought ; fuaim bhaoth, a horrid sound ; cho 
baotu ri t'airm, as useless as thinearns ; an 
cunnart baoth, im dreadful danger; tional 
baoth an t-sluaigh, the vast concourse of the 
people ; le sòlas baoth, with yiddy joy; gheibh 
bean bhaoth dlùth gun cheannach, ach chan 
fhaigh i inncach, a silly woman will get the 
vq me paying, but will not get the woof. 


2 (JM) 





2 Caprice. 





baothachd, see baothaireachd. 

baothail, -e, a. see baoth. 

baotizair, -ean, s m. Simpleton, foolish fellow, 
idi.t. 2**Calf. 3 (AF) Snipe. 4(JM) Fool- 
ish or inmoral talker. Cha leannan b, thu, 
said of one whose charms are more substantial 
than personal beauty ; is tu am bavthair! 
what a fool uou are! 

baothaireach,ff -aiche, Cullionly. 

d, 3. f. Talk or conduct of a fool, 

stupidity, absurdity, foolishness, 

baothairean, n. pl. of baothair. 

Wen -ain, 8&.m. Young fellow. 2 Block- 

vad. 
——ach, a. Foolish, simple, Gu 
baothanach, foolishly. 








silly. 


achd, ar Foolishness, simpleness, 
silüness. 

tas, -ais, ¢.m. Same meanings as baothe 
antachd. 


bavth-bhallan, -ain. s.in. Fool. 

baoth-bharaileach,ff -aiche, a. Paradoxical. 

baoth-bheus, an. sm. Immorality, improper 
ccuduct, misbehavionr. 

ach, a. Luimoral. 2 Dishonest, 








cae er A PS A ss a EE 


baralacn 


Gu baoth-bheusach, immorally, 
—— —— — au, n.p. of bioth-bheus. 
baoth-bhriathar,** s.m. Blasphemy. 
tbaoth-chaisgidh, a. Riotous. 
baoth-cheannach, ff -aicue, a. Paradoxical. 
baoth-ctilcasach,T1t -aiche, a. Pantomime. 
baoth-chleasachd, 8. 7. Buffoonery, farce. 2 

ttimmodest play. 

baoth-chleasaidheachd, see baoth-chleasachd. 

baoth-chluich,{} e, -ean, s.m. Farce. 

baoth-choltas, -ais, sm. Affectation. 

baoth-chreideamh, s.m. Superstition. 2 Erro- 
neous opnions in regard to religious mat- 
ters, 3**Wild creed. 

baot^-chreidinheach, a. Credulous. 2 Super- 
stitious. 3**Professing a wild creed. 

baoth-clireidinhiche, s.m. One who professes an 
extravagant or erroneous creed. 

baoth-dhócias,** s.m. Chimera. 
baoth-ghldir, -e,s. f. Foolish talk,rant. bombast. 

baoth-leum, s.m. Fearful or danverons leap. 2 
Prarcing, vaulting. 3**Bound. 

-—nach, a. Wildiy leaping, prondly 
prancing. Fach baotu-leumnach, a prowily 
prancing horse. 

baoth-radh, s.m. Foolish or profane expression. 
2**Iliotism. 

-——ach, a. Profane, impious, blasphe- 
mous. 2 Given to idle or foolish. (aiKing, 
An teanga baoth-radhach, the pro ane tongue. 

baoth-:hüzrach. a. Inclined to profane jesting. 

2 Of, or pertaining to, a profane jest. 
baoth-shigradh, -aida, s.m. Profane jesting. 

2 Lasc.vious talk. 
baoth-smnain, 8.f. Foolish thought. 2 Maggot. 
thar, a. Expert, excelliug. 

Tat, gon. Son. 

tbar, Air, s.n. Learned man. 2 Man. 3 Dart. 
4 Bread. REG, corn. 6{fHero. 7 see barr. 

tbar, -àir & barach, s.m. The sea. 

tobara, v.n. Go, march. 

bara, "8 barail) s. Thonghts, mind. Is 
misde bail: fearis a’ bhara ri falbk, a town- 
ship is the w-ree of a man who intends to 
leave. (J.M. gives “‘bharra,’’ aud D M. 
“burath” for bhara. ] 

bara, pl. -achan, s.m. Barrow. 2 Bier. t3łtłAct 
of going or marching. Bara-rotha, a wheel- 
barrow ; bara-làimhe. a hand-barrow ; bara- 
bocsa. a box-Þarrow; chuir e bara dheth fnén, 
he tumbled himself. 

barach, a. see barrach. 

fbàrach, gen. sing. of bàir, the sea. 

barachdail,** a. Rife. 

barag, see barrag. 

baragan, see bargan. 

baraig, see bairig. E 

barail, -e [& baralach], pl. baralaichean, s.f. 
Opinion, conceit. 2 Conjecture, guess. 3 
Supposition. 4 Expectation. Tha mi ’m bar- 
ail, I supose ` ma’s math mo bharail-sa, if I 
judge aright ; a réir mo bharaile, to the best of 
my bedef; ciod e do bharatl? what do you 
think ? thoir dhomh do bharail. give m” your 
opinion ` is fasin do bharail, va-n is thy expec- 
tation ; thoir t-arail, gu-»ss. 

each, a. see baralach. 

baraill, -e, -ean, s.m. Barrel, cask. 2 Barrel 
of a gun. 

baraille, see b^raiil. 

barailte, see baraille. 

baraisd, -e, s.m. see barrnisd. 

—————each, e, see barrai~deach. 

baralach, gen. sing. of bara l. 

-— — —-, -aiche, a. Conjectural, 2 Hypothe- 
tical. 3 Opinionative, notional. Ro bh. "ma 
ghnìomh, very conceited ‘of his own dowigs.— 


» 








baralach 





Uist Bards. 
-———— adh, -aidh, s.m. Conjecturiog, guess- 
ing, supposing. A’ b—,pr.pt of baralaich. 
baralaich, pr.pt. a’ baralachadh. v.a. Guess, 

conjecture, think, suppose. 
¢tbarainhlach, o. Censorious. 
barambluich, v.a. see baralaich. 
fbaramhuil, a. (see barraii) Excellent. 
baran, -ain, s.m. Baron. 
ach, a. Baronic-l. 
acnd, sf. Barony. 
barandach, 
barandachadh, 
barandaich, 
baraudail, 
baraudas, -ais, s.m. see barantas. 
fbasrann, -ainn, &.m. Degree. step. 
aich, v.a. see barantaich. 
baraut, an, s.m. Support, surety, safeguard. 
Istu bu bharant dochais dhomh, thou wast 
the surety of my hope 
ach, -aiche, a. 








see barant—. 


Warranting, warranted, 





e 2 Sure, certain, confident, as- 

sured. 

barantachadh, -aidh, s.m. Warranting. 2 
Warrant. A’ b—, pr.pt. of barantaich. 


barantadh,** -aidh, s.m, Warrant, commission. 
barantaich, pr.pt. a’ barantachadh, v.a. War- 
rant, give privilege. 2 Assure, confirm, make 
certain. 
barantail, -e, a. Warrantable, lawful. 2 Bea- 
sonable. 
barantas, -ais,s.m. Commission, warrant. 2 
Confidence, security. 3 Authority. 4 Pledge, 
in pawning. 5** Docket. Barantas-glacaidh, 
a warrant to apprehend. 
barasach, see barrasach. 
tbharath, s.m. Lyiog in wait. 
fbarba, -uirbe, 3f. Severity, passionateness, 
flercaness. 
fbar-baile, see barr-bhalla. 
barbair, Gaelic spelling of barber. 
eachd (barber)s. f. Business of a bar- 
ber or hair-dresser. 
barbarra, see borbarra. 
bar-bhrigein,f see brisgean. 
bar-brag,if-aig s.m. Tangle-tops cast ashore 
in May. 
barbrag,§ -aig, s./. Bar- 
berry—berberis vulgaris. 
bar-brisgein, s.m. see bris- 
gean. 
bàrc, Aire & barca, -annan, 
8. f. Bark, boat, skiff. 4 
Barque. 3 Sillow. 4 
+Book. Chunnicas bàrc, 
a skif was seen; bàrc 
bréid-gheal, a white-sailed 
boat. 
bàrc, v.a. Rush. 2 Burst 
forth, burst out. 3**Em- 
bark. 
—ach, -aiche, a. Rushing 
in torrents. 
——achadh, see barcachd. 
—achd, s f. Embarkation. 
— adh, -aidh, s.m. Rushing or pouring impet- 
uously, as waves. A’ b—, pr.pt. of barc. Muir 
mhòr a’ barcadh mu'im cneann, à huge wave 
rushing on my head. 
¢—aidh,tt v.n. Embark. 
fbirc-lann, s.m. Library. 
bard, -aird, pl. -àird ( barda & barian, ] 
s.m. Bard, rhymer, poet. Sheinu am bàrd, 
the bard sang. , **Poetry being, in the 
opinion of the warlike Celts, the l:keliest 
method of perpetuating their b.a-ery, the 








20. Barbruy 


barghal 


bards were held by them in the highest ve: e. 
rat‘on. Princes and warriors did not disdain 
to c.aim affinity with them. The Celts, being 
passionate!’ fond of poetry, would listen to 
no instruc.io., whether from priest or phil- 
osopher, «nloss it were conveyed in rhymes. 
Heuce the word bard meaut also a priest, 
philosopher, or teacher of any kind. We 
often find a bard entruste( with the educa- 
tiou of a prince, and about three hundred 
years ago, & Highland chief had seldom any 
other instructor. Such was the respect paid 
to the ancient bards, that, accor liug to Dio. 
dorus, the Sicilian. they could put a stop to 
armies in the heat of battle. After an en- 
gagement they raised the song over the de- 
ceased, and extolled the heroes who surviv: d. 

When a vard appeared in an army, it was 
either as a herald or ambassador, heuco his 
person and property were sacred in the midst 
of his enemies and amid their wildest raya- 
ges. In earlier times he never bore arms, 
and Owen asserts that it was unlawful to un- 
sheathe a weapon in his presence, Among 
the ancient British there were, according to 
Jones, three orders of bards—the Privardd, 
(Priomh-bhard) or chief bard: the Poswardd, 
who taught what was set forth by the pri- 
vardd ; and the Arwyddwardd, i.e. the en- 
sign bard, or herald-at-arms, who employed 
himself in genealogy, and in blazoning the 
arms of princes and nobles, as well as alter- 
ing them accordiug to their dignity or de- 
serts. Owen observes that their dress was 
sky-blue, an emblem of peace. 

Among the Irish Celts the bards enjoved 
Many extraordiuary privileges. The chief 
bard was called Filidh, or Olla:n^ ri dàn, a 

radluate or doctor in poetry, and had thirty 
inferior bards as attendauts, whilst a burl 
of the secoud order had fifteen. Ths Gael of 
Scotland was not behind his brother Celts in 
his veneration for the bards, for they had 
lands bestowed on them, which became bere- 
ditary in their farailies. A Highland chief 
retained two bards, who, like those of the 
Irish, had their retinue of disciples: und 
though the office did by no means procure the 
same doen respect as in times of oll, yet it 
wasalways filled to the utmost. Th2rea-sons 
for the decline of their power will ba found 
under ‘‘aois-dana.’’] 

tbàrd, -aird, -àird & an, s.m. Dyke, fence, 2 
Park. 8 Garrison. 4 Corporation. 

barda, n. pl. of bard. 

bàrdach, o see bàrdail. 

bàrdachd, 8. f. Poetry, rhyming. 2 Satire, lam- 
pooning, sarcasm. 3 rarely Corporation 
town. Ged theirinn e cha biandacii e, 
though I were to say it, it would be no sit re. 

tbardag,**-aig, -an, s. f/.Box, pannier, hamper. 

bardail, æ. Poetical. 2 Satirical. 

bàrdainn,—7s/ay, see bairliun. 

tbardal, ail, s.n. Drake. 

bàrdalachd, s. f. Quantity of poetry. 2 Satire. 
8 Unseemly language. : 

bàrdan, (dim. of bard) 8.m. Poetaiter. 

bàrilas, ais, sm. Satire, lampoo i. 2ttPoetry. 

bard-cluiche, -chluiche, gan, Dra.uatist. 

bard-dealbh-cluiche, see barid-cluiche. 

bard-dhan, s.m. Poetry, rhyme. 

fbarg, a. Red-hot. 

bargan, -ain, -an, s.m. Gaelic spelling of bar- 
gain. (còrdadh or cùmhnant.) 

aich, v a. Make a bargain. 

. aiche,** s.m. BDargainer. 

+barghal, am, Branches. 











bàr-gheal 


see bàrr-gheal. 


bar-gheal, a. 
s. f. Rag, tatter. 


barlag, -aig, -an 
in rags. 

— — —&ch, -aiche, a. Ragged, tattered, clouted. 

barlaid,(AC)-e, -ean, s. f. see barriait. 

bar-linn, see bairlinn. 

barluath, s.m. Portion of pipe-musicin ‘‘cedl 
amór” which precedes the taorluath. It does 
not occur in all tunes, but only in those of the 
“Moladh Màiri” type. 

bar-inhér. see bàrr-mhór. 

Tbarn, -airn, s.m. Nobleman. 2 Judge. 3 Battle. 

bàrnach, see báirneach. 

bàrnag.** -aig, $. f. Summons of removal. 

bàrnaig, pr. pt. a’ bàrnaigeadh, v.a. Summon. 
9 Warn, give summons of removal. 

eadh, -eidh, s.m. Summoning. 2 Warn- 
ing, smminons of removal. A’ b—, pr. pt. of 
harnaig. 

bàrnuigh, (AF) see bairneag.—Arran. 

¢+baroil, see barail. 

barpa, -annan, s.m. Cairn, snpposed to be a me- 
morial of the dead, barrow. 

barpail, a. *Monumental. 2**Arrogant. 

barr, -à, s.m. Top, uppermost part of anything. 
2 Point, as of a Weapon or shoe. 3 Crop of 
erain, grass, or vegetables. 4 Harvest. 5 
Superiority. 6 Suet. 7 Cream, fifat floating 
on che surface. 8 Scum  0**DBread, food. 10 
**Avme,  li**Pranc^. 12**Height, hill. 15 
**Head, helmet. 14t?iBattlement. 15**rarely 
son, see thàr.) Th ’n deagh bhàrr aca, Lien 
have an excellent crop ; bare nw suathad, the 
point of the neetl-; barr a ihata, theend of his 
staff ; thug sin bàrr air na chnala mi rieich, 
that excels everything i ever heard ; a bhàrr ar 
sin, besides, moreover ; barr maise, superiority 
in beauty ` mar cheò air barraibh nam beann, 
like a mist onthe tops of the bie: buntàta a’ 
cra: hadh on bk arr po atoes shaking from the 
haulins ;clia’ fag e bun no barr, he will leave 
neither root nor brunch; a’ chuach lei: fo bharr, 
his cup brimming over ; lion a mach le barr is 
le gucaig e, pour it out up to rhe brim, or with 
a head on it, Dia air barr, God above all,— an 
invocation used when in great danger or distress. 

barr’, see barraah. 

barr, v.a. See boa r. 

b ura, s.m. tnd. Spike. 2 Bar. 3 Court of justice. 

barra, PMY see cara. 

b. Tra-bhuile, see barr-bhai'e, 

barra-b.:alla, see barr-bhalla. 

— — ———üh, see barr-bhal.a. 

barra-buidhe, a. see barr-b'inidhe. 

barracaid,tt s. E Pride. 2 Loud talk. 

—-each,-diche, a. Proud, saucy. 

barracaideach, proudly. 

eachd, s. f. Pride, sauciness. 

barrach, -aich, s.a. Top branches cf trees, brush- 
wood. 2 Birch. 8 Fine tow (‘‘tirscs’’—-‘‘sec- 
onds" are bunnach, *'thirls" sgath.) Fo 
sgàil a’ bharraich, beneath the shade of the 
branches; snàthainn barraich. a threa ! of tow, 

barrach, -ziche, a. High-tovped. 2 Pmpacied. 5 
ITeaped up, as a measure. 4 Heaped over the 
brim of any dish. 5 Beetlinz, overtopping. 6 
Excessive. Cairt bharrach, a cart loaded 
over the brim. 

tbharrachail, a d, s.m. Cottage, hnt, booth. 

barrvachadh, (a!) pr. part. of barraich. 

barrachaol, see barrcnaol, 

barmehga -ais, 5.14. see barrachd. 2 see barr- 
enas. 

barrachd, s.f. Superiority, pre-eminence. 2 
Advantage, mastery. 3 Overplus. B’ion- 
gantach do ghràdh dhomh-sa, a’ toirt barr- 
achd air gràuh nam ban, thy love for me was 


2 Person 








Gu 


70 


barrail 


wenderful, surpassing the love of women; 
barrachd ort-sa, more than you have; ma 
bh.tiieas barracud agad, if you have any sur- 
plus, a bharrachd air sin. besides that; chi 
dithis barraend air aon fhear, two will see more 
than one. 





E ail, -e, a. Surpassing, superior, 2 
Bold, brave. 

-—————- 88,11 -ais, 8.2. see barrachd. 

fbarra-ehnst, s.m.  Pericranium. S 

barradh, -aidh, a.m. Hivderance, obstacle. 2 


see bara. A’ b—, see bearradh. 

barradh, see barr. A’ sitidh ar a’ bharradth 
bharr’ ud, sitting on the brow of yonder hill. 

barradh-dhias, -dhéis, se- barr-dhias. 

barradhriopair, see barr-dhriopair. 

barrag, -aiz, an. s. f. Posset. 2 Scum, cream. 
3 Sudden pain. 4 Grapp ivg, wrestling. 5 
Young girl. 6 ¢¢Kuct. 7itRod, switch. 15** 
Weeds Hat float on the water. Cha chinn 
barrag air cuid cait, cream does not come on 
a cats milk. 

barrayach, -aiche, a. Creamy, frothy. 

barraghlach, s.m, Tops or branches of trees, 
b ushwood. 

barrag-ruadh, -rnaidh, s.f.  Yellow-horned 
oppy—glaucium luteum. The fiower is yel- 
ow and not red, although caned ruadh. 


mA I RR RR SSSR ARES 





21. Earraj-ruadh. 
| barrag-ua/ne, s. f. s e barraig-uaine. 


barra-rüg, see barrviyg. 

barriibh, Cat. pl. of barr. 

barraich, v.a "lop up, heap, as a measure of 
grain. 2 Excel. surpass. i 

'harraich,** a. Matchless, surpassing, pre-emi- 
nent, transcen ient. 

te, a. Surpassing, excelling. 2 Supe- 

rior, pre-eminent. matchless. f13Lofty. 1t. 
part. of barraich Tipped, topped. 2 Excel- 
led, surpassed. Parr:ichte mar na seudair, 
excellent as the calare. 

barraidheachd, see barrachd. 

bàrraig, v.*. see }à'rig. 

fowrraighin, 8.7. Mitre. 

‘barraig-nain A s.f. Green scum on stagnant 
water, —coauferva». 

barrail, -ala, a. Excellent, eminent, surpass- 
ing. 2 Generous. 2 Gay, sprightly. 4 Trans- 
cendant. 5 Genteel. A’ mhaighdean bhar- 
rail, the sprighily maiden. 


barraig 


barrain. gen. sina. of barran. 
barraisd, -e, 8.m. Borage,—borage oficinelis. 
2** Green kale. 





92. Barraisd. 


barraisdeach, a. Fullof borage. 2 Like bor- 
age. 3 Of borage. - 

barraisg,tt e, -ean, s.m. Boaster, braggadocio. 

barrall,* see barr-iall. 

barramhais, see barr-mhais. 

barra-inbanadh, see barr-mhanadh. 

barr-a’-mhilltich,} s.m. Arrow 
grass,—triglochin palustre. 

barra-mhislein, s.m. Bird’s 
foot trefoil, —lotus cornicu- 
lata. í 

fbarramhuil, @. see barrail. 

barran, -ain, -an, s.m. Any 
kind of coping on the top of 
a wall, as nails, glass, &c. to 
serve as a fence. 2 Hedge, 
fence. 3 Top of a rock or 
mountain. "ew 5* *Crest. 
6** Elder tree. 7{t Ragged 
covering. 8(J.M.) Bandage 
tied round the head, i. e. 
covering the whole head, 
when sick, especially when og Barr-a’. 
suffering from headache. ` bitch 
Anns na barranaibh, in the AS 
fences ; fraoch sléibhe mar bharran air, tip- 
ped with mountain heath. 

—— — —dach, see barantach. 








24. Barra-mhislein. 


71 


barr-madaidh 
barraut, see barant. 








ach, see barantach. 
adh, see barantadh. 
as, see barantas. 





barr-aotrom,fț -nime, a. Nimble, quick. 

barra-ruc, see barr-roc & barr-staimh. 

barras, -ais, s.m. Superiority. 2 Residue, sur- 
plus. A bharrasair sin, over and above that, 
moreever. (see barrachd.) 

ach,-aiche, a. Distinguished, excellent, 

superior. 2 Lofty. 3 Ambitious. 4** Resi- 


dual. 6ftTopped. 
barra-sgaoilteach, see barr-sgaoilteach. 
see barr-thonn. 


barra-thonu, 
barr-bhailc,-ean, 8m, Cornice. 2 Entabla 
ture. 3 Constellation. 
barr-bhalla. s.m. Parapet. 2 Battlement, em- 
brazure, bartizan. 
barr-bhard, -àird, s.m. Chief poet. 2 Poet 
laureate. 3 Graduate in poetry, also filidh, 
see note under bard. 
——achd, s.f. Condition of a poet lau- 
reate. 2 Compositions of a poet laureate. 
barr-bhile, s.m. Cornice. 
barr-bhórd,* s.m. Deck of a ship. 
D n spe m 
arr-buidhe, a. Yellow-tipped, yellow-topped. 
2 Yellow-haired. iain éi 
barr-biorach, s.m. Cusp. 
barr braonau-nan-con,} s.m. Common termen- 
til or septtoil, see leamhnach. 
barrbrog, -0 g, see barbrag. 
barr-caideach, -aiche, a. see barra-caideach. 
barrehaol, -aoil, s.m. Pvramid. 
————, 0. Pyramivical, conical, tapering. 
barrchaoin, a. Very ini.d, very gentle. Triùir 
bhràithre b»arrchaoin. three gentle brothers. 
barr-chas, -aise, à. Curly-haired. 
——, 8. Curly locks. 
bàrr-cinn.Tf a.m. The hair. 
barr-cluigeanach, s.m. The order campanula- 
c^? of plants. 
barr-dearg.§ -e'rge, s... Thrift (plant) see 
tonn-a’-chladaich. 2/JM) Sea-weed, tangles. 
barr-leubhaidh, s.m. Battlement. 
barr-dhealg, -eilg, an, s. f. Hair bodkin. 
barr-dhias, -dhéis, s. f, Top of a blade of corn. 
2 Blade or point of a sword. 
bàrr-dnuine,ff s.m. Growing youth. 
tbarr-dog, 8.m. Box, paunier, hamper. 
barr-dhriopair, pl. ean, s.m. Butler, 
———— eachd, s.f. Employment of a 








butler, 

barr-fhionn, a. White-headed, white-topped. 
2 Fair-headed. Canach barr-fhionn, white- 
topped cotton-sedge. 

barr-gheal, -ghile, a. White-topped. 

barr-vheug.(AH) s. f Highest and most 
flourishing branch of a tree. 2 Tall, hand- 
some woman. 

barr-ghniomh, s.m. Work of supererogation. 
2 Transcendent exploit. 

barr-ghniomhach, -aiche, a. Superfluous. 

barr-gruaig,ft s. f. The hair. 

barr-gàc, -an, s.f. Blossom, bloom, most 
frequently applied to those of leguminous 
yegetables, as pease, potatoes, &c. see luis 
meiligeagach. Barr-guc air a mheuraibh, & 
bloom on its branches. 

barr-gug, see barr-guc. 

barr-iall, -éill, st Latchet, shoe-tie, thong. 
211Manacles. 

bàrrlait, -e, -ean, s. Í. Check, hinderance, pre- 
vention, suppression. 

bàrr-madaidh, (AH) s.m. Act of Pt € 
&«ovrity, ax one would scold a dog. Thug e 
1 árcmadailh oru, he scolded me as he would 





harr-suadaidh 

a loj. 

parr-inhais, -e, -ean, s. f. Cornice. 

—each, a. Having cornices, of, or 

pertaining to, a cornice. 

——————-ich, v.a. Ornament. 

barr-nihanadh, -aidh, s.m. Pestiny. Am fear 
4 bhitheas a b'arrsnhanadh a mach, he 
whose destiny is cast.—NGP. 

barr-mhor, -oire, a Large topp»d. 2 Branchy. 

barr-roc,** s. f. Sea-weed. tangles. 

barr-sgaoil.ff v.a. Lavish. 

barr-sgaoilteach,** a. Canacious. 

barr-staimh, sm. Broad leaves on top of sea- 
girdles, see stamh. 

barr-tachair, s.m. Crop sprung from seed left 
on the ground from former harvest. 

barr-bhonn, s.m. High surge. 2 Top of the 
waves. 8** Surface of the deep. <A’ siubhal 
nam varr-thonn, bounding ger the surges. 

tbarrngal chrann,1f s.m. Branches of trees. 

Pini, see bàirig. 

baruille, see baraill. 

bas, boise [& baise]-an & -a, s. f. The palm of 
the hand. Buailbh "ur basan uil’, a 
shluaigh ! clap yovr hands O al! ye people ! 
bas réidh, a smooth palm ; leòis air a bas- 
aibh, blisters on her hands ; bonnach air bois, 
cha bhruich e is cha loisg, a cake in the hand 
will neither cook nor burn —said, of th» shily- 
shally ; sgailc air bois, shaking hand upon a 
bargain. 

bas, -ais, s. f. Spoke of a wheel. 

e? -ais, s.m. Hollow or concave part of a 
club. 

bas, -àis, s.m. Death. 2**Destruction. Is 
e righ nan uamhas am bas, death is the king 
of terrors ; cha’n ’eil bas ach ruaig, there is 
no death but defeat; faigh bas, die, starve ; 
gheibh gach ni bas, everything shall die; 
droch bhàs ort ! bad death to you ! (^ com- 
mon form of imprecation) ; guin bais, the 
agony of death ; dealan bais, the lightning of 
death ; ma shaltraiche:s sluagh air mo bhas, 
if people tread on my death—a poetical sbsit- 
tution of death for the dead body, which is not 
apparent to those who blindly infer that bas 
means a dead body. 

thisa1 s.m. Fate, fortune. 

basach, -aiche, a. Streaked, varievated. 

bà:achadh,-aidh, s.m. Expiring, dying, per- 
ishing (of animals.) 2 Withering. À b—, 
pr. pt. of bàsaich. A’ basachadb leis an 
fhuachd. dying ,withertng or starving rit? cold; 
tha eair bàsachadh, it has died or withered. 

basadh,** -aidh, gan, The rubbing of the tlread 
ends of tape-work, 10 prevent tneir running 
into threads. (**basing".) 

bàsaich, pr. pt. a’ bàsachadh, v.n. Die (as an 
animal), perish. 2 Starve. 3 Wither, as a 
plant. 4 Grow vapid, as bet, An ni sin a 
bhàsaicheas leis fhéin, that which dies of it- 
self. [Note that “‘basaich’’ is only used 
in relation to animals. ‘‘Sinblhail,’’ “eug,” 
“caochail,” or “teasd” is always used wren 
speaking of persons, as, bliàsaich au ch, the 
dog died ; shinbhail an duiae, the man died. 
The expression ‘“‘fhuair an duine bay’’ is al- 
ways used in Scripture for the man died, but 
“fhnair an duine am bas’’ would be better 


— 





of *'bassie''—basiu. 
2** Death-like. | 
bas-airm, gen. sing. of bas-arm. 


Gaelic. ] i 
basaidh, -ean, s.m. (bas, palm) Gaelic spelling 
basail, -e, a. Deadly, fatal. 
Mortal. 4 Destructive. 
tbasal, -ail,s.m. Judgment. 2 Judge. 3** Pride, 
arrogance. 


72 


bastnhor 


basalachd, 8. f. ind. Mortality. 2 Deadliness. 

bàs'ar. see bàsmhor. 

basardaich,* san. Clapping of the hands for 
Joy, acclamation, rejoicing. 

bas-arm, -airm,s.m. Deadly weapon. 

basart,**-airt,-artan, Gaelic spelling of bastard. 

fbas-ascauas, san. Biss in music, 

basbair, -ean, $.m. Fencer., swordsman, Bha 
thu 'n ad bhasbair còir, thou wert a uoble 
swordsman. 

basbaireachd, s. f. Swordsmanship, fencing. 

bashairean, n.pl. of basbair. 

basbairich,** nun = Parry. 

basbhaidh, a. Haggish. 

bas-bhnail, v.a. Applaud by clapping the hands. 

bas-bhualadh, -aidr. s.n. Clapping or rubbing 
of hands, from grief or joy. 

bàs-bhuille, s.m. Dveatn-b'ow. Fhuair e a 
bhas-bhuille, he received his death-blow. 

tbasbruidheach, a. Lecherou-. 

d ———d, s.f Lechery. leeherousness, 

thase, a. Round. 2 Pel. seyret. 

t——ach, -aich, -aicheai,s.m.Cateh-pole. bailiff, 

bascaid. -e, -ean, s. f. Gaclic spelling of basket. 

each,tt a. Belonging to baskets, 

tbasc-airm, s.m. Circle. 

thascall,-aill, s.m, Wild man, savage. 

fbascarnach, -aich, 5.4. Lamentation. 2 11 
Stammering. 

fbascart, -airt, sm. Cinnamon. 92**Ciunabar. 

fbas-chailc, s.m. Ruddle. 

bas-charnta,** a. Globy, .lobular. 

bas-chlar, air, s.m. Obituary. 

fbas-chriadh, s.m. Ruddle. 

basdal, -ail, s.m. Noise, glitter, gaiety of ap- 
pearance, show. 

ach, -aiche, a. Gay, showy, flashy. 

Cheering. ’Nuair a thigan gloine basdal- 

ach, when the cheering glass comes round, og 

basdalach, a gay yorvth ; a ribhinn bhnidhe 

bhasdalaich, thou yellow-haired showy maid. 

achd, s. f. ind. Showiuess. gaiety. (ha 
"n fhaca mi a leithid air basdalachd, I have 
not seen his equal for showinss. 

basdard, s.m. Gaelic spelling of bastard. 

fbasg, v.a. Stop, stav. 

bas;air. v.n. Applaaud. 

bas: aird, v.n. Applaud. 

basgairdeachas, -41s, s.m. 

baszairdeadh, -eidh, s.n. 
pr. pt. of basgaird 

basgaire, s../. ind. Applause. 2tMourning. 

———ach,** a. Clapping the hands in the 
agitation of grief. 

—Aachd, s. f. Mournful clapping or wring- 
ing of hands. 2 Applause. 

basganta, a. Warbiiuz, melodious. 

basgart,** «ee bas-carr. 

basg-chriadh, s. f. IV:l-lead. 

basg-luaidh, s. f. Vermillion. 2 Red-lead. 

basg-!usth, sxe basg-inaidh. 

bas-guineach,tf -eicho, a. Death-:larting. 

basg: ir, see basg-luaidh. 

bà-shruth,tt$.m. Caim stream. 

baslach, -aich, -ean, s.m. Ha ‘ul, the full of 
the two palms place! together. 2 Burch, 
cluster. 

bàs-lag, s.m. Place of execntion. 
à pit in which the culorit stood. 
be seen at Finlarig.—™ M.] 

bas-laaidh sm. Appliuse, cpprobation ex- 
pressed by capping of hands. 

bas-luath. o, Ready- or unnble-handed. 

bas-mhiu, -e, à. Soft-palmed, smooth-handed. 

basinhoire, comp. of vasmhor 

—ac'id, s. f. ind. see àanhorachd. 

basmbor, -oire, @ Mortal, liable to death. 2 








9 


t 








see basgaireachd. 
Applause. <A’ b—, 





[Usnaliy a 
One is to 





basmhor 78 


báta 


———  — —————————«————————ÓM MM Á— 


Deadly, fatal. An corp basinhor, the mortal 

p ach,** a. Mortal, liable to death. Tha 
gach crò Làsmhorach, every body is liable to 

th. 4 

ek und, s.f. Mortality, deadliness. 2 
**Fataltty. 

bas-iihol,** v.n. Applaud. 

— — — — adair,** s.m. Applauder. 

fbasoille, s m. Vassal. 2 Tenant. 

basraich, s.f. Clapping or wringing of hands 
in mourning. 2** Shonting, roaring, calling 
aloud. Isia’ basraich, a’ taomadh a h-os- 
naich air ceó, and she wailing, pouring her 
-mnplaint on the mist. e 

Base, am. Dead'y spear Bàs-shleagh 
nau triath, the d'a liy svar of the chiefs. 

bastalach, see — ei 

tul. see basdal. - 

E s.m. Bath. Bat fiona, @ wine bath ; bat 

olaidn, an oil bath. 





at, v.a. Beat, cndgel. 
KR 4 s.m. Stick, staff, baton, cudgel, blud- 
bata, } geou. Gabh mo bhata, take my stick ; 


ni thu fleece, thon shalt make staves. 

ta, gen. sin7. of bit. 
ae at der s., m. on land,f. on sea. Boat, 

punce, barge. Fear bata, a boatman ; bat’ 

&iseir, a ferry-boat; stiùireadair a’ bhàta, the 

storrsman of the boat ; bat’ iasgaich, a ishing- 

boa’ ; chuir e a bhàt’ air acair, he brought 

his huat to anchor. . 

NAMEs OF PARTS OF A BOAT;— (see illust.) 

Rouwean hata] 

Al Ceann ùrlair, ceann nan ürlar,— Lewis, 

Wead. 

2 Fliuch-bhórd, Garb. 

8 Szar an droma, sgar an leigeil,— Lewis, 
Rebat. 

4 Forrv-dhruim, Slip-keel.— Lewis. 2 
Faise keel—a second stick nai!ol to the 
original Keel to restore it to its former 
thickness, when worn down by contin- 
ualiy dragging the boat up and down 
tne beach. 

B Sth, Clincher, overlap in rlanks. 

© Reang, aisesan, Joggled frame.--Gaírloch. 
D Wo re, an t-slige, Bent timber.— Lewis. 
E Claigeann, Stem. 

Aparan, Apron. 

Aiseann, reang. rong, ron^vas, rungas. 
Reangan—Sut’ ¢ land. Bib. 

An teslige, Sk n. 

T ir-ann, Breast-hook. 

Maid» sreinge— Lewis. Rubbine-piece. 
Beu! mor, ifslat beòil, tttaobh-shlat. 
Beni <to-—Lalay, Gunwa e. 

venl bag ; a’ chuairt bhedil,—Lewis, 
Saxboa-^l er gunwale strake. 

Ain b ul a staigh— Lewis. Inside wale. 

As E7 Gunwale. 

As Eó Rubbing-piece. 

As E8 Saxhoard. 

Cirean tarsuing, na 
Coaiaing. 
Mantle reang,—Gairloch d:c. 
rougais, 
Stringer. 
ùrlar, 


crean, —Lewis, 


€ werte © Naa wre 


*imaide 
Taobhan, reangas,— Lewis, 


Flat floor. 

Limber. 
Leud iochdair. bulz, na sgiathan, slat- 
an-builg; maid» builz—Lewis, Bilge- 
piece or bilgc-«ee:. 
9 Druin, eairli1, Kelson, 
10 As A4 Keel. 
Saidh-thoisich. Bior dubh, claigionn 
toisich, —Gairloch, Lewis, «c. Stom- 


O-31R 


A 


ac 
BOD He AN Mane CO 30990 0 tM 


5 


6 
7 
Nil 
2 
3 
4 


ie: 


Lunn chas— Lewis, 


Ciird nam barra, 


tarsann. Cuairt thoisich.— 
Gairloch, &c., a’ chuairt bheag— Lewis 
Breasthook, brace-stick. 


As F5 Stringer. 
As F6 Flat floor. 
Fiodhraich tharsuing, Cross timbers. 
As FY Kelson. 
As A4 Keel. 


Fliuch-bhord, gearr-bhórd, Keelboard 


or garboard. 
Foot-waling. 

As ba Stringer. 

As F8 Bilge-piece or bilge-keel. 
Cuairtean—Gairloch. bòrd (pl. bùird), 


stràc, pl. stracan’\—(AH.) Strakes. 
As ES Naxboard. 
As Es . Rubhing-piece. 
As E7 Gunwale. 
Ceanu roinge: ceanna chiíàmhan— 
Lewis, Head or rib. 


Slat an t-siùil mhóir, -lat-shiùil, an t- 
slat ladhrach, Gait. 
Gobhlag.— Lewis. Clipt. 


Giall, Cheek or jaw. 
Na roithlearan, ‘Trucks. 
Na bnill mhéra, Main ha!yards. 


Na barran, na bideinean, Peaks. 
Ceann an cópa' ghleididh, Guy end. 
Ball an t-siùil àird, ball sgòid an t-siùil 
mhul!aich, Top-sail sheet. 
Peak-lines. 
Gammoniug-iron. 
Stock of bowsprit. 
Geainann, Knighthead. 
As G1 Stem-post. 
Leabaidh a’ chroinn-spredid, 
of bowsprit. 
Mail’ a’ chroinn spreòid, Bitt. 
Maide tarsuinn, Cross-bitt. 
Slatag sgoid, Bumkin. 
Crann spreòid, crann dallif, 
uisge, Bowsprit. 
Bobstay purchase. 
P Bobstay. 
? ‘Lriangline. 
Beart a’ chroinn spreòid, Bowsprit 
shroud. 
Maidean a chroinn-spreói4, Bitts. 
Stàih an àrd-chroinn, ‘Lop-mast stay. 
Saidh-thoisich, bior diubh, — Stem-post. 
Aparan-thoisich, Inner stem-post. 
AS A4 
Lionadh-toisich, 


Geamann, 
Stoc, 


Bed 


crann- 


Deadwood in bow. 





25. Saidh thoisich. 26. Saidh dheiridh. 


01 


2 
8 


ID > 


Saidh-dheiridh, bior dubh, Claigionn 
deiridh,—Gairloch, Lewis, de, Stern- 
OsL. 
paran-deirich, Inner stern-post. 
Lionadh-deicidh, an t-4r, carr, Dead- 
wood in stern. 
Druin, Keel. 
Toli na stiùireach. tud ler-haand. 
Iarunn na stiùireach, am brod iosal, 
and when in the position o? O 6, am rod 
ard, Pintle. © & 7 together are call- 
edin Eng., ‘frudder-irons” or “rudder- 
bands,” in Gaelic *'ceanglai ce 1a 


bata 74 bata 





37. Roinnean bata, 





75 





dé 





^o 


28. Acfhuinnean bata. 


stiùireach,” or ‘bannan na stiuireach."*) 

The Ness (Lewis)boats have the ‘‘brods’’ 

on the rudder and the bands on the 

stern-post, but the herring-boats have 

the “brods” on the stern-post and the 
bands on the rudder. 





29. Cuird agus tarruingean. 


NAMES OF SHEETS (Ciird no buill nan sedl) 
AND HALYARDS (Tarruingean.) 


1 ^? Topping-lift. 

2 Tarruingean bhratach,  PeakHne or sig- 
nal halyards. 

8 ? Peaks. 

4 ? Throats. 

5 ? Tricing-line. 

6 Tarruingean an t-siùil thoisich, Fore- 
sail halyards. 

7 een an t-siùil spreòid, Jib hal- 

yards. 
P Spinnaker after-guy or spinnaker 
oom. 

9 P  Jibstay or jib outhaul. 

10 ? Fore spinnaker guy. 

11 P  Spinnaker and top-mast fore-sail 


halyards. 


12 Tarruing an ard-shitil. TTop-sail halyard. 


18 Sgòd an t-siùil mheadhoin, ball, sgòd, 
sgòid. Main sheet. 
14 Sgòd an t-siùil-thoisich. Fore sheet. 


15 S:ód an t-siùil spreòid, sgód an t-siùil 


chinn, Jib sheet. 
16 Crochadair na cearb, Reef pendant. 
16a Top-mast staysail sheets. 


17 Cluas an t-siùil mhullaich, 


cluas an te 


G2. 


bata 76 


bata 


—$——< $< $< $< <— << SSSA 


siùil àird, Topsail tack. 

18 wgód an t-siùil mhnillaich, sgòd an t-siùil 
ard. Top- sail sheet. 

Ball stadha, (Guy (a rope to steady any 
suspended weight.) 


NAMES OF FITTINGS (acfhuinnean) OF BOAT. 
—see illustrat ons.— 

1 Cnag-grabaidh, dealg-bhacaidh, putan, 
—Sny or toggle (a short bar of wood ta- 
pering from the middle to each end, 

laced in an eye at the end of a rope, to 
e the end from passing through a 
loop or knot, especially in a flag.) 

9 Deaig cheangail, dealg snaime, 
laying pin. 


3) Geadha,—Boat-hook. 
5 (?) Spor Thumb-cleat or spurs. 


Wooden- 
cayil or cleat. 


Be- 


Metal- 
Patent- 


101 Greimiche, Cleat. 
11 Cromag sgòid, dubhan na sgòid, Sbeot 


dk Greimiche, 
8 


clip. 
12 Post ceangail, Bollard. 
13 Cromag, E 
14) Cromag chumail, { Clip-hook, sail-hook. 
15 $ Bacan dùinidh, \ Cliphook. 
16 Slachdan bata, Davits. 


17 Dìonadair, 
19 be 
20 » 
21 ? 


23 P 

24 Rac, 
25 ie 

26 Iarna, 
27 


Pudding fend-off. 
chas-saibh, Sawdust fend-off. 
leathrach, Leather .,, 
ròpa, Rope fend-off. 


Fairleads. 


Paddle boat-hook. 
Traveller. 
Springhank. 
Hank. 
Haw-e-pipe. 
28 Udalan, udlan; carrachan—Lewis, Swi- 


vel. 
Marline-spike. 


29 Bior iaruinn, 

80 Biordainge, Pricker. 

81 As 28 Swivel. 

82 Ailbheag, failbhe, Ring-bolt. 

33  ? Eye-bolt. 

84 (P)Sgrobha sìnidh. Wire stretcher or 
sett-screw. 

85 P Thimbl 

86 (P)Geimhle, 

87 P 


e. 

Shackle. 

Stretcher guides. 

88 Sineadair, Stretcher. 

89 Bac, Thole, ( oar-cleats.) 
Baca bhràghad, the fore cleats. 
Baca meadhon, the middle cleats. 
Baca h-amar, the quarter cleats. 

89a Apran, bac, Sheath on gunwale to 
revent wearing by the oars. 

89b Putagan, bac, bacal, urcag, uracagan. 

Cnagan, (cnag thoisich & cnag dheir- 

idh)—Lewis. Thole-pins. 

40 Buthalràimh, . Rowlock. 


NAMES OF OTHER PARTS REQUIRING NO DIA- 
GRAM TO EXPLAIN THEM. 
Acfhuinn (an),—The sails. 
Acfhuinnean (na h-),—The fittings. 
Achlaisean, glüinean,— Beam knees, used to 
fix the thwarts to the side or planks of 
the boat, as the '*'cinn-tobhta" fix them 
to the gunwale. The ‘‘achlasan’’ lies hori- 
zontallyin the angle wbich the thw art 
makes with the side,but the '*ceann-tobh.- 
ta.” is upright. 


Aodach,—Sails. 

Aoir,—Sheet, bolt-rope of a sail. 

ard-chrann,—see crann ard. 

Bac,—Space between the rowlocks or thole 
pins,—Skye. 

Ball—Rope. 

E M a by which the tack is fas- 

ened. 

Ball langais—Towing rope. 

Bann,— Boom. 

Bior snaois,{{—Top of stem, 
saidhe.) 

Bidh,—Caulking. 

Boitig,—Carriage.— Lewis. 

Bord,—Plank. 

Bratach,—Flag. 

Bróg a’ chroinn,—Mast step, (square hole in 
which the lower end of mast rests. 

Broilleach bata,—The bows or stem. “A 
broilleach" (her bows) is said when look 
ing in front from the outside, but “a 
braigh” is used when looking inside from 
“tobhta bràghad” to the bow. 

Caleadh, bidh,—Caulking. 

Calpannan, see tairngnean calpa,— Lewis. 

Camus, (an,)—Stern seat. 

Ceann a’ chnac, —Thwart brace,—L. Broom. 

Ceann a’ chraidh,—Thwart brace,—Gairloch, 
Lewis, de, 

Ceann deiridh,—Quarter-deck. 

Ceann tobhta,—Thwart brace. 

Cearn,—Ship’s hold. 

Cheall, (a’),—Mast-step,—Gairloch. 

Chrois, (a’),—see glac. 

Cladain,—Sheaths of wood or leather placed 
ou oars to prevent their being worn by 
the thole-pins. 

Clàr,— Plank. 

Cl:^ag,—Square stern. 

Clathaich,—Bilge. 

Cin ri (foremost lower corner of any 
sail. 

Coilpean,—Rope or tow. 

Craunag.—Round top of mast. 2 Cross-trees. 

Crann àrd,—Top-mast, 

Crann deiridh,—Mizzen mast. 

Crann meadhon, erann mér,—Main mast. 

Crann niullaich,—Topmast. 

Crann sgoóide,— Boom. 

Croinn-grith,— Mast rigging. 

Crotan,— Lewis. see cladain. 

Cuairt bheoil,—Top stroke. 

Cudthroin socrachaidh,—Ballast. 

Cupuill, or cuplaichean, (na),—Shrouds. 

Déile,— Plank. 

Deireadh,—Stern. 

Deireadh cuaich,—Round stern. 

Dodirneag, an,—the oar-handle. 

Dorn chur,—Oar-handle,— Lewis. 

Eadar-bhacain,—Space between the rowlocks 

Faradh,—Shrouds. 

Fasag,—Plug-hole. 

Fiodhannan,—Tiinbers in general. 

Fuaigh-shlat,—Stock of a ship while build- 


(also ceanm 


ing. 

Glac,—Fork. An upright piece of timher 
near the stern in fishing boats, nsed for 
resting the upper part of the mast on 
when not up. 

Glas a’ chroiun,—Mast-lock. 

Glüineau,— Beam knees. (see achlaisean.) 

Greüniche,—Anchor.  »rov. 

Gualainn,—-Shouider, (curved part of the hull 
exteuding from the foremost stays, or 
foremost tho'es in a rowing-boat, to the 
stem.) 

Jall-theannsidh,— Brace. 


bata 


Jarnun comhalach,— Lewis. Clip for striking 
into the head of a fish when it comes to 
the boat’s side. 

Yormram,— towing. 

It: - Ar blade. 

“Làmh ud thall” (yonder hand) is only said 
when hauling or shooting lines wi' h oars, 
Tae shooting aad hau ing is done on the 
right side, so this applies to the port oars. 
"Án làmh seo fhéin” or ‘‘an làmh a bhos” 
is applied to the starboard or right side 
oars. 

Lannan, —Scales, roves (ronnd pieces of metal 
on which the nails are clinched inside. 
Leabrilh na taoma, lea^9'!h na taoime,— 
Sku» ; leabaidn-taomaida, —Vacaut space 

for baling. 

Liazh, an,—Oar-blade. i. 

Leagail, (an)—That part of a boat which is 
flattened out before baildiny up the sides. 
— Lewis, 

Luitiz,—Bilye-water.— Lewis. 

Luna, (an,) pl. -an, —the midpart of boat or 
oar. 2 Piece of wood paved under the 
keel when hanling a boat on the beach. 3 
Oar. 4 MM) Lever. 

Puc-tholl.—Plug hole. 

R.cas,—Sail-hoop. 

Ramh-braghad, or ramh-gualainn,—Stroke- 


oar. 
Ruadli-bhórd—Next board to “‘fliuch-bhord.”’ 
Sail,— Heel, «b tween keel and stern-post.) 
Sailtichean.tt—Hatches. 
Seas-aothar,**—Seat a-thwart. 
Sgairean,—Nails. (see tairngnean sgair.) 
Sgar, sgairean.—Gairloch. see shidhean. 
Sgiathau,—Side wiugs. Flat pieces put on 
each side under water to keep boat steady 
and from rolling. They are much stort- 
er and broader than the bilge-piece, aud 
are used for “crank” boats. 
Sgruig thoisich and sgruig dheiridh, —the 


77 


parts of the stem- and stern-posts about 


the gunwale.— Skye. 

Sguit, (an)—Stern-seat,— Lewis. 

Sguit thoisich, sguit dheiridb,— Board on the 
bottom of an open boat fore and aft on 
which passengers place their feet. 

figuman,— Baling-dish.— Lang, 

Slatan,—Yards. 

Slat sgoid,—Boom. 

Slat shiùil, —Sail-yard. 

Sliasaid, — Quarter. 

Slige,—Hull. 

Snaois,++—Prow. 

Spuidsear,—Baling-dish, 

Srol,—Flag. 

Stàdhannanm,(sing. stàdh,)—Stays. 

Strac beóil,—Top stroke. 

Suaicheantas, —Flag having a crest or badge 
as of à yacht club. 

Sidh,—Overlap in planks. 

Suidheachan, an,—the stern seat. 

Siidhean,—Scarf-joint. When in building à 
boat a plank is too short to ext: nd from 
stem to stern, it is supplemented by an- 
other, the two being united by a scarf- 
joint. The nails used in such joints are 
called '*tairngnean-sgair.'' 

Tairngnean barraidh,—skye. Riv t nails. 

Tairugnean calpa,—Nails for joining the skin 
to the stein, keel, aud cross tiinvers. They 
are not clinched. 

Tairngnean daraich,-- Nails of various sizes, 
the larger ones to fix planks to timbers, 
the smaller to fix keei-board to keel, 
and ends of planks to stem- and stern- 


bata 


posts. 
Tairngnean fruillichd,— Roves (nails.) 
m fuaigheil, see t.— daraich. 
Tairngnean rang, —Skye. see t— daraich. 
Tairngnean sgair, see note under süidhean. 
Taoimn,— Bilge-water. 
Taoman,—Baling-dish. 
Tarsnan,—Transom. 
Teannadan,— Brace. 
Tiolpadair,—Check. 
tiolpadia,— i 
Tobhta, pl. -aichean,—Seat or thwart. There 
are generally five thwarts ina boat, nam- 
ed as follows :— 

1. An tobhta chroinn or t— thoisich, (to 
which the mast is fixed.) 2. An tobhta 
bhraghad. 3. An tobhta mheadhon. It 
is called “an tobhta thovalaich" when in 
a moveable condition, and it cau then ke 
taken upand laid down in the bottom of 
the boat when desired. 4. An tobhta 
amar. 5. An tobhta dheiridh, an sguit, 
an camus, or an suidheachan. There is 
no seat a-stem ‘“‘tobuta chroinn.” 

Togail— Lewis, Carriaze. 

Toiseach,—Stem or bow. 

Toll an tic,—Plug-hole,— Lewis. 

Toll-cnaig,—Plug-hole. 

Toll iolaidh, or t— silidh,—Plug-hole. 

Treobhair (an),—That part of boat below the 
“leagail.” 

Trotha,—Lewis. Mast-step. 

Uidaea:n, —Set of sails. 

Urluinn,{{—Fore part of a ship. 





80. Roinnean Acrach. 


NAMES OF PARTS OF AN ANCHOR (Roinnean 


acrach.) 
1 Fainne,—Ring. 
2 Ciabhag,—Forelock. 
3 Gualann,—Shoulder. 
4 Stoc,—Stock. 
5 Dealg na ciabhaiz,—Forelock pin. 
6 Calpa,—Shank.-- Lewis. 
7 Fiacal, Spòg ; spàg(Fliüc,]—Fluke. Da 
spag na h-acrach, the two jlukes of the an- 
chor.— Lewis. 
8 Bas,—Palm. 
9 Gob, barr—Bill or pee. 
10 Gairlean,—Arm. 
11 Cria,—-Crown. 
12 Amhach,—Throat. 
Cori failbheig,—Part of a cable which is fas 
tened to the ring of the anchor. 


NAMES OF PARTS OF A BLOCK OR PULLEY, 


Ulag) 
1 Ceann,—Head. 


2 Kag,--‘Score. 
3 Cocnuil,—Block er shell, 





$1. Ulag. 


4 Dealg,—Pin. 

5 Sinzan—Saeafswallow. 

6 Ruidhlean, reidhlean, roithlein,—Wheel or 
sheave. 


NAMES OF PARTS OF A 
RUDDER, 
(Failm, stiùir.) 

1 Cuing,—Yoke. 

2 Iorunn na stiùireach, 
brod.—Pintle. see O7 

8 Stoc,—Stuck. 

4 Toll na  stiüireaeh-—- 
Rudde--band. 

6 Falmadair, failm, maide 

stiùraidh, **—Tiller. 

2& 4 Ceanglaichean na 
stiùireach, — Rudder- 
bands. 

Claigeann, Dead, where 
yoke or tiller goes on 
the rudder. 

Ghlas (3)—Key on stern- 
post. 





DIFFERENT KINDS OF 
BOATS. 


82. Failm. 

Bàidean, — Little boat, yawl, pinnace. 

Bàrca,—Barque. 

Bà a dà chroinn, —Wherry. 

Biriinn,—Galley,12- or 16-oared boat. 
linn Tigbearna Chloinn Raonuil" had 


**Bir- 


16 oars. 

Ceithir-ramhach, — Double-banked boat 
seating two men on each thwart with an 
oar each, one on each side. 

Clàrach,(AC)—Small boat. 

Clarag,—Square stern boat. 

Coi. e,—Skitt, light pleasure boat for seulling 
on lakes and rivers (called skif in England.) 
2 Small fishing-boat, coracle. 

Culaidh, eathar, —Coble, boat with cutwater 
head, flat-bottomed stern and transom set 
up obliquely. [Culaidh is a general term 
for a boat in the Reay country.—AG] 

Curach, curachan,—Coracle, canoe. 

Curaidh, iübnrach, tatrach,*—Wherry, boat 
to row 2 oars, fo landing passeugers. 

Dà-rànhach,—Single-banked buat kaving one 
rowlock (rowing one on a seat.) 

Deich-ramhach—Launch, boat using 8 or 10 


oars. 

Gabart,—Lighter, one-masted, round-sterned 
vessel, with along hatchway, cutter-rigged, 

Gedla,—Yawl. 

Iübhrach,—Cutter, good sailing vessel of tidy 
build.—Barra. 

Long—Square rigged vessel with 3 and some- 
times 4 masts. 

Long-rambach,—Pinnace, large boat used by 


bith 


- on eee 





war-ships. 

Luath bhata, } —Catter, small vessel with 1 

Luath long, mast, ma:nsail, forestaysail 
and jib set to bowsprit-end. 2 Any sloop 
of narrow beam and deep draught. 

Naonhag,**—Coble. 

Pacaid, —Mail-boat. 

Plodan,(CM)—Small beat of a smack, fishing 

or otherwise. 

Rainh-long.t{— Galley. 

Sgollag,—.?) Dinghey, small rowing-boat for 
use in a harbour. 

Sgoth,—Skiff, (sailing-boat, sharp at stem A 
stern, carrying lugsail, or lugsail and jib, 
and measuring from about 14ft. to 30ft.keel, 
The mast is lowered a-stein, not a-stern ag 
in other boats. 

Sgoth long,—Yacht. 2ttShip’s Be boat, 

Sgoth luath, gearradair,—Cutter, row-boat 
attached to war-ship. 

Sia-ramhach,—Gig, boat with straight gun- 
wale for 2, 4, or 6 oars. 

Slaod uisge; rath— Lewis, W. Ross,&c. ,—Raft. 

Smag, Gaelic spelling of smack. 

Treachaill-mhara, (an)—Fingal’s boat. 

LS When the name of a particular district is 
given for any term above, it does. not foli:o 
that such term is peculiar to that distri:t. 
but only that it is in use there. Many of 
the terms are common to the whole of the 
Highlands. 

A number of additional boating terms were, 
unforiunately, received too late to be stereo- 
typed here ; but they will be found in the Ap- 
pendiz. 

In addition to the authorities mentioned on p. 
XY, considerable assistance has been obtained 
in compiling these boating terms from :— 

Trans. Gaelie Soc. Inverness, xix, 213. 

“Fionn’s” letter to Highland News, 2/10/97. 

Donald Maciachlan, Connel. . 

Michael MacNeill, Castlebay. 

M. MacLeod, Uig, and Donald Murray, Aber- 
deen (chiefly for Lewis.) 

Farquhar Mackenzie, Paris, and A. R. Mac- 
Leod, Glasgow, (chiefly for Gairloch, Loch 
Broom, &c.) 

— NE Edinburgh, (for Western 

sles. 


FOR NAMES OF SAILS 
SAIL, see seòl. 


AND PARTS OF A 


batachan, -ain, s.m. (dim. of bata) Little boat. 

bataenan, -ain,s m. (dira. of bata) Little staff. 

bata cuilce,ff -aichean-, s.m. Cane. 

bataichean, n. pl. of bata. 

bataichean, n. pl. of bata. 

batadh (a’), pr.pt. of hat. 

batail, Gaelic spelling of battle. 2ttThreat. 

batailte, see batail. 

batailteach,tf -eicbe, a. Battalious. 

batair, -ean, s.m. Cudgelier. 2 Noisy fellow. 
3** Lounger, idler. 

bataireachd, s. f. ind. Cudzelling. 2 Idleness. 
3 Lounging. 4 Making a rattling noise. Is 
ann ort tha a’ bhataireachd ! what a noise you 
are making ! 

hata-speur, -aichean-, 3. m. Balloon. 

bat’-athair,** see bata-speur. 

bàt-bhüth,** s.m. Awning. 

Tbàth,s. 'lhesca. 2 Slaughter, massacre, mur- 
der. 3 Death. 3 Thirsi. 

bath. v.a. Drown, iinme.-se, 2 Quench, slake. 3 
Extinguish, smother. 4**rarey faint. 5t{Die, 

erish. Bhathadhe. or chaidh a bhathadh, 
e was drowned ` bh^t' ian gealbhan, she et: 

tinguished the fire (by pouring water on it); 


bat 


bháth e a phathadh, ke quenched his thirst; 
bathamaid gach smalan, let us drown all care. 
dath, a. see baoth. 
——, &.m. see baothair. 
dathach,-aich,-aichean, see bàthaich. 9tfSloth. 
bathachd, see bhaothairenehd. Thig b. ort, 
Sodlizhness shc!! come upon thee. 
bathadh, -aidh, s.a. Drown'r* 2 Quenching, 
slaking. 3 Sinothering. AT Faiut, swoon. 
A’ b—, pr pt. of bath. Eè hiudh mór aig oir 
thir, a great drowning near the land (applied 
to oe whodie as soon aa they get ‘heir 
luck); is e barrachd dein aodach a ni na 
longannan cao a ’bhathadh, 'tís too much sail 
that capsizes the narrow ships, (applied to 
persons with more a™)hition than grit.) 





83. Büthaica. 


bàthaich, -ean, s.m. Byre, cowhouse. 
PARTS OF A :YRE— 
1 Balla,—Wall 
8 Amar,—Trough. 
4 Post deiriilh, —Hind-post. 
5 Maide mullaich,—Top rail. 
€ Clach &mail,—Curb-stone. 
7 Buird tharsuiun,—Travis boards. 
8 Bacan,—Stake. 
12 Inne, carcair, gruip,(MM) —Gutter. 
18 Urlar,—Paved floor. 
Buall, buist,—Stall. 
Prasach,—Manger. (not in illust.) 
bá-thaigh, see bàthaich. 
tbathainte, pl. Cattle spoil. 
bathaire, see baothair. 
bathais, -ean, s. f. Forehead, front. 9 Crown 
of the head. 3 Impudence. Nach ann aige 
a bha a’ bhathais ! what impudence the fellow 
had ! cuiridh mi aghaidh bhur bonn ri 
bhur bathais, I will make you set about the 
work in earnst (lit. put the face of your soles 
to your forehead); caaidh mi thar bathais an 
ùrlair de leum, { went right across the fioor ut 
one jump ; bathais guu fhallus, @ brow with- 
out sweat, (said of one void of shame or com- 
mon sense. 
— each, @. Of, or belonging to, the fore- 
head. 2 Assuming in mauner, impudent, 


bold. 

————-eachd.{} s. f. Effrontery. 

batlal, see badhal. 

buhalaich, sm. Vagabond. 

bachar, -air,s.m. Wares, goods, merchandise. 
2°*Bale. 3**see barr. Bathar oir agus air- 
gid, agus chlach luachmhor, the merchandise 
of gold, silver und precious stones ; am b. a bha 
pan luinge, tre wa es that were in the ship. 

batnar-bhoó-d,* -bhùrd, s.m. Count r. 

batharuach,* s.m. Warehouse, shop, store- 


honse. 

tbhathznorm, see liath-ghorm. 

ba. hiach, see balach. 

thathlan, s.m. Flux of tke sea. 2 Tide. 3 
Calm. 


79 i _beachdaich 


tbath-laodh, s.m. Helmet. 

fbathroid,** -ean, s. f. Token. ` ` 

bàth-rós, -rois, s.m. Rosemary. see ròs Màiri, 

bath-shreth. ssm. Calm or sinceth stream. 

fb«th-throid, s. f. Helmet, head-piece. 

bàt-phubull,** s.m. Awning. 

fuatrós, see ros Mairi. 

be ( for bu e), 3rd. pers.sing.. past ind., irr. v. 
is. It washe, or it. B'e sin iarrtas do 
chridhe, that was the desire of thine heart. 

the, s. f. Life. 2 Wife, woman, female. 8 
Night, 

fbeabh, 8... Tomb, grave. 

beabbar, Gaelic spelling of beaver. 

tbeacan, -ain, s.m. Large fuzzhall, see beach. 
2 Mushroom, see balg-bhuachair. 

t- ach, a. Abounding in mushrooms, of 
mushrooms, like a mushroom. 

tbeacarna, s. f. Common prostitute. 

] beach, -a, -an, s.m. Bee. 2 Bee-hive. 3 Wasp. 
4** Beast. 5**Bird. Mar bheachaibh, as bees; 
dranndan bheachan an aonaich, the murmur 
of the mountain bees. 

——-,§ -a, -an, s.n. Devil's snuffbox or fuzze 
ball—iycoperdon gigantum. 

ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in bees or 
wasps. 2 Waspish. 3 Of, or belonging to, & 
bee or wasp. Mios b. seilleanach, the month 
that produces wasps and bees. 

beachaid,* see peachair. 
beachair, -ean, 8.m.  Bee-hive. 

| beachan, s.m. *see beach. 2**Little bee. 

We ax m s.m. Wasp. 92 Horse-fly. 

beachanta ** -ainte, a. Waspish, cross. Gu b., 
waspishly. 

beacuarn,** -airn, -airnean, 8. f. Prostitute. 

beachd, -a, -an, s.m. Notice, attention, obser- 
vation, perception. 2 Feeling. 8 Ambition. 
4 Idea, conception. 5 Distinct recollection. 
6 Opinion. 7 Behaviour. 8 Sense, judg- 
ment. 9 Conceit. 10 Aim, intention. 11 Carr- 
iage. 12**Vision, eyesight. 13 Surety. Gu 
beachd, surely, clearly; as a bheachd, out of his 
senses ` ma's math mo bheachd-sa, if I havea 
distinet recollection; mór "na beachd, con- 
ceited in her ideas ; tha mi 'san aon bheachd, 
I am of the same opinion ; geur shaighdean 
laoich a’s cinn:iche beachd, the arrows of the 
hero of surest aim ; am bheil beachd agad far 
an d'fhàg thn e ? have you any recollection 
where you left it ? gabh beachd air, pay parti- 
cular attention toit ; cha robu mi dorch gun 
bheachd, I was not so ignorant and void of 
perception; a réir mo bheachd-sa, to the best 
of my recollection or opinion ` cum sin 'nad 
bheachd, keep that steadily in view ; 's e sina 
bha 'm bheachd-sa 'san am, that is what I 
had in view at the time ; an do chaill thu, 
mar mise, do bheachd ? hast thou, like me, 
lost thy memory ? chuir na baird am beachd 
air na triath, the bards fixed their notice on 
the chiefs ; ma's comhrag do bheachd, if bat- 
tle be thine intention ; o bheachd, out of sight. 

+———., s.m. Covenant, surety. 2 Circle, ring, 
8 Multitnde. 

















t , v.n. see beachdaich.  2**Embrace, 

| compass. 

- s ach,[f-aicbe, a. Notional. 2 Perceps 
ive. 





achadh, -aidh, s. m. Considering, med. 
itating, contemplating. 2 Viewing, watch- 
ing. 3 Consideration, meditation. 4*Minute« 
ly observing. A’ b—, pr.pt. v. beachdaich. 
achail fi e, a. Imaginative. 

adair,** s.m. see beachdair. 

| ———4àich, pr.pt. AT beachdachadh, v.n. Q 











beachdaich 


serve, perceive. 2 Attendto. 3 Mark. 4! 


80 


beag 





Pity. 5ffBook. 


Consider, meditate. 5 Stare, eye. 6 Review, ' beadach, -aiche, a. Forward, impudent. 2 


criticise. Cha bh. shila h-àite, no eye shall 
discern her place, bheachda‘ch mi gu dur, I 
observed attentively ` bheachdaich iad am fear 
mor, they eyed the mighty man, 

aichte, a.,& pt.pt. of beachdaich. Con- 
sidered. 2 Observed, watched. 3 Ascertain- 
ed, certain. 


——--—aid,* see beachd-àite. 


beachdair, -ean, 8m. Observer, spy, scout. 











aidh, a. Certain, authoritative, sure. 2 
Observant, watchful, meditative. 
ons, 4 Exact, sure in aim. 5¢tHigh-minded. 
6**Considerate. 7ffNotable. Gu beachiaidh, 
considerately, also most deetdedly, most assur- 
edly ; tha thu beachdaidh gu'm bi, you are 
quite certain it shall be so. 

aidheachd,1t sf. Notableness. 

ail, a. see beachdaidh. 2** rarely 
circular. Nach beachdail an t-süil a th'aige ! 
how keenly observant his eye is ! 


Critie,reviewer. 3** Apprehender. | 
eachd, s.f. Spying, informing, es-! 


8 Judici-| —————4an, -ain, 8.m. 


| ————anach, ff -aiche, 


9 | beadaiche, 





er. 3 Pettish. 
d, s. f. ind. Forwardness, impudence. 


Prone to flatter. 


2 Flattery. 
beadag, -aig, -an. s. f. Lying enticing young wo- 


man. 2 Impudent, impertinent young Woa 
man. 3 Gossip. 


———ach,** a. Like alying female. 2 Like 


a gossip. 
ag, see |; j 
mpertinent, impudent, 
etulant. or trifling fellow, 2** Tale-teller, 
(Oe may a tup lamb about six months old, 
as it was very keen at that age to cover the 
sheep. Lads in their teens inclined to bave 
carnal connection with woinen are called bea- 
dagan in the W. Isles.—J.M.] 
an, mn. pl. of beadag. 
a. Pedantie. 
8.f. Pedagogy. 
comp. of beadach. 
——,*5 sa. Flatterer, cajoler, 2 En- 
ticing fellow. 


— cu 


2 Criticism, review:ng, (as of al beadaidh, -e, a. Impudent, petulant, forward, 


ionage. 
ook. pert. 2 Fastidious, nice, Inxurious. 3 Pet- 
beachd-àite, pl. [-àitean &] -àiteachan, m.j] tish. 4** Mannerless. 5** Sweet-mouthed, 


flattering. 6**Alert. An Inid bheadaidh 
thig an là roimh ’n oidhche, the forward 
Shrove-tid» th: day comes. before the night (the 
feest Lefore the vigil); beadaidh ri lina 
socair, luxurious in time of peace ; cho bh, so 
forward ` òran na circe beadaidh, a song from 
the pert hen; breac beadaidh, & trout. 

eachd, s. f. ind. Impudence, petulance, 
impertinence, ineivility, forwardness. 2 
Luxuriousness. 3 Capriciousness. 4 Pettish- 
ness. 5** Flattery. 6** Alertness. 7 Assur- 
ance. 


Observatory. 2 Watch-tower, 
beachdalachd, s. f. i.d. Circumspection, eau- 
tion, attention. 2 Self-conceit. 3 Sureness 
of aim. 4 Great punctuality in observing. 5 
ambition. 
beachd-bhorb. e. Haughty, imperious, insolent. 
-eolas, ff s.m. Intuition. 
-ionad, -an,8.m. see beachd-àite. - - 
-maraiche, s.m. Mariner’s compass, 
-sgeul, -sgeoil, s.m. Information. 
-shuil, a, s.m. Observation, vision. 
——-— -shüileach, -eiche, a. Minutely observant, 




















keen-eyed. !T——-——ean, s.m. Seoffer. 2ft Parasite. 
-smaointeachadh, see beachd-smuain-|tbeadaighe, see beadaiche. 
teacha‘ih. beadair,* va. see beadraich. 


-smaointich, see beachd-smuaintich. | beadal,** Gaelic spelling of beadle. 

—— -smuaiueachadh,see b—smuainteachadh. beailamanachd,** s.f. Proeacity, presumption. 
———- -smuainich, see b—smuaintich. i beadan, -ain, s.m. Calumny. 2**Forward, pet- 
-smuaiiteach, a. see b - smuainteachail.; ulant person. 

————— ——a&dh, -aidh, 8.m. Medita- ach, -aiche, &. Calumnious 2 For 
tii; contemplating, musing. A’ b—, pr.pt.oft ward. 3 Petulant. Gu beadanach, calumn- 














beachd-smuaintich. :  jously. 
————— ——aàil** a. Contemplative, | —— —achd, 8. f. Scurrility. calumny, 2** 
meditative. | Harit of ealuuniating. 3** Forwardness, 


-smuairtich, v.n. Muse, meditate, con-: pcrinuss, —— 
2** Salk. A bheachd-smuainteach- | beadarach, -aiche, a B loved, lovely. 2 Plat, 





template. 


adh 'san fhaiche, to meditate in the field. 


beach 'ta, a. Certain, sure, accurate. 


beach-each,(DM) s.m. 


Wasp. 2 Horse-fly. 


—— -lann, s.m. Bee-hive. 


tering, cajoliug, coaxing. 3 Pampered, de- 
licate, indulged 4 Fond. 5 Sportive, play- 
ful. Is beadarach an ni an onoir, honour ig 
delicaie ; Albainn bheadarrach / beloved Scot- 





t¢beachlannach, s. f. Place suitable for bee-| land? " 
hives. — ——— —d, 8. f. ind. Buxomness, playfulness 
, a Abounding in bee-hives. 5eadaradh, see beadradh. 


bead-fhaciacr ,-aiche, e. Impudently loquacious. 
fbead-fhuraobhadh,Tf s.n. Register,commen- 


tary. 
| +beairach, -aich, s. f. Playful girl. 
I ——, @. See beadarach. 
beadradh, -aidh, s.m. Fondling, flirting. 2 


+ —" 
beach mér,(AF) s.m. Hornet. 
beachnuadh firionn,$ 8. m. 
Square - stemmed St. 
John’s wort,—hypericum 
quadrangulum. (lit, male 
St. Johu's wort [ordinary 








St. John's wortis called Flattering. 2 Caressiug. 4 Toying.  5** 
betchnuadh boirinn by O’ Fon'ness, endearment. 6fkFun,sport, play. 
Reilly. ] Beadradh gu 


A’ b—, pr. pt. of beadraich. 

leòir, enou h of flirting ; chuireadh tu bodaich 

gu beadradh, you would set old men a-fondling. 
beadragan, see beadradh. 


tbeachran, v.a. Grieve, mo- 
lest, trouble, annoy. 
tbeachran -ain, s.m. Wan- 








deriug, straying. beadraich, pr. pt. a’ beadr:dh, v.a. Fondle, 
beach-thaigh, see beach caress, indulge, cajole, coax. 
elann. beaduidh, see beadaidh. 
bead, s.m. Flattery. 2 84. B achnuadh |-- eachd, see beadaidheachd. 
Cunning. 8 Trick. 4tf firionn. beag, œ. Little, shoit, diminutive. 2 Diş- 


——— ES RR. TN 


—_ ott 


agreeable, often used to express disapproba- 


tion. 3 Light, tritling, insigeitieant. 4** 
Young. 65**Few. 6(AH) Sordid, miserly, nig- 
gardly. Declined thus in connection with a 
noun : 
Sing. Plur. 
Nom. (m.) besg, ( f.) bheag, (m. & f.) beaga. 
Gen. bh xz, b ge, beaga. 
Dat. beag,* bhig, berga. 
Voc. bhig, bhea beaga. 


2 When the noun preceding beag has the ar- 
ticle before it, the aat. sing. masc. is aspi- 
rated (bheag.) Braj is compared thus : 
1st. Comp. bige, or lugha. 2nd. Comp., bigid, 
or lugaaid. 3rd. Comp. bigead, or lughad. 
Ach beag, air bheag, almost; is beag uach, 
almost ; rud beag, a tittie thing; duine beag, 
a diminutive man ; ùine bheag, a short time ; 
is beag orm thu,/ hate you; iad-an air am beag 
sibh, they who hate you; is beag seo, this is u 
trifling (light) thing ; is beag an dolaidh, it 
ts a small loss (he or she richly deserves it); 
na sionuaich bheaga, the young foxes ` na coin 
bheaga, the little dogs; na tir bheaga [ na 
daoine beaga.] the little men ; leanabh beag, 
a babe ; air bheag de laithibh, in a few days ; 
air glé bheag den oidhche, very early in the 
night ; is beag sin de Ghàidhlig, that is a poor 
sort of Gaelic; tha e fior bheag 'n a nadur, 
he has a very niagardly disposition; cna'n 
fheairrd duine a bni cho beag siod, a person 
is not any better of being so niggardly as that. 
* v.a. see beagaich. 

—, s.m. £ f. (n. pl. big, declined in sing. as 
a. beag.) Little one. 2 Nothing. 3 Any, the 
least. 4 pi The young. Am baeil a bheag 
de mhath air? is it worth anything ? am 
beag agus am niór, both great and small; an 
nia chi na big, is e a ni na big; whut the 
youny see, they do; a bheag a dh'aon ni is leat- 
sa, the least particle of what is thine; chan 
fhaich a bheag (am) bàs; nothing shall die ; 
beag is beag, little and little, by dejrees. 

beagachadh, -aidh, s.m. Diminishing, lessen- 
ing. diminution. A’ b—, pr.pt. of beagaich. 

b-agachd,£f s. f. ind. Littleness. 

beagaich, pr.pt. a’ beagachadh, v.a. Diminish, 
ləssen, abate. 2 Destroy. 

beagaiche, s.m. Abater, diminisher. 

beagaichear, fut. pass. of beagaich. 

b agaichidh, fvt. af. a. of beagaich. 

baxgaichte, past. part. of beagaich. 

bcagan, -ain, s.m., j: a. Little. 2 Few, small 
number,small quanti y. Air bheagan chéille, 
with little wisdom, witless; beagan uisge, a 
little water ; fuirich b-agan, stop a üttle; 
b-agan crìon, a very litte; a’ dol am beagan- 
aibh, growing into small portions, crumbling ; 
a lion beagan is beagan, mar a dn'ith an cat 
an sgadan, by degrees (little and little) as the 
cat ate the herrin7 ; beagan eile, a little more; 
air bheagan maith, worth little, of no value ; 
air bheagan tuireim, having little sense. 

beav-chionta, -an, 8.m. Petty crime, foible, 
slieht fault. 

beag-chreidmheach, -eiche, a. Of little faith, 
sceptical, incredulous. 

fbeagdhata, s.m. Stingy fellow. 

tea -eagalach, -ai«h*. a. Bold, fearless. 

beag-ghaduidheach i $f st Larceny, 

beuy-luach, see beay-luachach. 

bea z-luachach, -aiche, a. Val .eless,useless. 

bea;-nàire -e, s.f. Impudence, indelicacy. 

beag-nàrach, -aiche, a. Impudent, shameless. 
Gu b., shamelessly. 
, 8. f. ind. Shamelessness, impu- 


— 





dence. 


51 


P Bealltuinn 

beag-seadhach, -aiche, a. Inconsiderate. Is 
fnearr am beag-seadhach na’n draghaiche 
mór, mi-ghniomnach, the little sensible man is 
better than the great inactive burdensome man. 

beag-shnileach, -eiche, a. Piuk-eyed. 

ueairdean, see boitean. 

beairt, see beart. 

each, see beartach. 

ean, pl. of beairt ( for beart.) 

eas, see beartas. 

ich, see beartaich. 

tbeal, see benl. 

bealach, -aich, -aichean, s.m. Defile, passage, 
re or gorge of a mountain, glen. 2 Gap, 

reach in a wall or fence. 3 Gateway. 4 

Gate. ‘log am bealach, build the breach; mar 
eibnle 'sa bhealach, like a fire in the mount- 
ain gorge ; cid au bealach am buail sinn ? 
througa which pass shall we strike our way ; 

| air bealach ceart, ena right way ; druid am 

| Leai:ach, suni th» way. 

| bealach—Arg. Erroneously used for bealaidh. 

tbealada, ff sm. Anointing. 

bealag.** see mea g. 

bealaidh, s.m.ind. Proom, 
—sarcthamnus scoparius. 
[$Badge of Clan Forbes.] 

bealaidh Chattach,} s. m. 
Buteher’s broom. see 
cale-t healar h. 

be«laidheach,ff -eiche, a. 
Brooray. 

bealaidh Frangach.§ s.m. 
taburuum—cytisus lavur- 




















nim. 

ben.a dh Sasunnach, s.m.. 
Laburnum, see bealaidh 
Frangach. 

bealamas,* -ais, s.m. Re- 
fus: of a feast, crumbs 

that fall from the tab!v or from the niouth. 





85 D wealdidh. 





$6. Bealaidh Paorch, 


i bealbhach.ft s.m. Horse's bit. 

bealbhan-ruadh, -ain-ruaidh, -ain-ruadha, s.m. 
Species of hawk, buzzard or 2 Frog. 

thealchaithteach, a. Talkative. 

tbealgach. a. Garrulons, prattling. 

——————,** sm. In e-vreter. 

beall, see beoll. 

Bealltainn, see Dealltuinn. 

Bealltuinn, e, 8.f. May-day, first day of May. 
On the first of May was held a great Druid- 
ical festival in favour of the got Belus. On 
this day fires were kindled on the mountain 
tops for the purposes of sacrifice ; and be 


Bealltuinn 


tween these fires the cattle were driven, to 
preserve them from contagion till next May- 
day. On this day it was usual to extinguish 
all the hearth fires, in order that they should 
be re-kindled from this KC flame. In 
many parts of the Highlands the young folks 
of the district used to meet on the moors on 
lst. May. They cut a table in the green sod, 
of a round figure, by cutting a trench in the 
ground of sutficient circumference to hold the 
wholecompany. They then Kindled a fire, and 
dressod a repast of eggs and milk of the con- 
sistency of custard. They kneaded a cake of 
oatineal, which was toasted at the embers 
against a stone. After the custard was eat- 
en, they divided the cake into as many por- 
tions as there were persons inthe compavy, as 
much alike as possible in size and shape. 
''aey daubad one of the pisces wita charcoal 
till it was black all over, and they were then 
all put iuto a bonnet together, and each 
one, blindfolded, drew ont a portion. The 
bonnet holder was entitled to the last bit, 
aud whoever drew the black bit was the de- 
voted person who was to be sacrificed to Baal, 
whose favour they meant to implore in re: - 
dering the year productive. The devoted per- 
son was compelled to leap three times over 
the Rames.** 
Là buidhe Bealltuinn, a common name for 
May-day. 

+bealraidheach, a. Famons. 

tbe.Jraidhteach, a. Prattling, babbling, talk- 
ative. 2 see bealraidheach. 

tbealtaine, 8.f. Agreement, compact, bargain. 

bealtair,** s.m. Compact. 

tbealtuidh, a. Nasty, dirty. 

+--————-aachd, s.f. Uncleanness, filthiness. 

bealuidh, see bealaidh. 

fbeam, s.m. see beum, 

bean, pr.part. a’ beantainn [beanail, beantail, 
& beanallt.; v. a. & n. Touch. 2 Handle. 8 
Med Da with. Cha bhean sibhris, ye shall 
not Ion A it ; an ti a bheanas ribh, he who 
Loge, Le you. 

bean, s.f. Woman, female. 2 Wife. 


‘nus declined :— 
Sing. Plur. 
Indef, Nom. bean, mnathan, and 
mnai, 
Gn. mna, bhan, 
Dat mnaoi, muathaibh, 
Voe. a bnean! a mhnathan ! 
Def. Nom. a’ bhean, na mnathan, 
Gen na mna, nam ban, 
Dat (do)'n mhnaoi,(do)na mnatbaibh 


» ris a’ mhnaoi, ris na mnathaibh 
Bean a ghaoil, the wife of his affections ; goir- 
ear bean dith, she shall be called woman; bean 
nan deagh bheus, @ virtuous woman ; air a 
bhreith le mnaoi, born of o woman; mar 
mh avi, as a wife; bean a’ bhaile, the tenant 
or proprietriz of a place ; bean an taighe, the 
landiady or yoodwife ; bithidh taobh an teine 
aig caraid bean an taighe, the goodwife’s 
Jriend will be near the fire; bithidh caraid beau 
an taighe an uachdar an taighe, the qoodiwife’s 
Jriend will be over the house. The last vwo 
sayings do not necessarily mean that the good- 
wife will ba nasty to her husband's friends, 
but merely that her own friends will natur- 
allv feel more at home iu the house. Wien 
addressing one's mother in Gaelic, the ex- 
pression '*à bhean’’ (woman) i» used and 
not ‘ta, mhàthair.” 

bean, (AF) sf. She-goat. 2f{Step, degree. 
¢——, a. Active, quick, nimble. 


82 


beannachadh 


beanachas-taivhe, see banas-taighe. 

Tbeanadh, -aidh, s.m. Dullness, bluntness. 

t- ,v.a. Take. 2 Belong. 3 Reap, shear. 

beanag, -aig, -an, 8& J. Little woman or wife. 
2 Term of endearment for a female. 3** 
Pundle.(?) Mo bheanag ghaolach, my dear 
little woman. 

beanail, see banail. 

beanailt, s.m. Touching. A’ b—, pr pt. of bean. 

————-each, -eiche, a. Touching. 2 Meddling. 
3 Tangent. 

tbeanamhuil, a. see banail. 

tbeana:in, ft s.pl. Appurtenances, furniture, 

tbeanis-taizhe, see banas-taighe. 

bean-baile, s. f. Proprietrix of a village. 3 
Wife of a farm tenant. 

bean-bainuse, s.f. (dit. the woman of the wed- 
ding) Bride. 

bean-bharain, s.f. Baron's wife. 

bean-bhochd, $,/. Female mendicant. 92YPoor 
woman. Mnathan bochda, poor women ` an 
t-sean bhean bhochd, a poetical name for lre- 
land. used there. 

bean-bhrathair-athar, s.f. Uncle's wife, wife of 
a father's brother. Bean-brathair-m’athar, 
my paternal uncles wife, 

beau-brathair-mathar, sf. Uncle's wife, wife 
of a mother's brother. Bean-bràthair mo 
mhathar, my maternal uncle's wife. 

bean-bhràthair-seanair. 8. f. Grand-uncle’s 
wife, wife of a grandfather's brother. 

bean-bhrathar, s.f. Sister-in-law. 

bean-charaid, see bana-charaid. 

bean-chéile, 8.f. Spouse, wife. 

bean-chìche, s.f. Wet-nurse. 

bean.chinnidh, s.f. Kinswoman. 2 Clanswo- 
inan, female namesake. 

bean-chliamhuinn, see bana-chliamhuinn. 

tbeanchobhar, s.m. Horn. 

tbeanchobhrach, a. Horny, horned. 

bean-choimheadachd, s.f. Waitiug-maid. 2 
Bride's-m»id. 

bean-chomhar^adh,** s.f. Dowager. 

tbeanchnir, see beanchobhar. 

bean chumanta,1f5./. Harlot. 

bean-dalta, see ban-dalta. 

bean-éigin, see b— éigneachadh. 

bean-éigneachadh, -aidh, s.m. Rape. 

fbeangan, see meangau. 

bean-chliin, s.f. Midwife. Thubhairt a’ bhean- 
ghlùin rithe, the midwife said to her. 

bean-iasg, s.f. Spawner, female fish. 

bean-léigh, mna-l—, mnathan-l—, s.f. Female 
physician. 

bean-mhath,* sf. Small-pox. 
ded by the article oi) 

bean-mhic,* s. f. Daughter-in-law. 

beann, beinn, &.f. Degree. 2 Step. 3 Beam. 
4 Coruer. 5 Skirt. 3 Attention 7 Regard. 
8 Horn (Islay.) 9 Top, peak. 19** Drinking 
cup. llffRock. 12 Armofa cross. 13 Prong 
of acycle-fork. 14**rarely Bone. A bheann 
iübhraidh, its beam of yew ` brai h lin air a 
ceithir beannaibh, a sheet by the your corners; 
na toir beann air ciod à their e, pay no at- 
tention to what he says. 

beann, gen.pl. of beinn. 

ach,** -aich, s.m. Fork. 

-—————-,-BAiche, a. Skirted. 2 Corner-wise, 
3 Horned. 4 Pointed. 5 Forked. 6** Che- 
quered. 7**Mosaic. 8 see beanntach. 

beannachadh, -aidh, s.n. Blessing, benediction. 
2 Act or circumstance of blessing. 3 Com- 
pliment. 4 Grace before or after food. A’ b—, 
pr.part. of b:anvaich. Iarr b., aska blessing; 
sruth-bheannachadh nan ceatharn, the smooth 
address of the rubbers. 


[Always prece- 





beannacha th-baird 


beaunachailh-baird, s.m. Poet’s congratula- 
tion. It was the custom iu the sfighlands, 
of old, to mee, tne bride coming forch from 
her chamber with her mai lens on the morn- 
ing after her inarriage, and to salute her 
with a poetical blessing called beannachadh- 
bdird.—An Gàidheal, ii, 63. If, at any jovial 
meeting, any mau retired, for however short 
a time, he was obliged, before he was per:nit- 
ted to resume his seat, to make an apology 
forhis absence in rhyme. If he had no tal- 
ent for poetry, or if, from humour, he did not 
choose to comply,which was seldom the case, 
be was obliged to pay such a proportion of 
the reckouiug asthe company thought proper 























to propose. This, according to Martin, was 
beannachadh -báird.** 
— -beinge, 
ae SPI Forms of blessing 
inen been ' | said or sung on var- 
ifi “| i ious occasions, now 
illow-blessing p only in the Western 
couch-blessing. 


beannachan,** -ain, s.m. Cuckold. 
beannachd,-an,s.f. Blessing. 2 Farewell ex- 
ression. 3 Compliments, salutation. (see 
earnachadh. uir mo bh., send my compli- 

nents ; thoir mo bheannachd, give my compli- 
m-nts ; beannach/l Dhé leat, may the blessing 
of God attend you; tha mv bheannachd-sa 
agad, you have mu blessing ; beannachd leat ! 
farewell, adieu ! fag beannachd aige, bid hun 
adieu. say good-bye to him; beannachd do t' 
anam is buaidh, a blessing to thy soul and vic- 
tory ; beannachd a shaoid is a suiurhail leis, 
may he fare as he deserves; beannachd le 
cele..chdadh na h-òige, farewell to the pursuits 
of youth ; mo bheannachd "oa chui 

' chuideachd, I wish increase of prosperity to his 
gear and relations. 

beannachdach, a. 
salute. 

bea ‘nachdail,* a. «ee beannachdach. 

beaunacadan,* -ain, s.m. Insect that strikes 
one’s finger when holding it. 

beannag, -aig, St Kerchief, head-band. 2 
Corner of a plaid or shawl. 3 skirt. 4 Coif, 
linen eap. 5 see baunag. [Seems to be the 
true Gaelic equivalent of shawl. Iu Lewis 
it is à square piece of home-made tweed worn 
by women about their shoulders when at any 
work outside on a cold day. It is essentially 
quite square, so that when doubled the up- 
per corner exactly covers the lower.—J.M.] 

————4aàch, -aiche, a. Having corners, 2 Skirt- 
ed. 3 Plaited. 4**Having a coif, like a coif. 

beannaich, pr. part. a’ beannachadh, v.a. 
Bless, invoke a blessing. 2 Salute, 
Na beannaich dha, do not salute him ; Dhia 
beannaich sinn ! God bless us ! 
—idh, Jut. ajf. act. of beannaich. 

—te, a. £ pt. part. of beannaich. Bless- 
ed. 2 Saluted. 3 Holy. 4 Happy. Is bean- 
naicht' an duine, blessed is the man ; tha thu 
&' fà3 beannaichte, you are getting holy (a re- 
mark frequently inade in derision when the 
person addressed refuses to join in such as 
a Highland reel or a game of shinty, because 
he pretends that it is wicked to do so!) 

J»eannam, v.a. I steal, or tnieve. 

b-anuan, -ain, s.m. Little hill. 

bean-nighe, see bean-nigh»adaireach4. 2 
(JM) Female wraith of very small stature be- 
lieved to be seen or beard at a loca or burn 
washing clothes when some person in the 





83 


Prone to bless. 2 Ready to j bearaideach, -eiche, 


beàrnag 


neighbourhood was about to die. 
bean-nigheachain, see bean-nigheadaireachd. 
beau-nigheadaireachd, s. f. Washerwoman, 
laundry-maid. 

bean-nighida, see bean-nigheadaireachd. 

peannta, n.pl. of beinn. A bheannta ! voc.pl. 
of beinn. 

beanntach, -aiche, a. Hilly, mountainous. 2 
Roe&y. 3 Pinnacled. 

— —d, s. f. ind. Hilliness, mountainous» 
ness. 2 Steepness. 

beacntainn,tt s.m. Mint. see meannt. 

—— —— -— -dize,tt -e-, s.m. Wild mint 

beanntair,* s.m. Monntaineer. 

beauntan, n. & dat.pl. of beinn. 

bean nuadh-phósda,ff s.f. Bride. 

beannuchidh, see b-annachadh. 

beaunuich, see beannaich. 

—— ——-—te, see beannaichte. 

tbean-os la, sf. Hostess. 

|bean-ridir, see ban-ridir. 

beaa-siih, see ban-sith. 

heanssh übh!aidh, s.f. Womanin child-bed. 

b an-shniomhaich,tt s.f. Spinster, (i.e. female 
spiuner, not necessarily an unmarried wo- 
man.) 

bean-sithe, 8.f. see ban-sith. 

NCC s. J. Fornicatress. 





2 Adul- 
tress. 

beantag.ft -aig, -an, sf. Corn-fan. 

| bean-taighe, a € House-wife. 

beantainn, s.m. Touching, act of touching. A’ 

| b—, pr.pt. of bean. 

| baan-tuach, see ban-tuathanach. 

bean-uasal, s f. Lady, gentlewornan. 

fb anughadh, s.m. Recovering. 

hean-uibe, (AC) s.f. Witch. 

|Tbear, bir, see bior. 

tbear,** see beithir. 





is "na; tbeara, s.m. Judge. 





ch,* s.f. Dug-fish. see gobag. 

end, s. f. Judgment. 

a. Having m»ans—J.M. 
2(AH) Rude, derisive, sarcastic, ready to ap- 
p y nicknames to other peonia. 3 (D. M.* ave 

iorraideach, & bearraideach. Chan 'eil e 

bearaidzach, he is without rans ; a mbilid t- 
ibh bearaideach ` ye agile warriors !— dr 
nam beann, p. 67. 

fbea am, v.a. see beir. 

tbearan, -ain, s.m. Young man. 2 Pin. 3 see 
bioran. 

bearbh,** e.a. £n. Seethe. £}}Melt. 

— ———Aàádh,1f-aidh. s.m. Seething boiling. 2 
melting. A’ b—, pr.part. of bearba. 

ain, sf. Vervain. 

it air, £.. Retiner of metals. 

fbearg, s.m. Anger. 2 Champion. 

rT achd, s.f. Diligence. 











hail.|fbeargnadh, s.f. Vernacular language of a 


country. 
bearla, see bourla. 
beàrn, -eirn & -eàirn, pl. bearnan, s.f. Breach, 
fissure, gap, aperture. 2 Cranny, crevice. 3 
Ellipsis in gram. (written thus, * * * or 
) 5**Separation. Troimh t heàrnan 
nan neul, through the fissures of the clouds; le 
bearnaibh, with breaches. 
„v.a. Notch. 2 Hack. 3 Make a gap 
or breach. 
ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in gaps or 
breaches. 2 Notched. 3 Hacked. 4 Having 
or causing, fi sures, apertures, clefts, or opon- 
ings. 5 Having broken teeth. 6**Chopped. 
An sgiath mheallach bhearnach, the bossy 
scalloped shield. 
ag, -aig, -an, dimin. of bearn. 














beàrnan 

an, n. pl. of bearn. 2 dimin. of b»àrn. 3 

ttPerson with broken or uneven teeth. 
beàrnan-Bealltninn,} Marsh-marigold. 


cnorrach sliod. 
— — — -beàrnach, 
Bride. 


breac,§ Milk-thistle. 





see a’ 
Dandelion. see bearnan- 


see fothannan 





breac. 

-Bride, s.m. Dan- 
delion — taraxacum dens 
le: nis. 

bearn-iahiol, s.m. Hare-lip. 

thearr, a. Short, brief. 

bearr, v.a. Shave. 2 Shear, 
clip, erop, curtail, prune. 
3 Taaut, gibe. 

a, -an, see bearradh. 

adair, -ean, s.m. Bar- 

ber, hairdresser. 2 Critic. 

3 Shearer. 4 Giber. Ealt- 

ain bearradair, a barber’s 

razor. 














37. Bear: an- Bride. 
-daireachd, $£, Occupation of a b'rber. 





2 Shearing, clipping, «roppivg. 3 Carping, 
criticizing. 4 Satirizing, gibing. 
bearradiirean, pl. of bearradair. 
bearradan,tt -ain, 8.m. Nceissors. 
— —-(h, -aidh, -ailhean. s.in. 
hair or any other crop. 2 Searing, clipving, 
lopping, 
5 Short hair. 6 Cut, slice, shred, segment, 
fragment. 7**Sharp-pointed instrument. 8 
ftMountain ridge.  SffPreeipice. {ft Trip- 
ing along. A’ bearrah, pr.ot. of bearr. 
ean do bhearradh, shave thyself a’ bearr- 
adh na mòine, varing t.e peat-moss ; a’ bearr- 
adh a’ bhuntata, eroppiug the potatoes ` a’ 
bearradh nan eraobh, pruning the trees; a’ 
cromadh le bearradh a’ chnuic, stooning (as a 
hawk at full speed : down the slope of the hill. 
bearrag, -aig, ef. Razor. 
bearraiche, -an, s.m. see bearradair. 
bearraideach, -eiche, a. Light, nimble, actfve. 
2 Flighty, giddy. Gu bearraideach, Zij^h!ly. 


2 Snuffers. 





—— —— d,* st Flightiness, giddiness, 
lightheadediness. 
bearranach,** a. Miserable, mournful. 


bearra-phlub,** s.m. Ronndhead. 

bearrchasach, -aiche, a. Hign-mettled, of ard- 
ent spirit. 

bearr-sgian, 


-Gine, -sgéinean, s.f. Pruning- 


knife. 2 Razor. 

bearrta, s part. of bearr. Shaved. 2 Crop- 
ed, clipped, pruned, shorn. An treud 
pue the shorn flock. 


bearrtach,** a. Shaving. 2 Cropping, clipping, 
pruning. 3 Carping. 4 Fond of cropping, 
clipping, or pruning. 

bearrthach, see bearradair. 

bearrthag,tff -aig, -an, s.f. Razor. 

beart, beairt, pl. beairt [& bearta ] et 
Machine, engine. ?'Loom, frame. 3 Deed, 
work, exploit. 4 Harness, yoke. 5 Burden. 
6 Shrouds, tackling of a ship. 7 Sheath, 
scabbard. 8 Bundle, truss. 9 Clothes. 10 
ttAppendages of any kind. 11{{Threatening. 
412 Game at tables. $13 Judgment.  fi4 
Covenant, agreement. A bhearta iongan- 
tach, his wonderful works ; bearta treubh- 
antais, feats of valour; cóig luingis fo'm 
beart, jive ships in full equipment ; a Y nu fo 
bheart, Ais sword in the scabbard; ar siùil isar 
bearta, our sails and our shrouds ` ege anns 
a’ bheart, og web in the loom; da steud fo 
bheart, two steeds in harness; beart-dheiridh- 
dialta, a crupper ; cuiridh aon bheart as gu 
lòm gu duine is gun a chonn fo chéill, is cuir- 


84 


beart-fhigheadaireachd 


idh beart eil' e anu, ach a gabhail 'na h-àm, 

one deed may a man undo when his reason rul- 

eth not, and a step may set him up, tf taken in 
due tim’. 

ach, -aiche, a. Rich, wealthy. 2 Of, or be- 
longing to, a machine.  3*"Sheathed.  4** 
Like a sheath or scabbard. 5$ftfoo much. 
Duine bh a man of deeds, one rich in works, 
also a rich man. 

beartachadh, -aidh, s.m. Beaming, putting 
e in the loom. A’ b—, pr. part. of beart- 
aich. 

--——aich, v.a. Equip, adjust. 2 Yoke, har- 
ness. 3 Prepare. make ready. 4 Brandish, 
flourish. 5**Begin. 6**Knrieh. 7**Meditate. 
8 Puta webinthe loom. 9 Provide with 
tackling. Bheartaich ea charbad, he yoked 


his chariot. 
beartail,-e, o Well-furnished. 
beartair, s.m. Brandisher. 2** Achiever. 
beartar,** air, 8.2. Stroke, shot, cast. 
beartas, -ais, s.m. Riches. 2 Honour. 3 
Abundance. Beartas is urram, riches and 
honour. 
beart-chogaidh, -airt-, s.f. Arms. 
beart-leilbh, s. f. Warping sticks. 
deilbh 





see crarm 


Cutting, as of} beart-éididh, s.f. see b— -fhigheadaireachd. 
} » 2; | beart féin-ghluasad, -airt-, s.f. Automaton. 
runing. 3 Shaving. 4 Spear, dart. | beart-fhighe, see beart-fhigheadaireaci.d. 


beart-fhigheadaire clid, -airt-, &. f.  Weaver's 

lvozn, (see illustration 33.) The partsof a 

weaver’s loom are named as follows: 

1 Beart—Barra. Frane. 

2 Crann snath, garmau shnàth—Y arn beam. 

3 Crann aodaich, garman aoJaich—Cloth 

beam. 

4 Maide teannaidh.—Barra. Beam (or 

weights) to keep threads of warp tight. 

5 4Acfhninn, iomallan,— Heddles. 

6 Ullagan,—Baria. Batten. 

7 Croinn chan, greallagan, cranna cas, 
cliath, casan, casa.chean, arra, Skye.dc.,)— 
Treadles. 

8 Spal, [**smol]- Shuttle 
9 Iteuchan, bobau—Bobbin. 

10 Barran,—Poiuts. 
11 Snath,—Thread. 
12 4Slion, - Sleay.—Reed. 
The “‘slinn’’ is formed of 4 frames of reeds 
placed close to each other, the degree of 
closeness being in proportion to the texture 
of cloth to be woven. It is surmounted 
by a moveable smooth board called 
13 Slinn-chlàr,—Sleay-board. 
14 Sliasd, sliasdan,**— Ledge. 
15 ap n 
16 Inneach. nneadh.  Cuirreadh— Lewis. 
Uachdar—Barra. Woof. 
17 Sméideagan,—Heddle-bar. 
18 Eige, Clo— Barra. Web. 
19 Gaurman-uchd— A rgyll. Sliseag-uchd— 
Hebrides. Breast-beam, (square beam 
at weaver's breast when sitting at the 


loom.) 
Mogul,—Heddle-eye, 1nesh. 
Sliosan,—-Plates. 
Uchi suidhichte,—Standing back. 
Uchd crochta,—Hanging back. 


OTHER WEAVING TERMS. 
Ceithir-chuairt, 4-ply. è 
Cuidheall-iteachan, Wheel on which bob- 

bins are filled. : 
Cuibean, Knots of the warp, tied toa 


20 
21 
22 
23 


geen 


* Nos. 5 & 12 together, acfhuinn meadhon. 








beart-fhigheadaireachd 


beathachadh 





$8. Beart-fhigheadaireachd. 


small rod before beginning to weave. 
Dà-fhillt, Twill, double ply. 
Dealg, Thin piece of wood 
through the reed (iteachan.) 
Earrach (an), 


tbeascnaghadh, s.m. Agreement, accommoda- 


tion. 
or reed, put] tbeascnaich, vn. Confederate, agree, accom- 


modate. 


Stick with a nail in each end! tbeasenaidh, v.n. Agree, accommodate. 


for keeping the cloth stretched broadways | tbeasg, s.f. Prostitute. 





as it is woven. -- nadh,** -aidh, s.m. Speech, dialect. 2 
Faochagan,** see fuigheagan. Peace. 
Fuigheagan, Tarums (threads that fasten |tbeastan, gem. Grievance. 
the last end of web.) beath, s.f. see beith. 2**Blood. 
Iteachan, Reed. beatha, -annan, s.f. Life. 2 Victuals, food. 
Luigheagan, Thrnms (the threads that! 3 Livelihood. 4 Welcome, salutation. 5 see 
fasten first end of web.) beithir. Is amhuil aisling ar beatha, our 
Maide-leigidh. ^ Turmng.stick. life is like a dream; gheibh e a bheatha, he 


Riaghailt, is for spreadiug the thread before 
putting it in the loom. 

Rolagan, Rowans, rolls of wool after 
leaving the cards. 

Teannadh, is a 2-pointed piece of wood put 
at the edge of the cloth as it proceeds (the 
sleay is brought against it) to make the 
cloth firm. 

fbeartha, a. Clean, fine, nice, genteel. 2t 
Sharp, pm 811Boiled. 

fbeartrach, s./. Pair of tables. 2 Chess-board. 

beart-thuairneir, s.f. Turner's lathe. 

-treabhaidh, s.f. Plough. 

-uchd, $.f.  Poitrel. 

fbeas, a. Certain, correct. 

+——, s.m. see beus. 2 s.f. Speech, dialect. 

beasan,} -ain, s.m. Adder’s tongue fern. see 
lus na nathrach. 2**Gaelic spelling of basin. 

tbeas-chon, ëm. Syllogism, 








will get his livelihood; do bheatha-sa, a ghais- 
gich ! you are welcome,O hero! dean a bheatha, 
welcome him;is e slainte do bheatha e, you 
are quite welcome to it; fad làithean a bheatba, 
all the days of his life ; bhur beatha an dùth- 
aich. your welcome to the country ; an e mo 
bheatha ? am I welcome ? bheir duine beatha 
air éigin, ach cha toir e rath air éigin, a 
man may force a livelihood, but he cannot force 
success. 

beathach, -aich, s. m. ` Beast, animal. 2** 
strictly speaking any living animal. 3 Never 
applied, but by way of reproach or pity, toa 
human being. A bheathaich bhochd! poor 
creature ! a bheathaich mhi-mhodhail ! you 
impertinent brute! [McL & D. says ‘‘some- 
mes applied to persons as a term of affect- 

ion 
-beathachadh, -aidh, s.m, Living, benefice, 


beathachadh 88 beir 


maintenance, livelihood. 2 Food, nonrish- ! baigleid, sae beigneid. 
ment, sustenance. Air son beathachaid , | beignuid, -ean, sf Gaslic spelling of bayonet. 
Jor food ; fhuair am ministear og b., the young : be? for am bheil ? see bi. 





minister obtained a benefice (living.) A'b—,| —, v.a. see meil. 2++see8 bleith. 

pr. part. of beathaich. Supporting, main- ;bé'l, incorrect form of booil. 

taining, feeding. tbsil, s.f. Dict, meal of meat. 
bexthachail,** a. Alimental. beilbheag, -aig, see meiibheag. 
beathachair,** 3.m. Animator. ———— —ach. see meilbheagach. 
beathachan, -ain, an. s.m. Little animal. Mo | be'lbhean-rua.th, -ein-ruaidhe, s.m. Frog. 2 see 
bh. gaotach, my dear little crea ure. bealbnau-ruadh. 
5eathachan-feoir, (A) s.2n. Lesser shrew. beile,* sm.  Bridie-bit. 
beathadach,** -aich, s.m. Beaver. beileaci,* 3J. Muzzle for a horse, or other 
b. athag.-aig, s.m. see been, 2 see beith.| animal. 

3(AC) et ? Breath. 4(AF, prov. Bird. | beileag,* at —Lewts, for beileach. 2*Outer 


beathaich, pr.part. a’ beathachadh, v.a. Feed,| coating of a birch-tree. 
cherisu, nourish, maintain, support. 2 Wel-|tbeileam, s.m. Taunt, reproach. 
come, salute. Bheathaich o a’ chui4 eile, be" beileaman-ruadh, see beatbhin-ruadh. 
fed the rest ; b. mo chaoraich, feei my sheep ; | béil.au, -ein, s.m. Mouth, prattting mouth, 
b. thus« mis’ an diugh, agus beathaichidh; little mouth. 2**Prattling. 3 Prattling per- 
mise thus’ am màireach, you feed me to-day,! son. 4 Futility. 51$ ick scolding. Ciod 
and [ will feed you to-morrow. a’ bh. a tn’ ort ? why do you p-attle so? 
-— — ——eàn, n.pl. of b athach. ach, a. Garrulous, prattling, loquaci- 
--————idh, fut. aff. a. of beathaich. ous, talkative, petulant. 
~————-te, pt.part. of beathaich. Fed, nour- | —— ———-—.* s.f. Pratiag, garrulous female. 
ished, maintained, supported. 2 Welcomed. |; —————achd, 8.f. ind. Garrulity, talkative- 
beathail, a. Lively, vigorous, vital, pertaining | ness, loquacity, petulance. Is ann ort tha 
to life. a’ bhiéileanachd ! how you do prat» ! 
beath’-aile,** sf. Vital air, oxygen. beileich,* v.a. Muzzle, sto» impertinent talk. 
beathain,** s. Income. beilgeag, (AF) sf. Sinall trout. 
beathair, see beithir. treille,** -achan, sf Kettle, caldron. 
beathalach, a. Lively, sprightly. Gu b., lively. | bé:tleacn, a. pe SE haviag thick lips, 
-—— — —..—d, 3.f. Liveiiness, sprightliness. 2 achas, -ais, see beilleachd. 





* Vitality. —— achd, s.f. Deformity of blubber-lips. 

beilteag, -e'g, -an, 8.f. Rhind, outer covering, 
especially of a birch-tree. 

beillean,** 3.m. Contumely, reproach. 

b-ilt,**-e, Gaelic spelling of belt. 

fbeinnff sm. Tribe, stock, generation. 2 
Help. 3 Blemish, spot, 4 Oppression ve- 
proach. 5 Gaelic spelling of beam. 6 gen. 
sing. of beum. 

béim-cheap, -chip, s.m. Whipping-post, 

béime, gen.sing. of beum. 

béimeach, -eiche, a. see heumach. 

tbeimis, for bitheamaid (let us be.) 

béimneach, -eiche, a. Talkative. lo: macious, 

tbaimuead,tt-eid, sm, Furious switer. 

béin, gen.sing. of bian. Clogaid béiu an ruadh- 
bhuic, a helmet of roe-buck's skin. 

b inc, see being. 

f5einc, &.f. Separation, partition, disjunction. 

tbeine, sm. Champion. 2 Evening, 

beinean, -ein, s.f. Little woman. 

aah, see heucaich. being, -e, -eannan, 8.f. Bench. 2 Side bench 

beiveil, s.f. Making obeisance, courtesying, | or plank of a bed. 3**Banuk.—IJsluy. 

bobbing. 2 Friskiog. Ciod a’ blieiceil -bhreith,}} e -eau-breith, st Bar of 


beathan,** -ain, s.m. Diet. 
an, for beathaunan. 
———nan, pl. of bsaina. Victuals, 
beath'-eachdraiche,** sm. Biographer. 
beath’-eachdrai-lh, s.f. Biography. 
tbh3:thvhan,. AF) -ain, s.m. Bee. 
tbeatho-lach, sm. Beaver. 
tueathra, s.m. Water. 
t ch, gen.sing. of beithir 
1——— ———cha, Pertaining to a serpent or (2)a 
skate. 
! entüraichean, pl. of beithir. 
tbe:. sun. Beak, bill of a bird. 2 Point. 
becora-leacra, 8.n. Juniper. see aitionn. 
beie, -e, -eannan, sf. Courtesy. Dean b., make 
a courtesy. 
—, ft pr.part. a’ beiceil, v.n. Courtosy. 
——, 8.f. Point, nib. 2 Bill of a bird. 
béic, sf. see beuc. 
bviceadaich, (AG) s.f. Courtesying. 








th'ort P? why do you bob 30? A’ b—, pr.part.| judgment. 
of bie, beiage, Uist for being. 

béiceil, -il, see beucail. beingich,** v.a. Bench. 

beiceis,* s.f. see beiceil. b.ingidh,* &.f. see being. A 

-—— each, -eiche a. Bobbing, courtesying. 2|b iun, 8.f. irr». Mountain, hill, 2 Pinnac!e, 
Skipping, hopping. 3 Frisky. 8**Din. 4ttHead, top, high piace. Declined 


theich-airc, s.f. Bee-hive. thus :— 
boichd, see beic. Nom.Sing. beinn, Plur. beanntan, 
Tocichnoal, s m. Gavel kind, (a form of law| Gen. beinne, bean, 

suill observed in Kent.) Dat. bein, beanntan, 
b: icil, ff aen.sing. of beiceil. Voc. a bheinn ! a bh»annta ! 


Mar an ceó thill air a’ bheinn, as the dis- 
tant mist onthe hill. 
b»inne, gen.siny. of beinn. 
anneach, a. Fall of mountains or hills. 
beinneagaich,** v.n. Carol. 
b.inneal,* el, s.m. Binding of a sheaf of corn, 
binnean, -ein, son. Little kill. 2 see binnein. 
buinns ;,** Gaelic spelling or bench 
beir, v.irr. Take hold. 2 Bring forti, bar, pro 
duce. 3 Get outof sight witn. 4*tUive. O** 


beic-leammnach, a. Prancing, skipping, hopping, 
curvetting. 
——— d, s.f. Dancing, skipping, hop- 





ping. 
fbeid, for bithidh iad. 
+ eadh, a.m. Patching. 
beileal,** Gaelic spelling of beadle. 
béi In, gen. sing. of biadh. 
beididh, (AF) Lamprey (fish.) 
fb.idse, sf. see turus. 





beir 


Overtake. 6**Carry. Conjugated thus— ` 
Active Voice— 
IND.past. rug mi, Ee, I, &c. bore or bare. 
„ fut. beiridh mi, &c., I, &c. shall b»ar. 
INTÉRR.past, (an P nach ? cha) d'rug mi,&c. 
fut. (am b—? nachb—, cha bh—) 


beir mi, &c. 

SUBJUNC. past, (ged) bheirinn, (though) 1 
would bear; (ged) bheireadh tu, (though) 
thou wouldst bear ;(ged)bheireadh e, (though) 
he would bear ; (ged) bheireamaid, (though) 
we would bear ; (ged) bheireadh sibb, iad, 
(though) you, they would bear 
sá fut. (ma) bheireas mi, 
shall bear. 

IMPER. 1st. per. sing. beiream, let me bear. 

INFIN. A bhreith, (a bheirsinn,] to bear. 

PRES.PART. a’ breith, [a’ beirsinn} bearing. 

Passive n. "Bb bw MX 

IND.past, rugadh mi, &c., I, £c. was born. 

e jn Lg mi, &c.. I, £e. shall be born. 
INTERR.past, (an ? nach ? cha) d'rugadh mi, 
&e., was I, ée, (not) born ! i 
„ Jut. (am b—? nach b—? cha bh—)beir- 

ear mi, &c., shall I, &c. (not) be born ! 

SUBJ.pust, (ged) bheirteadh mi, &c., (though) 
I, &c. sho be born. d 
» Jut. (ma) bheirear mi, &c., (if) I, «c. 

shall be borne, dc. 

PAST PART. beirte, born. 

Agus beiridh tu mac, and thou shalt bear a 
son ` agus beiridh i mac, agus bheir thu losa 
mar ainm air, and she shall bring forth a son, 
and thou shalt call his name Jesus ; agus rug e 
air, and he overtook him ; beir uam e! beir 
uam e ! away with him! away with him ! mur 
beirear duine a rithist, unless a man be born 
again ` beir air an uan, catch (lay hold of) the 
lamb ; 'nuair à chi thu bean oileanach boir 
oirre, mur beir thus’ oirre, beiridh fear eile 
oirre, when you see an accomplished lady ( fe- 
male) take her, if you do not wed her another 
will; fhuair mi fios bho phiuthar dhomh nach 
beirinn bed oirre, I heard from my sister that 
I shall scarce find her alive. Beir in combin- 
ation with the prep. air, means ‘‘overtake, 
take hold of." [For additional uses of beir 
see under  breith.) 

fbeirbheis, s.f. Anniversary, feast, vigil. 

béire, s/. itterness. 

beiream, 1st. p. sing. imp. of beir. 

beiridh, fut. af. act. of beir, 

beirm, -e, s.f. Barm, yeast, ferment. 

———each,** a. Barmy. 

beirn, see bearn. 

-———each, see bearnach, 

fbeirr-sgian, s.j. Razor. 

beirsinn, s.m. Bringing forth, producing, 2 
(combined with air) Catching. A' b—, pres. 
part. of beir. 

beirt, see beart. 

¢——,8.f. Burden. 2 Two persons. 3 Help, 
assistance. 

ur puet part. of beir. Born, borne, brought 

ort 


beirteach, 'see beartach. 

fbeirtean, -ein, zm. Little burden. 

beirtzas, see beartas. 

beirtich, see beartaich. 

fbeis, s.f. Marshy ground. 
——eil,** s.f. Shelf. 

+——gne, s.f. Peace, quiet. 

déist, -e, -ean, s.f. Beast, monster. 2 Beast 
of prey. 3**Wretch. A’ tniteam an stri na 
béiste, fa'ling in contest with the mons‘er ; 
chuir droch bhéist as da. an evil beast hath de- 
v him; béistean doirbü, oppressive wret- 
ches. 


&c., (if) I,&c. 


87 





beo 

—— -dà-liunn,| 3.f. Tapeworm. 
—— -donn,* see béist-dubh. 
—— -dubh, -nibhe. s.f. Otter. 
—eaz,* xf. Earthworm, l 
—enlachd, sf. Brutality, beastliuess. 
—ean, -vin, s.m. Dim. of béist. Little beast. 

2 n.pl. of béist. 
Ee -e, a. Beastly, bestial, like a beast. 
—— .mhao! -mhaoil, sf. Seal, sea-calf. 


i 


iN 
r? 


Ka 
SAN 





59. Beitein, 4). Beith bheay. 
beitein,§ s.m. Mat-grass or moor-grass—nar- 
dus stricta. 





41. Beith. 
First letter of the old Gaelic 


beith, e, s.f. 
alphabet. 2 Birch tree—betula alba. ‘Sa 
bheith chùbhraidh, in the fragrant birch. 
Bage of Clan Buchanan. 

— bheag? 8J. Dwarf birch—betula nana. 

—— charraigeach,t &J. Knotty birch—betula 
verrucosa. 

—— chluasach,? 8.f. see beith dubhach. Ran- 
noch, Breadalbane, e, 

Feet sJ. Weeping birch—betula pen- 


a. 

—— dubh-chasach, Knotty birch. see beith 
charraigeach. 

——each, a. Of, or belonging to birch trees. 

beitheach, see beathach. 

tbeitheamhain, pl. of beach. 

tbeith-éigneachadh,t{ -aidh, s.m. Rape. 

beithir, beathrach, beithrichean[ & beathraich- 
ean,] s.m. Bear, prov. 2 Serpent. 3 Any 
wild beast. 4 Thunder-bolt 5 Largeskate. 
6(AC) Lightning. 

,** a. Wild, destructive, savage. 

toeith, luis, nuin, The Ogham Chraobh or 
old Gaelic alphabet. This is the Gaelic e- 
quivalent of the English expression "A, BO 
for alphabet, the words beith,luis,nuin.being 
the nawes of what were formerly the first 
three letters of the Gaelic alohabet. 

beith-na-nieasa,t s.f. (lit. the fruiting birch) 
Beech-tree. see craobh fhaidhbhile. 

tbeitin, see beitean. 

beitir, -e, a. Tidy, neat, clean. 

bel-ain, ? The circle of Bel or of the sun. 

+bemis, for bhitheamaid(we should h .ve been.) 

tbeu,** sf. Wain, chariot. 

benedin,§ Common avens. see machall coille. 

bed, a. Alive, living. 2 Quick. lively, spright- 

ly. Am bede Pishe alive ? tha e gu math 





Lien EE 88 beuc 


bed, he is pretty lively; air gaoitb chithear | ——a as, see bedlaideas. 

suinn nach bed, on the wind wre seen heroes | ——aiche, s.m. Chronicler. 2 Talkative pere 
that are dead; ma bhitheas ini beo, if I live ; Son, 

mar is bed mise, deir an l'irheacna, as I live, | beolaideas, -eis, s.m. Oral tradition. 

saith the Lord; am bheil e bed P is he alive ? beo-laoch, see beolach. 





am bed dhuit, a Dhcir2? are you alive, Daryo? | bed-leatromach, a. Quick with child. 

thoir beò, briny alive; gu ma fad: beò an|beoll,(LAC) s.m. Fire, glowing fire, embers. 

rizh ! long live the king ! am feadh is beò mi, |-——ag, (AC) &.f. Bright little fame. 

while [ live ; cho cinnteach "aa tha tau b:ó,| beó-luath, -luaithre, ar. Hot ashes or embers 

as sure as you are alive: chulr e a’ chlaca!b olum, -uiin, s.m. Scold. 2 Ridicule. 3 

mhuilinn a bheò bhenm bhàrr na sorch vin, tffCensoriousuess. 

he put the millstone with one tremendo s ef-| Toeosach, -aiche, a. Bright, luminous, glitter- 

ort of the support ` thilg iiféin beoslan air| ing. 2 Brisk. 3 Trim, spruce, dapper. 

a bhroilleach. shethrew herself in on» tremen-' tb.osaich, v.a. Beantify, adurn, deck out. 2 

dous leap on his breast ; is beo na h-eoiu ged: Make spruce or tidy. 

nach seabliazan uil iad, th» birds inanayge to} beò-sgar,** v.a. Divorce. 

live, though they he not ail hawks. ————=dh, -aidh, s.m. Divorce. 2 Separation 
beo,* s.m. Lite-time. 2 The living. 8fCattle | during life. 

4 Living flesh. B’Alninn thn rid’ bhed, thou beo-saiainie, SE Life-rent, livelihood. 2ttLife- 

wert randsome when alive ; eha dh an tarrang! tine. Tha a b. aice dheth, she has a life- 

's& bheò, the nail penetr ited the living "es^ ;| rent of it; ridir b, a kaight bachelor. 

cha'n fhaic thn ri d' bed e, you shall never ach, a. Oi, or pertaining to a life- 

gee him ` aan beo is am marbh, the living anı] rent. ?ff2aoulous. 

the dead ;an tir nam b., in the land of the|beottach, -aich, see beathach. 











living. beóthachadn, -aidh, 8.22. Re-animating,quick- 
beo-airgideach,fi a. Mercurial. euing,refresh:nent. 2 Kindling. 8 Enliven- 
beo-airgiod, s.n. see airgiod bed. ing. 4łł Sparks or coals by witch a fire is 
beochan, -ain, s.m. Small fire. B. teine, a| kindled. A’ b—, pr.pt. of bedth ich. 

small flickering fire. -—— ail, a. see beotha‘l. 2*ifaving a li- 


ta, -ainte. a. Vigorous, lively, sprightly.| vening or quickeuing imiuence. — 
tachd, s.f.ina. Vigorousness, liveliness, |--————a'r,** s.m. Reviver. 2 Kindler. 














sprightline s. -- an,* s.» see bedchan. 
+beochomhan, 3.m. Warren. beothachan-fedir, see beathachan-fedir. 
beodha, see beothail. b.othacban-teine,ff s.m. L ttle fire. 
--.—— Ch, l ^ -—————1, s.f. Couraze, vigour. . 
- chadh, Je beòthachadh. fb othadh, -aidh, 8.20. Stimulating, urging on. 
D chain, baochaibb, dat.pl. of bed, s. 
---—-——ich, see beothaich. beotnaich, gen.sing. of beotiach. - 
= il, see beòthail. —————, va. Kindle, light. 2 Re-animate, 
beodhalachd, see beòthalachd. arouse, revive, quicken. Is trica bh. srad 
beodhanta, see beòthail & beòchanta. baeag teine mór, a little spark has often kin- 

chd, see beòthalachd. dled a contagration, 


beò-dhealachadh, -aidh, s.m. Separation with | ————-—idh, ‘wt.aj.act. of beóthaich. 











life. ———— te, pas! part. of bedthaich. Quicken- 
-— -dhoil, -e, -ean, sf. Living creature. ed. animated, enlivened. 2 Kindled. : 
-— -euchdaireachd,** s.f. Biography. beóthail.-e, a. Vigorous, active, lively. 2 Vital. 
-— -eachdraiche, -ean, 8.m. Biographer. 3 Courageous. iutr2pid. 1** Fervent.zeal us. 
-— -eachdraidh. s.f. Biography. Tha iad b.othail, they are lively ; beòthail `n 
DEE iche, see bed-eachdraiche. ur spioraid, favent in your spirit. , 
- — fhal, -àil, -ailean, s.m. Enclosure. beòthalachd, s.f. Liveliness, smartness, agil- 
beo-füradbare, -airc, 8.m. Quick sight, clear | ity. 2 Vigour, vitality. 3**Acuteness. 

sight, lively view. beòthalas, see bedthalach i. 

ach, -aiche, o.  Quick-sighted,|b ót.an-teiue, see bcóthachan-teine. 

clear-sighted. eo-thorrach, a. Quick with child, ready to 

-— ghaineamh, -eimh, &.f. Quicksand. couceive, 


-— ghlae, v.a. Take alive. 2 Take prisoner. b:o-ihuisleach, a. Viviparons. 
alive. Bhed-ghlac iad e, they took Ain alive. ' t bes, conj. And. 
— ghriosach, -aich, s.f. Hot ember, |! +betearlagh, s». Ancieut law. 
-—iIarraidh, s.m. Inspection. 2 Aspiration. | beth, see beich. 
beòil, gen. sing. of benl. Tan b. de biiadh is betis, see biatas. 
lan baile de naire, a mouthful of meat anda beuban, -aiu, -auan, 8.m. Anything mangled or 





townful of sham’. spuiied, 
fbeoilean, see Léilean. - achadh, -ai th, s.m. Mangling, bruising, 
+beoili,** at, Katness multreating, spoiling. Fuuair va bhouban- 
beó-lobairt, -e, -ean, sf. Living sacrifice. achadh. he got maltreated. A’ b—, pr.part. 


beòir, -e & beórach. af Beer, ale. 2,AC)| b-nbamtic.. 
Spruce, spruce (beet, 3(AG) Black beer as: beubanachil, sf. Mangl ng, bruising, tearing, 
distinguished from ale—-Rvay Country. B.! maltreatment. 2 *Carnage. 
chaol, small beer ; b. ladir. stroug bee" ;'beunana!ci, pr. pa t. a b»ubanachadh, v. a. 
gloine bcorach, a glass of beer ` bedir dhubh,| Mangle, benise, maltreat, tear. 5** Bedaub. 


black beer. 81iDestroy. 
beol, -oil, sm. see beul. +2 Robber. —— — ——te, past pait. Torn, mangled, bruis- 
——aách, a. Talkative, loquacious. ed, maltreated, spoiled. 
——ach,* s.f. ({beo+luathach) Ashes with! bene, s.m. Roar, bellow, yell, outcry. 2 Noise, 
living embers, hot ashes. clamour. 
——ach, -aich, 8.m. ({bed+ -lach of òglach) | —, pr. part. a’ beucaich & a’ beucail, v.n. 


Livelyyouth. 2 Hero. Roar, bellow, make a noise. as the sea. 


beucach 


beucach, -aiche, a. Roaring, bellowing. 2 
Noisy, clamorous. 8 Apt to roar or bellow. 
B. du hlaidh, roaring and dark ; muir bh. fo 
ghavita a’ stil ; the roaring main contending 
with the winds. s 

beucaich, s. Roaring, loud noise, roar. 2 
Yelling, builowing A’ b—, pr.part. of beuc. 
Beacaich do thonn, the roaring of thy 
waves ` ciod a’ bheucaich a th’ ort P what are 
you roaring at ? 

beucaidh, fut. af. a. of beuc. D 

beucail, sf. Roaring, yelling, dismal crying. 

buncair, -ean, s.m. Roarer, 
b»uchd, see beuc. 

bauch taich, see beucaich, 

beucndail, see baucail. 

beucndair, see beucair. 

beuc-shruth, s.m. Roaring stream. 2 Cata- 

_ Tract. ^ , 

beu., -an, s.m. Loss, injury, harm, pity. 2 
Defect, blemish. 3 Distress. 4 Fate. 5 Blow. 
6 Action, evil deed, infamy. 7 Vice. 8 Mis- 
chef. 9 Nothing. 10** Gloom, 1117 Fruit. 
€ ha'n "eil beud air, there is nothing the mat- 
ter with him ; is mór aim beud e, it is a great 
pity cha d'éirich beud dha, no harm has hap- 
pened to hin ; duan gun bheud, a poem with- 
out blemish ; cha d'fhulaing e beud, be sustain- 
ed n^ loss ; druidear beul nam beud,the mouth 
of iniquity shall be stopped ; cha bhi beud ort, 
nothing shail be — ee you ; ’aodann fo 
bheud, his visage under a glooin ` faiceam mo 
bheud, let me see my fate. ae - 

——ach, -aiche, a. Hurtful, iniquitous, 2 
Blemüsaed. a Mournful, dismal. 4**Guilty. 
6** aral, 6**G oomy. Is beudach borb am 
buille, zattal and fierce is the blow ; am fear a 
bh.theas beudach e fhéin, cha sguir e dh'éig- 
neachadu chàien, he that is guilty himself 
t. ies to involve others. 

——acud, s.f.ind. Hurtfulness, iniquity, harm. 
2 Mournfuluess, dismalness. 

——ag,-aig,-an, s.f. ‘rifling, idling, tattling 
little woman, gossip. 2**Lyiug woman. 

——ag&Ach, a. Gossipping, trifliug. 2 Lying. 

—— dawn, n.pl. of beudag. 

b»udaich, pr.part. a’ beudachadh, v.a. 
injure, hurt, wrong. 

boa :-fhacal, -ail, s. m. Taunting word or ex- 
pression. 

b.ui-h.aclach, a. Fou)-mouthed, opprobrious, 
tannting. 2 Contumelious. 3 Scornful. 

t eudl-fuoireobhidi, s.m. Commentary, 

b-uzadh, see bìogadh. A dh’fhag mo ghrua’ch 
air beugadh, that left my cheeks snarting— 
Oran an t-saighdeir, p. 66 in an Duanaire. 

beui, gen. sing. £ npl. beòil, s.m. Mouth 2 
Opening, aperture, orifice. 8 Approach, near- 
Ness. Is tobar beatha beul an fhirein, the 
mouth of a righteous man is a well of life; 
beul an la, the dawn of dou: beul na h-oidh- 
che, dusk of the evening ` an taobh beòil, 
the fore part, front; beul ri, near, about ; beul 
ri tri m'osan,a5out three months; beul an lain, 
high-water nak; beul a bhi deas, nearly 
reuly , neaily done ; boinne am beul na 
gaoithe, a sign of rain(lit. a drop in the wind's 
month) ; is inairg do'n bheul-iochd stil a’ 
cnoiiuhieh, oue mustbe in a bad way ifa 
stranger's ey? is full of pity for him; cha bi 
urraiou iti beul Oort dha, I cannot touch 
(tusty) it; o bheul na tuinue gu fenr gorn, 


Harm. 


8y 


x 


beul-maothain 


3 Prating. 4 Flattering. 5 Fawning. 
Large-mouthed. 7** Montned. 
—— ——-8-, -ui-.,8. f. Artful speaking. 2 Prat- 
ing, babbling. 
beulag, -aig, -:n sf. Fore-tooth (—back tooth 
or grind r is cldray or cù'ag.;) 2 Ga», fissure. 
S, AU) Person in front of another on horse- 
ack. 
beulaibh, tt s.m. Front, fore:‘d3. 2 Presence. 
Beulaibb au taighe, the front of the house; 
air mo bàeula?b... in my presence ; cuir air a 
bheuiaibi e, put it before him; ma tha dad 
agad air mo bheulaibz,. if you have anything 
ou wish m» todo : c.a b’ uuu sin ar beniaibh 
oisge, that is no lumb in comparison with a 
yearling—N.G.P. [if applied toa woman, this 
apparently means that that was not her 
first production, or that she was far advanced 
in years before she produced aaything.—J M] 
tha siod air mo bheulaibh, J kave yet to do 


that. 
beulais,** ert Prating, babbling. 
—————each,** @ Argute. 
beul-aithris, s.f. Oral .epresentation or tradi- 
DAD. D. nan seanair, the tradition of the el- 
ers. 
beulan, -ain, s.m. Little mouth, 2 Orifice. 
beulan, s..f. see beulanach. 
ach, -aicne, a. Fair-spoken, inclined to 
flatter. 
ach,-aich, s.f. Of two waveson the sea 
ES is the nearer to the speaker. 2 Bridle- 
it. 


6** 








beulanaich,tt pr. part. a’ beulanachadh, v. @ 
Allure w:tn words. 

beulannach,tt -aich, see beulanach. 

beulaobh, s.n. Front, foreside. 2 Presence. 
**beulaibh" is the more corree’ form. 

beulas, ais, sy, Prattting, babbling. 2 Quibble. 

beul-a-staigh, s.m. Inside waiu of a boat. see 
bata, E» p. 73 and illust. 

beul-atha, -ain, om. Ford, shallow part of a 
river. 

pe a s.m. Band of a pair of trousers, 


zs A e 


beul beag. s.m. Saxboard of a boat, see bata, 
ES, p. 73. 

beu!-bhac,** -aic. s.m. Bridle-bit. 

beui-binn, s.m. Nightingale, see spideag. 2AQ 
Long-tailed duck. 

beul-bochd, sam. Pleading of poverty. 

beu'-boidheach,(Ali) s.m. Flattering mouth 
blandishment, fawning. wheedlinz, syco- 
phancy. 

beul brèagh, s.m. Flattering mouth. 2 Flattery. 

beul-chainat, -e, s.f. Oral speech. 

————-——each, -eiche, a. Talkative, loqua- 
cious, garrulous. 

beulchair,-e, a. Fair-spoken, flattering, smooth 
worded. 2 **Communicative. 

———-—eachd, s.f. Pleasing loquacity. 

beul-chómhrag,11 -aig, -an, s.m. Dagyzers-draw- 


ing. 

beul-chrabhach, -aiche, a. Lip-religious, hypo- 
critical, canting. . - 

beul-chrabhadh, -aidh, s.m. Lip-religion, cant, 


hypocrisy. 
beul-dearg, -eirge, a. Red-lipped.  . 
beul-dhraoidheachd, s. f. Incantation, ene 
chantment. 


beul-dhruid, v.a. Silence, shut the month. 
tbeul-fliaragadin, see beul-fhot. rag iadh., 


Jrem the marg n of the sea to green crops ;| beul-fharsuing, -e, a. Wide-inoutned. 
leaghaidh a’ chòir am benl an anfhainn, «|tbenl-fhothraghadh, sm. Gargar:sm. - 
go d cause su fers in ihe mouth of the incomp- | beul-gcràin, -àidh. s m. Lip-love, tiactery, dis- 


ten. 


beu;ach, -aiche, a. Fair-spoken, 2 Plausible, | beul-maotiuain, 


simulation. 


s.m. The sloat of ps? throat. 


beul-maothain 


2ttPit of the stomach. 

fbeulmhach, see beulanach. 

beul-ah jillireadh, -eidh, s.m. Offi iousness, 
flatcery, fawning, soothin:. 

beul-inér, -óir, s.m. Wide mouth. 2 Bung- 
hole. 3 Gunwale of a boat orship, see bata 
j7 p.74 for illust. 

beul-oideas, -eis, s.m. Tradition, oral tradition. 

beul-oilean, -ein, s.m. Oral teaching, tradition. 

beul-phurgaid, -ean, 8. f. Gargle. 











each, a. Gargling. 2 Of, or 
belonging to, a gargle. . 
eachd, s.f. Gargarization. 


beul-: adh, -aidh, s.m. Proverb, phrase, by- 
word. 2 Dialect. 3 Speech. 

beul-raidhteach, -eiche, a. Renowned, cele- 
brated, famous. 2 t{iTalkative. 


beul sìos ort ! int. A form of malediction. (Zit 


may you be down in the mouth.) 

beul-snaipe, s.m. Flint socket of à gun-lock, 
dog-head. 

beul-stoe,* s.m. Gunwale of a boat—Islay, see 
bata Vi, p. 74 for illust. 

beul-thaobh, see beulaibh. 

beum, gen. beuma [& béime} pl. -an, -annan, 
s.m. Stroke, blow. 2 Wound. 3 Gash, cut. 
4 AC) Handful of corn cut at one stroke of 
the reaping-hook. 5 Taunt, sarcasm, insult, 
reproach. 6 Stream. 7 Torrent. 8 Knell. 
9 Misfortune. 10**Gap. Gach cath’s na 
bhuail mi beum, every battle in which I struck 
a blow; cha ruig thu leas beum a thoirt 
dhomh, you need not taunt or gibe me; chuir 
e beum air an stiüir, he gave the rudder a 
vigorous turn ` no chuislean mar bheum, my 
veins like a torrent; bhrùchd iad a mach a dh’ 
aon bheum, they poured forward in one body. 

beum, pr. part. a’ beumadh, v. a. Smite. 2 
Cleave. 3 strike, asa bell. 4 Toll. 5 Taunt, 
reproach, vilify, cut, make a cutting remark, 
utter a sarcasm or criticism. 6ftSound, re- 
sound. O’n bheum na cluig, since the bells 
have tolled. 

beumach, -aiche, a. Full of gaps. 2 Destruct- 
i.e. 3 Taunting, sarcastie,cuttiug. 4 Wound- 
ing. 5 Tart. 6**Repr.achful,depraved. 7 
iiresouuding. Mar theine bheumach, like 
a destructive jire ; aineolach, beumach, igno- 
ran? anc sarcastic; bilean beumach, reproach- 
ful lips ; bui.lean colhromach, beumach, well 
aired, destructive b ows. 

beumadh, -aidh, s.m. Striking. 2 Resounding, 
tolling. 3 Cleaving. cutting. 4 Reproaching, 
vilifying. A’ b—, pr.part. of beum. Beum- 
adh sheol, furling of sails; beumadh chlag, 
the tolling of bs; an dubh-bhas 'g am beum- 
adh ’n an ruaig, gloomy death smiting them in 
their flight ; telu’-athair a’ beuraadh nan 
neoil, lightning cleaving the clouds. 

beumair,** sem. Biter. 

beumannach, a. see beumach. 

beum-cheap,** -chip, sf. Whipping-stock. 

beum-cluig,** -an-cluig, s.m. Knell. 

beuin-gréine,** s.m. Coup-de-soleil. 

beumnach, a. see beumach. 

——————d.,ii s.f.ind. Invection. 

beum-sgéithe, s.m. Striking the shield the 
old method of sounding an alarm or chal- 
lenge. 2* Severe sarcasm, sly insinuation.— 
Islay. Led. ghlaodh iad còmhrag, witha 
blow on the shietd they called to battle ; bhuail 
Treunmor b., T. sounded an alarm. 

beum-sice, s.m. | Rupture. 21fDisorder in the 
coating of the viscera. 

b»uin-slérbhe, s.m. Mountain torrent, violent 
3ud lcn streaim caused by rain, or the burst- 
ing oi a thunder-cloud, ‘‘spate.”’ 


0n 


b»n:ach 


beum-soluis, sam. Beain of light. 2**Sunbeam. 
Feuch am bvulo-sv.uis caol ud, behold yon 
small beam o (light. 

beum-sül, s.m. influence of the evil.eve. 
Opt cal delusion. $ Coup d œil. 4qtLisease 
m the eyes. 

beum-taire, 8.5. Fling. 

beuurtuathal,tf s.m. Blow or thrust in the 
wrong direcuon. 

tbeur, v.a. see beir. 

beur, -éire, $:4. Point, pinnacle. 
a lofty pinnacle. 

beur, béire,a. shrill, sonorous. 2 Loud-lunged, 
giving à loud or shrill laugh. 3 Genteel. 4 
Well spoken, eloquent. 5 ien, sharp. 6ft 
Prickled. 7{{ludeuted. 8 fig. Witty, sarcas- 
tic. 9fSharp, pointed. Fir bheur, genteel 
men; troimh bhearna beur nan neul, ti 
ihe fissures of the clouds. 

beura,(AC) a. see beur. 

chd, 8&J.ind. Shrillness, sharpness. 

beuradair,[$ see beurradair. 

beuran, -ain, s.m. Witty, prating, garrulous 
little fellow. 


Beur ard, 





beurla, s.f.ind. Speech, language. 2 The English 


language. Gnáth-bheurla na h-Eireaun, the 
vernacular dialect of the Anglo-Lrish. 
Beurla Albannach, sf. Anglo-Scottish. 
Beurlach, a. Of, or belonging to, the English 
language. 2*Well versed in the English lan- 


guage. 

Beurlachd,1] s.f.ind. Anglicism. 

Beurla leathann, 8J. Broad Scots. 

beurla na kémne, s.f. Fingalian or military 
Gaelic. 2 Lawyers’ Gaelic. 

beurla nam filidh,ffsJ/. Poetical language. 

ue nan deagharsan,[f s.m. Historical dis- 
ect. 

Beur?’ an Taoibh dbheis,ff sf. Broad Scots. 

Beurla Shasunnach, s.f. English as spoken in 
England. 

beurla theibide,ff er Medical dialect. 

beur?’ eagair,{{ ar Technical language. 

beurra, a. see beur. 

ch,* &.f. Prating female. 

ch, a. Witty, eloquent. 

chd,* s.f.ind. Eloquence, wit, waggery. 

——dair, -ean, s.m. Satirist, wit, wag. 

daireachd,tt s.f.ind. Satire. 

dh-theine, s.f. see beur-theine. 

beurtha, a. see beur. 

beur-theine,s.f. Bright fire. 2 Falling star, 
meteor. 3 Name of a star on the boss ofa 
warrior’s shield —Ossian. 

beus, -a, -an, 8. f. Moral qualities or manners, 
whether good or bad, virtue. 2 Behaviour, 
deeds, custom, conduct. 3 Amiability. 4 
Bass viol. Bean nan dea:h bheus, a virtu- 
ous woman ; fo bheus, quiet, on one’s good be- 
haviour ; fo dheagh bheus, under a good char- 
acter ; fodhroch bheus, under a bad character; 
aithnichear leanabh air ’bheus, a child is 
known by his manners; righ nam beusa mora, 
the king of lofty manners ` gheibh thu beus is 
gnàth na düthcha, you shalt get what the use 
and wont uf the country sanction—Islay; bes 
na tuath air am bithear is e a nithear, the 
customs of your associates you will ful.uw ; 
beus an aite far am bithear is e a nithear, 
the use and wont of the place y A dwell in you 
will con;orm with ; tounan fo bhens, waves 
at peace ` deazh bheusan, good murals : droch 
bheusan, Gad mo: ats ; bs s na dh'fhalbh, the 
deeds (conduct) of the departed. 

theus, s.m. ‘rade. 2 Art. 3 Rent, revenue, 
tax. + Fornicniion. 6 Botte 6ttBeily. 

ach, -aiche, @ Weu-v.aaived, weii-bred, 




















beusach 


2 Modest, bashful. 3 Virtnous, chaste, mor- 
al, ovposite of vicious. 4**Geutie. Mar ait- 
eal bausavh, like a gentle breeze. 

beusachd, sf. Good beh wviour, moral rectitude, 
nofrensive conduct. 2 Manuers, morals. 3 
**ash "::ness, 

beusaicheail, -vid, s.m. Degree of moral purity 
or muatesty,. 

bousail, see beusach. 

beu-nlachd, see bausachd. 

ben an, DD. of beu. 

t -us-ghrinn.tt-e, s.n. Good behaviour, 

beusninor.** «. Pashful. 

-achd,** s.f.ind. Bashfulness, 

b-us-ociue.ff sm. Moralist. 

beniail, s.f. Cattle. herds. 2 Cow. 

bhearr, (for bu ihearr) Were better, was 
better. B'(üeacr leain, J wits, I would prefer; 
b'fnearr dhonih. dhuit, dha, &c., i£ were bet- 
ter for m-, you, him, «c. 

bl For words beginuing with bA not appear- 
T ing below, see under b. 

bh’, (for bha) Used b-fore a word beginning 
with a vowel, as, an duiue a bh’ann, whoever 
it was, the man that was, (in eg ge -tis 
e Beurla a bh'aice féin air au fhuaim a bh’ 
ann, whatever the queer noise was that she 
made, she hersely called it English (sarcastic.) 

bha, past ind. of bi. Was, wert, were. 

+ habhair, v. Ye were. 

¢bnadar, v. They were. 

bhàirnis, Gaelic spelling of varnish. 

+bhamar, v. We were. 

adv. see a bhàn. 
bhaoth, 








see baoth. 

fbhaoi, see bha. 

tbhar, poss.pron. see bhur. 

bhàrr, prep. (formerly de bhàrr) From, from 
off. 2 Down from. Bharr aghaidh na tal- 
mhuinn, from the surface of the earth ; their- 
inn i bhàrr a’ chamhuil, she alighted from the 
camel; bharr do chos, from off thy fect ; 2. come 
to arief as regards worldly matters ; à bhàrr 
eir sin, bessdes that ; bhàrr an rathaid, off the 
way, bbàrr a leapach, off his bed, from his bed; 
buarr na ciche, weaned; 'n uair a bha teine 
ris an taigh, chuunaic e toit bhàrr a taighe, 
when the hous: was on fire, he saw smoke com- 
iny from her house ; thig uair bhàrr fad’ an là 
(aie a’ uthios seo), the day will bean hour short: 
er( this month) (gaining 1s tighinn ann]; fhuair 
iad bhàrr an turuis, they reached the end of their 
d ; chuir ua breacain sealladh brèagh 

yharr na cuideachd, the tartans gave the 

cuinpany a grand appearance (iit. put a beau- 

tiful appearance from off the company. LAL 

ways followed by the Genitive case. ] 


bharr, s. see barr. 

baárr,ft (à bi arr) adv. Moreover. 
bharrachd, prep. see a bharrachd. 
bhatas, v. see bi. 

bheairt, see beart. 


bheil? see ain bheil ? and bi. 

fbheileam ? ( for zın bheil mi?) Am I? Am 
bheileam féin am aonar ? am I left alone ? 

bheir, wt af of tabhair or thoir. Có ea bheir 
comhrag ? who will (ee battle ? bheir mise 
ort sin à divanamh, 7 will make you do that ; 
bheir mi ort gu'm faithnich thu e, Z will let you 
know it —inake you smart for it ; is math an 


91 


bhuainn 





would bear. 

bheireamaid, Ist. per. pl. past subj. of tabhair. 
We woulil give. 

bheirear, fut. pass. of beir. Shall bo born. 

, fut. pass, of tybhair. Shall be given. 
n, Ist. per. sing. past subj. of beir. 





bheirin 


would bear. - 
, Let. per. sing, pas! subj. of tabhair. I 
would give. 
bheirteadh, past subj. pass. of beir. (Ged) 


bheirtesà e, cthouyh) he were born. 
bheirteadh past subj. pass. of tathair. Is im- 
personal and re uires à prepositioual proe 
noun afier it thus, (ged boeirtcath dhomh 
(e), (though) (it: were given to me. 

hi, reg fut. of bi. Cha bai mi, J shall not be. 
tbhias, see b itheas, 

tuhid, (or bag iad) They were, 

fbhim, ( for bha mi) I was. 

bhio ar, -air, san. Gaelic spelling of vicar. 
bhiodh, see bhitheadh. 

tohiom, ( for bha mi) I was. 

bhios, see bhith az, 

bhiotailt, 8. f. see biotailt. 

bhiotar, see bhithear. 

bhiith, (a) infin. of bi, To be. 

bhitneadh, 2nd. & 3rd. per. sing. and. pl. of bi. 
Should be, would be. 

tbhitheam, (.for bha mi) I was. 

bhithear, fut. subj. impers. of bi. (If) (it) 
shall be, [Preceded by a subj. particle as 


ina. 
bhi eas, fut.subj. of bi, (If) shall or will be, 
[Preceded by a subj. particle as ma.] 
bhithinn, ist. ver. sing. past subj. of vi. (If) I 
should be, uif) I would be. [Preceded by a 
subj. postice: as, ma. (ma bhithinn but 
na'm biıthinn.`] 
bho, prep. Anucher form of rot which is the bet- 
ter of the wo. Ofteu written iu conjunction 
with the persona] pronouus thus :— 
Ist.sing.bonam, from me, pi. bhuaian, frum us. 
2nd. bhuat, from thee, bhuaibh, from you 
$rd.m. bhuaith, from him bhuapa, ( m. & f. ). 

J. bnuaipe, from her, from tiem. 

The forms under o are preferable to these. 
(Dr, Gillies says— “The p cf (bhnaipe or) 
uaipe, Dow used for th» fem. form of the 3rd 
per. sing. is both pkonetica!ly and histori- 
cally wrong. Tho form tuaithe” is fem. in 
structu. e, aud analogous to leithe aad rithe, 
and its use as a iasculine prep. pronoun is 
grossly incorrect. Uaidh (or bhuaidh) is the 
correct modern form of Old Gaelic uad, from 
him.” Dr. G. is literally right, although 
custom i3 against him, and “bhuaipe” from 
her, boinz a firmly established form, both in 
speaking and writing, it is never lixcly to be 
altered in the Iiighlands. To substitute 
bhuaithe for bhuain: now would cause unne- 
cessary confusion, but bhuaiih for him, could 
be used as easily as bhuaith or bhwaithe. 
Were the Gaelic language taught in all the 
schools in the Hizhlands, popular mistakes 
like this would never get a hold.] “Buo” 
is used after a vowel or vowel sonnd, also 
when it begins a sentence ; **o" is used after 
a pronounced consonant according to choice, 
—D.M. tt says “bho” in the hest dialects., 
* says ''bho'' is used in all the Isles. 


long a bier a mach an caladh as an d'fhalbh | bbobagan, see boban. 
j, a. you! ship—tha: which ga«ns the port whence| bhobh ! int. O dear ! strango ! 
she Stiet a remark som times made by min- i tbnolam, Gaelic spelling of vo^ume, 


isters of the “Auld Kirk" when they see or! bhò'n dé, adv. 
hear of seceders returning to their own com- ! bhos, 
An Aulder Kirk might use the; bhnaibh, 


muutou. 
xavi v with even greater effect.) 


see air bho’n dé. 
see a bho:. 
see uaibh. 


bhuaidh, see uaith. 


bneircainaid, Lat. per. pl. past subj. of beir. We bhusiuu, see uaiun. 


P 


bhuaipe 


bhuaipe, prep.pron. (bho) From her. 

Best, ? bho. MThae ’tighinn bhuaith, 
he 18 recovering; tha e ’dol bhuaith, Ae is 
getting worse. 

bhuam, see uam. 
see uapa. 

see uat. 


+bhuil, 
bhur, poss. pron. Your. Gu’m fosglar bhur 
sùilean, that your eyes shall be opened; spiorad 
bhur n-inntinn, the spirit of your minds. Of- 
ten contracted ’ur, [Takes n- after it when 
followed by a word beginning with a vowel. ] 
bi, irreg. v. Be, exist. Conjugated thus :— 
IND. pres. tha mi, &c., Iam, £c. 
» past, bha mi, &c., I was, £c. 

» fut. bithidh mi, &c., 4 shall be, de, 
INTERR. pres.,am bheil mi? &c., am I ? de, 
(mur) 'eil mi, Ee, (if ) Tam (not) dc. 

nach 'eil mi? &c., am 1 not ? £c. 
cha’n 'eil mi, &c., Jam not, cc. 

» past(an P nach ? cha, mur) robh mi, &c., 
was I (not) e, 

» (am P nach? cha bh—, mur) bi mi, &c., 
(shall ?) F (not) b», dc. 

SUBJUNC. pres.,(ma) bhitheas mi,&o.,(1/)I be. 

» past, (na'n) robh mi or (na’m) bithinn, 
(if) I were ; (na/n) robh thu, e, sibh, iad, 
or (na’m) bitheadh tu, e, sibh, iad, (if) 
thou wert, (if) he, you, they wre ; (na n) 
robh sinn, or (na’m) bitheamaid, (if ) we 


were. 

IMPER. 1 sing. bitheam, let me be, pl. bith- 
eamaid, let us be ; 2 sing. bi, be thou, pl. 
bithibh, be ye; 3 sing. bitheadh e, let hum 
be ; pl. bitheadh iad, let them be. 

INFIN. a bhith, to oe. 

PRE3. PART. bith, being. 

Es BHEIL is often used subjunctively as, 

Thaiad ag ràdh gu’m bheil, ^ they say it is so. 

IMPERSONAL torms ət verp Bi. 


Pres. Past. Future. 

Ind. thatar. bhatar. bitear. 
»: thathar. bha har. bithear. 
E thathas. bhathas. bitheas. 


Interr. (am)beilear? (an)robharP(am bitear? 
" (am)beileas? (an)robhas? (am)biteas? 
A nach’eilear? nach robar? nach bitear? 
a nach'eileas? nach robhas?nach biteas? 

Subj. (ma)thatar. bhatar. bhithear. 
The past subjunctive form biteadh is used 
impersonally, as, n’am biteadh a’ togail an 
taighe, if the people had been building the 
the house ; thatar ag radh gu’m bheil a’ bhan- 
righinn a’ tighinn do dh’Alba, it is said that 
the Queen is comin; to Scotiand. ‘Tha, gu 
dearbh, yes, indeed ; bithidh iad an sin, they 
shall bethere ; is dubh na mnathan ris nach 
bitear, dark are the dames that none will flirt 
with—N.G.P.; tha "pn t-àm agam a bhith 
tarruing, it is time for me to be moving. 

[Bi, when used in expressing the name or 
Pre sapon portaining to objects, must be 
ollowed by the prep. ann, joined with a pos- 
sessive pronoun of the same number and per- 
son, as the person or thing whose name, 
trade, or condition is mentioned ` as, tha m1 
'nam (ann ino) s31aor, I ama carpenter (lit. 
in my [state of bsiux a] carpenter) ; bha sinn 
'nar (ann ar)coigrica 'sau tir, we were stran- 
ers in the land ; tha Ceit ’na (anu a) banal- 
cs Kate isa nurse ; bithidh Seumas 'na 
dheagh sgoilear, James will be a youd scholar. 
tbi, gen. of beo. 

bi, ( for bu i) It was she. 2 [t was. Am bi 

abba siod P wasit she that waayonder } 


92 


bialanaich 


see beucaich 

see beucail. 

biacair, see beucair. 

biachar, see biadhchar. 

b'iad, ( for bu iad) They were. B'iad am feas- 
gar agus a’ mhaduinn an ceud là, the even- 
inq and the morning were the first day. 

biadh, pr. part. a’ biadhadh, v.a. Feed, nour- 
ish, maintain. 2 Patten, Gu’m biadhar e 
ann am fearann duin’ eile, that it shall be fed 
in another man's field (land ); biadh orra e, 
dole it out in small equal quantities (as short 
provisions. ) 


biacaich, 
biacail, 


biadh, gen. bìdh [béidh & bithidh] pl. biadhan 
& bidheanna,| s.m. Meat, f victuals, 


iet, provision. 2** Fodder, provender. B., 
is aodach, food and clothing; dhuibh-se bith- 
idh e mar bhiadh, to you it shall be for food. 

biadhach,** a. Alimental. 

———— —Aàdh,** -aidh, s.m. Alimentation. 

biadhadh, -aidh, s.m. Feeding, nourishing. 2 
Fattening. 3 Doling out piecemeal. 4 
Feed, victuals, meat, provender. A’ b—, 
(tf gives biathadh) pr. part. of biadh, 

biadhaid,* s.m. see biadh-lann. 

biadhar, a. Alimentary. 


biadh-briste,** s.m. Fragments. 2 Crumbled 
food. 


biadh an t-sionaidh, s. m. 
White or pink sedum—se- 


Dy 





Ke dum anglicum. 
ei biadhchar, -aire, a. Fruitful, 
p» 2 Substantial. 3 Affordin 
d substance. 4 Esculent. Sio 
d "d D biadhchar, productive corn, 
rae corn that produces a large 
a i quantity of meal. 
achd, s. E, Abundan- 
ce of provision, substance. 2 
42. Biadh an * Productiveness. 


t-sionaidh. biadh-chluan, -ain, sm. Kite 
chen. (płace to cook in, not 
condiment.) 

bia‘thchor, see biadhchar. 

biadh eóin'in, s.m. Woodsorrel, see seamrag. 

biadh eun,tt see b— eòinein. 

biada feasgair,** s.m. Supper, evening meal 

biadi-lann, -ininn, s.m. Pantry. 

biadh luibh,** s.m. Salad. 

biadh lus, -luis, s.m. Salad. 

biadh maduinn,** s.m. Breakfast. 

biadh-nan-edinein, se» b— -edinein. 

biadh-nóin,** san. Luncheon, mid-day meal, 

biadh-sholar, -air, sm. Pabulation. 

biadh-siubhail,t AG s.m. Provisions for the way, 

biadhta, past part. of biadh. Fed, nourished. 
Damh biadhta, o stalled or fed oz. 

biadhtach, -ai:h, -aichean, s.m. Grazier. 2 
Farmer. 3 Hospitable farmer, hospitable 
person. 4 Host, hostess—/scay. 5 buchen, 
6 AC) Raven. 7(AF) Glutton. 8**Order of 
Irish tenants who procured provisions for the 
nobles. Tha e 'na dheagh bhiadhtach, he is 
a liberal host. 

—— ——d,** s, f. ind. Hospitality. Is bochd 
a’ bhiadhtachd seo, this 1s a poor entertain- 
ment. 

biadhtaich, v.a. Share, impart, divide food. 

—— ——-.—e, 8.m. see biadhtach. 

biadh-thaigh,** s.m. Eating-house. 

biagais,(AF) s. f. Dogfish. 

tbiaidh, for bithidh. 

foiail, s.f. Axe, hatchet. 

tbial, -ail, s.m. Water. 

bial. see beul. 

——ag, see beulag. . 

bialanaich, see beulanaich. 


bilan es hizeir 


bian, gen.sing. & n. pl. béin, s.m. Hide, skin, 
pelt. 2**Abode. Tapaa applied to the 
skins of wi d animals only.] Bianan tuirc, 
th» boars hide; bu ghile a bian na canach 
sléibhe, whiter was her skin than mountain 
setie ; bian ròin, « s-al's skin; bian béiste 
duibhe, an otter's skin ` bian coinein, a rab- 
bit's skin. 

—&Bdair* sm. Currier. 

—— deasriche.¢{ s m. Currier. 

—— duh A, @ Swarthy. 2 Black-skinned, 

—— neal, a. Fairskinned, white-skinned. 

—— leasaiche, -an, Em. Curri-r, tanner. 

*biw, see b theas. p 

b gach, -a.che, (biadh sgathach, catching 
o morsels) a. Niggardly, miserly, 2 Catch- 
ing at trides. 

biawaire, -eau, €.». Sordid, mean person. 2 
tahr ton. 

wead, s/f. Niggardliness. 2¢¢Gluttony. 

biast, bèiste, -an, 8J. Soa béist. 2 Wretch. 3 
Unmannerlv child. 4ffWorm or screw of a 
ra nrol. 5fNi:gardly person. [Biast is not 
such a strong expression a3 béist. The for- 
mer might ba eased in correcting vulgarity or 
mischief iu a child, while the latter would 
b:avplied toa drunkard or other disreput- 
abie person..—A4 rgy/l.] Mir á beul biiastan, 
receiv:ny anuthing from Dor teg who do not 
wish to part with 1t ( Lit. getting a morsel out 
of the mouth of brats.) 

piast, pr.part. a’ biastadh, v.a. Abuse, revile. 

adh. s.m. Abusing, reviling. A’ b—, pr. 
»art. of biast. 

biastag, Akt. -au, see béisteag. 

biastail, -e, «. see béisteal. iiChurlish, nig- 
gardly. 

biastalachd, see béistealachd. 

biast-lonn, see béist-donn. 

b.ast-dubh, see béist-dubh. 

biata, see biadhta. 

biatach, se biixdhtach. 

as,** -ais, s.m. Food, victuals, nour- 
ishm nt. 

——— d, see biadhtachd. 

bia:aicne, see biadhtach. 

biatas, -ais, s.m. Betony. 
—beta marii na. 2 Beet- 
root. 3 Mangold wurzel. 

biath, see biadn. 

Achail, see biadh- 

char. 

achadh, see biadh- 
achadh. 

—--achd, see  biadh- 
tachd 

adh see biadhadh. 

22 entive. 

-aidh, $ see biaih- 


fbichin, see bichearb. 

bichiouta, a. & adv. see bitheanta. 

biehiontas, -aii, s.m. see bitneantas. 

bi-churam, -aim, s.m. see bith-cliüvam. 

tbid, sf. Hed.. fence. 

tbid, (for bithilh iad,) They shall be. 

bid, -e, -ean, s.m. Shrill chirping sound. 2 
Chirping of birds 3 Very small portion. 
4ttNipping, piuchiug. 

thìd, v.a. Nip, pivch. ?ffNibble. 

bid, pr.part. a’ bìdil. v.a. Cairp. 

bìdeach, -eicne, a. Very little. 2 Trifling. 8 
Dininutive. 

bideachas, tf -ais, s.m. Mordacity. 

bideachd,* et Littleness, smallness. 

bideadh, s.m. Nipping, pinching. A’ b—, pr. 
part. of tbid. 

bìdeag, -eig,-an, 8. E Verv small portion of 
anything, bit, fraction. 2 Crumb. 3 Morsel. 
41f Pinching.  Bidveag cirion, a little piece, 
Chaidh e "na bhideagan, it went into frag- 
ments. 

—ach,- aiche,a. Nipping, pinchinz. 

bidean, -ein, s.m. Hedge, fence. 2 see bidein. 

bidean, see bidein. 

bidear, tt -eir, -ean, s.m. see bidein. 

bideil, see bìdil. 

bidein, -ean, s.m. Point, summit, pinnacle. 

bilein, -ean,** s.m.  Chirper, peeper, young 
bird or fowl 3 Diminutive person or animal, 

———each, -eiche, a. eee as a hill 
or rock. 21: fig. Light-headed. 

bìdh, gen. sins. of biadh. 

——, a see bith. 
quiet as a lamb ; cho bidh ri luchaig, as quiet 
as a mouse. 

bidh, for bithidh, see v. bi. 

+bidh-cheartach, s. f. Tavern, 

bidh, s. f. see bith. 

bidheaz,** ep Bait (on a hook.) 

bidheauta, see b:theanta. 

—————-—chd, see bitheantachd. 






























——— s, see bitheantas. 

bi-dheantas,** s.m. Endlessness, 

tbilhearg, a. Red, unctuous, as fir or pine. 

bidhis, -ean, 8. f. Screw. 2 Vice. (ftbithis) 

each, a. Like a screw. 2 Spiral. 

bilil, s. f. Cont nual chirping. 2 Shrill sound, 
8 Squeak, As of rats, mice, or birds. A' b—, 
pr.part. of hid. 

fbidis, v. Were. 2 Let them be, 

bidse, s.f. Gaelic spelling of bitch. 2 Whore. 

--——ach, a. Addicted to whoredom. 

~——achd, s. f. Whoremongerinz, conduct of 
a prostitute. 

bidsich. v.n. Play the whore. 

big, s.m, & pr.part. see bid. 

hig, pr.part. a’ bail, v.n. see bid. 

tbig, a. Tender. 




















ainne. big ! big! int. Mode of calling to chickens, 
biathainne, 8. f. Earth- | biz, n.p. of 8. beaz. 2 gen.sing.m. of a. beag. 
43. Biatas. worm. 2 Bait. 


bigeach,(AG) a. dim. of beag. Very small. 

bigeal, see bitil. 

bizean,** s.m. Cap, hair lace. 

bigeil, see bidil. 

bigein.'T s.m. Rock-pipit. see gabhagan. 29% 
'iolden-crested wren, see dreathan ar chinn 
buidhe. 8(AF) Meadow pipit. 4 Any little 
bird. 5f sve biceir. 

Ls : bigein-haintighearna,1 s. m. Mountain lUn- 

Drinkinz-cup. 8 Bottle. 4 Deaker,''bicker".)| net or twite.—Uist. ses riabhag mhonaidh. 
Stt'Luggie." ` bigem Brizhde, (AC) (lit. St. Bridget's stile 

bicheanta, see bitheanta, bird) s.m. Linnet. 

— — —chd, sf. see bitheantas. bigein mór, (AF) s.m. Black shore-lar*. 

fbichearb. -chirb, s.m. Mercury. quicksilver. | bigein-sneachda, (AR) s.m. Little snow-bun- 

fbi-cheardach, -aich, s.m. Victuailing Louse, | tine. 


tavern. bigeir, sm. see b.ceir. 


biathm"or, see biadh-char. 

biathsadh, s.m. Provision for a journey, via- 
ticum. 

bibh, see bithibh. 

bibhidh,*s.m. Very large fire.—Je’ay. 

bicas, -ais, s.m. see hiocas. 

bicein,tt -ean, am. One single grain. 

biceir, -ean, 8.7. Small wooden dish, 2 


big-eun 


biz-cun, -edin, s.m. Any small bird. 

ben, e, s 7. see bith. 2 Pillar, post. 

e da bhigh 2y doruis, between he two door-posts. 
igh-c.r'oibh, -e-e, 8. f. ‘ 

bigheach, -eivhe, a. see bith. 

bizaeanta, see bitheanta. 

bizh-eoin, s. f. see lLith-eoin. 
bizh-thalmhuinn, s. f. see bith-thalmhuinn. 
thigil, see bìdil. 

bigirein, sve biceir. 

Tol, KSE i 

thil. a. Good. 

bilbheag, -eiz, see meilhheag. 

bile,-an, et Lip. 2 Rim, brim, edge, mar- 
gin of anything. 3ffCluster of trees. 4tLeaf, 
blade, Bheir mo bnilean clit dhuit, my lips 
shall praise thee; bilean nan sruthan uaig- 
neach, the margin of the lonely brooks ; bile 
na h-aide, She brim of the hat ; air a bhil 
uachdaraich, on his «prer lip; ag imeachd air 
bile na tràighe, waking on the sea-shore. 

fbile, 5. J. Mouth. 2 Bird’s bill. 3 Blossom. 
4 Beard. 

bileach, -eiche. a. neg, 2 Bladed, as grass. 
3 Fringed, bordered, edged, welted. 4 Bil- 
led, as a bird. 5ff Full of leaflets. Bròg 
bhileach, a welted shoe. 

, lich, -lichean, s.m. Leaf of a tree or 
herb. 2 Quantity of leaves. 8**Young leafy 
tree. Barr nam bilichean blathmhor, the tops 
of the flourishing green trees. 

bileach-choigeach, eich, 8.m. 
see bile-bhuidhe. 





Corn-marigold. 


bileach-losgainn, (a^ bh—) 
8.f. Burnet—asanguis orba 
bileag, -eiz, -an. s.f. Leaf- 
let. 2 Little blade. 3 
bag. 4 Leaf of a tree or 
herb. tt Tongue. B. 
fheoir, a blade of grass ; 
bileag chàile, a vlade of 

colewort. 
bileagach, a. see bileach. 
adh, -aidh, s.m. 





ping in small quantities. 
J A’ Ka pr. part. of bil- 
— " eagaich. 

Ak, Bileach-losgainn. Yilea gaich, pr.part.a’ bil- 
eagachadh, v.a. & n. Lick up continually or 
in small drops. 2**Browse. 

Wë Segen 8.f. Colt’s foot. see cluas 

iath. 

bileagan-nan-eun,ff s.f Bird leaflets, a sort of 
acrid plant—avium foliola. **Species of wood- 
sorrel. 

bileag-bhaite, s. f. Water-lily. 
bhaite. 

bileag-chapuill,§ s. f. Red clover, see seamrag- 
enapuill. 

pilean, n.pl. of bile. 


see duilleag- 


bileanach,§s.m.Sweetsea- 
grass. see bilearach. 

bilearach,$ s.m.S weet sea- 
Tass—zostera marina. 

bile-bhuidhe, s.f. Corn- 
marigold — chrysanthe- 
mum segetum. 

Tbileid, Gaelic spelling of 
billet. 

bileil, a. Labial. 2 Talk- 
ative. 

bileineach,tt s. f. see bil- 
earach. 

hil-fhaclach, a. Labial. 

bilidh,** (ror bile.) A 
bilidh a’ cur failt’ ort, 





45. Bilearach. 


94 


2» Continual licking or sip- 


binn-bheulach ` 
her lips saluting thee, 


Å- 


Eadar | bilisteir,-e, -ean. s.m. Mean beggarly fellow. 


2łGlutton, 3 il1sles) Rancid 
butter or tallow. 
bilisteireachd, s. Mean han- 
kering or searching atter food 
tbill, an, Leper. 2¢¢Fool. 
thille, s.f. Rag. 
thille, a. Mean, weak. 
billeachd, a /. Poverty. 
gedness. 3 Weakness. 
fbilleog, see bileag. 
thillian, s.m. Lit le dish. 
bim, ( for bithidh mi) I shall be. 
2 (for bitheam) Let me be. 
bi'mid, (for bitheamaid) Let us 
b^. Bile- be. 
bhuidhe. tbinbhrianachd, see binn-bhriath- 
rachd. 


2 Rag- 








47. Bile bhuidhe. 


bineach, see binneach. 
binealta, see finealta. 
binid, binnde[&  inide] binndean, s. f. Cheese- 
rennet. 2 Stomach of a calf, lamb, or hare. 
each, a. Like rennet, of, or belonging 
to, rennet. 
fbinigear, s.f. Gaelic spelling of vinegar. 2 
Pickle. 
bänn, -e, a. Melodious, musical, sweet. 2 Shrill. 
8 Harmonious. 4ifiTrue. An ni nach binn 
le duine cha chluinn duine, what a maa likes. 
not he hears not ; is balbh do bheul a bha 
binn, mute is thy mouth that was musical ; is 
binn leam do cheuia, musical to me is the 
sound of thy footstep; bu mhór am beud gu'm 
rachadh do bheul binn gu bràtu fo thalamh, 
*twere a pity thy sweet mouth should ever go 
underground (said ironically of bad singers. 
P It is not the i but the nn that is 
long, except in the far north. 
binn, -e, s. f. Sentence, judgment, decision, 
coudemnation. 2 Fate. S**Melody.4**Hop- 
per of a mill. Thoir binna mach, give a de- 
cision, pronounce judgment ` binn an aghaidh 
droch oibre, sentence against an evil work ; 
faigh Linn. receive sentence. 
thinn, ( for bha mi.) 
binu-bheu , -2òil, $.4a. Musical, sweet, melo- 
dious voice. 
-—ach, -aiche, a. Sweet-voiced, eloqu- 





binn-bheulach 95 


biolag 


____siimm-bhenlach HO 


nt. A 
binn-bbriathrach, -aiche, a. Melodious. 2 Elo- 

quent. d 
d, s. f. Melodiousness. 2 Elo- 





quence. s 
binn-chedl, -iùil, s.m. Sweet music. 
ach, -aiche, a. Melodious, harmo- 


2 Apt 





nious. : . 
ymo, &. Coagulative, curdling. 
to coagulate. 
à vc? -aidh, s.m. Gort Ee, coagula- 
ting. 2*Making cheese. Ballan inndeach- 
aidh, a cheese-vat. A’ b—, pr. part. of binn- 


dich. 

binndeal, -eil, -an, s.m. Head-dress. 2(DM) 
Forehead cloth. 

fbinndean, -ein, see binid. 

binndich, pr. pt. &' binndeachadh, 0.4. 
agulate, curdle. 2*Make cheese. 

— C — te, past part. Curdled, coagulated. 

binne,* s. f. see binneas. ` 

binne, comp. of binn. Is binne do ghuth oan 
smeorach, sweeter is thy voice than th» thrush. 

binneach, -eiche, a. Light, light-headed, fan- 
ciful. 2 Hilly, pinnacled, mountainous. 3 
Pointed. 4**Horned, antlered. 6*High-top- 
ped. Eilid bhinneach, the antlered deer. 

binnead, id, sm. Degree of melody, sweet- 
ness, or harmoniousness. Is fhearr leam do 
ghuth oan smeòrach air binnead, I prefer 
thy voice to the thrush for w-lody. à 

— ie, -an, s. f. Chu mn-y-top, ehimney- 
stalk. 
without a vent in it, especially one made of 
turf. One built of stone and lime is general- 
ly called stvadh.—J.M. 

ach, -aiche, a. ‘lowered, turreted. Ro 

shnuagh’or, fineant, binneagach, very good- 

looking, maidenly, towering.—Oran Chiann 

Domhnuill nan Eilean,in Filidh nam Beann. 





Co- 





p. 22. 

binnealach, -aiche, æ. Melodious, harmonious, 
chirping. 

binnealaich, s. f. Chirping of birds. 

b:nnealta, a. see finealta. 211Melodious. 

ch, -aiche, d. see tinealta. 

bisnean, ein, s.m. see binnein. 

—aca,* a. see binneineach. 

binpear,** air, s.m. Hill, pinnacle. 2 Pin, 
bodkin, hair-pin. 

binneas, -eis, s.m. Music, harmony, melody. 2 
Euphony in grammur. A'togaila guth le 
binneas, raising her voice with melody. 

binne-bheathach,(AF) s.m. Horned beast or 
animal. 

binnein, &m. Pinnacle, apex of a hill. 2 High 
conieal hill. 3 Turret. 4**Bell. Einnein 
na carraige, the pinnacle of the rock. 

each, -eiche, d. Acuminated, pinna- 


cled. 
fbinneochaldh, see beannaichidh. 
binn-fhaclach, -aiche, a. Melodious, having a 
sweet.toned voice. 2 Sweet-worded. Eun- 
laith biun-fhaclach, melodious birds. 
binn-fhuaim, -e, s.m. Sweet sonorous sound. 
———-each,£1 -eiche, a. Euphonical. 
tinn-ghnth, s.m. Melodions voice. 2 Sweet 
tone or note. Mar bhinn-ghuth ealaidh, like 
the sweet nots of a swan. 
bionid, see b:ni.l. 
each, a. see hinideach. 
fbinnse, -achan, Gaeiic spel'i'g of bench. 
biunseach,** a. Having beaches. 2 Like a 
benen. 
binnteach, see binndeach. 
adh, see binndeachadh. 
binntean, see binid. 




















(in Benbecula and De Uists, a gabie | - 


*—— —-aàch, see binideach. 

binnticn, see binndich. 

biob, s.m. for bab— Perthshire. 

Bìoball, see- Biobull. 

bioban, -ain, s.m. Disease in poultry, ''pip.^ * 

biobhuan, see bith-bhuan. 

D tachd, see bith-bhuantachd. 

Biobull, -nill, s.m. Bible. 

———ach, a. Biblical. 

biocas, -ais, s.m. Viscount. 

biochar,(AC) a. see biadhchar. `` 

bioda, -an, s.m. Pointed top. 2 Hill-top. Air 
chorra bioda, on tiptoes. s 

biod,* v.a. & n. Pique, gall, vex. 2 Bicker, 
canker. r 

pm, -aiche, a. Sharp-topped, pyramid- 
^al. 

biodach, see bideach. 

biodaich, v.a. Bud. 





48. Biodag. 
biodag, -aig, -an, 8& J. Dirk. 2 Dagger. Cha 
mhisd’ a thig dhuit am biodag, no worse doeg 
the dirk hecome thee; cha do chleachd am bade 
ach biodaz, the fellow was not used to a dirk. 





ach, a. Like a dirk or dagger. 2 Hav- 

ing a dirk or dagger, 

aich, v.a. Pon'/ard, wound with a dirk 
or dagger. 

—-—an, n.pl. of biodag. 

biodagraich,* s. Snick and snee. (fight with 
knives.. 

biodaich,ff v.&.«£ n. Bud. 

— Gaelic form of victuals. 2 Spirits— 





biodan.* -ain, s.m. see biodanach. 

—-—ach, -aiche, a. Sharn-tonp»sd. 2 Bicker 
ing. 3 Cankering. 4**[attling, prating. 

t -—ach, -aich, s.m. "'lattler, prater. 2% 
Bickering fellow. 3*s.f. Bickering female. 

tbiodarnach, -aiche, o. Chirping. 

biod-chas, s. f. Splay-foot. 

Liod-cheann, -inn, s.m Pointed head. 

———— ——Ach, -aiehe, a. Sharp-headed. 

biodh, 3rd. pers sing. inper. of bà. (Contrac. 
tion of bitheadh.) 

tbiodh,** s.m. The World. 

fbiodhanas, -ais, s.m. Discord. 

tbiodhbha, see biüthzidn. 

i- nas, -ais, s.m. see biodhanas. 

biog, -a, -an, &m. see nid, s.m. 2**s./. Start. 

——, v.a. Gripe, start. 

—ach, -aiche, d. Apt to start, causing to 
start. 2 Small, very little. 
——adh, -aidh, s.m. Startiag, 
strong or sudden emotion. 

V him. 
biogail, s. f. see bìdil. 
biogail, -e, a. Active, lively, frisky. 2 Ant to 





palpitation,. 
2 Griping. 3 


start. 8 Neat. 4 Small. 
bìoganta, a. Thrilling, sharp tingling sensa- 
tion. 


hiogaran,(AG) sf. Small wooden dish. 

biogarra, a. Mean, churlish, surly. 2 Censori- 
ous. 3f‘‘Cheepish.”’ 

.——————cend, s. f. Meanness, churlishness, ine 
hospitableness. 

biog-ghairm, s. f. The death-watch. 

1biol, s. J. Little musical instrument. 2 Violin, 
fiddle. 

biolag,** -aig, $. f. Little inusical instrument. 
2 in sion, & person wana ds fond of singing, 


biolag 


or whistling. 

ach, -Aiche, a. Musical, melodious. 2 
Fond of singing or whistli-g. 3**Blythe. 

biotair, -e, -ean, 8. f. Water-cr-ss—nasturtium 
ojwinalis. [Biolair is applied to all kinds of 
cresses. ] 

biolair-an-fhuarain, s.f. Fountain cresses. 

biolaireach, -eiche, a. Abounding in cresses. 2 
Of, or belonging to, cresses. Glacag bhiol- 
aireach, a d 4 abounding in cresses. 

biolair-Fraing,§ s. f. French or garden cress. 

b;olair-ghriagain.? s. f. Ladies’ smock or cuckoo 
flower. see plür-na-cubhaig. 

biolair-uaine, s. f. Green water-cress. 

fbiolar, -aire, a. Neat, fine, dainty, spruce. 

biolarach, see biolaireach. y 

biolasg, -aisg. s.m. Prattle, gabble, loquacity. 

ach, -aiche, a. Loquacious, prattling. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Loquacity, prattling. 











biolur, -uir, s.m. Bistort or snake-weed—poly- 
D d: 


gonum bistorta. r 
biom, (contraction of bith- 


eam. J 

fbion, adv. Readily, easily, 
usually. e 

bionn.(AC) a. Symmetrical, 
well-featured, beauteous. 
Is i mo leannan an té 
bhionn, my love is the 
beauteous maid. 

bior, -a, -an, s.m. Thorn. 2 
Prickle. 3 Small or sharp- 
pointed stick. 4 Any 
sharp-pointed thing. 65 
Spit. 6 Pin. 7**Goad. 8 

49. Biolur. **Bodkin. Bior 'nad 

dhorn na paisg; do not squeeze a thorn in thy 
fst; a’ geurachadh nam bior, sharpening the 
goads ; 'nam bioraibh 'n ’ur sùilibh, as thorns 
in your eyes is bior gach sràbh 'san oidhche, 
every straw isa thornat night.—N.G.P. 

bor, pr.pt. a’ bioradh. v.a. Prick. 2 Sting. 3 
Gall, vex. 4 Goad, spur on. 

Tbior.s.m. Well, fountain. 2 Water.—a.{4Short. 

bior (AH) s.f. Sour or angry look. Tha droch 
bhior air. he looks very displeased. 

biorach, -aiche, a. Sharp-pointed. 2 Piercing. 
3 Horned, having branching antlers. 4 Sharp- 
sizuied. +5**Watery. Sùil bhiorach, a sharp 
or quick eye ; le d' lannaibh biorach, with thy 
pointed swords; a’ guréigh bhiorach ‘na 
ot, the branching-antlered herd behind 

im. 





, -aich, -aichean, s. f. Two-year old 
heifer. 2 Year old horse or colt. 3(AF)Cow- 
calf, steer, filly. 4 Ox, bullock. 5 Dog-fish, 
see gobag. 6 Instrument to prevent calves 
from sucking. (büthach in Uist.—JM]  7** 
Boat ł see birlinn. 
bioracnas, -ais, s.m. Pointedness, 
sharpness, epigrammatical 
sharpness. 
bioradh, -aidh, s.m. 
pricking, piercing. 
part. of bior. 
biorag, -aig, -an, s. f. Tusk or side 
tooth in the mouth of a horse. 
bioraz,S -aig, -an, s.m. Dutch 
rushes or shave grass—equisetum 
hyemale. 
biorag-lodain, s.f.  Bandstickle. 
bioragach,** a. Aculeated. 
bioraich, v.a. Sharpen at the 
point, make pointed. 2 Stare, 
look steadfastly. 
50. Biorag. bioraiche, comp. of biorach. Sharp- 
er, sharpest. 





Stinging, 
A’ b—, pr. 


bior-fhíacal 





51. Biorag-lodain. 
bioraiche, -ean, s.f. see bioraich-ead. 2 see 


biorach, s. 3 Sharp, angular person. Bior- 
„aiche, mae na h-asail, «coit the foal of an ass 

bioraichead, s.m. & f. Conicalness, pointed- 
ness, sharpness, epigrammatical sharpness. 

bioraid, see biorraid. 

each, see biorraideach, 

tbioraidh,** sm. Bullock. 2(AF) Steer. 

biorain, gen. sing. of bioran. 

bioran, -ain, s.m. Stick, staff, little stick. 2 
3**Any sharp-pointed thing. f3**Strife. 4** 
Anguish, vexation. Bioran ’na laimh, a stick 
in his hand; bioran de sgithich,a twig of white. 
thorn; is math cobhair nam bioran le *chéile, 
„the union of sticks is helpfut. —N x. P. 

bioranech, -aiche, a. Abounding in sticks. 2 
Like a stick. 3 Full of prickles, 

, “aich, s.m. Pin-cushion. 21fNeedle. 
3 Troublesome or contentious person. 

—— ———-——an, -ain, s.m. Pinmaker. 

bioranaich,** v.a. Vex. 

—————-—e, -chean, see bioranaehan. 

~—te, a. Vexel, grieved. 





- 











62. Bioran-deamhnaidh. 
bioran-deamhnaidh, s.m. Minnow, pink. 
bioran-donais,(AH) s.m. Minnow, pink. 
bioran-druma,* s.m. Drum-stick. 


bior-an-iasgair, (AC) 

bior-an-uisge,(AC) biorra-cruidein. 

biorar, a f. Cress, see biolair. 

bioras, -ais, -an, s.m. Water-lily, see duilleag- 
bhaite. 

biorasg, see bior-iasg. 

Tbior-bhogha, s.m. Rain-bow. 

bior-bhogha,?$.m. Yellow flag, see bog-uisge. 

Tur met ur) s.m. Toad. 2 Water ser- 
e 


Kingfisher, see 


nt. 

1c Me -aich, s.m. Water serpent. 2 
Conzer-eel. 

bior-chluaiseanach, see bior-chlnasach. 

bior-chluas, -ais, -an, s. f. Sharp-pointed ear, 
as of a dog when listening eagerly. 

bior-chluasach, a. Sharp-eared, quick of hear- 
ing. 2**Having sharp or pointed ears. 

+biorchoil, s.m. Instrument for beheading. 

bior-chomhladh, -aidh, a, € Flood-gates,sluice. 

biordainge, s. f. Pricker, see bata Glp. 73. 

bior-deighe, s. f. Icicle, 

tbiordhach, a. Watery. 

bior-dhorus, -dhorsan, s.f. Water-sluice. 

bior-daruidheachd, s. f. Mode of divining by 
water. 

bior-dubh, s.m. Stem- or stern-post of a ship, 
see O1 and NI p. 73. 

bior-eidhe, see bior-deighe. 

bior-fheadan, -ain, s.m. Water-pipe. 

bior-fhiacal, -an-, s.m.  Tooth-pick. 


bior-fhion 


fbior-fhion, s.m. Mu: heglin, drink made of 

— and water boiled and fermented. 

bior-fuinn, s.m. Landmark, beacon. Bheirinn 
am bior-fuinn a mach, / would descry the 
lan tema k. 

biorg, pr-pa't. a’ biorgadh, v.n. Flow, gush. 2 
twitch suddenly and sorely. 3*Tingle, thrill, 
feel a cinzlin, sensation. 3ffGail. 

-———àüen, -Aichie, a. Ecscatic, trausporting, rap- 
purons, nervous, 

biorgadvich,* s. f. Thrilling or tingling sensa- 
tiou, 

b orzadh, -aidh, s.m. Painful wrench or twist. 
A’ b—, pr.part. of biorg. Bhuail biorgadh 
de'n eagal e, he was thrilled with fear. 

biorgainn.tt -e, s. J. Sharp lancinating pain. 

biorzanta, a. Perplexing. 2 Hampering. 38 
Vexatious. 4 Thribing. 6 Galling. 

—-—————ch, see biorganta. 

-— —— —chd, s. f. ind. Perplexity. 2 Entangle- 
ment. 3Intricacy. 4*Degree of thrilling, or 
tiugiing sensation. 

bior-zlantachain, s.m. Weeding grubber. 

bior-greasaidh, s.m. Goad, ox-goad. 211Awl. 

biorguinn, see biorgainn. 

bivr-iaruinn, s.m. Marline-spike. see bata 29 


. 46. 

bior-iasg. -éisg, s.m. Bait for flshing. 2 Fish 
with prickles. 

bior leacain,§ s.m. (lit. the pointed hill-side 
plant.) Juuiper. see aitionn. 

bior-linu, see birlinn. 

fbior-mhéin, 8. J. Ooziness, moisture. 

bior-nam-bride, see bearnan-Bride. 

fbior-oir, s. f. Water margin. 

tbior-phoit, s. f. Urn. 

¢biorra, see biorra-crùidein. 

biorra-an-iasgaire, s.m. see biorra-crüidein. 





68. Biorra-craidein. 


biorra-crùidein, {Į s.m. Kingfisher—aleedo ispida. 
fbiorrach. s. f. Boat, yawl, skiff. 211Muzzle. 
———--—dach, -aiche, a. see biorach. 

-— — ———dnRir, -eau, s.m. Tricky fellow, sharp- 


er. 2 Petty thief. 
biorrach lachan,§ Reed grass, see seasgan. 
¢biorrag, s. f. Soft marshy field or plain. 
biorraid, e, -ean, s. f. Helmet. 2 
3 Hat. 4* Cap with a scoop on it. 
twig. '711Cone. 7 rarely Strife. 
bu loinntreach snas, a burnished helmet. 
each, -eiche, a. Conical. 3 Wearing a 


5 Osier- 


helmet. 3 Of, or belonving to, a cap. 4 Scoop- | | L } 
}bith,a. Quiet, peaceabie, tranquil, calu. 2 


ed. 5**High-headled. 

biorramaid, s. /. Gaelic spelling of pyramid. 

--——each,** a. Pyramidical. 

fbiorran, -ain, s.m. Vexation of mind. 2 Top 
ot a small hill. 

t——, v.a. Distract. 2 Embarrass, 
snare, entangle. 

t ach, a. Distracted. 

$————aire. s.m. Fomenter of strife. 








oT 


Biorraid ! tbith, s. f. ind. Custom, habit. 





bith-bhuas 


biorsadh. -ailh, xm. Eazer impatience. "ff 
Reen wish. 3{Goading. 

biorsamaid,-ean, a. f. Roman balance for weigh- 
ing snail quantities, 2 Stee:-vard. 3(ArH 
Term of contempt, applied to a Bag Det 
woman. 

bior-shruth, 4m. ‘lhe old bed of a river. 

bior-shüil, -ùla, -üiiean, 3. f. Piercing eye. 2** 
Qu.ck-sighted eyo. 
——each, -liche, a. Quick-siguited, sharp- 
sighted. Gabhair bh.. sha p-sisited Joass. 
bior-snaois, s. f. Beak. 2 Top of th» stem of 
a boat, see bà a, p. 76. 

bior-stùc,** s.m.  Pyramitl. 

b-os, v. see bitheas. T2 s.m. Silk. 

biosa, ( for bi thusa) sometimes written bios 
and bi-sa. 

fbiosar,** -air, s.m. Silk. 

biosgach, a. Churlish, niggardly. 

biosgail, see biosgach. 

biosgair, -ean, s.m. Scrub. 





———eachd,** s.f. Scrubbishness, mean- 
ness. 
biota, s. f. Churn. 2 Pitcher. 3iVoessel. 


biota-bhiirn,(AG) sr. Water-pitcher 

biotailt, s.m. Gaelic spelling of victuals. 2 
Grain of all kinds. 

————each, -eiche, a. Abounding in victuals, 
or grain. 

biotais, see biatas. 

toioth, sm. The world. 2 Being. 

fbiothanach, s.m. Thief. 

Toioth-bhuaine, see bith-bhuantachd. 

bir, 3.m. Alarm note of th» solan geese when 
attacked at Ke: 2t see bior. 

bireid, see biride. 

fbir-fhion, see bior-fhion. 

biriche,** s.m. see biorach, s. 

birichean, s.m. Conoid. 

thiride,(AF) s. J. Breeding cow. 2**Shrew. 

E -ean, s. f. Galley. 2 Barge, pleasure 

oat. 

each, a. Abounding in galleys or barges. 

fbirread, see biorraid. 

Tbirt, s. f. Hilt, haft, handle. ?i[Castle, forti- 
tied place. 

tbirt, pl. of beart, Loads, bundles. 

birtich, v.a. Kindle, excite, stir up. 
an teine, poke the fire. 

tbis, s. f. Buffet, box, slap. 

b' ise, ( for bu ise) It was she. 

biseach,** -sich, s. f. Crisis of a disease. 

biseach, -eich, 2 see piseach. 


bisidh, Gaelic spelling of busy. 
biteag, ** -eig, -an, s. f. see bìdeag. 
biteig, gen. sing. of biteag. 





Birtich 





ead-piece. | bith. s. f. ind. Life, existence, being, living. 2 


The world. 31[Creature. 

2tiOrder, law. 
8 Wound. 4 Blow. 5 Contest. 6 Woman. 

bith, -e, s. f. Glue, gum. 2 Bird-lime. 3 Resin. 
4 Tar, bitumen. > Pitn. 6 Caulk:ny 


Coy. Bi bich, be quiet ; cho bith ri ua", as 
bith-, preposi'iv. particle signifying ever-, ai. 
ways, aa bith-bhuan, everlasting. 


| ¢bithbheanach. see biothanach. 
8 En- | thithbneauta, a 


Stolen. 

bith-bned, a. Everiiviug. 2 Everlasting. 
Perennial. 4**Kvergreen. 

hith-bhreun,,DM* see oitn-bhirennach. 


gre 


tbior-ròs,} s.m. White water-lily, see duilleag- | bitn-bur-unach,**s.m. Assatoetida. 


bhaite bhan. 2 Yellow water lily, 
duilleag ba1àite bhuidhe. 
bior-ròslaidh, see bior-rdstai@h. 


bior-rostaidh, s.m. Spit. 


see | vith-bhriatnrach, -aiche. a. 'Taixative, lequa- 


cious, babbling. 
. ind. Loquacity. 


——— mi, 8. f. 
bith-birigh, e, J. Essence. 2 Liío-biood. 


hith-bhnan $8 balgaireachd 
biuthasachd,* s.f. Defamarion. 








bith-bnvan, o, Everlasting, eternal, immortal. 
2 Perpetual. fblà, s.m. Town, village. 2 Piety, devotion. 8 
--—tachd,s. f.ind Hternity, perpetuity. Green field. 4 Cry, shout. 5 Offspring. 6 
hith-chainnt, a, f. Babblement, senseless ill-| Praise. 
timed prate. fblà, v.a. Be it enacted. 
tàth-chraoibh, -e-e, Gurn of trees. fb:à, a. Yellow. 2 Healthy, well. 3 Safe. 4 
bith-chüram, -aim, «.m. Anx'ety.continualcare| see blàth. 
or solicitude. 221W vidly care. blabaran, -ain, 3.m. Stammerer, stutterer. 
——— ach, à. Extremely careful. blabhdach, -aiche, a. see bladach. 
bith-dheanamh, -aimh, s.m. Continual acting. |blabhdair, see bladair & bladaireachd. 
bith-dheanta, see bitheanta. —eachd, see bladaireachd. 
-8, see hiiheantas. blac,(AC) s.m. Cream. (P bliochd) 
tbithe, gen. sing. of bith. fblaehd, s. f. Word. 
thithe,** a. Female, of, or belonging to, the | blad, -aid, s.m. Mouth. 2 Foul or abusive 
female sex. mouth. 28 Wide mouth. 4**Dirty mouth. 5 
bitheach, -eiche, a. Bitumenous. (AF )Wolf. 
vitheadh, 3rd. pers. sing. & pl. imp. of bi. Let |——ach, -aiche, a. Garrulous. 2 Abusive. 8 
[him, her, or it |be. Bitheadh e cho math; Wide-mouthed. 4**Foul-mouthed. 6 Gut- 
's a thogras e, let him be ever so good. tural. 
hitheag,(AC) s. f. Life. ——ach,* s. f. Female with a large month 
bitheain, 1st. pers. sing. imp. of bi. Let me be, | bladaidh,(AG) s.m. Flatterer. 
+bitheambnach, see hiothanach, bladair, -e, -ean, s.m. Flatterer. 2 Babb'er. 
tbithearnhnanta, a. "Yhievish. 8 Sycophant. 4 Blockhead. 5 Wide inwath. 
bithean,** s.m. Bait. €AFEFYWolf. 7ifCoward. 8**One of the fol- 
bitheanach,* a. ses ditheanta. lowers of a Highland chieftain. 
bitheanta, a. Frequent, continual, 2 Common. ,-air, 8m. see blaundar. 
8 Numerous. eachd, s. f. Flattery. 2 Sycophancy. 3 
bitheanta, o. Glutinous, viscous, tenacious,|  Babbiing. 4 Yelling, howling. 5 Cowardice. 
ropy. bladairt,* s.m. see bladaireachd. 
-— — —-chd,11 s. f. ind. Adhesiveness. bladar,** -air, s.m. Flattery. 2 Hypocrisy, 
bitheantachd,* see bitheantas. dissimulation. 
bitheantas, -ais, s.m. Frequently happening. ach,**a. Flattering, coaxiag. 
2**Frequency, commonness. 3**Common oc- | bladh, -aidh, s.m. Essence. 2 Juice. 3 Subs- 
currence. Am bò.. deer aenerally. tance. 4 Meaning. 5 ftPlattery. 6 Energy. 
bithear, fut. impers. of bi. [ít] shall be, [ex.| 7 Fame, renown. 8 Garland. 9 ttshout. 10 
under the word **beus.""] Praise. 11 Blow.  12* Pith. 13 see blà:h. 
bitheara, see bitheanta. Is buaine bladh na saoghal, renown is more 
bitheas, fut. subj. of bi. see bhitheas. 


lasting taan life—N.G.P. 
bith-eoin, sf. Bird-lime. 


fbladh, a Smooth. 2 Soft. 

bith-gheal,(AC) a. Beauteons. A Bhrighde|t——-, «m. see bloigh. 
bhith-ghil ! thou beauteous Bridget ! t——--, v. see bloighich. 

bith-ghràbhadh, -sidh, s.m. Cosmography, des-| bladhach, a. see biathmhor. 
cription of the world. , “Aich, sn. see blathach. 

bithibh, 2nd. pers. pi. imp. of bi Be ye. 
Bithibh coimeas do cheud, be a match for a 
hundred. 

bithid, for bithidh iad. 

bithidh, fut. ind. of bi. Shall or will be. 

bithidh, gen. sing. of biadh. 

bithis, see bidhis. 2if "emale A 

bith-labhairt, 3.7. Tatxativeness. 2 Prat- 

tling, perpetual talking. 

bith-ré, s. f. ind. Life-time. 

bith-shior, a. see bith-shiorruidh. 

bith-shiorruidh, a. Eternal, everlasting. 

bith-thalmhuinn, s.f. bitumen. 

tbitiorra, a. Cheerful, blythe. 

bitis, see biatas. 

bitse, see bidse. 

-——ach, see bidseach. 

-——achd, see bidseacud. 

bitsich, see bidsich. 

biu,(AC) a. see bed. 

biüdhas, ais, see biùthas. 

biùg, s.m. Difficulty in speech. Cha d'thubh- 
airt i biùg, she said nothing 

biügadh, -aidh, sse bi wenn, 

biüidh, see bitthaidh. 

tbiùtbaidh, -ean, s.m. Hero, champion. 2 Foe. 
8 Army. 

biüthannas, -ais, 3.m. Enmity. 





























eg 








-———-, -aic 
fbladhachd, s. f. Crushing,smashing. 2 Crumb- 
ling, breaking into pieces. 
bladhail, -e, a. (f£bludh, pith] Strong, forcible, 
evergetic, sappy, pithy. substantial. 
ladhair, -ean, s.m. see bladair. 2ffBlast. 3 
(bladi, 7)tBoaster. 
,V.h. Boast. 
——-, -e. «. Important, momentous, express- 
ive. 2 Substantial. 3 Siguifi-ant. 
——eachd, see blaghaireachd & bladair- 


bladhantas, see blaghaireach: & bladaireachd. 

bladhar, see bladair. 2* Substantial, full of 
meaning, substance, or importance. 

bladhastair, -ean, see blaomastair. 

. ——eachd, see blaomastaireachd. 

biadhb-leabhair, s.m. Contents of a book. 
ladh-leasgaidh, see blàth-fhleasg. 

bladhm, a, -annan, see blaom. 

bladhmadaich, e, see b'aomadaich. 

biadhmadh. see blaoma ih. 

bladnmag, -aig, -an, see vlaomag. 

tbladhinaich, s. Fame, commendation, praise. 

bladhmair, -ean, see blaomair. 

—eachd, see blaomadaich. 
bladhmannaca, -a'ch, -ean, see blaomannach. 
bladhmastair, -e, -ean, see blaomastair. 
biàthantas, see biùthas. ————-.-—-euachd, see blaomastaireachd. 
biüthas, ais, s.m. Fame, glory, reputation. 2/bladh-shigh, s.m. Elixir. 


Good or bad report. 3” Defamation of the|blad-shrónach, -aiche, a. Flat-nosed. 
worst kind. blad-spàgach, a. Flat-footed, plain-soled. 


biüthasach,* a. Defamatory, libellous in the|tblagaireacbd, s.f. Blast. 2 Boasting, blus- 
highest degree. tering, bravado. 





Dla gh Se? 
blagh, -aigh, see bladh. s 
¢-——, v.a. Puff, blow. Gaelic spelling of 
S 


e blaw. 

blàghach,** a. Effectual. 2 Famous, renowned. 

.—————,8. see blàthach. 

blaghair,** enn, x» m. Blast, puff. 2 
ing wind. 3 Blusterer, boaster. 

eachd, ** s. f. Blustering. 

3 Bravado. 

bligban,(AV) -ain, s.m. Whiting, pollack (fish.) 

blaghantach, -aiche, a. Boastiul, blustering. 

blaghastair, see bladnastair. 

bl:ghmbanach. -aich. s.m. Dlustering fellow. 

tolai, s. f. The womb. ` 

blaidh, -e, -ean, see bloigh. 

b aidh-lin, see braith-lin. 

blaigh, s. f. see bloigh. 

each, s. f. dé a. bloigheach. 

blaighdeachadh, -aidh, s.m. & pr.part. see 
bloigheachadh. 

deachas, see bloigheachas. 

blaighdich, see bloighich. 

blaigh-lin, see braitn-lin. 

fbla:mic, see blonag. 

each, see blonavach. 

blais, pr. part. a’ blasad [& a’ blasadh,tt] v.a. 
Taste, try by the inouth. 2 Sip. 3 Relish. 
"Nnair a bh ais e am fion, when he tasted the 
wine. 

blais-bheum, s.m. Blasphemy. 2 Taunt, re- 
proach. 3 Infamy. 

———-—ach, -aiche, a. Blasphemous, given 

| c 
aiseagail, s. m. ; 

blaiseagraich, see blaiseamachd. 

blaiseamachd,* s. J. Smacking with the lips. 
A’ b—, pr.pt. of blaiseamaich. 

blaiseamaich, pr. part. a’ blaiseamachd, v.a. 
smack with the lips. 2 Taste, try. 

blaisidh, fut. af. act. of bl is. 

blaiteachadh, -aidh, s.m. Warming. 2 Hatch- 
ing. 3 Fomenting. 4 Cherishing. 65 Feel- 
ing affection for. A’ b—, pr.pt. of blaitich. 
A’ blaiteachadh nan uighean breaca, haiching 
the spotted engs. 

fblàith, v.a. Smoothe, plane, level, polish. 


Bluster- 


2 Boasting. 














+ ,9. Smooth, plain, level. 

fblaith, s. Blossom. 

blàithe, comp. of a. blàth. Warmer, softer, 
sinoother. Warmest, softest, smoothest. 


"NE ighean 'bu bhlàithe süil, a maid of softest eye. 

aitneach, dee 

blaitheanach, d "wë Bloomy. 

blasthean, -ein, s.m. dim. of blàth. 
blossom. 2 pl. of blath. Blossoms. 

fb!aitheasach, a. Smoothed, polished. 

biaith-fhleasg, -eisg, -an, s. f. see blàth-fhleasg. 

aidh, ses b'àth-fhleasg. 

blaithin, -e, -ean, see biàithean. 

blaith-leac, -ic. s.f. "Polished flag, 
stone. 9ffPumice-stone. 

Tfbiaithmhenl,f s. f. Sea-monster. 

biaithteachadh, -aidh, 8.2. «2e blaiteachadh. 

bla:tich, pr.part. a’ b:aiteachadh, v.a. Warm, 
heat, hatch. 2 Foment. 3 Cherish. 

blanag. see blonag. 

ach, see blunagacn. 

th au, am. Farthing. 2 properly Plack (4d.) 

+blannda, a. Gentle, meek. mild. 

bianndaidh, s.m. Botten egg. 

—————-.—, a. Rotten. stinking 2 Stale, as 
milk. Ubh blanndaidh a rotten egg. 

blanndair, s.m. & a. see bli ndaidn. 

biann ar, -air, s.m. Cajoling, Hattsry. 2 Dis- 
2sianmnlation. 8 Hypocrisy. 4 ‘‘Blaruey.’’ 

blaoc, -oic, see blaoch. 

fblaoch, s. f. Whale. 


Little 





— 





smooth 





99 





hlaras 


fbl odh, -aoidh, s.m. Shout, lond calling. 2 
Breath. 

biaovth, pr.pt. a’ blaodhaich, v.n. Cry. shout. 

blaodaay, -aig, -an, 8. f. Noisy female. 

biaodhaich, s. f. Cry. A’ b—, pr. pt. of blaodh, 
Crying. 

blaodh-eun, s.m.  Bird-call. - 

blaodhwanach, -aiche. a. Imprudent, indis- 
creet. 2 Contemptible. 3 Foolish. 4 Blus- 
tering. 

thiaodhrach, see blaoghagach. 

blaog agach, -aiche, a. Noisy, clamorous. 

blaoghan, -ain, sm. The fawn’s cry. 2¢Calf’s 
cry 3 see bla, han. [tt says bladha;n.] 

b!aom,* v.a. Stare with the greatest surprise, 
as whentakeu nnawares, 2 Start, 

, "à, -annau, s. m. Flirt. 2 Start. 8 

Boast, brag. 4 Blunder. 

adaich, -e, s. f. Giddy starting. 2 Stupid 

outcry. 3 Boasting, bragginz. 4 Flirting. 

5 Blundering. 6*HaLit or staring foolishly. 

adh, -aiuh, -aidhean, s.m. Foolish excite- 
ment. 2 Flush. 3 Loud, senseless talking. 
4* Wonderful stare. 5 Starting. 6ttWhim. 
Thug e blaomadh le a drà shùil, he stared 
with both eyes. A’ b—, rad art. of blaom. 

blaoinag, -aig, -an, s. f. B didius stupid wo- 
man. 

blaomair, -ean, s.m. Blusterer, bragger, swag- 
gerer. 2 Kecentric per-on.  3*Fellow that 
stares like a fool. 4*Nonsensical talk. 

eacnd, sve blaomadaich. 

blaomannach, -aiche, a. Inconsiant, irresolute, 




















variabie. 2 ialxing incoherently or incon- 
sistently. 

, äich, s.m. Swaggerer, boasting 
fellow. 


blaomastair, -ean, s.m. Stupid fellow, dolt, 
blockhead. 2 Blusterer, bully. 

eachd, s. f. ind. Stupid blundering. 

tblaor, -aoir, 8.2. Cry, shout. 

T-——, v.n. Cry. 

fblaosg, s.m. Tne skull. 2 see plaosg. 

blàr, gen. sing. -àir, n.pl. -air,-a, & -an, 8.m. 
Plain, fieid. 2 Ground, floor. 3 White spot 
on the face of animals, (chiefly applied to 
cows and horses.) 4*Cow with a white spot 
onits face. 5 Green. 6 Battle. 7 Battle- 
field. 8 Peat moss, marsh. An ceud bhlàr a 
chuir iad, the first battle they fought ; a’ dol 
sios don bhlàr, going down to the battle-field; 
fraoch nam bàr, the rage of battle ; a muigh 
air a’ bhlàr, out on the plain; ’na shineadb 
air a’ bhlàr, stretched on the ground or on the 
floor ; chaidh e feadh a’ bhlair, it spilled on 
the GT sgeadaichear na blair, the plains 

shall be adorned; réidh a’ bhiàir, the plain 
of battle; thoir am biàr ort ! away with you ! 
tha biàr "na h-aodann, she (the cow) hasa 
white spot on her forehead; o'n bhlàr gu’bharr, 
from the ground to its top. 

blàr, -aire, a. White-faced, having a white 
forehead peuple! to cows and horses.) An t- 
each Dar, the white-faced horse. 

blar,(AH) v.a. Chip timber roughly with an 
axe or adze. 2 Hew a stone sligntly. 

——aidh, -aidh, s.m. Blaze, rongh chipping of 
wood. 2AH Houga hewing of stone. 

— ag, -Aiy, -An, 8. f. Wh te-faczd cow or mare. 
2** White spot on the face o: cat la, An gobh- 
al na blàraig, between the legs of the white-fa- 
ced cor. 

—an, -din, s.m. dim. of blàr. Little plain 
field. 2 Simatllevel spot. 35 Glade. 4ff Lit- 
tle moss, 

———As, -aiS, -an, 8.m. White spot on the face of 
an animal. 








blar-c'1a09,(AH) san Snuw-baell fight. 

—— -faiatnachd, AH) s.m Confusion, chaos. 

—— -fola, ALI) s.m. Place where catt.e used to 
be bled annually. 

—— -gealachaidh, s.m. Bleaching-field. 

—— iachd, see blar-thiathachd. 

——— Anoine, s.m.  Peat-inoss. 

—— -modna,tt see blè -inóine. 

blas, -ais, sn. Taste. 2 Savonr. 8 Flavour. 4 
Relish. 5 Particle, the least part. 6 Experi- 
ence. Am bheil blas air voalazan uibhe ? és 
there any taste in the white of an egg f cia mil- 
is leam blas do bnriathran ! how sweet are thy 
words io my taste ! is don’ am blas a th’ air, 
it has a bad taste; chan 'eil blas dheth an 
seo. there is not a particle of it here ; tha blas 
na meal’ air do phògan, thy kisses taste of ho- 
ney (lit. the taste of honey is on thy kisses);do 
bheul air bias an t-siucair, thy lips are as 
s vert as sugar ; is fheàrr blas an teine na blas 
na gainne, better the taste of fire than the taste 
of want—said when food is served very hot ; 
E déidh na h-uile blas(d), after all "e said and 
one, 

blas, -ais, see blaths. 

——Achd, 5. f. ind. Tasting, act of tasting. 

—ad, -aid, 8.m. Tasting, act of tasting. 2 
Bit. 2 Drop. Gun am blasad, without tasting 
them. A’ , pr. pt. of blais. [Cha chuala 
mi blasad dheth—for cha chuala mi guth 
dbeth—lit. I have not heard a taste of it; I 
have heard nothing of it—Sleat, Skye. J.M.] 

——adh, -aidh, s.m. Tasting, act oi tasting. A’ 
b—, pr. pt. of blais. 

——ardaich,* s.f. Smacking with the lips. 2 
Tasting with a relish. . 

blasbheum, St gen.sing. -bhéim, see blais-bheum. 

~—_—_——~-—ach,** -aiche, a. see blais-bheumach. 

blasd, see blas. 

blasda, a. Delicious, savoury, tasty. 2 Well- 
tasted. 3 Tasteful. 4* Agreeable. 5 Elo- 
quent. 6**Seasonet. Dean dhomh biadh 
biasda, make me savoury meat; briathran blas- 
da, eloquent or agrveable words. 

blasdachd, s. f. Sweetness, savouriness. 2 
Yastefulness. 3*Agreeubleness. 

blasdag, s. f. Sweet-mouthed female. 

blasd’or, see blasda. 

tb:asgaoin, s. f. Skull. 

biasmhoire, comp. of blasmhor. 
sweet. 

-—-achd, s.Jf. Sweetness. 


More or most 


2 Tasteful- 





ness. 

-—ad, -eid, s.m. Increase of sweetness 
or savouriness. A' dol am blasmhoiread, 
growing more and more savoury. 

blasmhor, -oire, a. Savoury, tasty. 2 Sweet. 3 
Tasteful. 

blas-phog, -oig, -an, s. f. Sweet kiss. 

blataich, see blaitich. 

blàth, -aith, -a, 8.7. 
Bloom. 3 Foliage. 





Flower, blossom. 2 
4 Colour, hue. 5 Fruit. 
6 Effect, consequence. 7 Mark, stain. 8 
Form, manner. 9 Devotion. 10 Praise. 11 
ttGreen field. 12{{Sea. 13 see blàlh.—Ged 
nach toir an crann-fige uaith blàth, although 
the fig-tree shall not blossom ; fo làn bhlàth, 
in full bloom ; thig e ’mach mar bhlàth. Ae 
shall come out as a flower ; bithidh a bhlàth 
ort, the (lit. its) effects will be seen in your 
case ; is léir a’ bhlàth ort, the (lit. its) conse- 
quences are obvious in your case ; daraig a’s 
guirme blàth, an oak of the greenest foliage ; 
biath a dh'fhuirich air na cupaichean, the 
stain that remained on the cups; blàth nan 
denr mu'n tig au iilo, th» drops show by their 
appearance that œa Bou i8 coming ; blàth 


1.0 


bleid 


fearra-dhris 's a’ choilleig, the hve of the 

briar-rose in the bud. 

blàth, -àithe, a. Warm. 2 Warm-hearted. $ 
Pieasant, kind. 4 Affectionate. 5** rarely 
White, clean. Is biàih anail na màthar, 
warm is the mother’s breath; tha e gé 
bhiàth, Ae is affectionate enough ; am aine 
blath a steach, warm (tender or pleasant } 
thoughts within; gu bog, blàth, snuy und 


warm. 
blàthach, -aich, s. f. Buttermilk. Deoch blàth- 
aich, a drink of buttermilk. 
——,** a. Efflorescent, flowery. 
adh, -aidh, s.m. Warming, fomenting. 
2 Cherishing, 3 Hatching. A’ b—. pr.part. 
of blàthaich. 
——ail,** a. Efflorescent, flowery. 
fblàthadh, s.m. Smoothness. 2 Politeness. 
blà.haicb, pr.part. a’ blàthachadh, v.a. Warm, 
foment. 2 Cherish. 3 Hatcb. 4**Air, f** 
Flower, as a plant. [thig fo bhlàth is better. J 
6**Polish, smoothe. 
-— —— ——te, vt. part. of blàthaich. 
fomented, &c. 
blàthaid, comp. ofa. blàth. 
blath-aigneach,* a. Enthusiastic. 
fblà:haile, s.m. Mark of a wound. 
biathan, -ain, s.m. Sinall flower. 
—— — —Ach, a. see batt mhor. 
blàthas, -ais, see blàtos. 
blà:h-büriachrach, a cne, a. Gentle, kind in 


Warmed, 


2ttTwig. 


speech. 2 Mild, atzectionate. 

-—— -buidhe,} s.» Dandelion, see bearnan- 
Bride. 

-—— -chainnteach, see b'àth-bhriathrach. 

-—— -chridheach,** a. 'l'ender-hearted, affect- 
ionate. 


-—— -fnleasg, -an, s. f. Garland or wreath of 
flowers. 

-—— -fhleasgadh, see blàth-fhleasg. 

fbolath-leig, s. 7. Pumice-ston». 

blàth-leighis, s.m. Any inedicinal plant. 

-—— -mhaiseach, a. In the biouin of beauty. 

blath-inhial,((AF) s.m. see tbleidh-mniol. 

blàthmhor, -oire, a. Blossomy, flowery. 

blath-mhor, -oire, a. Warm. 

biàtn-nam-bodach, -a-, s.m. Red poppy, 
meilbtieag. 

-—— -obair, -oibre, -richean, s. f. Embroidery, 
variegated needlework. 

.—— -olbreachadh, -aidh, s.m. Embroidering. 

-—— -oibrich, pr, part. a’ blàth-oibreachadh, 
v.a. Embroider. : 

blàths, -aiths, s.m. Warmth, heat. 2 Kindli- 
ness, affectionate disposition. Thig tits agus 
blàths, mildness and warmth shail come. 

blàths-inntinn,* s.m. Enthusiasm. 

fbleachd, see bliochd. 2 Cows. 

air,-ean, s.m. Soothing flattering fellow. 
aireachd, s. f. Flattery, soothing, cajo- 


seo 


ling. 

bleagh, (ffbleaghan) v.a. Milk, draw milk. Is 
ann as a ceann à bhleaghar a’ bho, you milk 
a cow just as you feed her (lit. it 1s from ner 
head that a cow ts milked. see bleoghainw. 

bleaghan, -ain, s.m. Dibble used for digging in 
sand for shell-fish ; also for planting Kale. 2 
iWorthless tool. 

bleaghainn, v.a. see bleoghainn. 

bleanach,(A F) s. f. Full-faced cow. 

tbleaszhanach,** a. Emulygent. 

bleath, v.a. 

ach, -aiche, a. see bleith—. 

——— -ghlüineach, -eiche, 

t mhor, a. Fruitful, productive, prolific. 

bleid, -e, ». f. Imper. (enee, 2 d: esting, so- 
liciting. 3 Cajoliug. 4**Larceny. 6**invy. 6 








bleid 1 


01 bliochd-^ochain 





**Xpite. 7**Adulation. $8*Importunity. 
bleid-chuirm,** s. f. Junket. 

—- , see bleideil. 

-——ealachd, see bleidireachd. 

-—ear,** -eir, s.m. see bleidir. 

———eil, -e, a. Impertinent, troublesome, teaz- 
ing. 2** Pilfering, thievish. 3** Invidious, 

spiteful. 4* Begging in a sly way. Fear 
ubh dana, fear ba. bleideil, a black-haired 
man is bold, a fair-haired man impertinent. 
fbleidh, -e, s. /. Cup, goblet. 
ir, see bladair. 

t mhiol, s. f. Whale. 

bleidich, v.a, Intrude. 

bleidir, -e, -ean, s.m. Beggar, teazing petition- 
er. 2 Impertinent fellow. 3 Coward. 4** 
Pilferer. 5(AF)Wolf. Urram a' bhleidire 
do'n stràcair, the sneak's deference to the 
swaggerer. 

bleidir,ff ee Buzzard, see clamhan. 

pn, Begin a genteel way, importune. 

2 Tease, trouble. 

each, a. Obtrusive. 

——eachd, s. f. Begging, beggary, solicita- 
tion. 2 lmpertineuce. 3 Obtrusion, intru- 
sion. 4**Thievishness. 6*importunity. B. 
mholaidh, impertinent praise. 

bleidir-molach,§ s.m. Rough-legged buzzard— 
buteo lagopus. 

‘riabhach,{ s.m. Honey-buzzard, 

clamhan. 

-tonach,7? see b— -molach. 

tblein, s. f. Harbour for boats. 

bleith, pr.pt. &' bleith, v.a. Grind, pulverize. 2 
Make meal. Gabh na clachan-muilinn agus 
b:cith min, take the mill-stones and grind meal. 

bleith, -e, s.f. Grinding, pulverizing. A’ b—, 
pr. pt, of bleith, Luchd bleith, grinders, 

millers 

each, -eiche, a. Grinding, that grindeth. 

eadh, -eidh, s.m. Grinding, pulverizing. 

—— -ghiü:.neach, a. In-kneed, knock-kneed. 
-nhiol, see bleidh-mhiol. 

te, past pt. of bleith. Ground. 

b!eodhaiun, see blecghainn. 

b eodhban, -ain, s.m. Wheel-barrow. 

bleodhann, see bleoghann. 

bleoghainn, pr.pt. a’ bleoghann, v.a. Milk. 

bleoghann. LF Milking. 2 Act of milking. 
A’ bleoghann a’ chruidh, milking the cows; cu- 
man bleoghainn, a milk-pail, AT b—, pr. 
part. of bleoghainn. 

bleomhnach,** s.m. Sniveller. 

bieth, see bleith. 

-——,(AF) Whale. 

fbieun, -a, sm. see blian. 

bliadhna, pl. chan, [& -ichean] s. f. Year, the 
space oí a year. Eadarseo agus ceann bliadh- 
na, within a year ; an ceann bliadhna, in a 
year’s tine ; Bliadhn’ a’ Phrionnsa, the com- 
mon name among Highlanders for 1745-6 (lit. 
the Prince’s year) ; bliadhna Chuilfhodair, 
the year in which the Ba.tle of Culloden was 
Ces (1746) ; am bliadhna, this year; a’ 
bhliadhna ur, the New Year ; a’ bhliadhn’ an 
àn seo, (bliadhna roimh ’n am seo-- D.M.) 
tris time last year. [Generally used in the 
singular after numerals followed by the plu- 
ral of other nouns, as, còig bliadhna, 5 years. | 

bliadhnach, -aich, -aichean, s. m. Yearling, 
year-old beast. 2 see blianach. 

-—, -aiche, a. Miserable. 

- —85,** -nis, 3.m. Annuity, 

— —— —-.,.—8il, see bliadhnail 

bviadhna-chain,** s. f. Aunuity. 

















see 




















bliadhna-leum, s. f. Leap-year. 

blialuin, -uim, s.m. Confused speech, stam- 
mering. 

blian, pr.part. a’ blianadh, v.a. Baskin the 
sun—Skye. ZAC Blanch. 

——, "Bn a. Lean, starved, wanting flesh. 2 
Meagre. 3 Insipid. 

——, ain, [& **blein] 3.2. Flank, groia, belly 
Làimh ris a’ bhlian, near the tark. 

——ach, e. Miserable. I. bliauach Nollaig 
gun sneachd, miserable is the snowivss Christ- 
mas. 

——ach, -aich, -aichean, s. f Meagre, tough or 
lean carcase. 2 Slow, inactive persos. ZAC 
Fish, bird, or beast that has died from want 
or disease, 4 Exhausted land, or land cov- 
ered with drift-sand.—Uist. 5tLean flesh. 
Leanaidh blianach ris na sràbhau, vean ;lesÀ 
cleaves to straw,—said of worthless people 
who &adhe:e to one another 

—— —&dh, -aidh, s.m. Basking. A’ b—, pr.part. 
of blian. 

blianag, (J.M.) s.f. Green level spot of land. 
Is minic a bha sül-chruthaich air bliadnnag 
bhoidhich, a quaymire is often seen on & bon- 
ny green level spot —applied to people whose 
character looked jair at a distance. A person 
walking or riding across the country wight 
be tempted to cross the blianag, but would 
soon find himself in a quagmire. 

bligh, see bleagh. 

tblimh, at, Sp:ttle. 2 Froth of a dead body. 

tblin,tt s. f. Eyelashes of a corpse. 
blincean,**-ein, s.m. Torch, üambeau. 2 Blink. 
blinn, see blimh. 

blivch,$ see tliochan. 

tolioch, s.f. see blaoch. 

blioch vi, fe ei, Corn marigold, see b 1e bhuidhe. 

biiovhan,(Mei & D., &$)-a1u, s.m. Dog aspho- 
del, or yellow marsh aspaodel,—n2narthecium 
ossifragum. ` (illust. 54. 

biiochd, $. f. ind. Milk. 2 Milkiness. 3 Pro- 
duce of cows. 4** Profit arising from selling 
miik, dairy produce. 5 AC Skimmed milk, 
sour milk, milk that has lost any of its origi- 
nai character. 6 AC Whey when in the curd. 
7 AF Kine giving milk. 

ach, -aiche, a. Milky, lacteal. 2 Milk- 
producing, giving plenty of milk. Chinu an 
spréidh gu bliochdach, the cattle became teem- 
ing with milk ; an coire bliochdach, the mik- 
producing dell. 

ar, a. see bliochdach. 

arachd,** see bliochdmhorachd. 

as, -ais, 8.7n. Tendency to milk, lactes- 














cence. 

bliochd-^och^dan, 8.m. Corn milk-plant, see 
bliochd fochain. 

is Lä 


tp 
B 
4^ a 





I 





56. Bliochd-fochain. 


54. Bliochan. 


bliochd-fochain 


us arvensis. (illust. 55.) | 

bliochd-fothannan, Cow milk-plant, see bliochd : 
fochain. 

blicendmhor, see bliochdach. 

achi, s. f. ind. Abundance of 
milk, milkiness. 

bliogh, see bleagh. 

blionach, -aich, see blianach. 

bli mach,f{ -aidh, s.m. Baskiug.—1sles. 

thliosan, -9'n, s.m. Artic oke, see farrusgag. 

bliotsan,3 e am. Wall iet- 

tuce — lactuca muralis. 








ands. 

blob, a. see blobach. 

——ach, -aiche,a. Blubber- 
lipped, thick-lipped. 

——achd,** s.f.ind. Defor- 
mity of blubber-lips. 

tolobaran, -ain, s.m. Stam- 
merer. 2** Blubber-lip- 

ed person. 

1bloc, a. Round, orbicular. 

tbloc, bluie, s.m. see ploc. 

blocadh,** s.m. Crack, 





56. Bliotsan. 


(noise. ) 

blocan, -ain, s.m. dim. of bloc, (for ploc) 2 
AF see blaghan. 

tblochbharr, v.a. Turn in a lathe. 

t»lochd, s. see bliochd. 

1blodh, see bloigh. 

+biodh, v. see bloighdich. 

tblodhaire, s.m. Battery. 

Llog, see blocan. 

hloide, ( for bloighdean.) 

bloidean ,, E 

bloidh, see bloigh. 

bloigh, e, -ean, 8.f. Half or part of anything. 
2 see bloighd. Bloigh "oan cadal, some 


oy. 

bloighd, -ean & -ichean, et see bloigh. 2 
Fragment, po€ ec 8 **Share, portion. A 
shleagh 'na bloighdibh, Ais spear in splinters. 

eachadh, -aidh, s.m. Halving, dividing, 

pon ia in pieces. A’ b—, pr.pt. of bloigh- 
ich. 








eachas, -ais, 8. f Act of dividing 

eag,-eig,-an, 8./ Little fragment or 
splint.r. 

-- — — ean, pl. of bloigh. Fragments, splinters. 

-ear,** -eir, s.m. Battery 2 Place from 
which an attack is made. 

bloighdich, pr. pt. a’ bloighdeachadh, v.a. Di- 
vide, break in pieces, cut asunder 

b'oighdichean, pl. of bloigh. 

bleigheach,a. In pieces,in halves. 2ttDivisible. 

—— —— — , 8. f. Part, portion, instalmeit. 

bloigheachadh, -aidh, san, & pr. part. 
bloighdeachadh. 

bloigheachas, -ais, 

bloigheag, see bloighdeag. 

bio'greil,a. see b'oigheach. 

bloighich, pr.pt. a’ bloigheadh, see bloighdich. 

bloing,** s.f. Bubble. 

bloinigeach,* a. Piump, soft, fat. 
ioinigean, s.m. Any plant with curled or crisp- 
ed leaves. 

-gharaidh, 8. m. Spinach—spinacia 








see 


see bloighdeachas. 


oleracea. 
bloinigein,tt s.m. Plump, fat child. 
blómas, -ais, s.m. Ostenration, pomp. 
ach, -aicne, a. Boastful. 2 Fond of 
show, ostentatious. 
lonag, -aig,s f. Fat, suet, lard. 
ach, -aiche, a. Full of suet. 2 Greasy. 
3 Abonnding in fat. 
—— -aich,** v.a. Lard. 





on 





102 


AT rare in the High- | 


bobeloth 


blonag-rotha, s.f. Coom on a wheel. 

tblor, -oir, &m. Nois-, loud noise. 

1—— ach, -aiche, a. Clamorons, noisy. 

t——ach, -aich, s.m. Clamorous noisy fellow. 

+——achan, ai, s.m. see blorach. 

tblos, a. Manifest, open, plain. 

Häre vn. Sound a horn or trumpet. 2 Ex- 
plode. 

blosg, s.m. Congregation. ?ffLight. 

--——ach, -aich, s.m. Clown, rustic. 

1blosgadh,**-aidh, s.m. Congregation. 2Sound, 
report. 

tolosgair, -ean, s.m. Collector. 

fblosg-mhaor, Crier at court. 2 Collector. 

tblot, s.m. Cave, den, cavern. 

tblotach, s.m. **Cave, den. 2 Cave-dweller. 

tulotach,** a Full of dens or caverns. 2 Like 
a den or cavern. 

blubach.tt a. Stammering. 

tbhluch, s.m. Fatness. 

tbluirc, s.m. Crumb, crumbs, fragment, frag- 


2 Voice. 


ments. 
tb.uirid, a. Pinched. 
blunag, see blonag. 


Tolusar, -air, s.m. Tumult, outery, noise, 

bo ! int Bo! bo ! word to excite terror in chil- 
dren. 

bo ! bo! int. Strange ! wonderful ! 

bó, s. f irreg. Cow. 2**rarely fawn. Decline 


thus :— Sing. Plur, 
Nom. ó, a, 
Gen. bai or boin bó 
Dat. ban? or bó, bà, 
Voc. a bhó! 
[ ime form of Gen. bà, * of Dat. boin, 


bó adhairceach, a horned cow. 
bé-nlinidh, buffalo. 
bó biailg-fhionn. white-bellied cow. 
bó bhainne, mileh-cow, 
bó bhreac, spotted cow. 
bó bhiadhta, AG) “ma't.” for killing. 
bó chcann-fhionn, white-fac-d cow. 
bó chais-fiionn, whit -'0oted cow. 
bó düruim-fhionn, white-backed cow. 
bó ghamhna (AF) farrow cow. 
bó gheamhraidh, winter “mart.” 
bó ghlas. grey cow 
bó lavich, cow in calf. 
bó liath.** grey cow,—grey with age. 
bó mhaol, cow without horns. 2 Polled cow. 
bó riabhach, brindled cow. 
bó *hea:g.cow not giving milk. 2 Barren cow. 
Is minic ai ha rath air aona bhó na cail’ ch, 
the old woman's oily cow hax often been luky. 
[Many of th» Hebridean blessing, and 
charms for cattle begin ‘tai t-edlar a rinn 
Calum-cille dh'aona bhó na caillich,” the 
cha. m given by st. Columba for the old wo- 
man's only cow.) Ciù n ris a’ bhó is garbh ris 
an each, gentle to the cow and karsii io the 
horse—supposed to be the proper ureatinent; 
dh’fralbb e leis a bnoin.(J M) he depe ted with 
the cow; bhnail e am bata air a’ bhoin, he 
struck the sow with thestag. 
boag, -aig,-an, see bodhig. 
bó-ailuidh, s. f. Buffaio. 2AF Furious ox 
bob, AF s.m. Worm, caterpillar destructive to 
bushes, &c. 
bobag,tt -aig, $.m. Boy, chum. [Used chiefly 
in the Veeative case,—a bhobaig! a Lhobag- 
ain di 2 Fool—Caraid nan Gaiiheul 
bobai.h,(AG) s.m. “Papa.” —Sutk’d. 
Loban, -ain, sm. Term of affection for a boy. 
2++Godfather, term of contempt. 3 “Papa.” 
boban,f -ain, s.m. Dobbin. 
tbobeloth, Gaelic alphabet. 


bobgnenach 


$bobgurnach, s.» Blast. 

bouh, -a, 8m. Fryht. 

bó-hhainne,(AF) s. /. Milch-cow. 

tbó-bhaith, s. f. Cow slaughter. 

toobhdach, s.m. Pimp. 

fbobhdag, s.m. Bawd. 

bobhlaireachd, 8. f. iud. Bowling. 

bobhstair, -e, -eau, sm. Gaelic spelling of bols- 
ter. pun 

bo ! bo! ** int. Strange ! wonderful 1 

bobug, see boban. 

boc, s.m. Deceit, fraud. 2 Blow, box, stroke. 

boc, buic, $.m. Buck, roe-buck. 2 He-goat. 
SAF Entire horse. 4**terin of ridicule for & 
2 Boc-earb, roe-buck ; fichead boo, twenty 
bucks. 

boc, pr.part. a’ bocadh, 
a deer or roe. 

boc, pr.part. a’ i.ocadh, v.n. Swell, blister. 2** 
Bloat, puff. 3 Grow turgid. 4* Infiame. 

bòc. -a, -an, sm. Pimple, pustule. 

bocach, -aiche, a. Like a roe-buck. 2 Abound- 
ing in roe-bucks. A’ Bhealltuinn bhocach, 
ro--producing May. 

bocach, -aiche, a. Bluff. 

bocadh, -aidh, s.m. Skipping, as a deer. 
Discussion. A’ b—, pr.part. of boc. 

bòcadh, -aidh, s.m. Eruption, blister, swelling. 
2 Frown. A’ b—, pr.part. of boc. 


v.n. Leap or skip, as 


Qxe 


bocaid, s. f. Whelk. 
fbocaide, } 8. f. pl. Studs or bosses of a 
fbocaidean,** shield. 


bócaidh, -ean, s.m. Terrifying object. 
-fhaileag,(AG) s.f. Wild rose-berry 

bocail, s. f. ind. Skipping. 2 Of, or pertaining 
to, à roe-buck. 3**Ostentation. 

b cain, ein, see boicionn. 

bó-cainneal, see bó-choinneal. 

bocam ort ! tt int. Threat to children. 

bòcan, -ain, s. m. Hobgoblin, sprite, spectre. 
2 Terrifying object, apparition. 3 Larva of 
insects. 4**Bugbear. 

bócan,tf -annan, s.m. Pimple, pustule. 

bocan, -ain, s.m. see bacan. 2 see bochdan- 
bearrach. 3 Little buck. 

¢tbocan, v.a. Bend, make crooked, 

bocanach, -aiche, a. Hooked, bent. 2t+ Of, or 
belonging to, little bucks. 

bocan-bearrach, see caochag. 

bocan-biorach,1] see caochag. 
-loin,fl s.m. Snipe, see gabhar-athair. 
bocan-rocais, (JGM) s.m. Scarecrow. 
boc-Bealltuinn,(AF) s.m. Wild or unmanage- 
able entire horse, said to be wilder about 
midsummer. 

boc-caol,(AC) s.m. (lit. a slim buck) Roe-buck. 

boc-cluigeineach,(JGM) s.m.  Bell-wether. 

boc-earba, buic-, s.m. Roe-buck. Cho luath ri 

3 emer ap as swijt as a roe. 
oc-ghabhar, VS 

Beo, } see boc-goibhre. 

boc-goibhre, buic-, s.m He-goat. 

boc glas,(AF) s.m. Large dog-fish. 2 Shark. 

boch.* s.m. Great happiness or joy, rejoicing, 
ecstacy.— Isles. 

-——, v. see boc. 

—— ! int. Hey day ! 

bochail -chala,a. Lively, animated. 2 Nimble. 
3 Proud, strutting. 4 Showy, ostentatious. 
5 Happy, overjoved. 

bochalachd, s.f.ind. Liveliness, animation. 2 
Pride of dress. 3 Joy, extreme happiness. 

buchan, -ain, s.m. see bothan. 2(AH) Vain, 
affected, impudent person. 

achd, (AH) 8.7.ind. Vanity in dress or 





103 





fbochd.ff s.m. 





| bochdas, -ais, 


bochduinn 





ta, a. Turgent. 

bochar. J M) sam, Mud, as of a cattle fold late 
in harvest, when the groumt is turaed iuto 
soft mud by the feet of the vuttle. 

Sch o Fullof mud. 

bòchd, v.n. see boc. 21fBud. spring. 

thochd, v.a. see bochdiunuic.a. 

boclid, a. e, Poor. 2 Needy. 3 Wretched. 4 
Sick, sickly. 5 Sad. 3 Lean, lank. 7 Dear. 
Ni làmh na leisge bocha, the hand of iaziness 
maketh poor; tha neach ann a leigeas air 
bhith bochd, there ts such that pretends to he 
poor ; is bochd an gnothach e, it is a sad ajf- 
&ir;is bochd nach d'fhuair sinn e, it is & 
pity we did not get it ; an duine bochd ! the 
dear creature ! is bochd a thachair dha, 
sadly it happen-d to him; tha e gu bhochd, be 
is sick ; crodh bochd, tear cattle; is fhearr a 
bhith bochd na bhith breugach, better be voor 
than false ` leaghaidn am bron am bochd an- 
am, (or an t-anam bochd), sorrow melts the 
miserable, 

bochi, a [ AC gen. sing. & n.pl.—Isles. ] s.m. 
The pop, the parish poor. 2 Poor person. 
Coiunichidn am beartach agus am bochd a 
clé.le, the rich and poer meet together; cuid de 
büochdaibh ua tire, some of ihe poor of the 
land ; a’ roiunairgiod nam bochd, distributing 
the poor's funds ; am bochd is an nochd, the 
poor and the naked; treabhadh nain dvochd, the 
tillage of the pour, [Declined like boc, buck in 
Barra, &c. Is misde na buic a bhi onar, the 
poor are the worse nf being numerous ` na beirt 
a’ dol a snas, na buic .’ dol a sios, the rich 
going up, the poor going down.—AC 

Breach. 2 Fire. 3 Reaping, 





cuttiug down. 
bochdadh, see bócadh. 
bochdail tt -e, a. Timid, turgid. 
bochdainn, s.f.ind. Poverty. 2 Trouble. 3 Mis- 


chief. 4 Bad luck. 5** Mishap. 6 The De- 
vil. Chuirsine gus a’ bhochdainn, that re- 


duced him to poverty ; thainig e gu bochdainn, 
he was reduced to extreme poverty ; is ann air- 
san a tha blàth na bochdainn, he has every 
sign of «extreme poverty about him; thig am 
misgear agus am geócair gu bochdainn, the 
drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty; 
chaidh a’ bhochdainn uile ort a nis, you are 
in a sad plight now; thàinig bochdainn an 
rathad an teaghlaich, the family was visited 
with affliction, or sickness ; ciod a’ bhochdainn 
a rug ort ? what the mischief came over you ? 
mar a tha a’ bhochdainu an dan dhomh, as 
my bad luck wowld have it; mar a bha a’ 
bnocidainn anu, as had luck would have it ; 
ann am bochdainn, in trouble; gu'n gabh a’ 
bhochdainn thn ! plague take you ! teagaisg 
na bochdainn ! what a preposterous idea ? leth 
na bochdainn ! what a remarkable, dreadful 
thing ! 

bochdainneach,** a. Causing trouble, poverty, 
or misery. 





—— d, SE Same meanings as 
bochdainn. 
boebdainnich, v.a. 
case poverty. 
bóchdan, see bócan. 
bochdan, n.pl. of s. bochd. 
bochdan-bearrach, -aich, 
-beuc ach, -aich, 
-biorrach, -aich, 
sm, Poverty, indigence. 2tf 
Bochdas agus beartas, poverty 


Lhnpoyerish, make poor, 


2 see caochag. 


see caochag. 


Leanness. 
and riches. 


ninuers. 2 Aftectation. 5 Folly. 4 Linpu- | bochdrach,** -aich, s.m. Beggar. 


dence. 


bochduinn, see bochdainn. 


bochnadh 


strait, 2 Mouth of a river. 
bó-choilleag, 
(Gaelic spelling of bucolic.) 


bé-choinneal,§ art Mullein (it. cow's candle) 


see cuingeal Muire. 
tbocht, s.m. see tbochd. 


boch-thonn, -thuinne, pl. -thonnan, s.f. Surge, 


billow, swelliug wave. 
buch-thonnan, n.pl. of boch-thonn. 
bech-thuinne, gen.sing. of boch-thonn. 


hbochuin, (AC) 5$. f. The sea, ocean. 2 Ripple 


at the bow of a moviug boat. 


PF (AC) s.f. Swelling, bursting, protru- 
ding. 
-Muire,(AC) st (lit. the swelling of 


Mary.) Month of May. 
bo -roin, s.m. Prawn. 2 Shrim 


p 
boc-ruadh, AC) s.m. (lit. red buck) Roebuck. 
Box, coffer, trunk, 
21[Blow. Bara bocsa, a rim- 


borsa. pl. -aichean sm. 
little chest. 
mod burrow. 
bocsa,}s.m. Box-tree or plant, see aigh-ban. 
bocsach, a. Boxen. 


an, TT -ain, 8.2. (dim. of bocsa.) Casket. 


boesadh, -aidh, s.m. Boxing. 

boc-saic,fl s.m. Suipe, see gobhar-athair 

bocsaich, va. Beat, thump, pelt, cuit, buffet. 

-—_———ean, n.pl. of boesa. 

bocsaid,ts.f Thump. 

bocsair, -ean, s.m. Boxer. 

bocsa-na-mionna, s.m. \Witness-box. 

boe-seang, Sam, (lit. slender buck) Roebuck. 

bocta, a. Blown. 

boc-thonn,tt s.f. Swelling wave. 

-- ————ach. tt a. Delougiug to swelling waves. 

bocum ort ! inf. see bocan ort ! 

bod TT s.m. Mentuia, membrum virile. 2 Tail. 

boda, (AF) s.m. Redshank (bird.) 

bodach, -aich, s.m. Old or churlish man. 2 Rus- 
tic, countryman. 3 Sorry fellow. 4 Mean- 
ness of spirit, niggardliness. 5 Mutchkin, 
liquid measure a little less than imperial 
pint. 6 Spectre. 7 Cod-fish. 8 AF Lesser 
seal. 9¢{Familiar term in addressing a youth. 
10(JM) originally married man without fam- 
ily. Chan eil e 'na bhodach, he is not a 
churl; bodach uisge-beatha, a mutchkin of 
whisky (half a bottle—the mean man would 
grudge to tuy a whole one. It was “biatach 
a’ bhotuil,” the man who divide’ the bottle 
among his friends that was praised of old.J M : 
beiridh na bodaich ort, the bogies will (a? 
holu of you; is e a chuireadh am bodach á 
feara bhitheadh teann, it (whisky) would 
drive meanness out of a miser or churl ` sliob 
bodach is sgróbaidh e thu, buail bodach i- 
thig e gu 'd làimh, stroke a churl and he will 
scratch you, strike him and he will come to 
your hand ; bodach leth bhaireach, the half- 
goal man, the old one who has to change sides 
when his side wins, an individual between two 
bands of players ; gean a’ bhodaich—as a 
bhroiun, thechurl’s suavity—off his stomach— 
this seems to mean that the churlish, greedy 
old mau is never pleased except when his bel- 
ly is well filled with good things ; is tric a 
tha suaib chuthaich air leauabh bodaich, 
there was often a touch of madness on an old 
man’s child. 

bodachail, e, a. Churlish, boorish, clownish, 
inhospitable. 2 Slovenly. 3 Like an old man. 

bodachan, -ain, r.m. Little old man. 2 in deri- 
ston squat young fel.ow. 

bodachas, -ais, s.m. Churlishness. 2 Brutality. 
3 Ruggedness of manner. 


bodach-dubh,} s.m. Children’s name for ribwort 


104 
+bochnadh, -2idh, st The sea, narrow sea, 












s f. Pastoral, rural dialogue. 


bodh 


in Perthshire and Argyllshire. see slàn lus. 
bo:ach-fhleasgaich, s.m. Bachelor. 
bodach-Gallda, (AH) s.m. Lowland (Scotch) far- 
mer, applied irrespective of age. 
bodach-gorin,} sm Field scabious. see gille- 
guirmein. 


bodach-nan-claigionn,? 8.m. Yellow rattle, see 
modhalan buidhe. 

bodaen-oidhche,* s.m. Tawny owl, see comha- 
chag uhonn. 

bodach-rocais,(AH) s.m. Scare-caow. 

bodach-ruadh, -aich-ruaidh, -aich-ruadha,s.m. 
Cod-fish. 2(JM) Codling. 

bodag, -aig, -an, 8. P. Rage, anger, short fit 
of passion. 2 Yearling calf. 3 Heifer. 4** 
Bawd. 

bo'iagac, s.f. Heiferthat wants bulling. 

bodagach, a. Apt to fly into a passion. 2 
Like a heifer. 3 Like a bawd, wanton. 

t-———d,** 3. f. ind. Rage, anger. 2 Rage 
for copulation, furor interinus. 

bod-agh, (AF) s.m. Heifer tit for breeding. 

boilair. -e, -ean, s.m. Debauchee. 

bodaireachd,** s. f Fornication. 

bodan, -aiu s,m. Membrum puerile. 

[^N 








68. Bouun-coille. 


59. Bodan-dvbh. 


bodan,$ s.m. Lesser reed-mace or cat’s tail— 
typha augustifolia. 
b idan,} s.m. Cat's tail grass or timothy—phleum 
pratense. [This has the same nawe in 
3aelie as typha augustirolia, as wel as 
phleum arenarium ard phleum alpinum.] 
hodan-coille,3 s. m. Wood sanicle—sanicula 
enrop.ea. 
budan-dubh,} s. m. Great reed-mace—typha 
latifolia. 2 Yorkshire sanicle (McL & D) 
Also called cuigeal-nam-ban-sith, and bog 
bhuine, which is not cor-ect.3 
o:ilan-measgain,? s.m. Bog-violet, see lus-a’- 
bhainne. 2**Butterwort. 
f^odar, see bodhar. í 
bod-chrann,-ainn, s.m. Crupper (in harness. 
bod-.à-bhioran, s.m. Year-old hart. 2 Kin 
of sail in a small boat. ] 
bod-dubh-a/-mbüsgain,(AF) s.m. Black-skinned 
apoult-fish, pouter fish. 2 Hose-fish. 
ER see badh. 


bodha 


bodha,* s^. Rock over which the waves 
break. 2 Dreaker over sunaeu rocks. 

bothag, -aig, -an, s. f. Common sandpiper, sea- 
lark, see luatharan. 2AF Hiuged plover. 3 
(AG) The bellow oue cow gives when gored 
Ly another. 

Lodhaig, -e, -ean, £. /. The human body. 2** 
Skin of the human body. Stti'erson. 4(JM) 
Hulk of a vessel. Òigh a's gloine bodha'g, a 
maid o? the fairest skin. 

bodhair, pr. part. a bodhradh, v.a. De:fen, 
stun with ucise. Cha whór nach do bhodh- 
air an t-òglach ini le ’raivheiceil, the fellow 
aimvust stunned m» with his roaring ; na bodh- 
air miie d’ dhrabhiuinn, do not stun me with 
your absurdity. 

bodhair. -aire, s.m. Murrain in cattle. 

bed aire, see buidhre. 

bo,huinu,-wn sam. The hain, thich. 2 Breach, 
stab, 3 Cali ofleg. 4ff¢Breast. 5(JM) Part 
of the belly of inan or beast below the navel, 
abdomen. 

bolhar, buidhre [& bodhaire] a. Deaf, dull 
of hearing. 2 Dull, heavy. Ach mar dhuine 
bodhar cha chluinn 1uise, but as a dea) man 1 
ao not hear. 

balhar, -air, sm. Deaf person. Tha na bodh- 
air a’ cluinntinn, the deaf hear; cluinnidh am 
bod'arfuann an airs, a daf mun hears 
tue sound of money ; có a rinn am bodhar? 
who made the «cuf ? tha na geòidh bodhar a’s 
t-khoghair, the geese are deus in autumn (they 
do not want to hear.) 

ach, -aiche, a. Deafening, stunning 
with noise. 

hodhar-chluasail, -e, s. f. Dullness in hearing. 

¢bodh-arfach,}{ s.a. Descroying of cows. 

buduar-fhead,-a, s.f Dull, heavy sound, as of 
whistling wind. 

ach, -aiche, a. Dull sounding. 

dodhar-fhuaim, -e, s.n. [& f.] Slow, heavy, hol- 
low sound, 

———— ——-— neach, -eiche, a. Dull sounding. 

dodhth, see bobh. 

Ló-dnearc.) s.f. Red whortleberry, cowberry, 
see 1us-n&m-braoileac. 

todhrach,** a. lníec ol with the murrain. Bó 
b ódlurech, a diseased cow. 

boohiaeh, see bodnar. 

bod .rud,** sm. Degree of deafness. 

bodhradn, -aidh, s.m. Deafening, stunning 
with noise. Tua mi air mo bhodhradh leat, 
you stun me with your noise or importunity. 
A b—, pr.part. of bodhair. 

tboel, s.f. Pith of any stalk. 

bog,** buig, s.m Marsh, fen, swam»y ground. 

bog, buige, a. Sft. 2 Boggy. 3 Tender. 4 
Silly, foolish. 5 Moist, damp. 6 Mellow. 7 
Spiritiess. &**Mweet or soit sounding. 9** 
Tnaid, effeinirate. A ciabh bhig, her soft 
hair ; a’ Pheailtuinn bhog, moist [showery ] 
May; 'fhir bhuig LO effeminate man ! le ’ribb- 
eid bhuig. with his suft-sounding reed ` bris- 
idh an theaugadh big an cneadh, a smooth 
tongue soitens a wound ` brisiin an tea gadh 
bbog an crà:mh, the smooth tongue breaks the 
bone ` àite bow, a place where a person or ani- 
mal ^s apt to sink ;cha’n "eil ann ach duime 
boz, he is only a cricken-hearted fellow ; gu 
by ba snug ami warm: eridhe bog, o 
tender heart; dh’fla.bhe gu bog, balbh, bodl-- 
ar. he sneaked away quietiy, without w word, 
tail between Ze 8. 

bog, pr. part. a’ bogadh, [— a’ bogadan & a 
bogaii] v.a. Dip. steep. 2 Move, agitate. z| 
Bob 4 Wag. 5tt see bogaich. Tha'ncüa' 
bogadh 'carbaill, the doy wags his toi: is 








105 


bor-an-lochain 


fhearr an cà a bhogas 'earbaill na'n cu & 
chuireas dreang air, better is the dog (et 
wags his tail than the doy that «nazis ; "nuwir 
a bhogadh an dram air, when the whisty 
would excite him ; bhogainn anns an alit e, 7 
would vip hün inthe burn, 

bog ach,** -aich, -aichean, s.m. 
mire. 

bogachadh, -aidh, sm. Softening. 2 Making 
tender or mellow. 3*Steeping. 4** Making 
effeni’nate. 6**Softening mito tears. A’ b —, 
won ig of bogaich. Softenirg, making tim. 
id, &c. 

hogachan,f em. Wheat-ear, see bri-cheal. 

bogachan, 8.232. Water-ouzel, see gobha-ui-ge. 

bogadach,** -aich, s.m. see boga wuch. 

bogadaich, -e, sf. Waving. 2 Shaking. 8 Tre- 
wor from heat of passion cr iupatience, 4** 
Continued or frequent bobbing, bo';binz ges- 
ture. 5** Gesture. Anns a bhogadaich, 
bobbing. 

bogadan, -ain, s.m. Shaking. 2 Wagging. 3 Bob- 
bing. 4 Waving. 5 Floating, heayivg, 6** 
Fellow who walks with a fuppish gait, in de 
rision. Tha ai chraobh a’ bogadan, the tree 
waves. A’ b—, pr.part. of bog. 

bogadanaich, s.f. db shaking, wagging, 
or bobbing. 

bogadh, -aidh, s.m. Softening, mollifyinz. 2 
Steeping, dipping. 3* Moistening. 4* Hate 
of sticking fast in the mire. 5 Wageing, bob- 
bing. 6**Sofiness, tenderness, 7**Mellow- 
ness, Chaidh a’ bhó am bogadh, the cow stuck 
fast in the mire ` a’ bogadh ‘earbaill, wac sing 
his tail ; is mithich a i-hith 'bogacdh nan gad, 
it is time to be steeping tue withes, (Ihis siy- 
ing meant * it is time to be going," aud ap- 
plied to the time when withes of osier, Zo, 
were used for fastenings of harness. These 
would become dry aud brittle if laid by for a. 
time, and would require steeping for a wile. 
before taking to hoise, —N.G.F.) A’ b—, pr. 
part. of bog. 

bogadh-leo, s.m. Bumpkin. 

bogag, tf -aig, -an, s.f. Frost-bitten potato. 

bog-a'-ghiosain,** see bug-ghio;an. 

bogaich, pr.part. a’ bogachadh, v.a. & n. Soft- 
en. 2M How. 3 Moisten. 4 Effeminat... 5 
Soften or melt into te:rs, 6 Steep. Bogaich. 
an leathar, steep the leather. see b g. 

—-————ear, fut. pass. of bogaich. Shall or will 
be softened. 

— — —idh, fut.aff. a. of bogaich. Shall or will. 
soften. 

— ———te, past part. of bogaich. Softened, 
made soft. 2*Mvistened. 

bogail a’) (AH? pr.pt. Bowing, bobbing. A" 
Daul is a’ beiceadh, bowing and scruping. 

bogainn,* 8.m. see bogan. 

bog-a-luireag, s.m. Term of contempt for a long 
shore sailor.—N.G.P. 

bogalta, a. Moist, wet, softish, watery. 

———chd, sf Tendency to softness or mois- 


Swann, quag 


ture. 

bogan, -ain, s.m. Anything soft. 2 Egg in ein- 
bryo. 3 Quagmire, marsh. 4**rare(y Bacon. 

boganach, -aich, s.m. Simple fellow 2 Buinp- 
kin, booby. 3 Coward. 4f{Vegetable fre- 
quently used by coopers. Is mi: ig a tila wig 
boganach á blathaich, buttermtlk has uften 
bred bumpkins. 

—,(AF) 8.5. Young puffin. 2 Any 
young bird. 

————, 8. f. Softness. 
bumpkin. 

bog-an-lochain, s.m. fi Water-ouzel, see eebha- . 
uisge. 2,,AF) Wh»at-ear see e SH" 





2 Behaviour of a- 


bog-an-lóin 106 boidhchead 


ving, waving. 
bog-ln:bh, see bog-lus, 



















bog-an-ló!n(AF) s.m. Snipe, sandpiper, see 
croman-loin. 


bogar, a. see bog. . 2**Balmy, balsamic. 3** | bogluinneach,** a. Flabby. 
———-—-d,** Flabbiness. 


Buttery. 4 Healing. 
bogarsaich,* s.f. Waving, wageing, bobbing. 
J mes -aiche, a. Soft-inouthed. 2 Mild, 
ind. 


amm — 


ing. 


-——as, -ais. s.m. Soft or timid speak- 





--——d, s.f. see bog-bheulachas. 
bog-bhuine, s.f. Bulrush(McL & D, **, & *) This 
name should not be applied to the reed-mace 
or cat's-tail—3. 
bog-chridheach, -eiche, a. Faint-hearted, cow- 
ardly, chicken-hearted. 
bog-ghiogan,} -ain, 8.m. 
Sow-thistle,milk-this- 
tle—sonchus oleraceus. 
bog-ghluasad, -aid, s.m. 
sa Floating, soft moye- 


] ment. 
e KI bog-ghluasdachd, 8, f. 
x see bog-ghluasad. 
d tbogh, v.a. Bend asa 











62. Bog-visge. 

bog-lus,§ s.m. Ox-tongue—helminthia echioi- 
des. [{Not senecio palludocis as O'Reilly sa a} 
2 Bugloss, see lus teang’ an daimh. 3 Vi. 
per’s bugloss, see lus na nathrach. 

bog mhuine,} Bulrush, see luachair-ghòbhlach. 

bogsa, pl. an, -achan, see bocsa. 

bogsach, a. see bocsach. 

bog-uisge,? s.m. Yellow flag or iris—iris pseud- 
acorus. [Corruption of bogh’-uisge.] 

tbogun, s.m. Bacon. 

Tbogur, 8.74. ses bagradh. 2 v. see bagair. 

thogus, for am fagus. 


OW. 
bogha, chan, s.m. Bow. 
2 Bow, bend. 3 Arch. 
4 Vault. 5 Rock sunk 
at sea (“‘blinder.’’) 6 
Wave called a ''hea- 
60. Bog-ghiogan. ver. Tha bogh’ air, 
it has a bend ; bogha 
na drochaide, the arch of the bridge ; tha 
bogha mòr aira’ bhalla, the wall has a areat 
bow or bulge ; mar bhogh’ air ghleus, ‘tke oi bogns, -uis, s.m. (& f.) Timber moth. 2 Bug. 
bow on the stretch ; tha bogh’ air a’ ghéig, the | bòichead, see bdidhichead. 
branch has a bend in it; chuir e’bhogh’ air|boicheal, -eil sm. Bottle. Boicheal bainne, 
lazh, he bent his bow ; fir bhogha, archers. a bottle of mick.—Sutherland. 
bogha,* pr.part. a’ boghadh, v.u. Bow, bend. | boiceanach,**-aich, s.m. Small boy of 14 years 
-braoin, sm. Rainbow. Mar b. a’ soill-| of age. 
seachadh, as a rainbow shining. boiceann,* s.m. see boicionn. 
-cath, s.m. Battle-bow. ach, see boicineach. 
-cogaidh, -achan-, s.m. Battle-bow. -—————-aich, sse boicionnaich. 
boghadair, -e, -ean, sm. Archer, bowman. tbhoichde, s.f. see bochdainn. 
— — — —eachd, s.f. Archery. boicineach,|| -eich, 8.7. Smallpox—Suth’d. 2° 
boghadh, (a’) pr. part. of bogha. Shingles, herpes.— Lewis. [Preceded by the 
bogha-drochaide,-achan-, s.m.Arch of a bridge. | article a’.] 3ffsee boiceanach. 
bogha-fidhle, s.m. Bow of a fiddle. boicionn, -an, 8.7. Goat-skin. 2**Hide, skin 
bogha-^roise, s.m. Rainbow. of any kind. 
boghaich,** v.a. Arch. — ————Aaich, s.m. Peltinonger. 
-— — ——te, past part. of boghaich. Arched. boicneach,tt a. Of, or belonging to, goat-skins. 
boghainn,* sf. The human body. 2 Person. adh, -aidb, s,m. Thumping or beating 
Is ciatach a’ bhoghainn duine e, he isa hand-| a person. 2* Belabouring furiously till the 
some person; nach ann aigea tha a’ bhogh-| skin blisters. 3**Thrashing. A’ b—, pr.part. 
ainn ! what a handsome body he has ! of boicnich. 
bé-ghamhna, s.f. arrow cow. boicnich, pr. part. a’ boicneachadh, v.a. Skin. 
bogha-mucag,(AC) s.m. Blue hyacinth. 2 Beat, belabour, flog. 3* Chastise till the 
boghan, -ain, s.m. see bodhan. skin blisters. 
-— ——, (Jor boghachan, pl. of bogha.) bòid, -e, -ean, s. f. Vow, solemn promise. 2 
boghar, see bodhar. Oath, swearing. Bòid ciaraig ris na fearaibh, 
bogha-saighde, -achan-, s.m. Archer’s bow. is boid nam fear ri ciaraig, the swarthy maid’s 
boghata,* a. Vaulted. vow against the men, and the men’s vow against 
bogha-uisge, s.m. Rainbow. 2} Iris, see seil-| her—never to marry one of them. 
isdeir. t——, v.n. Vow. 
bóghsdair, s.m. Gaelic spelling of bolster. boid,** s.m. Bottle. 2** a. Neat, trim. 
boghta,(DU) 8.m. Swatne of mown hay or corn. | thoideach, a. Tolerable. i 
tboghtainn, s.f. Building, 2 Roof, vault. bòideach, -eiche, a. Pertaining to a vow. 2 
boghun,** -uin, s.m. sce Làbhun. Like a vow. 
bogiach, -aich, -aichean, s.f. Quagmire, marsh, | boideachan,** -ain, s.m. Bodkin. 
morass, bog, swamp. 2 Barrow. tboideal, s.m. Pudding. m. 
bog-ladhrach, -aiche, a. Having soft hoofs or | bòidean, n. pl. of bòid. Boidean baistidh, bap- 


claws. tismal vows. 
boglag, 8.f. Softy 














3 +boideis, $.m. Drunkenness. 
boglainn, -e. s.f. see boglach. iboidh, a. Neat, tidy, trim, spruce. 
bog-luaciiai § gen. sing.-e, & -chrach, 8.f. Bul-| bòidhche, comp. of a. bòidheach. 

rush. see luachair gbóbhlach. bòidhche, ? deo biiüliüledl 
bog-iuasgacu, -wiche, a. Floating, softly mo- bòidhchead, 


boi lie 


thoidhe, see buidhe. 

Loidheach, comp. bòidhche, ‘a. Pretty, beau- 
tiful fair, handsome, comely. 2 Neat. Is 
ise a’s bòidhche. she is the most beautiful ; 
cha dean a’ ghlòir bhóidheach an t-amadan 
sàthach, fae words jill not a fool's belly. 

boidneachd,* see bóidhichead. 

boidheag, Jor buidheag. see lasair-choille. 

an, see buidneagan. 

loidheam,1? s.m. Flattery. 

+ oidheasach, s.f. Yeilow jaundice. 

boilhiche, see boidhichead. 

boidhichead, -eid, Sp. Beauty, increase of 
beauty, degree of beauty, handsomeness, ele- 
gance. Cha toira' buoidhichead goil air ai 
phoit, beauty will not boil the pot; is e do 
bhowhichead a león mi, it is thy beauty that 
has wounied me. 





boidhicheas,** -eis, ¢.m. Beauty, comeliness. . 


Cha'n e a mheud a bh., bulk is not beauty. 
&ho:dhlia, $.f. Puddle. 
iboidhmhios, for buidhe mbios. (July.) 
boidhre, see buidhre. 
boidhread, see buidhre. 
boidich, v.a. Promise solemnly, vow, swear. 
2 Curse. Bhoidich thu bòid don Tighearna, 
thou hast vowed a vow unto the Lord. 
boi-lirein, -ein, -ean, s.m. Fat, short man. 
Tborl-renlt, ag, Tailed star, com t. 
boulsear,* -eir, -earan, s.m. — 3aeiic spelling of 
botch-r. 2 Blockhead, stupid fellow. 
achd,* s.f.ind. Stupidity, concuct of a 
| lockhead. 
fbo'gbheulachd, s. f. ind. Stuttering, stam- 
mering. 
boige, see buige. 
boivean,** 8.2. Sniveller 
boigear,¢ sm Puffin, ducker, see budhaigir. 
tb-igeun, see boigrean. 
fboigh s.f. Teat, dug. 2** Udder. 
fboi.he, see buidhe 
bon:heach, see bòidheach. 
¢boigrean,** ein, s.m. Bulrush, see luachair 
Er obhlach, 2 Flummery. 3 Anything flabuy. 
urh.**a. Abounding in bulrush::, 2 
Like a b'ilrush. 3 Like flummery. 4 Flabby. 
,**-aich, s.m, Place where bulrushes 








grow 

¢boigshibhin, see boigrean. 

boil, see buile. 

boil-aighir, s.m. Over-joy. 

boile, s.f.ind. Madness, rage, fury, passion, 
frenzy. 2 see buil. C’arson à ghabh na 
cinnich boile ? why did the heathen rage ? a 
chridhe laiste le boile chatha, his soul highly 
inflamed with the fury of battle ; tha e air 
bhoile, he is in a great passion; fear na boile, 
the passionate man; is ann orra sud a bha 
bhoile ! how mau poer peo were ! 

boileach,** a. Apt to fly into a rage, furious. 
2 see buileach. 

ile (air) adv. Mad, raging, distracted. 

boile-cuthaich.ff s.f.ind. Mania. 

boilg, see builg. 2 Bubble. 3 Husks of seeds. 

thoilgbhiast, a €. Bellyworm, 

thoilgein, see balgan. 

Loilich, ert Idle talk. 2 Vain boasting. 3 
Dlu-terinz. bombast. 4 Telling lies. 6 Flir- 
tation. 7 DU) Talk of a person whose mird 
is Wandering, as in afever. 8 * Ostentation 
tha ech» làn de bhoitich 's a tha 'n tenba 
de bhiadh, he 7s as full « f romancing ag the 
egg 38 of meat (substance) ` thoir thairis de d’ 
bàóilich, stop your romancing. 

b.lisg, s. Prattling. 

tb ill, -e, s.f. Knob, boss. 

tboill-fhada, for buill-fhada. Long limbed. 


107 


boinneanta 


tboillrinn, s.f. Ring, circle. 

boills2, -e, -ean, sm. Gleam, glare, flash. 2 
Effulgence. glitter. 3**Peep. Fo bhoillsg an 
là, in the effulaence of day. 

, v. n. Gleam, shine, flash, glitter. 2 

Radiate. 3**Peep, look. 

each, -eiche, a. Glitteriny, gleaming, 

beaniing, shining, blazing. 2 Sparkling. 3 

** Peeping. 

eachd. s.f.ind. Brightness, refulgence. 

2* Gandiuess. 

eadh, -eidh, -eidhean, 8. s». Shining, 

gleaming, glittering, glarivg. flashing, eff- 

ulgence. 2 Cheering, rousing, lively. 3 Fond 

of dress gaudy. A b—, pr. part. of boillsg. 

Is math au comharra air an t-side shamh- 

raidh, boillsgeadh dearg 'bhi as na soluis fad 

air falih, @ good siyn of summer weather, 

when the far away lighis have a reddish 

gleam; a’ boiliszeadh air an t-sliabh, shin- 

ing on the mountain. 














|fboillsgean, v.a. Make round or bulky. 


—, -ein, s.m. Focus or centre of à 
fire. 2ttNavel. 
tain. 
boillsgeanachd, tf s.f.ind. Bulging out. 
boillsgeanta. a. see boillsgeach. 
- hd, see boillsgeachd. 
boillsgeil, a. Dazzling, flashiug, shining, lumi- 
nous, 
fboilrinn, gt Ping. 
boin, gen. {dat —J M] sing. of bó. 
tboineadh, -eidh, s.m. Running issue, serofu- 
lous sore. 2 Sprouting. budding. 
thoinean, s.m. Bud, sprout. 
boineanta, see boinneanta. 
boineid, -e, -ean, sf Bonnet. Boineid bhaM- 
ach, buineid chath-dath, a tartan bonnet; is i 
a’ bhoineid bhiorach a ni an gille smiorail.the 
cocked bonnet makes the smart lad. [Boineid 
is m. in Suth’d; boineid biorach, a Glengarry 
bonnet.—AG] 
-an-lossainn, &.f. Brown boletus—bole- 
tus bovinus. §Also applied to other species 
of this genus. 2$Puff-ball, see cao hag. 
each, a. Haing bonnets. 
ich,** v. Cap. 
boineid mhór, s.f. In Is’ay something similar 
to ''struileag," an imaginary boat which 
was sent from one to ano her, rhyme accou- 
panying it. It was never sent to a frieud, 
and no one cared to keep it long, if he conld 
not make a verse himself, he must get soine- 
one else to make one for him, as it could not 
be passed on by any other means.—An t- 
E'leanach. 
boineid-smachain, s.f. Mushroom,—A berfeldy, 
see balg-losgainn. 
boinich,(AC) v.n. Vow. Boinichidh mi do 
Mhoire, Iwill vow to Mary. 
boinn, n.pl. of bann 
boinne, gen.sing. of baun 
boinne, -achan, [& bvinnean—DU] s.f Drop of 
any liquid. 2ffCurrent. Gach bot: ne, every 
d on; cha’n "el boinn’ again, Ihave not o 
dron ` boinne fola, a drop of blood ; 2 a name 
Jor @ LOMAN. 
boinne,ff adv. Ona sudd n. 
boi"neach,ft -eiche, œ. Srromting., 2 Dronping. 
bo:naea.th ft -eidh, s.f. Budding, sprouting. 2 
Running sore. 
boinneag.** -vig, -eagan, s.f. Cake 2DU) 
Sma l drop. 
boinnealaich, -e, sf. Dropping of rain previous 
to u stiower. 
boinneanta, a. Mild, gentle. 2 Stout. 3 Hand- 
some, 4 Healthy. 5 ae 
A 


3 see buillsgean. 4**Moun- 





— i 











boinneantachd 


boinneantachd. s.f. Mildness, gentleness. 2 
Firines.. 3 Stoutness, 4*H'v dsomeness. 

boinne vrtaich, see boivaealaicu. 

boi^nre-bàn, s.f. Acrospire. 

boiune-fula $ s.m. Spotted persicaria, see gluin- 
each mhór. 2ftfair one, beauty. 

boinne-liath,(DU. à.f. Foreshot, Lrst drops of 
whisky «distilled. 

boinne-taig, St Rain-drop. 

+boir, s.m. Eiephaut. 

boirb, -e, s.f. see buirbe. 2ftiDrow of a ridge. 

boirb-büriathrach, see borb-bhriathrach. 

bo:rbeachd, see bnirbe. 

boirche, 3.f. Elk. 2 Buffalo. 3 Thick edge. 

boir-chriasth, s,f. Certain species of clay. 

boirdheich,** a. Hyperborean. 

+boire,** s.f. Hole. 

boireal -eil,-an, s.m. Small augur, whimble. 
2 Joiner’s brace. 

boiream,* -eim, s.m. Rumour, surmise. 2 
Creating hubbub-—Jslay. 

ail,* a. Spreading, as a rumour orl 

surmise 2 Creating great interest. 

boireann, see boirionn. 

———ach, see boirionnach. 

boireanta, a. Effeminate. 2 Feminine in gram. 

boirg,* sam, Little serewed-up mouth. 

boirgeach,* -aich, s.f. Prating female. 

-— — —,* -aiche, a. Having a prating mouth. 

boirgire,* s.m. Fellow with a little screwed 
up mouth. 2 Tattler. 

boiriche, s.m. RUNS proosa, bank, 

boirinn,** s. Buttock. 

boirionn, a. Female, of, or belonging to, a fe- 
male, feminine. 

ach, a. see boirionn. 

ach, -aich, $.m. Female, woman. B. 
bòidheach, a pretty woman ;firionnach is 
boirionnac», a male and a female; boirionn- 
ach ei: eachdail, a handsome female. 

boirionnachd, s.f.ind. Muliebrity, woman- 

boirionnas, -ais, s.m. hood, effeminacy. 2 
** A dultress. 

bois, -e, -ean, gen. sing. of bos. 

boisceal!, -eill, s.m. & f. Wild man or woman. 
2 Hind, deer. 3 Cowardice. 

-eill, a. Uncivilized. Thog thu oirnn 








gu'n robh sinn boisceall, you have reported of 
us tut we are savage. 

boiseachd, s.f. Palmistry. 

boiseag,-ei:,.an, s.f. Box or slap on the cheek. 
2**Siap with the palm of the hand. ` 8**Lit- 
tle palm. 4ttHandful. 5*Palmful of water. 
Boiseag uisge, a handful of water. 

-—— ———aàchadh,-aidh, s.m. Boxing or slap- 
ping o4 the cheek. 

—— ——an, (JM) -ain, s.m. Coddle. 

boisean,ff see basaidh. 

boisean-ionnlaid,f] s.m. Washing-basin. 

Tboiseid, -e, -ean, $.f- Belt, girdle. 

boiseid, -e, -ean, s.f. Purse, budget. 

boisg, v.n. see boillsg. 

boisge, s.f. see boillsgeadh & boillsgeachd. 

ach, a. see boillsgeach. 

boisgealachd, see boillsgeadh & boillsgeachd. 

boisgeanta, see boillsgeach. 

—chd, see boillsgeadh, 

boisgeil, see boillsgeil. 

bois-ghaire, see bas-ghaire. 

boisileag,(AC) s.f. Palmful. 
of water. 

boisteadh,** s.m. Tincture. 

boiteach, s.f. Swampy ground. 

boiteadh,tf s.m. Boiled food for horses. 

boit,f sf ‘laste for. prov. 

boiteag, -eig, -an, s.f. Cauldron. 2 White 
worm indung. 3 Earthworm. 








2 Small palmful 


108 


f | bolg-dhnbh. -chuibhe, «. 


hollsgair-bà'rd 


boiteal, Si 8.m. see b.itean. 
; eil, s.m. Pride, hauythtinexs,arrogance, 
ach, -aiche, a. Proad, hope em pre- 
suluptnous, arrogant. ] 
^ aich, see buiteana ch. 
o1tean, -ein, -eaBan, 8.9. Bundle or wisp of 
straw or hay. 2(AC) Bottle, pottle. A’ Pali 
nan boitean, a’ crumneachadh nan sop,losing 
the Ger" di "ne e the wisps. 

ach, a. In wisps or bu s 
wA p udles, as hay or 


— — —-achadh, (a!) pr. part. Mak 

hay into SZ) ve Le "ip 
————-àich,* pr. pt. a’ boitea 

Make into = or wisps. —] > 
—— —- mearbhail,** am Jaek-o'-lantern. 
boith,* s.f. (for both) Cottage, hut. 
boitidh ! boitidh * int. Call to a pig.—Skye à 


d Suth’d, 

vitig, s. Carriage, see p. 76. 

tbol,** s.m. Poet. PAM skill. 3 Cow. 

bol,f -dil, s.m. Bowl, cup. 2**Cratcr. 

bol, pr. part. a’ boladh. v.a. Smell, scent. 

tholachd, sf.ind. Poetry 

boladh, -aidh, s.m. Smell, stink. savonr. Cha 
n ioghnadh boladh an sgadain a bhi de'n t- 
soitheach ’sam bì e, it is no wonder that the 
herring vessel smells of herring —N.G. P. 

bolaich, s. Loud speaking. 2 DU)Bou:bast. 

bó-làn,(AF) sf. Full-grown cow. 

bó-laun, -a, s.m. Cow-house, byre. 2 Fold. 3 
110x-stall. 

bolanta, a. 
quisite. 











Excellent, consummate, fine, ex- 

Gu bolanta, exquisitely. 

— ———chd, s.f. Perfection. 2 Exquisiteness 

bó-laoigh, s.f. Cow with calf. 2 Milch cow. 

bolb, -uilb, s.m. Species of worm or eaterpillag 
destructive to bushes. 

bolg, -vilg, af. see balg. 

——,{ v.n. see balgaich. 

—ach, -aiche, a. see balgach. 

——ach, -aich, s.f. see balgach. 

bolgam,-aim, see balgam. 

bolgan,* -ain, 8.m. see balgan. 2**Frock. 

bolgan-béiceach, see caochag. 

bolgan-beucan,* see caochag. 

bolg-an-t-solair, see balg-solair. 

; see balg-dhubh. 

bolg-luachair,? s./. Bulrush, see luachais 
ghobhlach. 

bolg-saighead, see balg-shaighde. 

—— -séididh, s.m. see, balg-séididh. 

—— -solair, s.m. see balg-solair. 

tbolguidh, for builg. 

tboll, $.. Boss of a bridle or gorget. 

bolla, pl. chan, [& -ichean,**] s.m. Net-, or an- 
chor buoy. 2 Boll (measure of 16 pecks.) 3. 
**rarely Bowl, goblet. Bolla mine, æ boll of 
meal ; bolla buntata, a boll of potatoes. |B. 
is used in the singular after numerals which 
otherwise govern the plural.] 

bolladh, see bolla. 

Tbollag,** -aig, $.f. Shell. 2 Skull, top of the 
head. 3 Heifer. 4 (AF)Bullock. 

bollan,(AG) s.m. Small tub. 

bolla-stiüraidh,** s.m. Buoy. 

tbollog, see ballag. 

tbollsair,** s.m. Citer, crier. 
ttTeacher, doctor. 

bolisg,* v.n. Bluster, babble. 

ach,* a. Blustering, boastine. 

ach,* ef, Blustering curious female. 

tbollsgair, v.n. Proclaim. 

T , -ean, s.m. Antiquary. 2 Herald 

2* Buk 


2 Antiquary. 3 








crier at court. 3 Boaster, blusterer. 
lying fellow. 
+ ——- -büird, sm. Grand carver, 


bollsgaireachd 1 
bollagAirenchd,* s.f. Habit of blustering or | 
swaggering. ; 1 
bollsganta,* a. Blustering, swaggering, bul- 
lying. 
inr. Gaelic spelling of bolster. 
bolt, built, s.m. see balt. 
+——adh, vf. Bolt, bar. 


——anach, a. Rank, olefactory. 

t——anas, -ais, s.m. Smell, odour, perfume, 

f——nigh, v.a. Smell. 

boltrach, -aich, s.m. Scent, smell, odour, per- 
fume. 2 Volume or bolt of smoke, fire, ashes, 
&c. Oladh agus boltrach, oii and perfume. 





, ‘aiche, a. Scented. 2¢f{smelling, 
scenting. 

ail, a. see boltrach. 

an, -ain, s.m. Scent-bottle. 2 Per- 





3 Nose ay. 4 Spikenard. 5 Perfumer. 
as, -ais, s.m. Perfumery. 2 Fragrance. 
Sttscent-bottle. 4ttNosegay. 
bo.cra ch,** e n. Smell, scent, perfume, aro- 
matze, f2**CLafe. Bholtraich e boladh, 
he smelt a «m. 
te, pust pt. Aromatized. ] 
fboltrnunachad^ afp. sa. Sceuting, smelling. 


fum». 











fbolunta, a. Hetiued. 2 Excellent, fine, ex- 
qnisite. 

boina, s.m. Bomb. 

bomach,tt a. Of, or pertaining to, a bomb. 


¢bomadair, sf. Vom.t. 

tboman, v.n. Boast, vaunt, brag. 2 Exalt. 
—————,** ain, sn. Boast, bounce. 

ach, a. Boasting, vaunting, blustering. 
&ch,** s.m. Boasting or blustering fel- 








low. 

achd, s.f.ind. Habit of bragging, boast- 
ing, vaunting or blustering. 

bomannach,tt -aiche, a. Spotted, chequered. 

¢bomluchd, s.f. Cow and profit. 

bonaid, sev boineid. 

boncait,** -ean, s.m. Balk. 

bonn, -ninn, pl. -uinn & bonnan, s.m. Heel. 
2 Sole. 3 Foundation, found of honse. 4 
Pedestal, bottom, base, socket. 5 Coin. 6 
B:om of a sail. 7t{Good, advantage. 8 Tyre 
ofa cycle. Bonn na broige, the sole of the 
sho»; cha'n eil mi bonn ann ad eisimeil, I am 
not the least in your reverence, I do notcarea 
stra for you ; fichead bonn, twenty sockets ; 
fi head bonn airgid, twenty pieces of silver ; 
bonn na beinne, the base a! the mountain ; fo 
bhonnaibh Tur cas, under the soles of your feet; 
bonn leth-chruin, a ha/f-crown piece; thug iad 
na buiun asda, they took to their heels ; roth- 
an aig gack bonn, wheels at every base; a. 
chù ria bhonn, his do; at his heels ; á larach 
nam bonn, instanter ; thug e buinn di, he 
took to his heels. 

fbonn, a. Good. 

bonnach, -aich, s.m. Cake. (Scot. bannock.) 
Mar is miannaich brù bruiechear bonnach, as 
the storaash craves te scone is loasted. [ Ban- 
nach in Suth’d—AG. 

air, -ean,s.m. Wandering greedy beggar. 

aireachd, s.f.ind. Practice 0. a wan- 

dering glutton. 

an, -Ain, 8m. Little cake. 3 That 
part of a spade on which the foot presses. 

bonnach £n t-sodail,(AH) (it. the cake of fiat- 
tery; Wh'ith thu bonnach an t--odail, yov 
have eaten the cake of flattery—sai toa child 
When it mauifests an undue aimonnt of 
fri-ndship for anyone. 

bonnach-50is6,/AC) s.m. Cake made on the 
palm of the hand. 








int&ch-celoicbe,C A HD) 8. m. Thick oat-meal cake ! 


109 — 
ed on a griddle but in an upright position be: 


fbonnamh, s.m. i 
bonna-mine,(AF) Bittern, see corra-ghrian. 
bonnan, -ain. s.m. 


bonnan-buidhe,: AF) 


bonnanta, a. 
born-a-sé, pl. buinn- & bonnacha-, s.m. Half- 


borbachd 


fore a fire. 

bonnaz,-aig, -an, &.f. Jump, spring. 2 Sole 
of a shoe. 3 see bannag. 4(DU) Little cake. 
"Dol air bhonnaig, going out as guisers on 
New Year's eve. 


—-——ach, a. Leaping, bounding, jumping. 
bonn-a-h-ochd, s.m. Piece of eight (the Span- 


ish peso duro or “hard dollar." 


tbonnaidhe, for buinn. 
bennail, a. 
tbounainne, s.m. Footman, lacqney. 2 Bit- 


see borrail. 


tern, see corra-ghr'an. 
Tribe, family. 


Little sole. 
s-e corra-ghrian. 
ach(AC)s.m. Short, stont, well-set man. 
s.m. Heron, see corra- 
2 Crane, see corra-mhonaidh. 


— n "em d } (aR) see corra-ghlas. 
see bunanta. 


12 (AF) Bit- 
tern, 


ghlas. 


penny sterling (lit. a piece of six, tle. six 
peighinn or Scots pence. 


bonu-a-sia, buinn- & bonn:cha-, see bonn-a-sé. 


honn-bog, s.m. Cushion-tyr; .of a cycle.) 

bonn'chan. -ain, sce bunuachan. 

bonnchart, -airt, -an, s.m. Baik, laud between 
two ridges. 

bonn-chasach, -aiche, a. Stout, strong-legged. 

bonn-chninadair, -e, -ean, 8.3. Shoe-iast. 


bonn-crnaidh, s.m. Solid tyre (of a cycle.) 


bonn-crüin,1f s.m. Crown piece. 

bonn-dnbh, s.m. Heel— Lewis CG Suth'd. At a’ 
bhuin;-duibh agus bas an aona mhic, the 
swelling of the heel and the death of the only 
son—eyrally painful and dificult to bear; losg- 
adh buinn-dnihh, losgadh gu enáàiinh, burn 
ing in the heel, burning to the bone (express- 
ive of the agony of a sore heel.—NGP. 

bonn-mhall, a. Steady, firma, constant. 

bonnsach, -aich, -aichean, s.f. Dart, spear, 
javelin. 

bonusach,(DU) a. Steady, firm. 

bounsachd, s. f. ind. Leaping, springing, jump- 
ing, Yau:ting. 

bonnsaich, o.n. Spring, dart, bounce. 

bonnsair,** a.m. Thrower. 

bonn-shiidheachadh, -aidh, s.m. Establishing. 
2 Getting a firm footing. 

bonn-shnidhich, v.a. Establish, found. 2 Get 
or give a firm holding. 

bonntach,-aich, 3.7. The thickest part of a hide, 
used for shoo-soles. 

Thor, a. Illustrious, high, noble. 2 Proud. 3 
Ostentatious. 

Swelling, pride. 

boraisd, see barraisd. 

Tborb, -uirb, s.m. Tyrant, oppressor. 

borb,* v.a. Enfiame, swell.tf 2 Get enraged. 
Bhorb a chas. hts foot entlamed ; bhorb i’na 
aghaidh, .she got enraged ayainst him. 

borb, buirbe, a. Fierce, furious, violent. 9 Pas- 
sionate, raging. 3 Outrageous. 4 Strong. 5 
Savase. 6 Turbulent. 7 Cruel. 8 Rude, ig- 
norant. 9¢fHaughty, proud. O'n iorguill 
bhorb, Droa the fierce contest ; tha ’m fnaim 
maran gealuhradh bord, their sound ts like 
the boisterous winter ` nochd an sluagh borb 
caoimhneas dhninn,the barbarous people show- 
ed us kindness ; is borb au dnin’ e, he is a pas- 
sionate man ;tha'n t-amadan borb, the fool is 
TANN]. 


+borbs, see borbas. 


maie on the palin of the hand, and no’ bak-| borbachd, s.f.ind. Fierceness, furiousness. 2 


borbachd 


Barbarity. 3*Cruelty. 

borbadh, -aidh, s.m. Raging, swelling. 2 Fierce- 
ness. 3 Haughtiness. 4 Enfiamiug.  5*En- 
raging, getting furious. Also used for buirbe. 
A’ b—, pr.pt. of borb. 

borbarra, a. Barbarous, wild, flerce, untamed, 
uncivilized. Gu b., barbarously. 

borbas, -ais, sm. Strictuess 2 Severity. 3 
Rigour. 4 Sharpness. 5 Churlishness. 6 
Fierceness. 

bor»-bhriathar,** s.m. Barbarism. 

borb-bhriathrach, -aiche, a. Speaking fiercely 
or rudely. 2 Vain glorious. 3*Furious. 

borb-choigreach,ff Ach, sm. Foreigner. 

borbhan, -ain, 8. m. Murmur, low sound, 2 
Purling of a stream. 3**iimuming, grum- 
bling, any continued low sound. 4łłNoise 
of a tempest, or 5tt of small stones falling. 
'S fhaua bhuam fhéin Bealach a’ bhorbhain, 
far from me is “the defile of murmuring” (name 

` ofa place in Trotternish, Skye.) 

ach, -aiche, a. Deep, grave, bass. 

ach,** -aich, s.m. Bassin music. 

achd, sf.ind. Deepness or bassness of 
sound. 

Sich, s.f. Murmuring, grumbling, mut- 
tering. 2 Gurgiing. Ciod a’ bh. a th’ ort? 
what are you grumbling about ? 

borbnachadh, -aidh, s.m. Incitement, encour- 
agement, instigation. 2 Impulse. 3 Swelling 
with rage. A’ b—, pr.pt. of borbnaich. 

borbnaich, pr.pt. a’ borbnachadh, v. a. € n. Im- 
pel. 2 Heave with anger or indignation. 8 
*Enrage. 4íttFester. 

borb-ràdh,** s.m. Barbarism. S 

borb-smachdail, a. Arbitrary, imperious. 

bore, pr.pt. a’ bòrcadh, v.n. Spring, sprout, bud. 
2 Blossom. 3 Swell. 4 Burst. 

——ach, -aiche, a. Springing, sprouting, bud- 
diag | 2 Swelling. 3**Tall. 4H Strutting. 

— adh, 


ding. 2 Swelling. A’ b—, pr. part. of borc. 

bord, bùird, s.m. Table. 2 Plank, board, deal. 
8 Board (directors or managers of company &c) 
4 Boarding. Air bhord, boarded, as a board- 
er ; air bord, on board (a ship); cuir air bord, 
put on board ; mu 'n bhòrd, about the table ; 
aig ceann a’ bhüird, at the head of the table ; 
sgoi'-bhüird, boarding-school ; sgoil a’ 
Bitird, a Board-school ; tha e fo'n bhòrd, he 
is dead ; bord da-dhuilleig, a two-leaved table; 
bord beulaibh, the starboard of a ship ; bord 
cüiaibh, the port of a ship ; cuir air 'bhórd, 
board him, send hYm to a boarding-house ; eha 
"n e am bord a theirig dhuit ach am beagan 
fearainn, you did not fail because the mould- 
board gave way, but because the land was too 
small ; am bord mór uaiue, see below. 

bord, v.a. & n. Tack. 2 Board (asa ship.) Bh. 
iad an long, they boarded the ship. 

bordadh, -aidh, s.m. Tacking, as a vessel at sea. 
A’ b—, pr.pt. of bord. 

bordaich, v.a. Plank. 

bordair, -ean, s.m, Gaelic spelling of **boarder 
and of ¢tborder. 

bordaireachd, s.f.ind. see bordadh. 

bord-beulaibh, s.n. Starboard side of a ship. 

——  -chluich, s. pl. billiards—Forbes’ G.Gr. 

—— -cluiche, s.. Billiard-table. 

—— -cülaibh, s.m. Port side of a ship. 

—— -luathaidn, 8.m. Waul :ing-table. 

——— -luinze, s.m. Deck oi a ship. 

e—— -wór (am), am Bord mór Uaine, s.m. The 
Doar. of Green Cloth, the highest court of 
appeal. Théii mise gu lagh leis, agus mur 
Ia, zb mi ceartas cha stad mi gus an ruig ini 
SA Lord Uaine an Lunnainn, PU go to law 














116 


-aidh, am. Springing, sprouting, bud- | f 


bos-bhualadh 


with him, and should 1 not get justice, 1 will 
not rest till I bring my case before the Beard of 
Green Cloth in London. 

—— -na-cise, sm. Board of customs or excise. 

—— -uachdair,(AH) s. m. Lid of a chest or 
coffin. 

—— -uaine, 8.m. 
cloth. 

—— -uisge,** 3.m. Flood-gate. 

——-urchrainn, s.m. Mould-board of a plough, 
(bord-urehair—* ; bord ürach—AM) 

tborg, s.m. Tower. 2 Village. 3 House. 

borlanachd,t+ sr, Compulsory labour for a 
landlord. 

borlum, -uim, s.m. Sudden ev? cuation, 2 Strip 
of arable land. 3 Ridge, seclivity. 4 Royal 
castle lands in the Highlands. 5] Sudden 
flux or vomiting. 

tboroimh, s.f. Tribute of cattle. 

tborr, -a, s.m. Knob. 2 Bunch. 3 Grandeur, 
pride. 4 Greatness, majesty. 5 Swelling 
tumour. 6 Curled upper lip. 7 Blubber lip. 
8t{tElephant. 

Tborr, a. Great, noble. 2 Haughty. 3Splen- 
did, grand. 

fborr, v.a. & n. Swell. 2 Become big and 
proud. 3 Scent, as a dog. 4**Bully, 5**Swag- 
ger. 6**Parch. 

borrach, -aich, s.m. *Great, haughty, or proud 
man. 2 Projecting bank. 

borrach,§ -aich, s.m. Mat-grass or moor-grass. 
— Skye, see beitein. 2 Borage, see barraisd. 
8 Sweet meadow-grass, see mislean.. 

— —— —, a. Blubber-lipped. 2++Bullying. 

thorracha, ga. Bladder. 

borrachas, -ais, st, Boasting, bullying. 2 
Bravado. 3ftBlubber-lips. 

borradh, -aidh, s.m. Swelling. 2 Bravadoing. 
3 Parching. 4 Scent, smell—Skye. 6t+File 
of soldiers. 

———-ach, a. Parched. 2 Valiant. 

borraidh, s.f. Borage, see barraisd. 

bosse -e, œ~ Swaggering, boastful, haughty, 


proud. 

borraileachd, a f. Pride. 

borraisd, s.m. Borage, see barraisd. 

Tborral, s.m. Brace, pair. 

achd,** &.f. see borraileachd. 

borran, -ain, sm. Haunch, buttock. 2 Little 
blubber-lip. 3ffsee borrach. 4ttAnger. 

borras, -ais, s.m. Protuberance, prominence. 
2t¢Blubber-lip. 3tfSolder. 

ach, -aiche,a. Blubber-lipped. 

borr-fhuaim, s.m. Low murmuring noise, 

borrghanta, a. Swelled, bloated. 2 Pompous, 
3 Turgid. 4+tFierce. 

borr-shuil, et Full round eye. 

———each, -eiche, a. F'ull-eyed,round-eyed. 
2(AM) Sulky—Uist. 

Tborr-thoradh, s. m. Grandeur, magnificence, 
majesty. 

fborruin, see borran. 

Tborsa,** s.m. Purse. 

Tborsair,** s.m. Purser. 

borsadh,** s.m. Bourse. 

bos, boise, boisean, s.f. see bas. 

tbos, a. Certain. 2 Abject, low, mean, vile, 
of low origin. 

bos (AH) a. Hollow, emitting a hollow sound. 

bosag, -aig,-an, s.f. Slap on the cheek or mouth. 
z Handful. 

achadh, -aidh, 

tbosan, 8m. Purse. 

bosarguin, s. f.  tDestruction. 
the hands in grief. 

bos-bhuail, seve bas-bhuail. 

bos-buualadh, -aidh, s.m. see bas-bhualadh. 


The green table, board of green 








2 Bursar. 





see boiseagachadh. 


2tt Clapping 








bosd 111 bra. 
bosd, s.m. see bocsa. avenue, alley, passage. 
bosd, v.n. Boast, vaunt. ,0. see bodhar. 


——, -a, s.m. Boast, pride, boasting language. 
2 Vaiu-glory. Am bòsd gun fheum, the useless 
boast. 

—ail, -e. a. Vaunting, boasting, boastful. 
2 Vain. Luchd b., boasters. 

—air, e, ean, s.m. Swaggerer, blusterer. 
2 Bully. 3 Turbulent noisy fellow. 

—alachd,* 5s. f. Boastfulness, vain-glory, 
swaggering. 2 Romance. 

bosdan, -ain, s.m. Small box. 2**Basket. 8 
(AM) Child's coffin— Uist. 

bosghaird, see basgaird. 

-— ——eachas, see basgairdeachas. 

-— —— eaàh, ¢.m. & pr. pt. see basgairdeadh. 

bos-ghaire, see basgaire. 

boslach, see baslach. 2{{Fire. 3f{Vault. 

bos-lua:th, see bas-luaidh. 

bis-luaidh, see bas-lnaidh. 

bos-luath, a. see bas-luath. 

O—— ———, sf. see bas-luaidh. 

bos-mhin, see bas-mhin. 

-— ——— each, @. see bas-mhin. 

bosraich, s.t see basraich, 2**Shouting, roar- 
ing 3**sSquall, high wind. Mar bhosraich 
gt. like the loud winter gale. 

bòstail, see bòsdail. 

bos-uaill, see bas-uaill (appendix) 

bot, -dit, 3.7. see bòtuinn. 

bos, -a, -an, s.f. Vote. *v.nm. Vote. 

bot. -a, -achan, s.m. Mound. 2 Bothy, house 
3*River bank. 

bu., s.m. see bod. 

fbotach, ef. Reedy bog, fen. see bothach. 

bòtach, a. Wearing boots, booted. Gu spor- 
Ach, b., spurred and booted. 

botaich,** v.a. Boot. 

botailh, -ean, s.f. Wooden vessel of the size 
of half an anker (5or 6 gals.) 

f^otaigear, -eir,-an, s.m. Fork. 

botair ** -ean, s.m. Bootmaker. 

botais,tt f.f. see bótuinn. 

baal, ail, see boiul. 

-——aich, see botulaich. 

t——lach,-aiche, a. Violent, furious, turbu- 
lent, outrageous. 

both, s.m.ind. Perturbation. 2 Furious agi- 
tation. 3 Declamation. 4 Vehement action 
of body. A’ cur nam both dheth, in great 
avitation. 

tboth, -a, -an. s.m. Cottage, hut, tent, bower, 
bothie, now buth. 2fthade. 3*Plash. 

bothach,** -aich, af Marsh, quagmire, 

————-, -aiche, a. Tull of tents or cottages. 

bothadh,(AG) -aidh, s.m. Startling. Chuir e 
bothadh orm, he sta: tled me. 

botuag, -aig s.f. Ringed plover, see trileachan- 
traizhe. 2 see bothan. 3 see bodhag. 

ach,tt a. Abonnding in huts or booths. 

bó-thaigh,-e,-ean, s.m. see bàthaich. 
bothaireachd,** sf. Prey. 

bothan -ain, 3. m. Cottage, ht, tent, booth, 
bower, bothie. Bothan ain fasgadh nam fuar- 
bheann, a hut in the shelter of the bleuk mourt- 
ains ; rinn e bothain d’ a spré dh, he made 
booths for his cat‘le; mar bhothan a ni am 
fear-counhead, as a booth that the watehman 
mates ; cha chuir mi bothan air, Z will not 
conceal it— Uist (J M.) 

ach. It a. Bowery, belonging to a cot- 





tage. 
bith n-airidhe,“DU) s.m. The sheiling. 
bothau-faire. sm, Sentry-box. 
botliar,(JM) -air, s.m. Soft mud. Rinn iad 
ba bar duoth, they mad soft mud of it. 


eee e Á— 


botrachan, an. see bod-chrann. 

botrumaid, -e, -ean, s.f. Slattern, drab, slut, 
trull, slovenly woman. 

-—— — —-— each, a. Drab»ish, sluttish. 

botuinn, -e, -ean, s.f. Boot. 

——— ——e&ch, a. Booted. 2 Thick-legged. 

— — —eachadh, -aidh, s.m. Booting. 

— ———ich, v.a. Boot, put on boots. 

botul, -uil, s.m. Gaelic spelling of bottle. 

-——ach, tf a. Having bottles. 2 Bottled. 

- —aich, pr.pt. a’ botulachadh, v.a. Bottle, put 
into bottles. 

.— —-——te, past part. Bottled. 

botulair, see buidealair. 

botulan,ff -ain, -an, s.m. Small bottle. 

botus,|| uis, s.m. Belly-worm. 





63. Botus-each. 


botus-each,(D.M.) -uis-, 5. m. Horse-bot—9gas- 
terophilus equi, —(an intestinal worm.) (lit 
63 does not represent crecthleag-nan-each, 
which lives on blood of animals, but the fly 
of botus-each, which does not take any food 
while in the fly form. It is often called 
creithleag in error. see cr ithiegg.] 

bó-ursainn,(AF) e.f. Her best cow always taken 
by ne proprietor of old froin & newly-made 
widow. 








ES echt? ope = 
65. An dòigh air a’ bir oibreachadh. 


bothar, -air, -aircan, 6. um, Lane, road, street, | bra, gen. bràthan, pl. bràthntan, s. f. Queru, 


bra 


handmill. 21Brow. 3 AC) Anything ronid 

anything that hasnoend. Is fheairrde bra 

a breacadh gun a briseadh, a quern is the bet- 

of being picked but not broken ; bonnach bràth- 

an, a round bannock ; liabag brathau, a round 
founder. 

We are indebted to Mr. D. Murray (of Lewis) 

Aberdeen, for the following nam.s of 
PARTS OF A QUERN :— 

1 A'chlach ioce'idarach, a’ bhrà iosal, or ai 

chlach t-hniun, the nether stone. 

9 A'chlach uachdarach, or a’ bhra ard, the 
upper stone. 

1 & 2 Clachan na brathan, the stones. 

An dual, Eye-bar, the cross stick in “eye.” 
Am mialair, The bearer, the stick on which 
the upper stone rests. 

6 An t-aotroman, Bearing-gear, the stick or 
wedge that lightens the pressure of the 
stune on the grain 

An sgonnan, the handle, by means of which 
the quern is turned. 

Sùil na bràthan, the eye. 

Fiacail, th’ tooth. 

Bannas, gum) Thelower side of upper 

Carbad, jaw f stone, and upper side of 
lower stone. 

Leth-bhann, leth-bhuinn, In gear. 

A’ cur na bràthan air a leth-bhuinn, put- 
ting the mill in working order. i. e. mak- 
inv one stone to fit the other and to re- 
volve with equal weight on both sides. 
Chaidh i de a leth-bhann, it is off one 
side of the nether or sole stone. 

Sasag, large round vessel made of straw, 
9in. high and Aft. in diameter, for holding 
the meal before sieving. 

An loban, straw vesset smaller than sas- 
ag, Jor keeping the roughest portion of 

the meal (garbhann.) 

An rüsgan, a vessel for holding the husks 
(catnadh.) 

Cisean-bafair, a vessel made of sea-bent, 
from which the quern is fed with one 
haud while being turned with the other. 
[Cisean-mürain—DM 

Craiclonn-brathan, Skin spread on the 
ground under the quern to keep the meal 
Jrom going on the floor—'*Fionn." 

Nos. 12, 18, 14, & 15 are all narrower at the 
bottom than at the mouth, something after 
the fashion of a zinc pail. [see mnileann.] 
brabau,$ s.m. Purple mealie-grass, see bunglas. 
brabhd,* s.f. Bandy-leg. 2(CR) Big, clumsy 
person or thing. 

ach,*a. Bandy-legged. 

ach,* af, Bandy-legged female. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Idle talk, bravado. 

brabhdair, sm. Noisy, talkative fellow. 
Blusterer. 3 Bully. 4 Bandy-legged man. 

eachd, s.f. Blustering language, bra- 
vado. 2 Swaggering, loud talk. 3 Haughti- 
ness, insolence. 

brabhd-chasa:h, a. Bow-legged. 

brabhtalachd, see brabhdaireachd. 

tbrac, -aic,s.m. Arm. 2 Shop. 3 8,f. Harrow. 

fbrac, v.a. & n. Break, as with a harrow. 2 
Embrace. 

brac, AC a. Rich, as milk. 

bràc, (AC) s.m. Curve, curve of a wave imme- 
diately before breaking. 2 Bellow, roar of a 
stag. 3 Branch, applied tc antlers of a deer. 
4 Reindeer, red deer, fallow deer, deer in 
general. Ceud brac bruaill an t-samhraidh, 
a hundred reindeer intractable in summer. 

f¢braca, san. Breaker, harrow. 

bracach, aiche, a. Greyish, white and black. 





e a 09 


= 
O © 0 N 


13 


14 
15 


16 











2 





112 


|.. 


bradan-si igeack 


tbrac.uth,f} -aidh, s.in. Cabin. 2 Harrow. 

braca'lle,** -an, s.f. Bracelet. 2 Sleeve. 

bracairneach, «. Greyish, dusky. Mart b., @ 
black and white faced cow. 

bracan.** -ain, 8.m. tBroth. 2 Gauntlet, glove. 
8 Handeuft, 

brach, s.m. Bear. 2(AF^ Dog. 3**Lippitude. 

brach, pr. pt. a’ brachadh, v.a. & n. Ferment, 
malt. Stot 

brach, e. (Gu braeh, adv.) see brath. 

fbraeh, -aich, sn. Pimple. 

bracha, gen sing. of braich. 

brachach, see brachadh. 

brachadair, -e. -ean, san. Maltman. 

braehadh, -aidh, s.m. Fermencing, fermenta- 
tion, malting. 2 Tainting, rotting, putrefy- 
ing. Grüthan na h-earba guu bhrachadh, 
the roe’s liver untainted—N.G.P. A’ b—, pr. 
pt. of brach. 

brachag, -aig, -an, s.f. Pustule. 2]Stye. 3 Oph- 
ZS soreness of the eyes. 4 see brach- 
a 

— Ach, -aiche, a. Pimply. 2 Ophthalmic 

brachan, -ain,s.m. Anything fermented, lea. 
ven. 2 Putrefaction. 8*Rubbish. - 

bràchd, (AC) s.f. Putrescence, putrefaction. 2 
Effervescence, fermentation. 3 see brüchd. 

- , (AC) a. Fat, rich. 2 Generous. 

tbrachd, s.f. Drop. 2 Sap, juice. 3 Increase 
of riches. 4 Reaping, mowing. 5**Hatred. 

brachd,* see brachan. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Substantial, solid, firm. 

- ag, -aig, -an, s. Drab, slut. 

brachdlig,( AM) s.m. Vile fellow. 

bra-cheo, s.m. see brath-ched. 

brach-shuileach, -eiche, a. Blear-eyed. 

—— , $.f.ind. Blear-eyedness. 

braclach, see broclach. 

bracuirneach, -eiche, a. see bracairneach. 

bradach, -aiche, a. Thievish. 2 Stolen. 3 
Roguish. Measar e mar ni b., it shall be rec- 
koned as stolen goods ; tha thu cho breugach 

 's& tha 'n luch cho bradach, you are as un- 
truthful as the mouse is thievish. 

—_—.,** aich, s.m. Thief. 

bradag, -aig, -an, s.f. Thievish woman. 2 Term 
of familiarity used for checking a female. 3 
Sly young girl. Ceisd bradaig air breugaig, 
ask the thief if I be a liar. 

-chail,** s.f. Cabbage-worm. 

bradaiche,** enn, s.m. Thief, robber. 

bradaidh, s.m.ind. Thief, robber. 2 Familiar 

term of reproof. 31fRogue. 4 The Devil (N. 

High's.) Saoilidh bradaidh nam bruach eur 

ST e uile cach, the thief of the braes 

thinks all others thieves. 

















eachd, see bradalachd. 
bradalach, a. Thievish. 2 Haughty, Gu ba 
haughtily. 
A s.f.ind. Theft. 2 Pride, arrogance, 





haughtiness. 3*Trickiness. 
bradan, -ain, sm. Salmon 2 Swelling on the 
skin, ridgy tumour on the surface of the body. 
ach, -aiche, @ Full of salmon. 2f 
Full of swellings. 
-bacach, AC (lit. halting salmon) $. m. 
Sturgeon. 
-brathan, AC (it. round or quern-like 
salmon) s.m. Turbot. 
-breithinn, AC a, am, The salmon of 
knowledge touched by Fionn. 
-Cearr, (lit. left-sided or broad sal- 
-geàrr, mon) AC s.m. Sturgeon. 
-leathann,AC (lit. broad salinon) s.m. 
Sturgeon. 2AF Halibut. 3 lurbot.— West qf 
Ross (CR.) 
-sligeach, sm. Mullet. 


























bradh 


bradh, see bra. 

t- —, see bràth. 

bad, v.a. Oppress. e 

beadnadair, -van, s.m. Kindling, flre-wood, 
iuel. ? Large tire—skye. 

brxdhan,** s.m. Chat wood. 

fbeadh-rudh, s.m. Ambush. 

bra tuidh, see t-ra‘taidh. 

fbraíal, \brath+fuille’ sm. Deceit. 

brag, (CR) nm. Herd of deer, group of stags or 
hinds— d thole. . i : 

brag.* v.n. be infected with an epidemic or 
coutavion. . e À 

beagad** -àid, -an, s.m. Gaelic spelling of bri- 


de. 
bragàdach,** a. In brigades. , . 
bragainn,** s.f. Bragging, boasting, vaunting. 
Thoisich e air bragainn, he began to vaunt. 
——_,** v.n. Brag, boast. 2 Flourish. 
bragair, s.m. (Leaves of the sea-girdles. 2** 
Braggadoccio. In Uist the seaweed cast a- 
shore in summer, and of which kelp was 
made—( JM.) ] 
bragaire.§ s.m. Barberry (plant)—Lewis. 2 
AH)*“Lopper,” an animal belongiug to cither 
k or fold on which its owner bestows ex- 
ceptional attention in order that it may excel 
all specimens of its class in the neighbcu - 
hood. Rinn thu bragaire de’n ghamhainn 
ruadh, you have made a t: pper of he red stirk. 
-—————-&Bchd, s. f. Empty pride, pride above 
merit, vain-glory, boasting. 
bragh, -a, s.m. Burst, explosion.  21Peal. 
——-—, a. see brac. 
achail.** a. Purulent. i 
bràghad, aid, -an, s.n. Neck, throat, wind- 
pipe. 2**back. 3łłBreast and upper parts 
of tke buty. Lagan a’ bhragha.d, the hollow 
at the upper part of the breast ; a bràznad gu 
seimh a’ soillseachadh, her neck shining sojt- 
ly ; rdiseidh brù brazhad, the belly will sti ip 
the neck ; losgadh bràghad, the heartburn. 
, gen. sing. vi WE 
acu. a. Of, or belonging to, a neck or 
throat, jugular. 2**Havinga long neck. ` 
auch, -e, sf. Crackling, bursting, as in 
drying of grain. 2 Noise. 
braghadh, s.m.  Purulence. 
bragh. 4ffsee bràghad. 
brazhairt, s.7. Truss, bundle. 
fbragha-ruigheach, see bragha-ruighidh. 
tforagh«-ruighidh, sf Gibbet. 
bragsaidh, s.f. **Braxy," disease among sheep. 
foraie, s.m. Mouth. 
b.aicsas, -eis, s.f. Gaclic spelling of breakfast. 
braich, bracha, s.f. Dalt, fermented grain. 
Aui-baracha, a mait-kiin ; muileann-bracha, 
a malt-nill. 
än, Stag. 2 Buffalo. 3AF Wolf. 4AT 
Ladver. 
¢braicheam,-eim,s.m. Pack-saddle, pannel. 2** 
Horse-collar. 
eadh, s.m. Malting. 
eamn, $. See tbraich. 
ealuhaill, 
eann, see fbraich. 
——-eas. -eis, 
tbraicmhias, s.m. see braiceas. 
qvraicue, s.m. Cat. 
braid, -e, -ean, s.f. llorse-collar, brecham. 
z*Collar round a tuief’s neck.—Jolay. € 








2 Gore. 3 see 











T 








9 see 
brazhad. 4 see brà ghe. 5 Alountain, moun- 
tainous country. Lrail-chluaiseiu, kams ; 
braid ph^ib, a hors:-cu..ar made of coarae (taz. 

bruit, -e, ef, theft. Lucud braid, thi-ves ; 


saor o ol.raid is o antlacud, free frou (Uert or | 


vad behaviour. 


113 


braighirt 


braidean, -ein, a.m. Little horse-collar. 2 Calf's 
collar, 3 lhievish fellow. 

braidh, see bràigh. 

braidhe,** s. Blast, bonnce, knack, clap. 

bra:dhin,** s.f. see bra. 

braiühleag,-ig, an, see braoileag. 

—————.—ach,a,. see braoileagach. 

braidseal, eil, -an, s.m. Hill used asa beacon, 
*lhis word is now used for a iarge tire ot auy 
kiad, particularly iu times of r joicing. 2 
Volley. 3 Broadside, scolding. 'S aun a aiba 
a tha 'm b. ciatach ! what a fine blazing fire 
you have ! au ceud bh. a leig iad, the first vol- 
ley they fired ; "a iad sud a fhuair am b., 
what a scolding they got ! 

braig-il CR) a. Vain, uplifted.—4 rran. 

bràirch,-e, pl. dean, & -de. x. m.(d: f.) Hostage, 





pledge. 2 Prisoner. Braighde-gill, pledges. 

braigh, -e, -dean,s.m Loud repoit, loud cravk 

or clap. 2 Heavy stroke. 3 Monosyllable. 

Leig an gunna braigh as, the gun made a loud 

repoi t. 

burning, cracxle, burst, explode, crash. 

bràigh, gen.sing.-e & bràghad, pl. bràigheachan, 

s.m. The upper part of any thing or pl»ce. 2 

**Upland country. 3 Cable. 4**see bràghad. 

5 see braid. 6(AH) Chief (upper 3rd. 

a’ chuirp, the upper part of the breast; 

bràigh dùthcha, the higher partsoj a 

district ; Bràigh Lochabair, the braes 

(dit. upper pa:t) of Lochaber ; bra sh 

an (aighe, the top of the house ` braigh 

a’ ghlinne, the head of the glen; 

bràigh na :eapach. the top cf the Led; réiteach 

bràighe, ezpec'ora«ion (lit. a clearing of the 

chest,) do bh-ai;h bhàn, thy fair busum: 

braigh na stairsnich, landing on a staircase. 

bràizhde, pl. of bràigh. 

-— — — Ach, a'ch, -iehoan, s.f. Horse-collar. 

bra ghdeachd, s f. inad. see braighdeanas. 

¿rài hdan, pl. of bràigh. 

braighdean, -ein, -an, s.m. see braidean. 

slavery. Am braighdeauas, tn captivity. 

tbraig hcinneach, a. Abie to obtain or procnre, 

bràighe, see biagh. 2:1 Means of ob:a- ning. 

-— ach, äich, a m. High:arder, mounta:n- 
eer, spee ally one belonging te the Braes of 

bràijheach,** a. Haring a lorg neck 2 Hav- 
ing a handsmne neck. 3 Of, or belouging 
to. a necx. 4 Upiandish. 

braigheacn, œ. Giving à loud report. 2 Ex- 
plosive. 

Little cable. 

braigheachd, 8.9. Confinement, constraint, 
imprisonment. 

braignead, ed, see bràghad. 

bràs headh, s.m. Report, explosion, crackling. 
2 Blow. 

Tbraighean, s.f. Debate. 

braigheardaica, &J. Crackling. 2 Dlustering, 
swaggering. 

braigh-:hill, s.m. The goal, ascendant or pre- 
eminence. Thug thu braigh-ghill air na 
ever heard; tha sin a’ toirt braigh-ghill air a 

h-uilo ni, tat excels everythmy ; thuair e b. 

ort eun tung dnuit, he got the ascenaant in 

defiance of you. 

brai-h'd, see braid. 


bràigh,* v.a. Give a crackling sound, as wood 
part of shield in kera dry.) bra gh 
a’ chroinn, the mast-head; bràigh £5. Práigh 
bra sh-chrann, s.m. "lop-mast. 
--—as, -ain, sm. Bondage, captivity, 
Lochaber, 
braizheachan, -ain, -an, 8.94. 
braigheall,(AF) see broigheal. 
chnala mi riamh, you surpass everything I 
bra.ghirt,** e, f. Bundle. 


brà'gl:-ioslaid 


tbraigh-ioslaid, s.f. Collar. 

brài;h-leab,* s.m. The wood roof of a house, 
sarsing. 

braighleach,* — Lewis, see broilleach. 

braighleag, see braoileag. 

bra ghlicn,* v.a. Make a noise. 2 Crackle. 3 
Blaster, swagger. 

braighlich,* s.7. Noise, crackling. 2 Bluster- 
ing, swaggering. 

bràigh-sheol,* s.m. Top-sail. 

bràizh-snlat,* s.m. ‘Top-sail yard. 

braight,* see braidseal. 

braightseal,* see braidseal. 

forail, v.n. Dismiss. 2 Refuse, reject, slight. 
3 Feel. 

braile, -ean 8.f. Heavy rain. 2 Violent sud- 
den eruption. 3 Burst of indignation. 

braileadh, -eidh, see braile. 

brai’-lin, see braith- in. 

brailis, s f. Wore of nie or beer. 

braim, brama, bra.i:nnan, [gen. pl. in Uist 
bràm] s.m. Crepitus ventris. Mar tha gille 
mór nam braim, cha'n fhuirich e thall ’s 
cha’n fhuirich e bhos, like the ne’er-do-weel, 
he will stay nowhere. 

braimneach, -eiche, a. Addicted to f—g. 

tbrain, s.m. Chieftaiu. 2 Naval commander, 
captain of a ship. 3 Front, begiuniug. 

tbraiu, s.f. see broinn. 2 see bra. 


t--——, a. Big, bulky. 2 Avundaut, extensive, 
f--——each, eich, sm. see brain. 
+--——-each, -eiche, æ. see brain. 


braineach,**-uich, s.m. Prow of a ship. 

brainn, branna, ( for broinn) see brù. 2* Bul- 
ging. 

Te -e, a. see bras. 21fJocose. 3 rarely 
Fabulous, inventive. 

brais,* sf. Fit, convulsion. Tha na braisean 
trie, the fits return ojten. 

bràisd, see braist. 

braisdeach, see braisteach. 

braise, s.f.ind. Rashuess, boldness, impetuos- 
ity, fervour, ardonr. 2 Wantonuess. 3 Rapid- 
ity. 4ffit of sickness. see braisead, D. 
fola is feòla, (Lii. heat of blood aud flesh) 
youthful inpetuos:ty. 

braiseachd, see braise. 

braisead, -eid, s. f. Degree of forwardness, 
boldness, rashness, iinpetuousne-s, fervour, 
ardour, wantonness. 2 Rapidity. 

+braiseagnach, s.f. Unjust accusation. 

braisealachd, s f.ind. seo braisead. 

braiscil,-e, a. Keen, bold, fervid, impetuous, 
forward. 

braiseineachd, see braisead. 

braisiche,(J M) s.m. A man of 60 or 70 years of 
age. Ihave heard a young woman in Lewis 
asking for her father of another person say, 
“am faca tu am braisiche againn ?'' 

braisionlach,t see braiseagnaci. 

braisleach, s.m. tFull-iorined, bulky man, 2 
Fat middle-aged man. 

tbraislead, s.f. Gaelic spelling of bracelet. 

brai--sgeul, -eoil, s.m. Feigned narrative, fable, 
romance. 

bra.si, -e, pl. -ean &-eachan, s.f. Brooch. 2** 
Bracelet. (see illust. 67.) 

each,tt a. Abouudiu; in brooches, per- 

taining to a brooch. | 

eachan, -ain, -au, &.m. Little brooch. 

braistich, v.a. broocn. 

Tbraith, v.a. Inspect, oversee. 

braith-bheartach, -aiche, a. Vain-glorious, con- 
cvited. 

tbraicheheam, s.m. Stag. 2 Wild ox. 

braitiean, pl. oi brath. 

tbraitheoir, s.m. Overseer, inspector. 








114 





67. Bràistean Gàidhealach. 
braith-lin, s.f. Linen sheet, linen cloth. 


braithlis, -e, see brailis. 

braithre, pl. of bràthair. 

a Cuas, -18, 8.92, Brotherhood. 2 Part- 

nership. Cha bhi baithreachas mu mhnaoi 

no mu fhearaun, there is no partnership in 
women or land. 

uchd, Ses braithrealachd, 

ag ig, 8f. Paternal aunt, 

aiachd, st. Erotherhod, brotherly 
attachment, brotherlinsss, fraternity, unane 
imity, harmony. 

an, pl. of bràthair, 

— ——ich,.DU) v.a. Admit to brotherhood 
(e.g. masonic.) Tha e air a bhràithreachadh, 
he has been aumitied a brother craftsman. 

——-il, -e, a. Brotherly. 2 Atfectionate, 
Gràdh bràithreil, hroiheriy love; agus nach 
do chuimhnich iad an coimh-cheangal braith- 
reil, and that they have not remembered the 
brotherly contract, 

brallach, (AW) s.m. Shell-fish. 

braim, see brain. 

brama, gen. sing. of braim. 

brama, a. Uupolite, uncivilized, boorish. ott 
Unlucky. . 

bramach,-aich, see broinach. 

bramadaich, s.f.ind. State ot being swelling, 
b.owing up. 2 Repletion. 

bramair,** s m, Flatulent fellow, one addicted 
to f—g. 2 Unpolished fellow, noisy feliow, 


- 





-+ 


boor. À 
branian,]-2in, sm. Misadventure. 2 The 
Devil. 3**Crupper. 4**Croup. 


ach, a. see brama. 
ach, -aich, s. m. Noisy fellow, boorish 


fellow. 
———achd,** s,f.ind. Noisiness, boorishness, 
2 Sulkiness. e 


nan, pl. of braim. 
————ta,** a. Doori:h, unpolished. 2 Sulky, 
bramartaich, s.f. Frequent f—g, habis of f—g. 
bramasag, -aig, -an, s./. Prickly head of a this. 
tle burdock.) 21Cloth-.burr. 3 Fiatulenee, 
4 Disaster, betokened by eating the Grat 
bread of the season without butter. 
bramsag, see bramasag. 
tbran, a. Poor. 2 B ack. 
Bran,-ain, s.m. Mountain stream, name of 
severalrivers in the Highiands, 2 Name of 





Bran 115 bras-bhuilleach 
Fionn'sdog. S**lusks of corn, bran. 11| berry,} see grainnseag. 2**Dogberry, see 
Raven. fó Rook. caor-chon. É h e 
¢branar, s.m. Fallow ground. braoilich, s.f. Loud ncise, rattling sound. 2 


fbrancas, see brangas. 

foraudair, see braundair. 

bra ndal, m - 

ftbrandubhan, Ain, s.m. Spider’s web. 2(AF) 
Spider. 

bran-fbitheach,( AF) Aen, s.m. Raven. 2 Rook. 

brang, -aing s.m. Horse's halter, 2f Slip of 
wood in the head-stall of a horse's halter 
resting on the jaw. 3 Horse's collar. 

ach, -aiche, a. Snariiug, growling. 2 

Grinning. 








68. Brangas. 


-——as, -Bis, s.m. Scold’s bridle, used for 
scolding women in the old days. [It was 
made of iron, came down over the nose in 
front and kept their chins from wagging.] 2 
Padlock. 3łtHalter. 

fbran-ghaire, s.m. Corpse left in the open air. 


b.angus, see brangas. 
tbrann, -ainn, s.m. Firebrand, burning coal 
2 Woman. 
branna, gen. of brainn, ( for bronn) see bri. 
—————-ch, a. see brounach. 
——ch, AË, see bronnach. 
-—— — ——ire, 8.m. see brounaire. 
fbrannamh, -aiinh, sm. Coat of mail  2fi 
Ches--man. 
branrdaido, s. E Gaelic spelling of brandy. Is 
mairg à dh’doladh branndaidh ! pity him who 
woud drink bra. y ! (instead of whisky.) 
branndair, -e. -ean, s.m. Gridiron. 
—each.tt a. Pertai.ing to a gridiron, 
abounding in gridirons. 
braunduidh, see branndaidh. 
fbrannrach, -aich, s.m. Border of a country. 2 
D Gen, fold. 
fanuradh, s.m. Trivet, pot. 
fbraunumbh, see fbrannaiuh. 
beanorgain, (AF) s.n. Raven. 2 Crow. 
tbranch, s.m. Confines or border of à conntry. 
br«cdag,(CR) s.f. Huff, Ghabh e braodag, he 
tok tue huf 
bravihilach, -aich, see broaoilich, 
Bravynal, -il, s.m. see breitheal. 
-————aich, s.f.ind. see braoilich. 
fbraoi, s.u? Eyebrows. 
braodhlich,tt see braoilich. 
fbraoighii, v.n. Crack, crnmble. 
f— ————-e, 8.f. Crack, flaw. 2 Heavy shower. 
braoileadh, -eidh, -ean, 8. m. Great noise, 
bounce. 2ffFurious burst of indignation. 3 
HUrack, flaw. 
bravileag, -eig, -an, 8.f. Whortleberry. 2 Bil. 
berry. 3 Cranberry—Locha er. 4 Called by 
Cameron?) lus-nain-braoileag, which see. 
5 Small pieces of dried peat— A rayll. 
—-ach, a. Abounding in whortleberries, 
&c. Do leacan b., thy rocks abounding in 
whortleberries. 
an, pl. of baoileag. 
-Da1--con,** -eig-, -an-, 8.f. Red bear- 








Violent burst of indignation. Ciod a’ bhraoil- 

ich a tha n sud? what noise is that ? ciod a’ 

bh. a tn’ ort P why do you make such a noise } 
bravim, see braim. 

braoisg, — 8.7. Grin, gape. 2 Distortion of 
the mouth, asin contempt. 3 *Yawn. Chuir 
e b. air, he grinned, 

braoisgeach, -eiche, a. Grinning, gaping. 2 
Tootniess. 3 Broken-edged. 4** Having a 
a distorted mouth. Fear braoisgeach, a 
man with a distorted mouth ; a bhodaich 
bhraoisgich! you grinning old man! an claidh- 
eainh braoisgeach, the broken-edged sword. 

,*8,f. Female with broken teeth. 2 
Grinning female. 

braoisgean, -ein, s.m. Toothless person. 3 
Oue who grins. 3 One with a distorted mouth. 

——— ———àcha s.f. Habit of grinning. 

braoisgeil, s.f.ind. Idiotic laughter. 2*Prattling. 

braoisgire,* s.. Grinning fellow. 2 One that 
distorcs his mouth in contempt. 

braolaid,-e, sf. Raving, dreaming. 

braon, -aoin, s.m. Drop. 2 Drizzie. 3 Rain. 
4 Shower. 5 Dew. Gach braon d’ a fhuil, 
every drop of his blood ; le braonaibh na h- 
oidhche, with the drops of night ; braon nan 
sion, the drizzling of the blast; bogha nun 
Kë the rainbow, (am bogha-braoin—.PertA- 
shire. 

braon, v.a.&n. Drop. 2 Distil. 3 Drizzle. 

braonach, -aiche, a. Showery, drizzly, rainy, 
dewy, dropping. ’Sa mhadainn bhraonaich, 
in the ee morn ; an duibhre biaunach, the 
dewy gloaming. 

-———-d, s,f. Continual drizzling, constant 
dropping, genial showers, showery weather. 
braonan, -ain, s.m. The bud of à brier. 2 see 

braonan-bnnachaille. 
ach,tt a. Abounding in earth-nuts, of an 
earth-nut. 

————— -bachlaig,} -ain-, 8.m. Tormentil or 
potentil, see 1eainhnach. 2 Earth-nut, see 
braonan-bhuachaille. 

-bnuachaille,$ -ain-, s.m. Earth-nut— 
bunium flexuosum., 
-fraoich,} -ain-, 
mentil, see leamhnach. 
-nan-COu, 8. mM. 
mentilla erecta. 
braon-bogha,tíi -achan-, s.m. Rainbow. 

-dhealt, s. f. lleavy dew. B. na maidne, 
the heavy dew of morn. 

braos, -a0:8, see braoisg. t2 Prosperity, in- 
crease. 13 Lie, romance. 

+——ach, -aiche, a see braoisgeach. 

dail,** see braoisgeil. 

braosgail, see braoisgeil. 

bras, braise, a. Rash, impetnous. 
ive. 3 Bold, intrepid, daring, 4 Brisk, 
quick, sudden. 6 Hasty. 6 Wanton. 7 In- 
considerate. 8 Ardent, incautious. Bras le 
d’ bheui, rash with thy tong:.e (mouth) ; each 
bras. a mettlesome horse; bras bhu'lleach, 
ready in dealing blows ; mar steud-shruth 
bras, like an impetuous torrent; ag rath ri 
"mhic burasa, saying to his impetuous sons. 

tbras, s.f. Hat. 

brasach,** a. Nimble, lively, sudden. 

fbras-asgnaidhe,ff s.m. Sophist. 

brasailt, s.f. Panegyric. 7 Eulogy. 

brasaire-büird, $8.34. Sycophant, one who sub- 
sists by Nattery. : 

bras-bhuilleach, -eiche, a. Ready in dealing 
blows, quick in action, incautious, 








sm. Common tor- 


Dog.carmillion—tor- 








2 Keen, act- 


bras-b'u'npe 113 brat-leapach 


p ————Ó————————————————————————— 
— 


bras-bhuinne, s.f. Torrent. 2 Strong current.| mation of him ? a anv aig Dia tka brath, Gud 
3 Stormy sea. 4 Whirlpool. alone knows ; tna e air bhrath, he is to ve 
bras-chaoin, -e, a. Quick and pleasant. found ; cha bh: am bard air burath, the bard 
+bras-chomadh, see tbras-chuma. shall not be Jownd , gun burath furtactl, 
bras-chómhrag, -aig, an, s.m. Ardent fighting. | without expectatio; uf recief ; cia inaragh:ibb 
2 Tilts, tournaments. sinn brath mar adi’é:reas dhuit ? how shull 
¢bras-chuin, v.a. Counterfeit. we get information of what happens to you ? 
t—— ————adh, s.m. Counterfeiting. brath, pr. part. a’ brathach, v.a. Betray. 2 
tbras-fhalt, s.m. Hair of the head. Deceive. 3 Spy. 4 Suppose, guess. 5 In- 
brasgan, -ain, s.m. see prasgan. form against. 6**Design, intend. 7**En wr- 
bras-ghabhail, sf. Quick burning. tain an opinion. Brathaidh iad a chéile, they 
bras-ghaille, see bras-ghalladh. shall betray one another ; esan a bhrath e, he 
Tbras-ghalladh, s.m. Deciamation, that betrayed him; a" brath tighinn, intenving 
bras-ghallaimh, see bras-ghalladh. to come ; bha e a’ brath mo bhualadh, he was 
bras-ghaoir, -e, $ f. Quick loud noise. about to strike me. 
foras-gnruag, (cas-ghruag) s.f. Curled lock,|bràth, -a, s.m. Judgment. 2 Destruction. 
curled hair. [The sense conflagration given in the dic- 
brasguil, see brais-sgeul. tionaries is due to Druidic theorisings and is 
fbras-luidhe, s.m. Perjury. Luchd-bras-luidhe,| imaginary.—1] Gu laa’ bhràth cha’n é rich 
perjured persons. Calum, Malcolm shall not rise again till. tne 
bras-ageul, -sgeoil, see brais-sgeul. day of judgment ; na tréig mi gu buileach xo 
bras-stróiceadh,Tt£ -eidh, s.m. Violent tearing. gu brath, do not forsake me utterly nor for 
Tbrat,** s.m. Jirignent. ever ; seachd bliadhna roimh ’n bbrath thig 
brat, gen. sing. -a, [& brait] pl. bratan, s. m.| a’ mhuirair Eirinn ré aon thràth, seven yeu;s 
Covering, mantle, cloak. 2 Veil. 3 Coverlet,| before the day of judgment the sea at one tide 
bed-cover, counterpane. 4**Blanket. 5 Cur-| shall cover Ireland ; cha ghluais e gu cruadal 
tain. 6*Hair-cloth for a kiln. 7 Apron—| gu bràth, (pron. gu bràch) he shall never move 
Islay. 8 itag. Crochaidh tu am brat, thou} to the perils (of war.) 
shalt hang the veil ; agus ghabh iad brat, and | bràth, gen.sing. bràthan, see bra. 
they took a garment ; brat na h-oidhche, tAe| bratha, gen.sing. of brath. 
mantle of night. tbrathach,ja. Constant, .ontinual. 
bratach, -aich, -aichean, 8. f. Banner, flag,| brathadair, -ean, s.m. Betrayer, informer, 2 
colours, ensign. Bratach shìth, the fairy} Knave. 3 Traitor. 4 Kindling, ttgreat fire. 
flag, now in Dunvegan Castle, and said toj 5 Fuel. 


have been brougnt by tbe parson of Ha:ris| br«thadh, -aidh, s.m. Betraying, spying, iu- 











from Constantiuople at the tune uf the Uru- 
sades ; a’ buratacá mudr aig righ nau lann, | 


forming. 2'Trea&chery. Luchd brathaidh. spies. 
A’ b—, pr.part. of brath. 


the great banner of the king oj swords; bra ach brathaidh, Zut of o, of brath. Shall betray, &c. 


àlainn righ nam magu, the beauteous banner bràthair, yen. bràthar, pl. bràithrean, 


of the king of the pecus. 

, @ see bradach. 

ag, -aig, -an, s.f. Banneret, pennant. 
&l,ff-e, Bannered. 

—— —d,** 3.. ind. Envertainment. 

bratag, -aig, "agau, 8. J. 

caterpillar. 2*"tiag. S3**lnipudenu girl. 4l 
**Canker. 

ach, -aiche, a. Abounding with hairy 
caterpillars. 

brataich, v.g. Kindle, rouse, ferment, excite. 
brat-broin,s.m. Mort-cloth. 

brat-chasach,** o, Bow-legged. 

brai-dhearg, a. Red-veiled, covered or decked , 
witn red. 
brat-diona, 8.7. 
brat-dubnar, s.m. Awning. 
brat-fataich,* em. Cloak. 2**Blind man. Mar 


‘Lh: rough or hairy | ———— 








Awning. | ——— 


& rei 


s.m. Brother. Is lag guaiainn gun bnràtn- 


air, feeble is the arm of him who has no vio ner, 


-altruim, $.m. Foster-brother. 

OU DP, s.m. Paternal uncle. 
air m'athar, my paternol uncle. 
-vochd, s.;^. Friar. 2 Poor brother, 
lay-capuctin. 

«éle, s.m. Brother-in-law, wies or 


Brath- 


husband's orotaer. 


-céirde,tt s.m. Br.ther-craftsian. 
—eachi. see vra'tureileachd, 
WHO see bràithreachas. 
eaiacud, 
caa, n.pl. of brathai-. 

eil, =, @ see bàá. thaireil. 

2anàthar, sm. Maternal uncle. Bràth- 
air mowhathar, my maernal uncle. 

-emhort, s.m. Fratricide. 

-suiridhy.tf sun. Rival lover. 


bhrat-falach don dall, asa cloak for the blind. | 

brat-gniise, s.m. Veil for the face. ; bràthan, gem, Stu, & n. pl. ot bra. 

ibru, s.m. Residue, remnant. 2 Fragment. ' bràthar, gen. sing. of bràthair. 

vrach, -a, s.j. Knowledge, not.ce, informing, , bràth-cheo, s.m. Bewilaerment. Chaidh e ’na 
information. 2 Treachery, advantage by un-| Gë, he got bewildered. 
far meaus, betraying, spying. 3 Treason. 4! brath-foitle, s.m. Intention of betraying. 2 Un- 
**Soy, 5 Intention, design. 6 see bràth. 7| fair dealing. 3 Unawares. 4*Disguise. 
fursuit of information. ?**Expectadon. — 8| brath-gabhail, sam. Consideration, forethought, 
Opinion, idea, guess. 9**Mass, lump. 10**; (AH, Close application. 3(AH) Determined 
Lie. 11**Dependance. 12 see bra. Am bheil| effort. An làn a’ tighinn a staigh cho bras 
brath aige ? has he any information? does bel air na favdnla.chean gu’n robh feum air 
know ? tha amhiann air brath a dheanamh, brath-zabhaii n.1'm faigheadh duine tnairis 
ort, he means to betray you, or inform against) orra, the tide coming $n so briskly upon the 
you ; ghabh e brath orm, hetovk the advantage! sandy hollows t. at one dad to exercise prompt 
oy me; bi air brath, be in pursuit cf informa- — deiste ation ru 2, awing his way over them. 
Gow; vm bheii briacu agad c'àit ir baeile? vrath-liu, see biur aedu. 
have you any idea where he (Gi "a ann a tha , 5ralh-:osgadh,1] -aiuh, s.m. Furious burning. 
brash amadain agad air, you tak the advan- brat-iaima,** sf. IIund-towel. 
tie af hun as though he were a jool; au d’ ` brat-leapach, s.m. Counterpane, 
fuluir thu a barach ? did you get any injor-; quilt. 


bed-cover, 


brat-lin 


see braith-lin. 
brat-nasg,1f s.m. Brooch, skewer. ; 
brat-roinu, 3.7. Dividing cloth, partition veil. 
brat-sga.le, see Lrat-guuise. 
brat-:péilidh, &m. Swacddling-cloth. 
brat-ùrlair., s.m. Carpet. 
foratalian,** Gaelic (orm of battalion. 
ibre, s.m. Hall, beadlauid. 
breab, -à, -an, 8m. Kick. 2 Prance. 8 Spurn. 
4 Start. BAAL, Argcr—4Zti-ay Country. Chuir 
e breab orm, he ma?e m» angry; bhuail e 
breab air, Ae gave Ain a kick. 
„va. Kica. 2 Spurn. 3 Prance. 4 
Stamp with the foot. 5 Reject. 6 Start. 
ach, -aiche a. Apt to kick or prance. 2 
Elas.ic. Each breabach, brògach, a prancing 
strony-hoofed horse. 
adaica, sand. Kicking. 2 Prancing, 
bounding. 8 Starting. 4 Stamping. 
breabadair, -eau, s.m. Weaver. 2 One who 
k.cks, (1n Uist *‘breabadaireachd” was 
considered the lowest possible calling ın 
whien a man could take part; People seem- 
ed even ashamed to wention the word ‘‘breab- 
adair.” They used to say ''breabadair, l- 
cead na cuideachd,” (a weaver, with the com- 
m permission) ; breabadair nan casan 
oisgt’, the burni-legged weaver (used as a 
term of contempt.) 
eachd, s.f.in 14. Trade of a weaver. 2 
**Habit of kickiug or stamping. 
ean, n.pl. of breabadair. 
br: abadh, -aidh,3.m. Kicx, kicking. 2 Pran- 
ciug, prance. 3$ Bounding. 4 Starting. 5 
Stamping, stamp of the foot. 6**Spurning. 
A’ b—, pr. pt. of breab. 
breabail,-e, sf. Kicking. 2 Prancing. 3 Spurn- 
ing. 4 Stamping. 5 Gurgling noise. ‘Tha 
na sruthan ri breabail, the streamlets are 
guraling. 
ESCH, gen.sing. of breaban. 
regbair 2 ; 
E E. juan sm. Spider. 
breaban, -ain, -an, s. m. P:ece on a shde-sole. 
2 Heel-piece—4s/ay. 3tt Patch on the so.e 
within. 4f{Any small piece of leather. 5** 
Patch on tip of a shoe. 6 DU) Any patch 
hanging on to, or connected with anything. 
Di-inain a’ biireabain, the Monday of chas- 
tisement, when boys were whacked with toe 
Soie of a shoe. They were very api to get 
into mischief on Sunday, anl their parents 
dil not like to chastise them tiil Monday. 
breabanach, -aiche, a. Kicking. 2 Praue.ng. 8 
Abvunding in shoe-patches. 4t{Spurning. 5 
Jerking. 
— ——4d,11 s.f. Botchery. 
breahanaiche, -ean, s. m. 
Cobbler. 
breaban-deiridh,t{ s.m. Heel-piece for a shoe. 
-toisich, s.m. Fore-sole for a shoe. 
breabartaich,** s.f. Jerking. 2 Kicking. 3 
Prancing. 4 Spurning. 
breac, brice, a. Spotted, speckled, chequered, 
iebald. 2 Marked with small-pox. Breac 
e neoineanaibh, chequered with daisies ` each 
breac, a pielald horse ; bó bhreac, a pieba d 
cow ; fear breac, a man pitted with the small- 
pox ; cù breac, a spotteu doy. 
breac, bric,s.m. ‘Trout. 2 Salmon-trout. Zär 
Salmon. 4** rarely Badzer. 5 ** Wolf, 
breac, brice, s.f. The sinall-pox. [Preceded by 
the article a’ (bh—)] 2**Any spotted appear- 
ance. 
breac, pp pt. a’ breacadh, v.a. Carve. 2 Chequer. 
8 Speckle. 4 Kmbroider. 5 Set or pick a 
milistone. 6 Engrave. 7 Cover with devices. 


brat-liu, 


























Shoe-maker. 2 


117 














| . breacan-an-fhéit lh 


tffMix. Ott Cover with freckles. 10 PU; 
Cu. turf with a spade preparatory to turni: 
the sod. 
ach, ET -aich, s.m. Art or act of shing for 
trout. 
ach, -aiche, 
Pock-inarked. 
breac-a'-cliruidh, s.f. | Vaccination. 2 Cow-rox. 
brea-azuaun-buiiae-nan-allt, CR, &. m. Yellow 
wagtail—¥W est or Ross. see breacan-buidne. 
breacadh, -aidn, sm. Spotting, chejuering. 2 
Carving. 3 Engraving. 4 Eimbroideriug, or- 
uamesting. 5 Picking a miil-stone. 6 Get- 
ting fr caled, 7 Getting black and white. 
8(DU! Breaking the surface of cue ground 
with any sharp instrument. A’ b—, pr.part. 
of breac. 
-—— — — -muiliein, see breac-a'-mhu:ltein. 
— -rionnaich, s.m. Dappled sky. 
———.— -seunain, see brrac-sueuuun. 
————-. -sianain, see breac- ;heunain. 
.———— — -teine, a.m. Shiu freckles. 
breacag,-aig, An, s./. Sumall thin cae. 2 Scone. 
3 raucake. Breacagan nco-ghorrtichte, un- 
leavened eg Lan. 
breacaich, v a, Cargo, 
. chequer 
——te, past pt. 
spotted. 3 Ui. 








4. Abounding in trout. 2 





2 En:rave. 3**Bedrop. 





Mixed. 2 Chequered, 


4 Engraved. 


breacain, gen.sing. & n. pl. of breacan, 

breacair, -e, -van, s.m. Graver (engraving tool.) 
9 Engraver (person.) 

—  — —eact.d, af. Employment of an engraver. 
2 Chequering, chequer work 

breac-a’-mheauaidh, tt s.f. freckles on the face. 

see Dreac-a ‘-uthuiltein. 


breac-a'-nihuiüan 
?, 





y y ATI 
PÈ A 
a A | 8 


utei. 


69. Breac-a’-mh 


breac-a'-mhuiltein, s.m. Davpled sky, kind of 
clouds known as cirro-cumulus. 

breacan, -ain, pl. an, [& **-ain] s.m. Highland 
plaid. 2 Tartan. Parti-coloured c'oth 
was used by the Celts from the earliest times 
but the variety of colours in the breavan was 
greater or less, according to the rank of the 
wearer. That of the ancient kings had seven 
colours, that of the druids six, and that of 
the nobles four. In the days of Martin the 
tartans seemed to be used to distiazuish the 
inhabitants of ditterent districts, and not the 
meinbers of different families as at present. 
He expressly says that the inhab‘tants of the 
various islands were not all dre:sed alike, 
but that the setts and eoioura of the various 
tartans varied from isle to isle. As he does 
not mention the use of a sperial pattern by 
each family, it would appear that such a dis- 
tinction 1s à modern one, and taken from tha 
ancient custom of a tartan for each district, 
the family cr clan orizinally mo-t uumerous 
in each part eventuauy adopting as their dis- 
tinctive ciau tartan the tartan of such dis- 
tric. Mart'n’s information waa not obtain- 
ed on hearsay, he was born in Ssveand rear- 
ed in the midst of Highland cas oms. 

breacanaeh, a. Tartan, 2 Plaided Aodach 
breacanac’1, tartan clothes. 

breavun-an-fLéilidh, san. Belted pla.u., This 


hreacan 118 breac-ceann ae 


ew 


euinyp nw ou unonarg 704 | 






78. Breacan-buidhe. 


breacan-buidhe,T s.m. Yellow wagtail—mota- 
cilla flava. XAF) White, grey, or pied wag 
tail, see breac-an-t-sil. 


"eun yoqap uzow»ig “OL 


is the original garb of the Highlanders, and 
formed the chief part of their costume. The 
breacan in its simple form is now seldom used. 
It consisted of à plain piece of tartan, two 
yards in width, and four or six in length. In 
dressing, this was carefully plaited in the 
middle, of a breadth suitable to the size of 
the wearer, and sufficient toextend from one 
side around his back to the other, leaving as 
much at each end as would cover the front of 74. Breacan-glas, 
the body, overlapping each other. The plaid 
being thus prepared, was firmly bound round breacan-glas,{ s.m. Spotted fiy-catcher—musei- 
the loins with a leathern belt, in such a man-|, Capa grisola. : 
ner-that the lower side fell down to the mid- | breacan-sgiobalt, T s.m. Spotted fly-catcher, see 
dle of the knee-joint and then, while there breacan-glas. 
were the foldings behind, the cloth was dou- 
ble in front. The upper part was then fas- 
tened on the left shoulder with a Jarge brooch 
or pin, so as todisplay to the best advantage 
the tastefulness of the arrangeinent, the two 
ends being sometimes suffered to hang down, 
but that on the right side, which was necess- 
arily the longer, was more usually tucked 
under the belt.— Logan. 

breacanach, a. Plaided, dressed in plaids or 
tartans. 475. Breac-an-t-sil. 

breac-an-anmoich, adv. Rather late, latish. | breac-an-t-sil,f s.m. White, grey, or pied wag- 

tail,—motacilla Yarrelii. 2 Chaffinch Met, 

& D., 2nd. Part.) 

breacarsaich,* s.f. Twilight. 2 Middle state, 
especially of health. 

Ureac-beachdaidh, see breac-beadaidh. 











71. Breacan-baintighearna. "6. Breac-beadaidh 
breacan-haintichearna,fl s.m. Grey wagtail—| breac-beadaidh, s.m. Loach. 
mo'acilla boarula. breac-bhallach, -aich, a. Spotted, speekled. 
breacan-beithe,f s.m. Chaffinch—fringilla coe- | breac-bhoiceannach,* s. f. Herpes, shingles— 
ibs. 2 Linnet (MeL & D.) 3AF Green lint| Bute, Cowal & Lochfyneside. 
white. 4tfSpecies of grass. breac-ceanudac,(AF) s.m. Turbot. 


breac-chreideamh 


breac-chreideambh, s.m. Mixed religion. ` 

breac-deamhainn, s. m. —Jsay, see bioran- 
deamhnaidh. 

breac-dhearg, &. Spotted with red and some 
other colour. An tarbh breac-dhearg, the 
red and white bull. 


-yonboenaf-oMarg “LL 





breac-feusagach, s.m. Barbel. 

preac-fhrangach, s.f.The venereal, pox. [Prece- 
ded by the article a’ (bh—.) 

breac-geal. s.m. Salmon-trout. 

foreachaoidh, s. Indifference. 

ibreachd, s.m. Doubt. 

¢breachdan, $.. Wheat. 2 Custard. 8 Fresh 
butter. 4**Fresh ineat. 5 see breacan. 

breac-iteach,-eiche, a. Having spotted feathers. 
Glacagan nan eun breac-iteach, the delis of 
the spotted birds. 

breac-iteag,** -eig, s.f. Spotted or speckled 
feather. 

breac-laogh, -aoigh, s.m. Fawn. 2 Speckled 
calf. . 





&ch, a. Abounding in fawns or spot- 
ted calves. 

breac-liath, a. Greyish. 

breac-lion, -lin, -lontan [& **-liontaichean] 
Trout-net. 2 Drag-net. 3 Landing-net. 

breac-luirgneach, a. Shin-freckled. 

breac-mhac,(AF) Magpie, see pioghaid. 

breac-mhara, (AF) s.m. Mackerel. 2 Roach. 

breac-mhuc, s.m. Magpie, see pioghaid. 

breac-mhuilinn,** see breac-a’-inhuiltein. 

breacuachadh, -aidh, s.m. Chequering,spotting. 
2 Miugling. 8 Embroidery. 4 Variegating. 
A' b~, pr.pt. of breacnaich. 

breacuaich, pr.part. a’ breacnachadh, v.a. Che- 
quer. 2 Mix. 3 Make spotted. 4 Embroider. 

— te, a., & past pt. of breacnaich. Che- 
quered. 2 Made spotted. 3 Parti-coloured. 
4 Embroidered. 

breae-nam-bo,* s.f. Cow-pox. 

br «uc-dtraich,|| s.". Chicken-pox. [Preceded by 
the article a’. | 

breac-riounaich, see breacadh-rionnaich. 

breac-seunain, see breac-sheunain. 

breac-shean, a. Oldish. 

breac-sheuuain,||s.f. Freckles. [Preceded by 
the article a’. ] 

bieac-shith, 8.7. |Chicken-pox. 2 Nettle-rash. 
3 Livid spots o1 the skin of a dying person, 
4 Hives (McL & D.) [Preceded by the ar- 





119 


breamas 


ticle a’, 

breac-shoillsich, v. n, Shine faintly. 2 Glim- 
mer as the twilight. 

breac-sholus, -uis, sm. Twilight. ?**Daybreak. 

8ttGhimmer. 

breacta, past pt. of breac. Sm 

2 Embroidered. 5 Carved. 
mill-stone. 

Tbreac-ughach,11 a. 

breacuich, see breacaich. 

tbread, -eid, s.m. Breach. 

tbreadh, see brèagh. 

——achd, see brèaghachd. 

————a8$*, see bréaghad. 

bréag, Gig, 8./., & v. see breu». 

ach, -aiche,a. see breugach. 

adair, sm. see breugadair. 

tbréagadh, see breugadh. 

bréagag, see breugag. 

bréagaire, -e, -ean, s.m. breugaire. 

breagan, see breugan. 

[breazarsaidh, sr. Imagination. 

breag-chrabhadh, s.m. see breug-chrahhadh. 

b;éagh, -a, a. Fine. 2 Well-dressed, 3 Splen- 
did. 4 Good-looking. 5 l'retty. 6 Beauti- 
ful. 7 Surprising. 8 Showy. 9 Pleasant. 
10 Specious Nighean bhreavh, a handsome 
young woman: là brèagh, a fin» duy; is brèagh 
nach d'thàinig thu dhachaidh an am, it is 
surprising you did not conne hone in tiine ; gu 
bréagh aninoch, pretty late in the evening; cia 
brèagh a suuadh ! how splendid her appear- 
ance! "nuair a labiras e gu bréagh, when he 
speaks fair ; tri nithean brèagha: long fo 
sheol, craobh fo bhiath, duine naomh air 
leabaidh a bhais, three beautiful things : a 
ship under sail, a tree in bloom, a holy manon 
his death-bed. 

achd, sr, Finery. 2 Prettiness. 3 Or- 
nament. 4 Showiness. 5 Elesance. 6** 
Speciousness. A bhreaghachd, his ornaments. 

bréaghad, -ail. s.m. Beauty. 2 Attire. 3 Or- 
nament. 4 Finery. 5**Showiness. 

aich, v.a. Adorn, ornament, embellish. 

2 Accomplish. 

aichte,** past pt. Accomplished. 

Tbreaghaidh, s.m. Enthusiast. 

bréaghas, -ais, ssm. Finery, ornaments, showi- 
ness, gaudiness. 

+breaghaslach,** -aich, s.m. see breisleach. 

tbreaghaslaich, see breislich. 

bréaghchaid,* s. f. Degree of beauty. 2 Super- 
iority in beauty. 

tbreag-luigh, v.n. Forswear, perjure. 

Tbreagnuich, v.a. see breugnaich. 

breaghoire, see breugaire. 

tbreall. -eill, s.m. Knob. 2 Knob at either 
end of the sticks of a flail. 3f{Glans mentu- 
le. 3**Phymosis. 

breallach,(AF) s.m. Small hose-fish. 2 (AM) 
Large ceckle-shell. 

breatlacn,** a. Having a phymosis, of, or rela- 
ting to a phymosis. 

brealiau,** -ain, s.m. Vessel. 

—— ——— -dubh,$ sm. Crowberry, see lus-na- 
tionnaig. 

breamain, gen.sing. d n. pl. of breaman. 

breaman, -ain, -an, 8.m. Tail of a sheep or 
goat. 2 Backside, rump. 3* Train. Barr 
a’ bhreamain, the tip of the tail. 

———ach, -aiche, a. Tailed. 2 Like a tail. 
3 Of, or belonging to a tail or train. 

— — — -fuilteach,|j gan, Piles. 

breamas, -ais, s.u. Mischief. 2 Mishap, mis- 
chance. 3 Fatality. 4fThe Devil. 5*Blun- 
der. Dh'éirich am breamas dhuit, mischief 
hus happ end to you ; cha leighis aithreache 




















Lied. chequered. 
4 Picked, as a 


Full of spotted eggs. 

















breamas 


as brcainas, repentance cannot remedy a blun- 
der; ri breamas, at misc^i^f., 

breaiasach, -Aiche, a. Uufortunate, unlucky. 
z Fatal. 3 Ruinous. 4 Bungling, blundering. 

d, s.f. Fatality. 2 Misfortune. 3 
Unfortunate state or condition, 4**Liability 
to inischance. 

breamasag, see brama*a:. 

brewn, -éiu, s. & a. see breun. 








Vreanarh, 

breanadn, see breun—. 

bréanan, 

jhe, see brionglaid. 

renta 

eR ael } see breun—. 

tbreas, 3.72. Prince. 2**King. 3 Potentate. 
4 Voice. 5 Loud noise, sonnd. 

t , v.a, Reign. 





breas, a. Illustrivus, eminent, great. 

--——ail,** a. Princely, migüty. 

threas-aontaidh, sm ‘Sh: royal assent. 

tbreas-chathair,-thrach,-. hraichzan,s.f.Throne. 

foreas-cnolbh, -an, &m. Sceptre. 

tbreasda, a. Principat. 2 Quick. 3 Lively, 
sinart, 

Tfbreusia:1g.,** 8.m. Dece:t. | 

tbrea -lann, -ainn, sf. Palace. 2 Court of jus-| 
tice. 

fbreas-oirchiste, s.f. Royal treasury. 

tbreas-rod, s.m. King’s road. Cha'n'eil breas- 
ro 1 gu cé-mheas, there is no royal road to (easy 


| 

way to learn» geometry. 

breath, -an, &.f. Row, rank, layer, stratum. 2 

Flake. 3 Also nsed for breith. 4**Couch. 
Tri breathan, three rows. : 

tbreath,** a. Clean, pure, bright. 2 Innocent. 

b.eathach, a. In ranks, in rows. 2**Judicial, 
critical. 3 see breitiueaci. 

breathal, -ail, sm. see breitheal. 

see breithealach. 

see breithealaich. 

see breitheamh. 

breathanas,* s.m. sec breitheanas. 

bre:tnas,* -ais, s.» Frenzy, extreme fury, 
flaming wrath. 2tfinfatuatiou. Tha e air 
bireathas, he is frautic ; tha breathas a 
chutnaich air, he i8 in a frenzy. 

breathnach,** a. Judiciary. 

h,* s.m. see breithneachadh. 

breathnaieh,*v.a. see breithnich. 

turgathnas, s.m. Bodkin, skewer. 
Tongu» of a buckle. 

breice,** (breac) s.f. Spots, spottedness, ma- 
ciation. A bhreics, hes (the leopard’s) spot- 

ed N38. 

tbreicuueoras, s.m. Sculpture. 

b.éid,* v.a. Spread peats—North High's. 211 

Wear or deck with the bréid, or matron's 
badge. 3ffPatch. 

——, -e, -ean, s.m. Kerchief, napkin. 2 Sail. 8 
Patch, piece of cloth of any kind. 4 Woman's 
head-dress, consistiug of à square of fine lin- 
en niuned round the head, and fastened with 
cor:ls of silk or pins of silver or gold, douned 
by a womai the morning after her marriage, 
ani regarded as the badge of wifebood. 
5, DU) Rag, clout. 

bréid-air-toin, s.f. Ifen-harrier, ring-tail hawk, 
monse-hawk.—cireus cyaneus. 

bré.d-an-craunaig,AC s.m. Kerteh on props." 

bréid ban, AC s.m. White kertci. 

bié:d beannach AC) 8.m. **Pinnacled kertch.” 

b éid-broige,1 s.m. Shoe-patch. 

b.éut-brona, s.m. Apron. 

bré: t-cuailein,AC s.m. Hair kertch. 

bed cuimir uan crùn, AC s.m. Shapely kertch 
oi the crowns. Béd cuimir nan tri cı ùin, the 





-—ach, a. 
-———— ——aich, v.a. 
breathamh, 





——-.— 0, 


2 Clasp. 3 


120 


bre'sle ch 


shupely kertch of the three crowns. 

bréileach, -eiche, a. Like a kerchief. 2 
ged, tatt red. 38f Of, or belong nz to clot 
of any kind. 4**L:ke a woiaa’s head-dress. 
5**White-spreading. Ar siùil bh., our white- 
spreading sails. 

ich, &.f. (Lit. woman with the brén 
Married woman, matron. Bua mi ‘nam 
bhré.dich. 'nam ghruagaich is ’nam bhiam- 
traich 'san aon àm, I was a married woman, 
a virgin and a widow at the same time. 

bréileachag.AC see bréideag. 

bréideadh, - idh, sm. Dressing of the head, 
2 Attiring, clothing. 3 Adjusting the badge 
of matron. 4 Patching. 

bee AC s.f. (Lit. L:ttle woman of the bréid) 

ifle. 

bréi lean, -ein, -einean, 8.m. Little rag. 2 Clout 
3 Coif. 4 Web of frieze. 

bréidean, n.pi. of bréid. 

préidear,ff -eir, -an, s.in. Botcher. 

béil geal, s i. White head-dress. 

bréid-gheal, -ile, a. White-sailed. 2 Having 
a white handkerchie- or napkin. Boirion- 
nach b., a female with a white head-d ess; 
luingeas bréid-gheal, cranna h,a white-sailed, 
high-ma. ted ship. 

bréidich, v.a. Patch. 

bréid-shoithichean, s.m. 


bréid-uchd, s.m. Stomacher. 2 Bib. 
tbreife, 


tbrofne, T Finger-. or toe-nail, 2 Hole, 


toreifneach, a. Full of holes. 

+ -——--——,, sm. Rustic, boor. 

bréig, ^ ^, ( see breng. 

, Dë. | 

+——, s.m. Rustic, boor. 

bréig-chiabh, see breug-chiabh. 

——-————-adlair -e,-ean, see breng-ch—. 

bré.ge, gen.sing. of breug. Beul na bLréige, the 
lying mouth. 

bréige, CH see breug. 

tbreigeadh, -eidh, gem Violating, abusing, 

oréig-fhios, -a, s.m. see breug-fhios. 

-—ach. a. see breug-fhiosach. 

fbréignich, s.m. Fiction. 

bréiv-riochdaich, see breng-riochdaich, 

¢breiieacin, see braoilich. 

fbreilealh, see bravileadh. 

breill, gen.sing. of breall. 

breilleis, s/f. Delirium, raving. 

each, a. Delirions. 2 Causing delirimin. 

eachd, 8f. Deliri usness. 2 Liability 
to delirium. 3 Giddiness. 

breim, see braim. 

bréin, gen.sing. of breun. 

bré:ne, comp. of brenn. 

Per Durbnlence, turbnlent disposition, 
3**Mtink. Thig a biréine a nìos, his stink 
shall ascend. 

brés «eachd, 

bréinead, 


Rage 





Dish-clout. 




















see brennachd. 

see Lreunad, 

b.éineag, see breuuag. 

bréinean, see breunuan. 

——-—— -brothach. -aich, s.m. Ox-eye, see 
neòinean mór. [Preceded by the article am. ] 

bréinid, see breuna d. | 

fbreis, s.f. Tear 23> Distilling. 

foreis, v.d. see bris. 

brane E sm. Still. 

breixg, see brisg. 

` CH a. Moved, provoked. 

1breisi, a. Dropping. 

fb-eisün, sf. War-cry. 

breisleach, Ach, s.m. Dream. 2 Abashment. 8 
Confusion. 4| Delirium, raving. 51 Nightmare, 
Chur e ’m breislich mi, he quite confuunded 





breislvaca 


wie ; chaidh mi am bhreislich, I was confoun- 


ded. 

freisleachadh, -aidh, see breisleach. 

ail, -e, æ. Confusing. 2 Delirious. 3 
Cansing deliriuin. 

breisiich, pr. pt. a’ breisleachadh, v.n. Rave, 
talk irrationally. 2 Confuse, confound. 

fbreismmion, s.m. Writ, mandamus, royal man- 








date. 

breith, s. f. Judgment, sentence, decision. 2 
Row, rank. 3 Layer. 4 Birth, descent. 65 
I.terpretation, signification. 6 Bearing, 
carryiug. 7 Penance. 8 Overtaking. 9** 
Opmwn. 10** Censure. 11** Contidence. 
Breith air a’ phobull bheir thu, thou shalt 
judge the people ; tha Dia ann a tha ‘toirt 
breith air an talamh, there is @ God that 
judgeth the earth; na h-aingidh anns a’ 

nreith, the wicked in judgment; ciod is breith 

de "m bhruadair ? wha’ is the interpretation 
of my dream ! thoir breith air mo bhiruawair, 
interpret my drear ; a’ dol air seacharan o 
Im breitn, going astray from their birth ; o 
bhreith gu bas, from birth to death ` bithidh 
breitn luath lochdach, « hasty or faulty 
judgment will be hurtful. 

Ureith, (e, thoir breith) v.n. Judge, sentence. 

bretch (a') pr.part. of beir. A’ breith air làimh 
orm, seizing me by the hand ; cha b' fhad’ bha 
sinu a’ breith orra, we soon overtook them; a’ 
breith air a chéile, seizing each other ;thaia' 
breith cloiune, she is bearing children ; a’ 
breith u.ghean, laying eggs ; a’ breith searr- 
ai h, casting a foal: a’ breath laoigh, calving; 
a’ br ith uain, yeaning ; a’ breith uircean, 
Jariowing; a breith chuileanan, whelping: a’ 
breih phiseag, kittening. [For additional 
exiiiiples sev up ler Wir.) 

breiti-air-eivina,tt s.m. Violence, deforcement. 
tapine. 2*Child scarcely alive when born. 

breitn-tnidheachais, s. f. Thanksgiving. Agus 
ir b., and after giving thanks. 

breitn-lhiud:,**$./. Sentence of condemnation, 

bre th-dniugheachd, tt sf. Legitimacy. 

breit! each, a. Judicial, critical. 2 Exact, ac- 
e nato. 

breithneadaireachd, s.f. Interpretation, as of 
dreams, &c. 

breitieal, -il, s.m. Confusion, as of mind. 2 
Astoni«umrent. 3*Delirium, raving. 4**Ter- 
ror. $**lurinoil. 

breithealach, a. Causing confusion. 2 Apt to 
be confused. 8 Cansing terror. 

bre tiealaich, v.n. Hurry. 2 Confuse the mind, 

,** &f. Confusion of mind, flurry. 

“breitheamh, -eimn, pl. -a -an & -nan, 8m. 
Judie. Z Umpire. 2**Judgment, decision, 
seutence (more usually breitheanas.) | Nach 
dean breitheamh na talmhainn uile ceartas P 
shall not the judge of all the earth do right 1 

bréieneambnas, see breitheanas. 

breothvanas, -ais, an. 8J. Judgment, de- 
cis on, sentence. 2 Faculty of judging. 3 
Sudden calamity. Thàinig breathanas ort, 





—— ———— n 


a judgment came upon you; is firinn breithean. | t 


ae an Tighearna, the judgments of the Lord 
ae true; ià a’ bhreitheanais, the day of judg- 
ment, 

breijvanaxach, a. Retributive, as a just judg- 
meiul. 

Wwre'thoant cen, -aiche, a. Judicious, prudent. 
2 Sxilfal. 3 Judicial. 

brvith-fhéillteachd, s.f. Birthday solemnity. 

tbr"ithiontair, s.m. Fuller. 

triith-la, -laithean, s.m. Birthday. 

bretthneacn, a. Imaginative. 

breitüneachadh, -aidh, s.a. Apprehension. 2 


£21 
















breóchuail, 


oreth 


Conception, inagination. 3** Way of think- 
4ifArt or faculty of judging. 


ing, idea. 
bilInterpretation. B. aisling, the interpre- 
tation of a dream; adh’ aon bhreithneachadh, 
of cne way of thinking. 

breithuich, pr.part. a’ breithneachadh, v.a.dn. 
Conceive, apprehend, imagine, suppose. 
Ju uge, opine. 3ttInterpret, explain. 

not dite. sf. Arbitration. 

-^ bhairteach, tt -eiche, a. Judicat 
breitich, v.n. Swear. 
tbreitireachd, sf. Interpretation. 


breo, v.n. See breoth. 

tbreo, s.m. Fire, flame. ta. see bréagh. 

breoc,* v.a. Patch. 

breocaich, v.a. Botch, patch. 

breocail, p.part. a’ bredvladh, v. a. 
put together. 

tbreoch, s.m. see bruach. 

bredchaid, -e, -ean, sf. Any fragile, tender, 
or brittle thing. 

breochail, a’) AC pr.part. Drivelling. 

see breócail. 

breóchdlair,tf see bredclair. 

breó-chlach, sf. Fliut. 

breo-choire, 8.2. Warming-pan. 

breo-chual, sr, Funeral pile, bonfire. 

breocladh, -aidh, s.m. Clumsy patching. 
b—, pr.pt of breócail. 

breoclaid,t sf. Sickly person. 

breoclair, -e, -ean,s.m. Mender,botcher,patcher, 

breodh, see breoth. 

—-—adh, see breothadh. 

breó-dhruidheachd, s.f. Pyromancy. 

breòg, -dig, s.f. Leveret. 

tbreog, a. Feeble, weak, sickly. 

tbredg, v.a. Pound, bruise. 2 Bake, 

fbreogach, -aich, -aichcan, sm. Baker. 

tbreogadh, -aidh, $. n. Crushing, bruising, 
pounding. 

breógh, v.n. see breòth. 

+breoghas, see brioghas. 

tbreoghasach, see brioghasach. 

breoig, AH) sf. Feeble, weak, sickly person. 
2 Fragile vessel of any description. 

breoillean, -ein, s.m. Darnel, rye-grass—lolium 
perenne} and temulentum. 

breòilleanach, a. Abounding in darnel or rye- 
grass. 2 Like darnel or rye-grass. 

breòinn, (AF) s. Cat. 

bredite, a. Infirm, frail, weak, feeble, sickly, 
tender. 2**Slender. 3**Drnised. 4ffUotten, 
putrid. Ged tha mi breòite, thogh I be in- 
firm ;tha mi breòite, tinn, Lam weak and 


Patch 


A’ 


sickly. 

breòiteachd, s.f. Infirmity, frailty, weakness, 
debility. 2 Sickliness. 3**Slenderness. 4{f 
Rottenness. 


breólaid, -e,-ean, s.f. Dotage. 2 (Debility. 3 
Delirium. 

bredlaideach, -eiche, a. Delirious, raviug. 2 
Doting. 

bredlamas,ftf -ais, s.m. Confusion. 

tbredn, -oin, s.m.  Blemisb, blur, spot. 

, v.a. Blur, spot, stain. 2 Efface. 

breoth, pr.part. a’ breothadn, v.a. dén Rot, 
corrupt, putrefy. 2 Drnise, crush. 3 Maim. 

breothailh, -aidh, s m. Putrefaction, corrupz- 
ion, putrefying. 2 Wounding, ma:ming. 3 
Bruising, crusning. 4**becay, consumption. 





b**Wound. 6**Crush, brue. A’ b—, pr.pt. 
of breoth. 

breothag,(DU) -aig, s.m. Te: f.) Fat, corpulent, 
middle-aged person. 


tbreothan, -ain, s.m. Wheat. 
tbret,** a. High., 
bretb, sew breith, 


2 breuban 122 brianna 


breugnaichte, past part. ot " 

breug-riochd, s.m. Disguise. 2ttSpectre. 

breug-riochdair,* s.m. Pretender, disguiser. 
2 Traitor. 

breun, bréine, a. Stinking, foetid, putrid 2 
Filthy, loathsome, nasty, corrupt. 3* Bold, 
indelicate, as a female. 4 Of a turbulent, 
boisterous disposition. 5**Clumsy. 6ffBeast- 
ly, brutal. Bainne breun, soured mik —(AC,; 
o’n ótrach bhreun, from the stinking dunghill. 

; v.a. Become corrupt. 2 Stink. 

,»&Jf. Stench. 2 Corruption. 

ach,*s. f. Turbulent immodest female. 

&ch,** -aiche, a. Stinking. 2 Nasty. 
8 Surly. 

breunachd, e E Corruption, rottenness. 2 
Becoming rovten. Stench, stink, bad smell. 
4 Degree of turbulence. 5* Indelicacy. 

breunad, -aid, s.m. see breunachd. 2 A'b—, 
pr. pt. of breun. 

breunadh, see breunachd. 

breunag, Si, -an,s.f. Dirty female, slattern, 
drab. 2 Turbulent female. 5¢+Sulky woman. 
4(JM) Lying woman. Aontachadh bnonnaig 
le breunaig the jlattering woman agreeing witi 
the lying woman—a commun saying ín tne 
Outer Hebrides when two bad characters con- 
spire to prove a ua or to hide & fault. 

breunaid, s. f. Stink, putrid smell. 

breunair, s.m. ‘lurbulent man. 

breunan, -ain, s.m. Dirty fellow. 2 Dunghill. 
3 Any stinking thing. 4 Surly ill-tempered 
fellow. 5t{Juhospitable man. 

tbreunan, v.n. Stink. 

breunan-brothach,**-aich,s.m. The great daisy. 
2(JM) Dirty fellow given to sullen anger, a 
bad description of anyone. 

breun-bliith,** «. f. Assafoetida, 

tbreun-chrann, s.m. Kind of tree. 

breuu-fhedcullan,(AF) s.m. Foumart,fulimart, 
see feocullan. 

breun-ladhrach, -aiche, a. Rotten- or stinking- 























breuban, see breaban. 

breng, bréige, breugan gen.pl. breug, gf Lie, 
faisehood. Saor m’ anam o bhilean nam 
breug, deliver mysoul from lying lips; fluar- 
adh ’sa bhréig e, he was found out ina lie ; 
gheall Dia do nach comasach breug a dhean- 
amh, God, who zannot lie, promised. 

breug, pr.part. a’ breugadh, v.a. Soothe,amuse. 
2 Flatter. 8 Pacify. 4 Cajole. 6 E tice. 
Breug am paisde, pacify or soothe the child ; 
breug leat e, cajole him away with you ; 'g a 
bhreugadh mar gu'm bitheadh leanabn ann, 
cajoling him as though he were a child; ma 
bhreugas peacaich thu, if sinners entice thee. 

«aci, -aiche, a. Lying, false, deceitful. 2 
**Flattering,cajoling,soothing. 3**D ceived. 
Is breugach thu an diugh, you are deceiving to- 
day ; tha e cho breugach 's a tha an cat cho 
bradach, he is as mucha liar as the cat is a 
thief [an empha.ic way of saying a man is a 
liar | ; tha e breugach, he is untruthful ; nach 
breugach thu! how much you lie! also you 
don’t mean it ! 

ach,* sf. Lying female. 

achan, s.m, Plaything. 

&chd,1l et Illusiveness. 

adaire, ean, s.m. see breugaire. 

adaireachd, see breugaireachd. 

adan, see breugachan. 

adh, -aidh, s. m. Cajoling, flattering, 

soothing, lulling, amusing. 2* Caressing. 

ag, -aig, an, 8f. Little lie. 2 Lying 

female. 

aich, v.n. Belie, falsify, give the lie. 
2 Disprove. 8 Gainsay. Bhreugaich e mi, he 
belies n breugaich e, belie him; ged éig- 
nichear an sean-fhacal cha bhreugaichear e, 
though the proverb be gainsaid it cannot be 
disproved. [also breugnaich. 

breugaiche,** s.m. Same meaning as brewgaire. 

breugaire, -an, s.m. Liar. 1s fhearr duine 
bochd ua breugaire, a poor man ts better than 
a liar; 6isdidh am breugaire teang’ an aimh- 
leis, the liar lisiens to a corrupt tongue ; is 
fheairrde breugaire fianuis, a liar is the bet- 
te of a witness. 

breugaireachd, s.f. Practice of lying. 2 of con- 
tradicting. 3 Vice of lying. 

breugan, -ain, -an,tts.m. Child's toy. 

—— ———, n. vl. oì breug. 

breug-chiabh, an, s. 7. Wig, peruke. 

————--. —-adair, -e, -ean, s.m. Wig-maker. 

breug-chràbnach, a. Hypocritical, deceitful. 

breug-curavhadh, -aidh, s.m. Hypocrisy, dis- 
sembliug. 2 False devotion. 

breug-thaidheachd, s. f. Fa!se prophesying. 

breug-fhios, -a, s.m. Enthusiasm, fanaticism. 

———--—ach, a. Enthusiastic. 

Lreuglachadn, -aidh, s.m. Fore-swearing, PS 
juring. 2 Falsitying, gainsayiug. A' b—, 
pr.part. of breugiaicn. 

breuglaich, pr.part. a’ breuglachadh, v.a. Per- 
jure, forswear, gainsay, belie. 3 

te, past pt. Forsworn, perjured. 2 

Gainsaid. 3 Falsitied. 

brenguachadh, -aidh, sm. Falsifying. 2 Be- 
lying, gainsaying. 3 Contradicting. A’ b—, 
pr. pt. oi breugnaich. 

breugnachair,** -e, -ean, s.m. Gainsayer. 

brenguaich, pr.part. a’ breugnachadh, v.a. Be- 
lie, falsify, gainsay, disprove. 7 Contradict. 
wl we e mi, he belied me. [also breug- 
aich. 









































toed. 

breuntachd,ff 8. f. see breunachd. 

breuntag,** -aig, -an, s. f. Filthy drab. 

breuntas, -&is, s.m. Filth. 2 Suuk. 3 Putre- 
faction. 4 Any loathsome smell. 

breun-ubhal,§ s.m. Prickly buckthorn, see 
ramh-droig hinn. 

tbri, adv. d: prep. Near to. 

furi, s. f. Anger. 2 Word. 3 Effort. 4 Ris- 
ing ground. 5 Dignity. 6 Honour. 7 see 

11gu. 

tbria, sn. Town. 

tbriadn, s. f. Remnant. 

briadna, see bréagh. 

———chd, see brèaghachd. 

d, -aid, see breaghad. 
ich, see bréaghaich. 

————— 8, -ais, $. J. see brèaghachd, 

briag, see breug. 

briagh, see breagh. 

Toriagh, s.m. Wound, mortal wound, 

bnaguachd, see brèaghachd. 

briaghas, -ais, s.m. see breaghas. 

briaghchaid, see breaghad. 

brian, -ain, sm. Word. 2 Composition. 3** 
Warrant. 4**Author. 5 (AC) Angel, arch- 
angel, god, divinity, hence gol of evil. 6(AC) 
Term ef exclamation, a bnriain ! thou god ? 
cha Inidh Brian leam, Satan shall not (ie 
down with me. [** says brian is f] 

ach, a. Fairspokeu. 2 Full of speech- 
es, specious, pro-iny. x 

fbrianna, s.m. Author, 2 Composition. 3 
Warrant. 

t , pl Pieces 








, 8, f. Same meanings as breugnach- 
adh. Thug e a’ bhreugnaich dhomh, ke be- 
lied me. 

vreugnaichidh, fut. af. a. of breugnaich, 











brian-sgaradh 


123 


brigh 


brian-sgaradh, -aidh, am Cranny, chink,cleft | bric, gen sing. & n.pl of breac. (s.m.) 
ream. 


briantadh, -aidh, s.m. see illust.78.] 





7 


78. Briantadh. 


fbriar, s.m. Pin, prickle. [? Eng. brier.] 

bri'ar, see brighnihor. 

briarach, a. Thorny, prickly. 

briathar, -air, pl. briathra & briathran, s.m. 
Word. 2 Saying. 3 Assertion. 4 Oath. 5 
Verb. 6 rarely Victory, conquest. Air mo 
bhriathar, upon my word. 

briathar, v. see briathraich, 

briathra, n.pl. of briathar. 

briathrach, -aiche, a. Wordy, verbose, talka- 
tive, loquacious. 2 Verbal. Ni thu am fear 
tosdach briathrach, you make the silent man 
talkative. 

—— ———adh, -aidh, s.m. Wording. 
ing. 3 Stating. 

—an; -àin, -an, 8.m. see briathradair. 

—— ————4à8, -ais, s.m. Eloquence. 2 Elocu- 
tion. 3 Verbosity. 4 Oratory, rhetoric. 51f 
Phraseology. 6*Wit. 

Eu s.m *Dictionary, lexicon. 2**As- 
serter. 


2 Swear- 





eachd,* s.j. Lexicography, lexi- 
cographer’s work. 

briathradan,* -ain, see briathradair. 

briathraich, pr. pt, a’ briathrachadh, œ. a. 
Affirm, maintain, assert. 2 Dictate. 3 Swear 

to. 4 Set down in words. 

briathrail,-e, a. Verbal. 2+¢Verbose. Eadar- 








theangachadh briathrail, a verbal translation. | 
| brigean, 
2! brigh, s. f. Essence. 


brib, pr.pt. a’ bribeadh, v.a. Bribe, suborn. 
brìb, -e, pl. [-ean &] tt-eachan, s... Bribe. 
Small sum of money—4s/ay. 3 Driblet. 4 
Item. Am bheil thu ambrath a’ bhrib sin a 
phaigheadh ? are you going to pay that tri- 
"ug sum ? brìb nach do ghabh, who has not 
tsena bribe, 
bri eadh, -eidh, s.m. Bribing, bribery. A’ b—, 
pr. pt. of brìb. 
bri>ear,** Gaelic spelling of briber. 
bribearichd, s. f. Bribery, venality. 
bribeil, (AM) a. Mean. Duine bribeil, a mean 
man. 
bri-bheadagan,ff -ain, s.m. Word-pedant. 
brbid,(JM) er Small debt. Tha bribidean 
fhiach aigea muigh, he has small debts out 
2. e. against people. 
E 


bric-dhearg,** s. Ruddock. 

brice, gen.sing. of breac, (s./f.) 

brice, comp. of a. breac. 

brice, s.f. Spottednes:. 

brice, 8. f. Gaelic spelling of brick. 

bricear, -e, -ean, s.m. Brickmaker. 

bricein, -ein, s.m. Sprat. 2 small trout. 

bricein-, prefix attached to certain names of ani- 
mals, derived from breac. [also breacan-] 

bricein-baintighearna, see breacan-baintigh- 
earna. 

bricein-beithe, 


see breacan-beithe. 





79. Bricein-caorainn. 


bricein-cacrainn,™ s.m. Mountain finch,—frin- 


gilla, montifringilla. 

bricein-dubh,3} s.m. Baldmoney, (plant) see 
muilceann. 

bric-liath, a. Greyish. 

bric-shorn, -üirn, s.m. Brick-kiln. 

fbrid,** -ide, s. f. Bridle. 

bride, s. f. see fride. 

T^»rideach, dich, -dichean,** s.f.[& m." Dwarf. 
2 Bride. 3 Virgin. 4**Grub. Cha bhrid- 
each air an fhàich e, he is not a dwarf on 
the battle-field ; carraig Phaidean aig na brid- 
ich, Padeen’s rock in the possession of the 
dwarfs—a common saying in Tiree when the 
weak get possession of what by right belongs 
to the strong—J. M. 

t —ail, a. Dwarfish. 2 Like a virgin. 3 
Bridal, like a bride. 

brideag, -eig, -an, s. f. Part of thejaw. 2 Lit- 
tle woman. 

Brideag,** -eig, s. f. Image of St. Pridget, used 
on that saint’s eve by unmarried girls, 
with a view to discover their future husbands. 

bridean, s. f.(bird) see gille-bride. 

bridein, see brid-eun. 

brid-eun, -eoin, 8.m. Oyster-catcher or sea-piet, 
see gille-bride. Choluath ri bril.eun 'san 
tràigh, as swift as a sea-piet on the shore. 

brig,* s. f- Heap, pile. 

——,* v.a. Pile, build as a stack of peats. 

———eadh, s.m. Stacking. A’ b—, pr. pt. of brig. 
Aen na mona, building the peat-stack 
— Mull. 





see briogais. 

2 Snbstance. 3 Wealth. 
4 Sap, juice, pith. 5 Elixir. 6 Vigour. 7 
Strength, virtue. 8 Value. 9 fire, avail, 
benefit. 10 Juice of ineat. 11 Meaning, in- 
terpretation. 12 Energy. 15**Relish. 14** 
Capacity. 15**rarely Tomb. 16**Miracle. 17 
ttMountain. 1s5**Valour. 19**Price. Chaill 
na h-ùbhlan am brìgh, the apples lost their 
sap ; mairt-fheoil gun bhrizh, beef without 
substance ; craobh gun bhrigh, a sa pless tree ; 
briathran gun bhr'gh, words without mean- 
ing; innis dhonih brigh mo bhruadair, tell me 
the interpretation of my dream ;a’ caitheadh 
mo bhrigh, dissolving my substance ; is deac- 
air brigh do sgeoil, sad is the substance of thy 
tale; b’e seo bu bhrigh d’ an dan, SS was the 


brigh 


burden of their song; caithidh cumha gun 
bhrigh, mourning consumes without avail ; do 
bhrìgh, a bhrìgh, by virtue of, because; thubh- 
air triath Eireann bu mhor bhrìgh, said Ire- 
land’s chief of great energy ; ged gheibhinn 
brìgh Eireann, though I were to get the wealth 
of Ireland; innis da ar brìgh, tell him our 
strength. 
brigh’ar, a. see brighmhor. 
brizh-àrd, s.f. Definition (in gram.) 
brigh-chainnt,** 3. f. Argument. 
brizhead, ‘see brighealachd. : 
bri;healachd, s. f. Substance, substantiality. 
2 Vigorousness. 3 Juiciness, pithiness, vir- 
tne. 4 State of being full of meaning. 
brirheamh,* see breitheamh. 
brìgheil, -e, a. see brìghmhor. 
brighich, v.n. Strengthen, confirm. 2 Establish. 
tbrighide, s.f. Hostage, pledge, security. 
brigtiiun,* s. f. Seasoning. 2 Any fat. 3 Dain- 
ties, delicacies. +4 see bruidheann. 
.— ————eachadh,* s.m. Act of seasoning. 2 
Act of feeding on dainties or delicacies. 
brizhnhoire, comp. of brìghmhor. | 
——aáchd,** s.f. Substantialness. 2 
Juiciness. 3 Vigorousness. _ 
brizhuhor, -oire, o Energetic. 2 Sappy, 
juicy. 3 Substantial, solid, real. 4 Eftica- 
cious, effective,effectual. 5 Full of meaning. 
brizh-sgriobhaidh,** s. f. Argument. 
brigh-tharruing, 8. f. Abstraction. 
brigis, see briogais. 
brill, see breall. A 
brillean,** -ein, s.m. The clitoris. 
———— ach, a. Lewd. 
brilleineach, a. see brilleanach. 
brinün-bodaich, s.m. Mean, shabby old man. 
[t.for breimein, a side form of braman.] 
Tbrin, s.,f. Dream, reverie. 
+brindeal, s.m. Picture. 
*brin-dealan, s.m. Frontlet. 
lbrindealbhadair, s.m. Painter. 2 Sculptor. 
+brindealbhadh, s.m. Painting, sculpture, lim- 
ning, pourtraying. 2 Disguising. 
fbrinneach, s. J. Hag,o' woman. 2**Mother. 
+prinnichte, a. llag-riüden, 
briob, v.a. see brìb. 
-—, -a, -an, 8. f. see brìb. 
-——achd, see bribearachd. 
briobadh, see bribeadh. 
briobair, see bribear. 
————eachd,* see bribearachd. 
4briochd, s. f. Wound. 2 Art. 8 Trade. 4 
Secrecy. 5 Witchcraft. 6 Colour, complex- 
ion. 7 Beauty. 
+briochdaic, s.f. Amulet. 
bri-lail, pr.part. a’ brìodal & briodaladh, v.a. 
Caress,fiatter, coax, court. 2**Tattle. 
briodal, ail, s.m. Caressing, acts of fondness, 
expressions of tenderness, soft words, kind 
speeches, endearing attentions. 2 Flattery. 
3 Language and manner of lovers, courting. 
Do bhricdal cuil, thy secret flattery. <A’ b—, 
r.part. of brìodail. 
briodalach, -aiche, a. Caressing, fondling. 2 
Flattering, inclined to flatter or cajole. 3** 
Taitling. 
briodalachd, s. f. Tattling. 2 Propensity to 
flatter. 3tfCaressing. 4t{Amorousness. 
briodaladh, -ailh, s.m. Caressing. 2 Cajoling, 
flattering. 3 Tattling. A’ b—, pr. part. of 


briodail. 'G am briodaladh, caressing them. 
briodalaiche, s. m. Flatterer, cajoler.  2** 
Tattler. 3tfCaresser. 


-———— 


— — —^4 comp. of briodalach. 
briodalair,** s.m. Dallier. 
Rriodha, see brèagh. 


124 


brionuag 


briog, v.a. Cut round, hack. 2 Thrust, stab, 
Gaelic spelling of prick. 3tt Restrain. 

-——, s.m. Confinement. 2 Restraint. 

-——ach, -aiche, a. Mean, miserly, avaricious. 
2 Spiritless. 

-——achd,* see briogadaich. 

briogadaich, or. Avarice, meanness, sordid- 
ness. 2 Ludicrousness, affected capering. 3 
ttHacking, cutting. 

briogadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of stabbing or thrust- 


ing. 

briogaid, 8. f. Elderly woman. 2 Morose old 
female. Esan a phosas briogaid, he who mar- 
ries a morose old female. 

cach,* a. Elderly. 2 Like @ little or 
morose female. 

briogaire, -an, 8. m. Miser, mean shabby fel- 
low, churl. 

~-————achd, 8. f. Sordidness, avarice. 2 Want 
of spirit. 

briogais, -ean, [n.pl. briogsan—DU] s.f.Breech- 
es, trousers. Briogais anairt, linen breeches. 

————each, a. Having breeches or trousers. 

: ich,ft v.a. Breech, put into trousers. 

tbriogan, -ain, s.m. see briogais. 

—-——ach, a. see briogaiseach. 

briogh, see brigh. 

fbrioghach, a. Hilly, mountainous. 

brioghach, a. see brighmhor. 

brioghail, a. e m 

briozhalachd, 8. f. see brighmhorachd. 

brioghas, -ais, s.m. Fervour of passion, fond- 
ness, dalliance. 

-—————ach, -aiche,a. Fond, given to dalliance. 

brìoghmhor, -oire, a. see brighmhor. 

brighmhorachd, see brìighmhoireachd. 
briollag, -aig, 8. f. Illusion. 

————ach, -aiche, a. Illusory. 2 Deceitful, 

briollair, -ean, s.m. Whoremonger, lecherous 
fellow. 2**One afflicted with incontinence 
of urine. 

briollan, -ain, s.m. Chamber-pot. 2 Urinal. 3 
Ignorant stupid fellow. 

——~——ach, -aiche, a. Stupid, boorish,ignorant, 

———achd, s. f. Stupidity. 2 Boorishness, 
ignorance, rudeness. 

tbriollsgaire, s.m. Bully. 2 Interfering, med- 
dling person, busybody. 

fbrion, s.m. Fiction, lie, 2 Drop. 3 Gem. 

brion,** s.m. Disquietude, dissatisfaction. 

tbrionach, -aich, s.m. Liar. 

brionain-beó, see buinnean-beó. 

brional, (AF) s.m. Male seal. 

tbriondath, v.a. Counterfeit, forge, imitate. 

brionglaid, -e, -ean, s. f. Confusion, wrangling, 
disagreement. 2**Dream. 3**Reverie. 

briongiaideach, -eiche, a. Causing trouble, 
confusion or mischief. 2 Squabbling, wrang- 
ling, quarrelsome. 3**Dreaining. 
brionglaideachd,** s. f. Chicanery. 2 Quarrel- 
someness, 
brionglaidich, 
rassment. 
brionglaidiche,* s.m. Chicaner. 

tbrionn, see tbrion. 

brionn,ft s. f. Prettiness. 

brionn, a. see brionnach. 

——-—ach, a. Pretty, comely, fair. 2 Flatter- 
ing. 3 Lying. [t from tbrion] 4 Striped with 
various colours. [f from Eng. brinded, now 
en RH 5 Shining, glittering. 

brionnachd, s. f. Prettiness, comeliness. 2 
Flattery. 3 Falsehood. 4 Glitter. 5 Variety 
of colours. 

brionnag, -aig, -an, s. f. Glitter. 2(JM) Flat- 
tering woman. (see note nnder breunag.) 
Bha’n Traigh-bhan 'nà brionnagan, the white 











v.G. Cause trouble or embar- 


briommag 126 vrisleach 


shore was glittering. 

brionnal, -ail, s.m. Flattery, fawning, syco- 

hancy. 2 Caressing, toying, flirting. Nie 

Bimal, he will flatter ; ri brionnal, flirting. 

brionnalach, -aiche, a. Flattering, fawning, 
sycophantic. 2 Toying, flirting. 

brionnalachd, s. f. Habit of flattering or fawn- 
ing, sycophancy. 

brionndal,-ail, see brionnal. 

brionndalach, see brionnalach. 

brionn-shuil, -ula, -ean, s.m. Bright, lively eye. 

brionn-shuileach, -eiche, a. Having bright, 
quick eyes. 

brios, -a, s.m. Mockery, derision. 2*Half-in- 
toxication, ‘‘breeze.”’ 

briosagnaidheachd,** s. f. Sophistry. 

briosaid, -ean, s. f. Belt, girdle. 2* Witch, 
SOrceress. 

briosaideach, a. Belted, girdled. 2 Like a belt 
or girdle. 

briosag, -aig, -an, s. f. Witch, sorceress. 

t¢b-ivsargnaiche, s.m. Sophist. 

tbriosargnaidhe, s.m. see tbriosargnaiche. 

fbriosarguin, s.f. Sophistry. 

briosg, pr.part. a’ briosgail & briosgadh, v.n. 
Start, leap, jerk, move suddenly or quickly 
through surprise, fear, or joy. 2* Quicken, 
come alive, as à child in the womb. 3 Crum- 
ble. 4* Quiver, as the flesh of an animal 
immediately after being slaughtered. 

briosg, -a, -an, .m. Start, leap, sudden moye- 
me.t, emotion of joy, fear, or surprise. 2 
Breve, short mark over a letter in gram. 3 
** Very short space of time, instant. 411 
Bony part of the mouth. 

briosg,-a, a. see brisg. 2ttPressed. 

brio-gachd, see briosgarrachd. 

briosgadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Starting, sud- 
den motion, leap, springing, jerking. 2 
Briskness. 3 Very short space of time. A’ 
b—, pr.part of briosg. 

briosgaid, -ean, s. f. Gaelic spelling of biscuit. 
[t by folk-etymology made to agree with 
brisg, brittle.] 

briosgaideach, a. Abounding in biscuits. 

br:osgaid-mhara,tt s.f. Sea-biscuit. 

briosgail,* s.f. Sudden start or movement. 2 
Quickening, state of coming alive. A’ b—, 
pr.pt. of briosg. 

briosganta, a. see briosgarra. 

Tfbricsgarnach, a. Crackling. 

tbrioxgarnachd, s.f. Crackling. 

br.osgarra, a. Brisk, lively, active, ready, wil- 
ling. 2 Apt to jerk or start. 

brio.garrachd, s. f.  Alacrity, activity. 2 
Readiness, willingness. 

brivsgartaich,* s. f. Starting or jerking move- 
ment, as the flesh of an animal newly-flayed. 
2 starting, moving. 

briosg-ghloir, -e, s. f. see brisg-ghloir. 

brioxg-ghloireach, a. see brisg-ghldireach. 

briosglach, o Frank. 

brioxg.an,}s.m. Silverweed, see brisgean. 

briosog, -oig, -an, see briosag. 

briosnirneach, -eiche, a. Ludicrous. 2ttHairy. 
3 Muted up. 

thriut, a. Speckled, spotted, piebald. 

briot. s.m. [**5,f.] see briotal. 

tbriotach, a. Stammering. 2 Chattering, talk- 
ative, prone to tattle, prattling. 

briotachan, -ain, s.m. Prater, tattling fellow. 

tbriotaire, s.m. Stammerer. 

briotal, -ail, s.m. Chit-chat, tattle, small talk. 
2 Flatcery. 3 Sound made by birds in pur- 
suit of the fry of fish. 4 Meeting or company 
where everyone is speaking. 6**Caressing. 

tbrivth, 8.2». Fraction. 


brisg, v.n. y 
brisg-bhuille, s.m. Smart blow, sudden quick 





brisgeachd,* 
brisgead,* 
brisgealachd, 
brisgean, -ein, -einean, s.m. Cartilaginous part 


bris, v.a. Break, fracture, splinter. 2 Burst. 
3**Break forth. 4 Exclaim. 5 Become in- 
solvent. 6**Back. Bhris fàire air monadh 
nan sruth, the dawn brake on the mountain of 
streams ; bhris le guth a gràidh an òigh, the 
maid exclaimed with her voice of love ; bhris e 
a shleagh, ke broke his spear; bhris e, he 
failed [*bhris air” isa better form, and the 
one in common use alloverthe W. Isles—JM] 
brisidh an aimsir, the weather will turn to 
rain. 

brisd, v.a. see bris. 

brisde, see briste. 

brisdeach, see briseach. 

brisdeadh, -didh, see briseadh. 

briseach, -eiche, a. Brittle, apt to break. 2 In- 
terrupted, broken. 3 Confused, inarticulate. 
4**Glimmering. 5**Splintering. 6**Anfrac- 
tuous. Solus briseach nan reultan, the bro- 
ken light of the stars. 

briseachd, s. f. Anfractuousness. 2 Brittleness. 

briseadair,tt e, -ean, s.m. Infringer. 

briseadh, -s: th, -sidhean, s.m. Breaking, splin- 
tering. 2 Burstiug. 3 Break, breach, fissure. 
4 Act of breaking. 5 Failure, insolvency, 
A’ b—, pr.pt. of bris. Luchd-brisidh mhionn, 
breakers of oaths ; briseadh air bhriseadh, 
breach upon breach ; briseadh air son brisidh, 
breach for breach; troimh bhriseadh nan neul, 
through the opening of the clouds. 

briseadh,** 3rd pers.sing. & pl. imp. of bris. 

-——__—— -céille, s.m. Derangement of mind. 

-——— ——— -creideis, s.m. Bankruptcy. 

—— —— -cridhe, s.m. Heart-b ak, over-power- 
ing sorrow, grief, pain, aiHiction, vex: ion, 
continued cause of vexation, dejection of 


mind. 2**Discouragement. 

-—————— -a-miach, s.m. Eruption. 2 Outbreak- 
ing of any kind. 3 Rebellion. 

-——— -posaidh,(AM) s.m. Adultery. 


brisg,-e, a. Bri-k, lively, agile, active, clever 


(n Scots sense.) 2 Brittle. 3 Tender, as 
flesh. 4 Mettlesomie, as a horse. 5 Alert, 
ready. 6 Not stingy, as & person. 7**Hasty. 
see briosg. 


blow. 2** Jerk. 


brisge,* s. jf. Readiness, aptness. 2 Activity, 


animation. 3 Tenderness. 4 Brittleness. 
see brisge. ` 

see brisge. 

see brisge. 


of a bone. 2 The p.rt 
of tripe called brisket 
or gristle. 3j9ilverweed, 
white tansy,—(/it. the 
brittle one) —potentilla 
anserina. 4**Wild skir- 
ret—sium sisarum. B. 
milis, the sweet-bread of 
any creature. 5**Moor- 
grass. 

—— ach, a. Abound- 
ing in gristle, like gris- 
tle,gristlv. 2 Abound- 
ing in silver tansy. 

——ach,** -aich, s. f. 
Crackling,rind of roast- 
ed pork. 

brisg-gheal, -ile, a. Limpid, clear, transparent. 

brisg-ghloir, s. f. Quick utterance, gabble, prat- 
tle, loquacity. 

————--——enach, a. Garrulous, talkative, for- 
ward, pert, prating. 

brisg-phune, s.m. Crotchet in music. 

tbrisleach, af Overthrow of an army. 2 | 





80. Brisgean (8) 


brisleach 
Breach. . b ' 
brislean, -ein, -an, .m. Silverweed, see bris- 
gean. 


———ach, a. Abounding in, or like, white 
tansy or silverweed. 

brisneach, a. see briogaiseach. 

brisnean, pl. of briogais.[ Used only in poetry.] 

brist, v.a. see bris. 

briste, a. & past part. of kris. Broken. 2*Made 
a bankrupt, insolvent. 3 Bruised. 4 Wound- 
ed. 5**Splintered. Tha mo chridhe briste, 
my heart is broken ; is e ìobairt Dhé spiorad 
briste, the sacrifice of God isa broken spirit ; 
a ghairdean air clarsaich bhriste, his armon 
a broken harp ; fear briste, a bankrupt. 

briste, for brisdeadh, see briseadh. 

bristeach, see briseach. 

bristeadh, s.m.& pr. part. of bris, see briseadh. 

bris-thraisg, s. f. Breakfast. 

brith, -e, a. see bruich. 

+brith,** s. see breith & breitheamh. 

fbritheaghlaidh, a. Kind, gentle. 

britheamh, -eimh, han, s.m. see breitheamh. 

fbritinneas, s.m. The measles. 

fbrium, s. f. Helmet. 

fbro, a. Old, ancient, antique. ?211Much,many. 

+bro, s.m. Champion. 2 Quern, handmill, see 
bra. 3** Grinding stone. 

fbroar,]f s.m. Fault, error. 

Tbróas, s. f. Old age. 

brobh,3 s.m. Sea-scirpus or round-rooted bas- 
tard eypress—scirpus maritimus. 

brobhadan,**-ain, s.m. Grasshopper. 

+broc, a. Grey, dark grey. 

broc, -ruic, Sa. Badger, “brock.” : 

brocach, -aiche, a. Speckled, freckled, spotted 
in the face, pock-marked. 2 Greyish in the 
face. 3 Like a badger. 4 f}fIll-scented. 61i 
Dirty. 7**Odious. i 

bròcail, pr.part. a’ bròcladh, v.a. Mangle, spoil- 
distigure, lacerate. 

brocair, -e. -ean, s.m. Fox-hunter, badger-hunt- 
er, destrover of vermin in the Highlands. 

——eachd, s. f. Fox-hunting, badger-hunt- 
ing, vermin-hunting. 

brocanta, a. Shy, like a badger. 

-—s,** -ais, s.m. Shyness. 

brochail, pr.pt. a’ brochladh, v.a. see brócail. 

brochaill, s.m. Banner of Gaul, son of Morni. 

brochan, -ain, sem. Porridge. 2 (Skye, de.) 
Pottage, gruel. Deoch bhrochain, gruel ; so- 
dar bhrochain, thick gruel ; a’ phoit bhroch- 
ain, the porridge-pot ; agus bhruich Iacob 
brochan, a»d Jacob made pottage ; brochan 
tiugh, porridge ; brochan tana, gruel ; broch- 
an bainne, milk porridge ; brochan feòla, gruel 
of flesh juice ; brochan liath, milk gruel ; 
chlisg ain brochan nach d òl mi, the porridge 
that I have not sipped trembled—a far-fetched 
way of making known that one has got a very 
bad fright—Mull ` brochan reamhar, amh do 
na gillean, brochan tana, bruich do na h-igh- 
eanan, for the boys, porridge thick and raw, for 
the girls. well-boiled and thinner far, —Uist. 

brochanach, -aiche, a. Gruelly, of, or pe ae. 
ing to gruel or porridge. Bi gu curraiceach, 
brogach, brochanach ’sa Gheamhradh, be 
well capped, shod and fed in winter. 

brochan-bainne,* s.m. Milk porridge. 

brochan-cruithneachd,* s.m. Flummery. | 

brochan-ghall-pheasair,* s.m. Lentil porridge. 

brochan-leanna, s.m. Ale-berry. 

brochd, s.m. see broc. 

ach, see brocach. 

brochlach,* s.f. Woman. 

brochladh, see brócladh. 

brochlaid, -e, -eau, 8. f. ‘Trash, 2 Mixture of 








126 


different meats. 

broclach, -aich, pl. -aichean [**-aich] s.f. War- 
ren. 2 Badger'sden. 3tfFox's den. 

brocladh, -aidh, s.m. Spoiling, mangling, wast- 
ing. —, pr.pt. of brócail. 

broc-lann, -ainn, s.m. Badger’s den. 2 Den of 
wild beasts. 3 Cavern. 4*Any stinking piace. 

broc-luidh, see broc-lann. Tha broc-luidh aig 
na sionnaich, the foxes have holes. 

brocuil, see brócail, 

brod, -oid, s.m. Pride, arrogance, haughtiness. 
2**Chastisement. 3 Land—Mull. 4 Brood, 
crowd, band, swarm.—Argyll. 5 Children, 
the rising generation. Féin-spéis agus bròd, 
self-conceit and arrogance; Vbrod-gheadh, a 
goose that has a brood, a dam. 

brod, bruid, brodan, s.m. Goad. 2 Prickle,sting. 
3 Choice of anythig. 4 Best quality of grain 
or of any other article. 5 Lid. 6 Small board. 
7* Box handed round a church to collect alms. 
8 Pintle of rudder or stern-post, see bata 
07. p.73. XDU} Awl. Brod an t-sìl, the best 
part of the corn; brod na poite, the id of the 
pot ; brod an taighe, a splendid hous». 

Tbrod,ff s.m. Spot, blemish. 

brod, pr.pt.,A' brodadh, v.a. Stir up, rouse, sti- 
mulate, goad, sting, excite. ?* Level or 
smoothe land with à spade after the first 
ploughing. 211Pick or separate the best parts. 
3(DU) Stir up in search of anything. 

——ach, -aiche,a. Stimulant, tending to enliven, 
stirring up. 2 Goading, prickling. 

brodach, a. In crowds, in swarms. 2**Arro- 


brog 


gant. 
brodadh, -aidh, s.m. Goading, spurring, stimu- 
lating, stirring up, urging. 2 Compelling. 
3 Searching. 4*Levelling land. 5 Poking. 
6**Winnowing. A’ b—, pr.pt. of brod. 
tbrodail, a. Proud, arrogant, conceited, for- 
ward. Tha e cho bródail ris a’ mhac mhal- 
lachd, he ìs as proud as Lucifer. 
brodalachd,* s.f. Arrogance, haughtiness, 
extreme pride. 
brodann,tt s.m. Goad, prickle. 2 Staff. 
brod-ghaineamh, -eimh, s.m. Gravel. 
brodaiche,* oam. Bodkin. 
We, ah 8.m. Straw, stem. 2 Atom. 3 Point, 
spot. 
brodhach, -aiche, a. see brothach. 
fbrodhag, sr, Bosom, fold of the breast clothes. 
brodh-braighe, s.m. Common rush, see luachair. 
brod-griasaich,(JM) s.m, Poker. Dheanadh 
a fiaclan b. "aa ghealbhan, her teeth (are so 
long that) they would make a pes for the fire. 
brod-iasg, -éisg, s.m. Needie-fish. 2 Sword-tish. 
Kee s.m. Spear for killing floun- 
ers 


brod-teine, s.m. Poker. 
brodunn, -uinn, s,m. see brodann. 





81. Seann bhrògan Gàidhealaich. 


bròg, -dige, bròvan. s.f. Shoe ? Hof 3 By we Ay 


broy 


ure of speech, Foot. 4 Sorrow. 6 DU Fish's 
roe—Gairloch, Loch Broom, e, [The High- 
land brój was made of a piece of raw hide 
with the. hair turned outwards and tied 
before and behind with a thong.) Cuir ort 
do bhrogan, put on your shoes ; brog an eich, 
the hoof of the horse; bualidh e bròg ort 
fhathast, you will feel the bad effects (sorrow) 
of that again; bhuail an t-earrach seo brog 
oirnn, wehave felt the sad effects of this unto- 
ward spring ; o mhullach gu bròig, from head 
to foot ; brògan air a’ chat! na'm bitheadh 
na h-osain air, rachadh e & cnàimn na h- 
amhaich, the cat with shoes on! had he the 
hose on, he would break his neck (with conceit) 
—said of & conceited person who has little 
to be conceited about ; bròg a’ chroinn, a 
mast-step (see bata, p. 76) ; bróz gun deir- 
eadh, asandal, or slipper ; brogan tionndaidh, 
shoes turned inside out after being sewn; brog 
truisg, cod’s roe. 

tbrog, aJ. House. 

brog, see tborg & brugh. 

Tbrog, a. Sorrowful. 

brog, pr.pt. a’ brogadh, v.a. Spur, stimulate, 


go 
——, -oig, -an, ¢.m. Shoemaker’s awl. 2 Probe, 


poker. 

brogach, -aiche, a. Sturdy. 2 Lewd, filthy, 
nasty. 3 Spurring, goading, stimulating. 

brógach, -aiche, a. Shod, wearing shoes. 2** 
Having large shoes.  3** Strong-hoofed, in 
which sense it is applied to one of Cuchul- 
lin’s horses. 

brogach, -aich, s m. Sturdy littlə boy. 2 Young 
lively lad— Provin. 

tbrogachadh, ¢.m. Approaching. 

brogadh, -aidh,*" s.m. Goading, stimulating. 
2 Conciliation. 

brogag, sf. Little shoe. 

broógag-na-cu'aiz, see bróg-na-cubhaig. 

brógaich,*e.a. Shoe, supply with shoes. 

brogaich, v.a. Approach, come near to. 2tf 


ig. 

brogaidh,** s.m. & f. Name given to a cow that 
puts with her horns. 2 in derision, Squat, 
sturdy fellow. 

brogail, -e, a. Sturdy, lively, active, hale, 
hearty.**[Always applied to old people.—* 
81 “In good form." 

brogair,** oan, s.m. Hastener. 

brógair, -eau, s.m. Shoe-maker, cobbler. 

eachd, s.f. Shoe-making, cobbling. 

brogalachd, s.f. Sturdiness, activity. 

brogan, -aiu, -anan, s.m. Awl. 

ach, -aich, -aibhean, s.m. Lively little 
man. 2 Smart boy. 3**Lively, sturdy fellow. 

——-—ach, -aiche, d. see broganta. 

broganta, a. Sturdy. 2 Live:y, jocose, active, 
brisk. 3{Crooking. Cailleach bh., a lively 
old worn. 

broga:tachd, s.f.ind. Sturdiness. 2 Liveliness, 
briskness, alacrity. 

bróg-bhré d, -e, -ean, a.m. Sandal. 

bró--ualpach,* sp, Boot. 

biog-vhiddair, -ean, 8.m. Cobbler. 

brog-íhiodna, e.r. Sabot, wooden shoe worn by 
e ant? on the Continent. 2 Clog. 
dal. 

tbrogh, s.m. Filthiness, dirt. 2 see broth. 

tbroghach, -aiche, a. 
ive, superfluous. 

foroghaidh, s.m. Increase, profit. 

broyhau,** a. Dirt. 

fbrorhain, 8 f. Exo?s3, superfluity. 

brog-a-cubristg. 8 f. 2Heart'a euse, pansy—vio- 
su irwwor, 22 Bog iolet, see mòihan. 28 











3 San- 


see brothach. 2 Excess- 


broinileag 
Blue-bell, wild hyacinth, see fuath mhuc. A 
Round-leaved bellflower, see am pluran cluig- 
eannach. 5§ Corn coc..Te, see lus loibheaeh. 
[McL & D. in eel part gives butter- 
wort, and in Eng.—Gael. part cuckoo flower 
and eowstip. tt gives wild viokt. ** gives 
butterwort. } 
tbrogoid, sf. Bur. 
bróz-sgriob, -a, sj. Kind of 

shoe. 
broguidh, -ean, ¢.m. Shoema- 
er 


broice, sf. see broicean. 

broicean,-ein,s.f. Mole,freckle. 

broicne, 8.f. see broicean. 

broicneach, -eiche,a.Freck!ed. 
Aghaidh bhroicneach, a 
Sreckled face. 

broid,* v.a. Embroider. 

a. s.f. see braoil- 

i 


ch. 
broidileag, see brù-dhearg. 
Tbroid-inneal, -eil, 


garb. 
broid-innealta, -eilte, a. Embroidered. 
broidireachd,* st see broidneireachd. 
broidneireachd, s.f. Embroidery. 
broigealachd,* s.f. see brogalachd. 
broigeanta,* a. see broganta. 
————-—chd,* s/f. see brogantachd. 
broigeil,* a. see brogail. 
tbroigheal, -il, s.m. Cormorant, sea-raven. 
broighleach, a. Bustling, noisy, tumultnous. 
broighleadh, -idh,s.m. Bustle, confusion, tur- 
moil, loud noise. [also braoilich.] 
broighleag, -eig, s f. see braoileag. 
——— —— ach, a. see braoileagach. 
broighlich. s.,f. Noise, ba ling, confusion, tu- 
mult, 2* Crackling of wood on a fire. 3** 
Swaggering. 
broigi.e:ueach, -eiche, a. Substantial. 
broileadh, -eidh, gan. see broighleadh. 
broilein, -e, s.m. Manyplies in an animal’s 
stomach. [he Gaelic Dictionaries errone- 
ously give “kirg’s hood," which is currachd 
au rign.] 2f Pig’s snout.— Badenoch. 
— ————each, -eiche, a. Manyplied. 
broilich, st see broighlich. 
broilleach, -lich, -lichean, s.m. Breast, bosom, 
front. A b. mar chobhar nn stuadh, ber 
bosom like the foam o! the waves ; an urrainn 
duine teine a ghabhail ’na bh. agus gun 
'aodach a bhith air à losgadh ? can a man 
tate fire in his bosom without burning his 
clothes ? broilleach bata, the bow or stem of o 
boat, see bata, p. 76. 
broilleach-bothan,'l s.m. Black-throated diver 
(bird.) see learga. 
tbroimceadh, s.m. see broimseadh. 
foroimeis, s.f. Anger, boldness. 
tbroimseadh. s.m. furious burst of anger. 
tbroin, s.f. Height. 2 Large company. 
bróin, gen.sing. of bron. 
bròin, v.a. Mourn, lamment, deplore. 
broineach,* s.f. Ragged woman. 
garment or vesture. 
——,* a. see broineagach. 
broineag, -eig, -an, s.f. Rag, shred, tatter. 2 
Ragged garment. 3**Apron. 4{}Ill-clothed 
woman. 
broineag, see bronaz. 
broineagach, -aiche, a. Ragged, tattered. 2 
Full of rags. 
broinein, s.r. Sickly person. 2 Querulous.com- 
plaining person. 3 Wretch. 4¢tPoor or sorry 
person. 
broinileag, s.f. see brù-dhearg. 





82. Brog-na- 
cubhaig(1.) 
sm. Richly-embroidered 


2 Ragged 





broinn 
‘breinn, dat. of bra. 
nom. Belly, &c. 


br»inn-dearg, 

broinn-deargàn, sf. see brù-dhearg. 
fbroinn-fhionn, a. White-bellied. 
broisde,* see Wbraist. 


troisg, pn.pt. a’ brosgadh, v.a. Excite, incite, 


123 


2 Used provincially aal bestow, concede. 
‘bronnach,ftf -aich, s.f. Girth, belt. 2**Belly» 


brosglach 


band. 3* Corpulent femule. 

bronnach, -aiche, a. Swag-bellied, gluttonous. 
2 Bagged. 3 Well-fed. 4 Bellied. Caoraich. 
bhronnach, well-fed sheep. 

-— -diolta, s. f. Saddle-girth. 





tbroisnean, -ein, ëm. Bundle. 2 Small faggot. | tbronnadh, -aidh, s.m. see pronnadh, 


stir up, provoke. 

broit, -e, 8.f Bosom, breast. properly 2 Cover- 
ing for the breast. Cuir ’n ad bhroit e, Let wt 
in your bosom. [f The word appears to be 
from brat, a mantle,with a leaning for mean- 
ing on bruinne, breast. 

+broith, s.m. Carnation colour. 

+broithdheanta, e. Flesh-coloured. 

broithlein, see broilein. 

brolachan,t} -ain, s.m. see brollachan. 

brolaich, s.f. Inarticulate and incoherent mut- 
tering, as in sleep. 2t+tRaving. 

brólainn,-ean, s.f. see brothluinn. 

brolamas, -ais, s.m. Mixture. 

brolasg, -aisg, s.m. Garrulity, confused loqua- 
city. ?tf*Flattery. i 

ach, -aiche, a. Talkative. 3 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Tattling, loquacity. 

brolosgach, a. see brolasgach. 

brollach, -aich, s.m. see broilleach. 2++Mess. 

brollachan, -ain, s.m. Ragged, naked person. 
2* Anything entangled or entwined. 3 Shape- 
less, deformed creature. 4 Clumsy, lumpish, 
stupid person, but not a malicious person. 6 
Senseless creature. [** says hl 

+brollaigh, s.f. Boldness, confidence. 

bróluinn, -e, -ean, s.f. see brothluinn. 

brom, A, see bramadaich. 

bromach, -aich, -aichean [ & **-aiche]s.m. Colt. 

broman, -ain, -an, s.m. Rustic, boor, rude per- 
son. 3 Booby. 4f see braman. 

ach, -aiche, a. Rustic, rude, country, 

boorish. 

ach,** -aich, s.m. Countryman, bump- 
kin. 


¢bron, a. Perpetual. h 

bròn, òin, s.m. Sorrow, grief, 2 Mourning, 
wailing, weeping. 3* Mourning dress or ha- 
biliments. ’S e seo fàth mo bhroin, this is the 
cause of my sorrow ` fo bhròn, sorrowing, la- 
menting ; is beannaichte iadsan a tha ri bròn, 
blessed are they that mourn ; thionndaidh thu 
dhomh-sa mo bhròn gu dannsadh, thou hast 
turned forme my mourning into dancing ; ol- 
adh aoibhneis an àite bròin, the oil of joy for 
mourning ; tha iad "am bron, they are in 
mourning (apparel) ; is fhearr dol gu taigh 
a’ bhròin, it is better to go to the house of 
mourning ` mo bhròn ! alas ! woe 18 me ! 

bròn, v.n. Sorrow, grieve, mourn. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Sad, sorrowful, mournful. 
2 Grieved, mourned. 3**Mourning. 4*Mean. 
Le cumha brónach, with sad lamentation. 

—~adh, (a’) pr.part. of v. bron. 

tbronadh, s.m. Destruction. 

bronag, -aig, -an, s.f. (AF) Gudgeon, gobie. 
2t see bronnag. 3t prov. Crumb. 

bronag, -aig, s.f. Poor, sorrowful, mournful fe- 
male. 2**Disconsolate female. 3**Quernlous 
female. 4 for bruanag. 

brón-bhrat, -ait, sm. Mort-cloth, pall. 

bron-chuimhne, s.f. Sad remembrance.  Bhur 
brón-chuimhne, the sad remembrance of you. 

brdn-cuthaich.tt s.m. Melancholy. 

#bron-muilinn, 8.7. for brà-muilinn. Mill-stone. 

bronn, gen.sing. & gen.pl. of bri. 

, [**-oinn] s.m. Gift, favour. 2 Track, 
mark. 3 Breast. 

$bronn, v.a. Distribute, divide. 2 Graut, Hike, 














83. Bronna 





bronnag, -aig, An, s.f.  Gudgeon. 2 Little 
bulky female. 3**Apron. 
bronnair, -ean, 8.m. One who divides or gives. 
2 Liberal one. 3* Corpulent male. Gheibh 
bronnair mar a bhronnas e, is gheibh loman 
an lom dhonas,the liberal will get as he spends, 
but the niggard will get more wretchedness. 
bronn-dhearg,** s.f. Ruddock (fish) 
bronn-ghabh, ail, v.n. see bru-ghabh. 
— — ——Aaàil, s.f. see bri-ghabhail. A’ b—, 
pr.part. of bronn-ghabh. 
bronn-ghabhailte, see brüà-ghabhailte. 
bronn-sgaoileadh, -lidh, st Flux, diarrhoea, 
dysentery. 
bronn-sgaoilte, e. Troubled with flux. 
— ———aách, a. Causing a flux or dysen- 





tery. 

+bronnta, a. & pt.part. of bronn. Bestowed, 
given away, distributed. 

Tbronntanus, s.m. see bronntas. 

fbronntas, s.m. Gift, favour. 2**Fairing. 3 
Track. 

bronnthach, -aich, s.m. see bronnach. 

tbros, s.m. Track of a wheel carriage. 

brosdachadh, -aidh, s.m. see brosnachadh. 

tbrosdadh, -aidh, s.m. Stimulating, encour 
aging, stirring up. 

brosdaich, v.a. see brosnaich. 

brosdan, -ain, -dannan, s.m. Spunk, match. 2 
Little -ticks to light a fire. 

brosduich, see brosnaich. 

brosg, v.a. see brosnaich. 

tbrosgach, a. Easily frightened. 

brosgadh, s.m. Exhortation, incitement. 

brosgail,** v.a. Actuate, incite. 

brosgal, see brosgul. 

tach, a. Anthypnotic. 

brosglach, -aiche, a. Lively, active, brisk, 
rompt. clever (in Scots sense.) 8**Flattere 
ing, 4**Loquacious, 





brosglachadh 


brosglachadh, -aidh, see brosnachadh. 

brosglachd,** s.f. Promptitude. 

brosgluchadh, -aidh, see brosnachadh. | 

brosgluich, see brosnaich. 2 see brosguil. 

brosguil, print. a’ bros ‘ul, v.a. Flatter, cozen, 
coax. 21 Fawn, as a dog. . 

brosgul, -uil, san, Flattery, adulation. 2** 
Lively talk. 3} Fawning, asa dog. <A’ b—, 
pr.pt. of brosguil. Fe r brosguil, a flatterer. 

——ach, -aiche,a. Flattering. 2 Coaxing, 
cozening. 

brosgulair,** s.m. Aulator. 

brosluim, e, s./. Excitement. 

tbrosna, -ai, s.m. Faggot. 2 Armful. 

t¢brosnach, sf. River, running water. 

brosnachadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Incitement, 
provocation, spurring on, exhortation, en- 
couragement to heroic actions, cheering. 2 
Flattering. 3 Piece of martial music for the 
bagpipe classed uhder “ceòl mór.” A" b—, 
pr.pt.o1 brosnaich. B. catha, a battle song. 

brosnachail, a. Instigating, encouraging, pro- 
vocative. 

brosnachair,** -ean, 8.5. Cheerer. 

br snadh, see brosnachadh. 

brosnaich, pr.pt. a’ brosnachadh, v.a. Provoke, 
incite, encourage, bestir, spur on, actuate. 
Iad-san a bhrosnaich mi, they that provoked 
me; bhrosnaich e ri faicinn an righ, he cheered 
up on seeing the king. 

—— te, past part. of brosnaich. Provoked, 
incited, actuated. 

brosnuchadh, -aidh, s.m. see brosnachadh. 

brosuuich, see brosnaich. 

te, see brosnaichte. 

brot, -oit (& -uit), -an, s.m. see brat. 

——,-a, 8.m. Broth. 

——, v.a. see brotaich. 

——,* a. Fat. 

brotachadh, -aidh, s.m. Thriving, improvement 
in condition, becoming fat. [Generally ap- 
plied to cattle of any kind.j  z** Convales- 
cence, A’ b—, pr.pt. of brotaich. 

brotadh, see brotacuadh. 

brotaich, pr. pt. a’ brotachadh, v.n. Thrive. 2 
Mend, improve in condition, grow fat, fatten. 
3 Feed grossly. 4t+Gluttonize. 

broi-bhiathadh, -aidh, s.m. Feeding grossly 
with inteution to fatten. 

brot-braigileineach, eich, s.m. Hotch-potch. 

$broti s.m. Mole. 2 Ditch. 3 Flesh. 4 Fire. 
5**straw. 

broth, -a, s.m. Itch, eruption of the skin. 2 
Mole. 3§Pruri;o. 4 for bruth. 5(AC)Breast, 
bone. 9ttLunar halo. 7}{Straw,corn, 








c. 

bro:hach, -aiche, a. Scabbed, mangy, itchy. 2 
Filthy, disgusting. 3,J 3 Pertaining to sul- 
len anger. Duine Lro bach, a man given to 
sullen anger ; cà brothach, a mangy dog; caora 
bhrothach, a scabbed sheep. 

brothag, -aig, -an, 3.f. Bosom. 2 Fold of the 
breast clothes. 3 Little ditch. 4 Little hol- 
low. 5 Dirty wencn. 6 for breothag. 

fb.othair, s.m. Caldron. 2 Butcher. 
isruiser. 

brothaireachd, st Bruising, mauling, maim- 
ing. 2 Butchering. 

fbro.haireagadh, 8. m. Shambles, butchery. 
2**for brnthadaireachd. 

fbrothairne, sf. Down, fnr. 

¢bro-thaigh, s.m. see broth-thaigh. 

brothas, -ais, s.m. see bruthaist. 

tbrothlach, s.m. Pit made iu the ground for 
dressing meat in. 

¢brothladh, a. Intent on mischief. 

brotulain,** em. see broilein. 


g** 


139 


brusiga 
tbrothlnachair, s.f. Rush, rushes. 
brothiniun, sf. Agitation, confusion, struggle. 
2 Meeting of tides. 3** strn.gle between 
windand tide. 4 Steam: 5 Heat aud stink. 
6* Disagreeable heat. 
-—each, a. Tnmnituons, causing cow- 
motion, agitative, disturbed, confused. 
broth-thaigh, -thaighean,s.m. Slaughter-house, 
shambles 
tbrotiach, s.m. for brollach 2). ?11Boiling.pit. 
brù, irreg. sf. Belly. 2 Womb. 3 Big belly, 
asa woman with child. 4 Bulge. 
Deciined thus ‘— 
Nom.sing. brù pl. brüthan,lffbronna & 
bronnaichean. | 


Gen Abronn bronn 
Dat broinn bronnaibh 
Voc. a bhrù! a bhrütha ! 


2 Gen.sing. broinne (DU.) 

Tha brù air a’ bhalla, the wall bulges ; brù- 
ghoirt, belly-ache ; a brù torrach, her womb 
pregnant ` toradh na bronn, the fruit of the 
womb; air do bhroinn, on thy belly ; làn 
bronn, bellyful ; cha lion beaunachd bru, 
blessings do not fill a belly ; is gainne bri na 
biadh dhuit, you are scarcer of belly room 
than you are of food—applied to a gruinbler ; 
loisg thu do bhrù ’s cha d'rinn thn do ghar- 
adh, thou hast burnt thy beliy but dids! not 
warm thyself (this saying can be applied in 
various ways, for instance, à man wakes great 
efforts to gain a certain object, but comes to 
grief in his endeavours) ; tha a bhrü air an 
t-sop, his belly is on the straw (this applies to 
& gluttonous person or animal who would eat 
till he conld not move, and had to lie down, 
dh'ith e gus an robh a bhrù air an t-sop. 

yoru, sf. Hiud. 2 Bank. 3 Country. 

bruach, -aich, -an, s,f. Bank. 2 Brink, bor- 
der, edge, brim. 3ffSurly boor. 4 see bruth- 
ach. Bruach an uillt, the bank of the river ; 
air na bruachan seo, about these borders ; 
bruach dhnine, a boor of a fellow, a stupid 
fellow. 

—ach,if-aiche, a. Banked. 

ag, -aig, -an, s.f. Little bank. 

brnachair. eau, s.m. Surly fellow, person of 
unamiable disposition. 2 One that hovers 
about, lounger, hoverer. 

-——-———-e&chd, s.f.ind. Hovering about, loun- 
ging. 2 Gruinbling, sullenness of manner, 
pouting. 3 Obstinacy. 

bruachan,** ain, s.m. Little bank. 
fawn. 

brnach-bhaile, s.m. Suburbs. 

tbruachdach, a. Magnificent. 

bruadair, pr.pt. a’ bruadar & bruadaradh, v.n. 
Dream Bhruacair mi an raoir, I dreamed 
last night. 

bruadair, gen.sing. of bruadar. 

bruadal, sm. see bruadar. 

bruadar, -air, -an, 8.m. Dream, reverie, vision. 
A’ b—, pr.part. of bruadair. 

bruadaradh,** -aidh, s.m Dreaming, act of 
dreaming. A’ b—, pr. pt of bruadair. 

bruadaraiche, an, s.n. Dreamer. 

bruadarach, -aiche, a. Visionary. 

tbruaidh, -ean, s.m. Peasant. 

fbruailhe, see bruaidh. 

bruaidlean, am. see brnaillean. An t-sean 
fhuil uasal, onorach, cha taradh bruaidlean 
conas aisd’, strife would not be evoked from the 
old, noble, honourable blood by grief or annoy- 
ance— Duanaire, p.53. 

-—&ch, a. see bruailleanach. 

————-—Aáchd, s..f. see brnailleanachd. 

tbruaigh,1l s..coll. shreds, rays. 








2 rarely 


brnail 


bruail,(AC) 8.74. Dreams. 
in my dreams. 
brnaillean, -ein, sm. 


Ann mo bhruail, 


Grief, melancholy. 2 
Annoyance, vexation. 3 Confusion, tumult, 
noise, 4 Murmur. 5 Tronble. 6 Oftence. 
7 Distraction. Co a tha eur bruaillein ort ? 
who is troubling vou 2 duine gun bhruaillean, 
an inofensive man ; loch gun bhruaillean, a 
quiet loch ; is mor am brnaillean a dhùisg 
thn, yt have created a great tumult ; mar 
bhruaillean thonn vir druim a’ chuain, as the 
tumult of waves on the sw face of the ocean ; 
tha brusilietn air aghaidh nan tom, there ts 
boding gloom on the fuco af the hillocks ; chuir 
mi brnsilleeu air au óizh, J have troubled the 
maid. 

pruailleavuch, -eiche, a. Disturbing, confound- 
ing, deranging. 2 Grieved, vexed. 3 Caus- 
in: grief or vexation. 4* Riotons, tumult- 
uous. Is b. m’ aigne, my thoughts are dis- 
tirbed. g 

———— ——d, Sind. Grief, sadness, melan- 
choly. 9 State of being grieved or vexed, 
vexation. 3**Disturbance. 4++Confusion. 

bruais,$ v.&. Crush b» pieces. 2 Gnash. prov. 

bruan, zr.part. a’ bruanadh, v.a. Break into 
small pieces or crumbs, crush, crumble, 
pound,pulverizo,smash. 2$ Thrust. 3 Wound. 
dr Disjoint. 

bruan, -ain, -ruanan, s.m. Fragment, incrsel, 
gplinter, crumb. 2* Shortbread, cake made 
of butter, &c. to keep children quiet. 3DU) 
Large portion. Thuit bruan de ’n bhalla, a 
large part of the wall fell. 

toruan, s.m. Stab, wound. ?1jThrust. 

bruanach, -aiche, a. Causing or tending to 
crumble, pound, or break. 2 Crumbled, 
pounded. 

——_, 8.1. Fragments. 

-— — ——, 8.f. Continued breaking, smashing, 
or crumbling. 2 State of being in pieces or 
fragments. 3* Fragments. i 

bruauadn, -aidh, s.m. Breaking, crumbling, 
smashing, pounding.  2** Disjunction. 3** 
Crashing noise. A’ b—, pr.pt. of bruan. A’ 
bruanadh o na cnocaibh, crashing from the 
hills. 

fbruanadh, -aidh, 8.m. Act of stabbing or 
thrusting. . 

bruanag, -aig,-an, 8.f. Morsel, crumb, piece, 
fragment. 2* Littlecake. 3f{slight thrust 
or stab. 

—————ach, -aiche, a. Full of crumbs. 
to fallinto pieces or crumbs, 

bruanaibh, dat.pl. of bruan. n 

bruanan, -ain, sm. Morsel, crumb, piece, 
fragment. - i 

bruansgadh,tt -aidh, s.m. Crunching, crush- 
ing. 

E mil. s.f. Deep crashing or grating 
noise, clashing noise. 

, pr.part. a’ bruansgal, v.a. Break 
into fragments, crumble. 2* Make a deep 
crashing or crushing noise. 

bruarsgal, -ail, s.m. Falling in pieces or frag- 
ments with a crashing noise. A’ b—, pr.part. 
of bruansgail. : 

bruanspealt,* s.m. Splinter. 

, PT. pt a’ bruanspealtadh, v.a. 
Splinter, hew, hack. 2 Smash, break. 

— ——— ——-ach,a. splintering, hacking, hew- 
ing. 2 Smashing, crashing, breaking. 

——auh, -aidh, s.m. Splintering, hack- 

ing, hewing down. 2 Crashing. 3 Smashing. 

A’ b—, pi.pt. of bruanspealt. A’ b. chraobh, 


hewing Anon trees. aan 
bruauta,** pust part. Disjointed. 2 Broken 


2 Apt 











130 


Dra-choreur 
into fragments. 3 Wonnded. 


bruasgail, see bruansgart. 
bruasgal, see bruansgal. 


brü-bhruilhinn,?f s.t Ventriloquy. 

brucach, -aiche, a. Spotted, speckled, freckled 
(particularly in the face.) 2 Foul, squalid, 
hithy. 3**Pimpled. 4 Gloomy. La brue- 
ach, a glooiny, lowerin: day : caora bhruc- 
ach, a speckled sheep, black-faced sheep ` Aal, 
ann brucach, a freckled face. 

brucachadh, saidh, s.m. Act of irregularly 
digging up tne soil. A" b—, pr.pt, of brucaich. 

brneachd,* s f. Gloominess. 

brucag, $.f. Chink, cranny, 2 Eyelet. 3 Dir- 
ty, drabbish little woman. 4 Leaky boat. 5 
**Leaky vessel. 6f$Dım candlelight. 7 Lit- 
tle shrivelled horse. Cha bu bhrucag air 
meirg i, she was not a rusty, leaky vessel. 

— — —-&Ach,** a. Crannied. 

brucaich, pr part. a’ brucachadh, v.a. Dig. 2 
Turn up the ground imperfectly. 3 see 
breacaicnh. 

brucainneach, see brucach. 

- d, s.f. Spottedness, freckledness. 

brueanaich, s.f. Dawn, peep of day. Bi an seo 
'sa bhrucanaich, be here at dawn.—Islay. 

bruchag, &f. see brucag. 

—ach, à. see brncagach. 

brü-ehainnt, see brü-bhruidhinn, 

brùchd, -a, -an, 8.m. Sudden rushing forth, as 
of a multitude, sally, any sudden burst or 
disruption. 2|Belch.. 3 Heap, large quanti- 
ty, glut. 4 Buige. 5 Rift. 6ffBlast. 73M 
In Skye, Lewis, &c., the red sea-weed cast 
on the shore and collected in heaps and al- 
lowed to ferment. [it is called *'feamainn 
dubh” in Uist.] Rinne brüchd, he belched; 
thàinig brüchd de na daoinea mach, a rush of 
the people came Jorth; thuit brüchd de'n 
mhòine, a great quantity of the peats fell. 

brùchd, pr.part. a’ brùchdail & brüchdadh,v.n. 
Sally, rush out, burst forth. 2 Pour. 3 
Bulge. 4 Belch. 5 Rift. Bhrüchd na daoine 
a mach, the men rushed forth ; tha e'bruchd- 
ail, he is belching ; bhrùchd 'fhuil a mach,his 
blood rushed out; bhrüchd iad g'ar cómhnadh, 
they rushed to our aid. 

brüchdach, -aiche, a. Pouring, sallying, break- 
ing or bursting forth. 2 Belching. 3 Causing 
a rift, belch, or sally. 4 Of, or pertaining to, 
a rift, belch, or sally. 

brichdadh,-aidh, s.m. Rushing, pouring forth, 
sallying. 2 Belching. 3* Rifting. 4*Gush- 
ing. A’ b—, pr.pt. ot brùchd., 

[brüchdag, -aig, s.f. Blast. 

brüenda-dubh, (JM) s.m. Seaweed in a rotten 
state.— Uist. 

brùchdail, &,f. Rushing, pouring forth, sally- 
ing. 2 Belching. 3 Bilging. 4 Rifting. 6* 
Gush. A’ b—, pr.pt. of brüchd. 

tbrichdan, s.n. see brüchdag. 

brüchd-ruadh,| s.m. Waterbrash. 
under ruadhan.] 

————— ————ain, s.m. Belching from an over- 
loaded stomach. 

brüchd-seile, 8. 27. 

bruchlag, -aig, -an, s.f. Mean or wretched 
hovel. 2 Crumbling, insecure wall. SffBad 
boat. 

--—ach, -aiche, a. Mean, squalid, dirty- 
looking. : 

bruchlas, -ais, s.m. Fluttering of fowls going to 
roost, 

bri-chorcachd, s.m. see brü-chorcan. 

brü-chorcan,$? s. m.  Heath-rush, stool-bent, 
dirk-grass.—juncus 8quarrosus. 

brü-choreur, sve brü-chorcan. 











[see note 


see brichd-ruadhain. 





bruch-huil 


brach-shuil, -ula, -nilean, &. f. 
Bird-sye, hole through which 
lizht may enter. 

——. ——vach, eiche, a. Bird- 
eyed, hariag quick small eyes. 
¢bru ian,**-ain, s.m. Simmering 

noise. 2 sce bradan 

#—-—-0g s.m. (bradan òg) Sal- 
mon tront. 

brudh, see bruth. 

brudhach, -aich, -aichean, s.m. 
see ruthach. 

-—ail, see bruthachail. 

brù ihachd. t} et ind. Prevalence. 














brüdhadh, see brùthadh. 84. B u-chor- 
brudhainn, can. 

-—— each, 

-——eachd, see bruth——, 
brudhaiste, 

—ach, 





tbrudhaiteach, s.m. Thread-bare coat. 
tbrudhan, -ain, s.m. Smal! bundle of sticks. 
brù-dhearg, -dheirge, a. Re! b-- sted. 





m a, wa C 
\ ech ` \ 
M A di We 
>). Drü-dhearq. 
brù-dhearg, -eirge, s.m. Robin red-breast.— 
erythaca rubecuia.F 
brü-dheargan, s m. see brù-dhearg 
brug, s.m. see brugh. 
bruga dubh, see bruchda dubh. 
fbrugaidhe, s.m. see brughaidh. 
brugh, bruighne,bruighnean, s.m. Large house. 
2 Village. 8 Tower. 4 Fortified town. 6 
Fairy hillock. 6 Tumulus. 7 Cave. 8 House 
half under the surface. 9ft Fort. Sith 
bhrugh, a fairy hillock. 
brügh, see brüth. 
brü-ghabh, pr.pt. a’ brü-ghabhail, v. a. 
ceive, as a female. 
brü-ghabhail, s. f. Conception. A’ b—, pr.pt. 
of brü-ghabh. 
bri-ghabhailte, past part. Conceived. 
brughach, s.m. see bruthach. 
brughadh, -aidh, see bruthadh. 
brughaiche, s.m. Burgher. 2 Farmer. 
fbrughaidh, 8.m. Farmer, husbandman. 
Tbrü:haidhe, s.f. Gormandizing, voraciousness, 
gluttony. 
brughan, -ain, s.m. 


Con- 


see bruan. 





66. Bri-yheal. 


I31 


bruidhneach 


bri-gheal,f s.m. Wheat-ear (bird)—sazicola 
enanthe. 

bruic, gen.sing. & n.pl. of broc. 

bruich, pr.pt. a’ bruich & a’ bruicheadh, v.a. 
Boil, seethe, simmer. 2 rarely Roast, toast. 
Bruich e, bot it ; tha e bruich, it is boiled ; 
thae 'ga bhruich, he is boiling it. 

bruich, s.f. Boiliug. A’ b—, pr. pt. of bruich. 
Is don’ a’ bhruich a th’ air, how badly it is 
boiled. 

bruicb,-e, a. Boiled, seethed. 2 Roasted, 
toasted. 3** Sultry. 41f Ruddy-faced, red- 
dened with anger or passion. 

eadh, 8rd. per. sing. & pl. imp. of bruich. 

eadh, s.n. Boiling, seething. 2 Decoc- 

tion. 3 Any of the vari us ways of subject- 

ing eatables to the action of fire in cooking. 

A’ b—, pr.pt. of bruich. 

ealachd, s.f. Sultriness, warmth. 

eil, -e, a. Sultry, hot. 

-— — idh, fut. aff. act. of bruich. Shall boil. 

te, a. & pt. pt. of bruich. Boiled. 

bruid, e, -ean,s.f. Captivity. 2 Stab, thrust. 
3 Grief, anguish, affliction. 4ffCheck. 5t 
Thorn. 611i Carrying, bringing. Thug thu 
bruid am braighdeanas,thou hast led captivity 
captive; tha thu ’gam chumail ann am 
bruid, you keep me in great anziety. 

brùid, -e, -ean, s.m. Brute, beast. 2 Brutal 
person. 

bruid, pr. pt. a’ bruideadh, «v.a. Torture, op- 
press,enslave. 2 Stab. 3* Give the hint by 
touching. 4 Probe, poke. 5 Dig. 6 Foment. 
7 Fire. SfiStir up. 

—— —e&chadh, -aidh, s.m. Digging, stirring. 2 
Budding of grain. A’ b—, pr.pt. of bruidich. 

eadh, -eidh, s.m. Stabbing, thrusting. 2 
Soliciting, enticing. 3*Touching by way ofa 
hint. A’ b—, pr. pt. of bruid. 

brüideag, -eig, s. f. Little brute, beast. Z 
Brutish woman. 

bruideag,1t -eig, -an, s.f. Any pointed weapon. 
2 DU) Shove, punch, blow. 

brùidealachd, s.f. Brutality, beastliness. Z 
coarseness, savageness. barbarism. 

bruidean, n.pl. of brnid. 

brùidean, n.pl. of brùid. 2 dim. of brùid. 

brùideil, -e, a. Brutal, beastly. 2{{Unsavoury. 

fbruidhe, see tbruighe. 

achd, s.f. Colony. 

bruidheann, gen. sing. -inn & bruidhne, s. f. 
Talk, speech, conversation. 2 Qnarrel. 3 
Report. 4tt Noise of talk, tumult. Tha mi 
a’ cluinntinn bruidhne, I hear talking or can- 
versation ; bruidheann mhór, loud talk ; tha 
an leithid sin de bhruidheann am measg 
dhaoine, there is such a report among people ; 
chuala mi bruidheann fada uam, J heard ta k- 
iny at a distance ; móran bruidhne, much talk- 
£v; cath bruidhne,much fast and loud tacking. 

bruilhinn, see bruidheann. 

bruidhinn,* pr.pt. a’ bruidhinn, v. a. Speak, 
say, talk. Bruidhinn ris, speak to him; bha 
mia’ bruidhinn ris, J was speaking to him; 
e uim’ am b’ fhiach leat bruidhiun ris ? why 
would you condescend to speak to him? chan 
"eil agad ach a bhi bruidhinn, talk on as 
you like 

fbruidhlionta, o. Cloyed. 

bruidhne, gen. sing. of bruidheann. 
mor bhruidhne, the talkative man. 

bruidhneach, -niche, a. ‘lalkative, garrulous, 
loud, loquacions. 2** Querulous. 3 Given 
to gossip. 'S e siod am fear bruidhneach ! 
what a talkative fellow that is! sgathaidh an 
Tighearna an teanga bhriidhneach. the Lord 
shall cut off the tongue that speakcth proud 














- 











Fear na 





brnidhneach 132 bruthainneadh 
things, ] : bruiteach, -eiche, a. Warm, snug, comfortable 
bruidhneachd,* sf. Talkativeness, garrulity, | 2 Contented. 
loquacity. tbruith, senn. Flesh. 
bruidhte, see brüite. , pr.part. a’ bruith, v.g. see bruich. 


bruidich, pr.pt. a’ brnideachadh, v.a. & n. see 
bruid. 8 Bud, as grain. 

bruidil,orf v. see brnid. 

bruidleachadh, see bruideachadh. 

bruidlich, see bruid. 

+bruigeineach, y. Quarrelsome. 

+brnigh,** vA Field. 

tbruighe, s.f. Farm. 2IT sm. Farmer. 

tbruigheadh, s.m. Burgomaster. 

Tbruighean, see bruidheann. 

brnizheann, -inn & -ghne, pl. -ghnean, s. m. 
Palace, royal residence. 2 Fairy hill. 

fbruigheas,** s.m. House. 

+bruigheir, s.m. Farmer. 

+bruighseach, s. Womb with young. 

+bruighteach, s.m. Tyrant, oppressor. 

dbruigne, s.f. Assault. 

bruill, pr.pf. a’ brùilleadh, v.a. Crush, bruise, 
beat. thrash. 2* Squeeze. 
chnàiuhan. Z will crush your bones. 

brüilleadh, -eidh, s.m. Cru-hing, bruising, beat- 
ing, thra-hing. 2* Crush, squeeze. 

brüilleagadh,1i -aidh, s.m. Broiling. 

bruillich,** v.a. Probe. 

briillidh,* s.m. see bruillig. 

bruillig, -e, -ean, Sam, Man of clumsy figure, 
and of awkward, unwieidy motions. 

brüiligeach, -eiche, a. Clumsy, unwieldy, 
awkward. 

———————4, s. f. Clumsiness, awkwardness 
of gait or movements. 2 Corpulency. 

bruillsgeantachd,** s.f. Impetuosity. 

bruim-fheur,- fhevir, s.m. Couch or switch- 
grass, see feur-a'-phuint. 

+bruin, s.f. Caldron. 2 Kettle. 3 Belly. 

+--——, v.n. Makea rattling noise. 

brüinceach, -ceiche, a. Preguant. 2 Productive. 

bruin-deargan, see brü-dhearg. 

bruine, see bruinne. 

brnine-àrd, a. Having a high breast or chest. 
An ainnir bhruine-àrd, the ,high-bosomed 
maid. 

briiniceach, see brüinceach. 

brüinidh, s.m. Spectre. 2 The brownie of the 
Lowlanders. 

tbruinne, a. Fine. 

bruinne, s. f. tBelly. 12 Caldron. 8 Waist. 
4 Chest.front, breast. Bruinne seang, a slen- 


der waist. 
ach, -ich, -ichean, s.f. Nurse. 2 
3 Giutton. 4 (AH) Stout, (stupid 


| 


t- 





Mother. 
man. [When u ed in senses 3 & 4 it is masc.) 
fbruinneadach, -aich, s.m. Apron. 
bruinncadh,tt -cidh. sm. The front. 
ibruinuean, -ein, s.m. Nap or pile of cloth. 
--—ach,** a. Nappy, as cloth. 
bruinninn, see bruinnean. 
tbruinteach, a. Great with child. 
bruis, s.p]. Shivers, splinters, fragments. 
bruis, -e, -ean & -eachan. s.f. Brush. 
bruis-dreachaidh, s.m. Pencil, artist’s brush. 
bruisinn,** v.a. Brush, 
, S.f. Gaelic spelling of brushing. 
bruit, gen. sina. of brat. 
brüite, pt.pari. of brùth. Brnised. 2 Broken. 
8 Crushed. 4 Oppressed, grieved, sad. 
Daoine brùite, truagh, poor, oppressed men ; 
c'arson an osnaich bhrùite ad chliabh ? why 
the sad sigh from thy bosom ? iadsan a tha 
brüite'nan spiorad, they who are contrite in 
spirit ; fuil bhrùite, extravasted blood; tha m’ 
anam brùite 'am chom, my soul is oppressed 
within me. 


Brüillidh mi do | brundal, 


bruitheadh, see bruicheauh. 

brnitheann, -einn, s.f. Skirmish. 21[ see 
bruthainn. 311 see bruidheann. 

tbruithne, s.m. Refiner. 

bruithneach, -eiche, a. 
(AC) Frank. 

——__-_——, -eich, s. f. see bruthainn. 

brii-lionta, a. Satiated, cloyed. 

————— —ch. ao. Satiating, filling, cloying. 

+bruitin, s.f. The measles. 

tbrullsgiantach, a. Impetuous. 


see bruthainneach. 2 


Tbrum, v. Pede. 
Tbrumair, -ean, s.m. Pedant. 
1—— —eachd, s f.ind. Pedantry. 


tbrun, -uin, sm. Firebrand. 

brünaidh,-ean, s.m. Corpulent man. 2(DU) 
rarely figuratively Pompous man. 8 Gaelic 
spelling of Lowland brownie. 

see brünsgal. 

brundlais, see pronndail. 

brünsgal,tt ail, s./. Rumbling noise. 

brüs,** v.n. Gaelic spelling of browse. 

Tbruscair,** s.m. see brusgar. 

brusg,tt -uisge, s.f. Crumb, bit. 9/AH)Un- 
kempt matted head of hair. Bithidh mi 'nad 
bhrusg, I am ready to fright pou (i.e. to pun- 
ish you by plucking yonr hair.) 

brusgach,ff -aiche, a. Diiminutive, trifling. 2 
Blear-eyed. 2 (AH Shaggy, unkempt. 

brusgadh, -aidh, s. m. Diminutiveness, mean- 
ness. 2 Blearedness of eyes. 

tbrusgar, s.m. Broken ware. 3 
Mob. 

brutach, -aich, s.m. Digging. 

brutag, ff -aig, -an, s.f. Palmer-worm. 

brntaich,tf v.a. Di 

brüth, pr. part. a’ brüthadh, v. a. Bruise. 2 
Crush,pound,pulverize. 3 Squeeze,compress. 
Brüthaidh thusa 'shail-san, thou shalt bruise 
his heel. 

bruth, -a, pl. bruithean, s. J. 

brùth. s.m. (broth) Bruise. 

Tfbruth, -a, pl. bruithean, s m. Hair of the 
head. 2 Heat in the blood or skin, itch. 31f 
Anything red-hot. 4T$1Confined hot place. 

bruthach, -aieh, -atchean, s.n. [& f ] Ascent, 

steep, acclivity, hill-side, brae, precipice. A’ 

dol suas am bruthach, ascending the brae; 

thoir am bruthach ort ! take to your heels! 
thug e am bruthach air, he took to his heels ; 
le bruthach, downhill, downwards ; ri bruth- 
ach, ascending, upwards , fo chreiz na bruth- 
aich, under the rock of the steep; ruithidh an 
taigeis féin le bruthach, even a haggis will 
run downhill. 

ag,-aig. s.f. Little precipice. 

ail, o Full of precipices or braes. 2 

Ascending, steep. 

-—_———-an,’-ain, s.m. Short ascent. 
bràthadair. ean,s.m. Pestle, pounder, bruis- 
er, crusher Le bruthadair, with a pestle. 
——-— — -—eachd, s.f. Pounding. bruising,crush- 

ing. 2 Maiming. 3**Pugilism. 

brùthadh, -aidh, -aidheiwn, s.m. Bruising, con- 
tusion,|| crush. 2 Act of bruising, pounding, 
ague eme, or crushing. <A’ b—, pr. part. of 
bràth. 


2 Baggage. 


see brugh. 


——, 8rd. sing. & pl. imp. of brùth. 
brüthaidh, fut. aff. act. of brùth. 
bruthainn, -e, -ean, s. f. Sultry heat, warmth. 
Nach b’e sina’ bhruthainn ! what sultriness !* 
cach, -eiche, a. Warm, sultry. 2 
**Glowiug. 3**Red-hot. Aimsir bh., sultry 





bruthainneach 


weather 

brut ainneachd, s.f. Continuance of warmth, 
siltr ness. 

brah wist, s... Brose, a kind of pottage, used 
mostly inthe Lowlands, and mide by pour- 
iug boiling water or milk on meal, which is 
stirred while the liqnid is being poured on. 
2 Brewage. 

bruthaisteach, a. Of, or belonging to, brose. 
2 Of, or pertaining to, à clumsy or bulky per- 


son. 

brochan, n.pl. of brù. 

bruthan, -ain, sm. Faggot. 2 see brughan. 

¢bruthchan, s.n. see brocnau 

bruth-chorc, : see bruth-chorcan. 

————————a8n, -ain, 8.n. Heath-rush, stool- 
bent, dirk-grass, see brü-chorcan. 

cud, è. f. ind. Fainting through 
leat. 

bù ! int. Sound to excite fear in childreu. 

bu, past ind. of defes. v. is. Was, wert, were. 
Bu whi, J was; b! e ( for bu e)he was; b’ i 
q for bu i) shewas; b’ fhearr leam / would 
mv b’ fhèarr a thi gun bhreith na 
hi gun teagasg, better not to have been 
born than to be unl arned ; b’ fhearr gun tòis- 
each dh na sgur gun chrìochnachadh, better 
not begin tha: stop without finishina; b’ fhearr 
a bhi gun fhà nue na fainue Inacheach, bet- 
ter Ge without a "y than wear a rush one. 
[Bu is written b’ before a wor beginning 
wit a vowel or fh ; aud 5, ^, f, 9, 
t are aspirated after bw, as B’ mane 


,b fhearr 
leam. ] 


Ba dana e 1 how daring he was ! bu 


gheur el how sharp it was! bu mhios’ e, it| tbuactha, a. : 
was worse ; bu phailt iad, t ey were plenti-| Luadhach, -aiche, a. 


Jul; a laoich bu whór an só!as nam fleadh. 
bu mhór an am cruadail, Aero who wast 
great in the joy of feasts and in time of trou- 
tle, For various other idiomatic expressions 
commencing with bu, see uuder the preseut 
tense, Lë, 

tna, 

tbaabh, ( (AF) s.f. Cow. 

buabhall, -aill,-an, s.m. Unicorn. 2 Buffalo. 

3 Truunet, cornet, wind instrument. 4 Cow- 

stall. 5¢{ lorn. 0f: Apron. 7** Any wild 

horned creature. Mar adharc bh:abhaill 

àrdaichidh tu m’ adhare-sa, my horn shalt 

thou exalt as ihe horn of an unicorn ; le h-iol- 

ach agus le fuaim a’ bhuabhaill, with shout- 

ing and with sound of cornet. 

ach, a. Like. of, or pertaining to, a 

passo: 2 unicorn; 3 buffalo; or 4 cow- 

«tall. 

-————aiche, s.m. Trumpeter. 

buabhall-chorn, s. 5 Buyle-horn. 

buabhull, -nill, see buabhall. 

ach, see bnabhallach. 

aiche, see buabhallaiche. 

buac,* v.a. Work lime and gravel into mortar. 
2 Work clay &c. 

buac, sm. Dung used in bleaching. 2 The 
liquor in which cloth is washed. 3 Un- 
bleached linen, linen in an early stage of 
bleaching. 4ff Brow of a hill. SIT Roof of a 
GEN, 63{Settlement. 7**Cap of mist ona 

Mi. 

fbuacachan, -ain, s.m. Bleacher. 

bua adh, (a') pr.pt. of buac. 

fbuacais, see buaic. 2**Confusion. 

fbuach, -uaich, san, see buac. 

+———ach, a. Fine, beauish, foppish, gaudy. 

buachaiil, e, -ean, s.m. Cow-herd. 2 Shepherd. 
$ Watch or protector of cattle of any kind. 4 
** Youth. Is bnachaillean na daoine, the 
men are shepherds ` am buachaill dh’ an 


133 


m, p.s, & | 


buadhghallan 


coir, the herdsman near them. 

buachaill-an-sgadain,(AF) s.m. Large ray or 
skate,nort hern chimera —chimera monstrosa. 

buachaill-bréize,(AH) s.m Rudely built monu- 
ment on the crest of a hill. 

buachaille, gen. sing. of buachaill. [Often used 
as the nominative. ] 

buachailleach, -eiche, a. Pastoral. 2 Of, or per- 
taining to, a shepherd or cow-herd. 

— d, st, Herding, watching cattle, 

occupation ora herdsmau. Ri b., or, ris a’ 
bh., herding. A’ b—, pr.pt. of buachaillich. 

buachaillich, pr. pt. a’ buachailleachd, v.a. 
Herd, tend, keep cattle. 

buachaill-seomair,** ssm. Valet-de-chambre. 

buachair,* v.a. Bedaub with dung, 

buachar, -air, s.m. Cow-dung. 2 Dung of cat- 
tle in general. 3**Dunghill. 4**stall. Bua- 
char bho, cow-dung; dubh-chail' &' bhuachair, 
a dung-hill trollop. 

u an, -ain, s.m. Dried cow-dung used for 
uel. 

bua-choilleag, Gaelic spelling of bucolic. 

buadan,** ain, sm. The bone in a horn. 

buadh, -aidh, pl. -an & -aunan,gen.pl. buadh,s.f. 
Virtue, excellence. 2 Palm. 3 Endowments, 
qualifications, talents. 4** Gem. Deagh 
phuaidheannan nàdurra, excellent natural 
talents ` deagh bhuaidheannan inntinn, ex- 
cellent mental endowments ; tha buaidh air 
an uisge-beatha, whisky has virtue in it ; fear 
nam buadh, the man of accomplishments. 

, gen. pl. of buadh 

, aidh, s.m. Food, sustenance. 

Precious, 








A 





Victorious. 2 Highly- 

gifted. 3 Virtuous. Connal buadhach, wic- 
torious Connal. 

buadhach, -aich, s.m. see buadhaiche. 

— ——— —&adh,-aidh, s.n. Conquering. 2 Act 
of conquering or overcoming. 3 Excellency. 
4* succceding well in anything. A’ b—, pr. 
pt. of buadhaich. 

buadhachzil.* -e, a. Triumphant, victorious, 
overcoming, subduing. 

buadhachas, -ais,s.m. Attainment of superior- 


ity. 2 Gaining of victories. 8ftLuck. 4** 
Victory, triumph. 
buadhaich, pr.pt. a’ buadhachadh, v. a. & m. 


Conquer, overthrow, subdue, subject. 2 Pre- 
vail. 3 Triumph. 
buadhaiche, -an, s.m. Conqueror, champion, 
victor. 2**Tribute. Gheibh am buadhaiche 
e, the conqueror shall receive it. 
buadhail, -ala, a. Victorious, triumphant. 2 
Lucky, fortunate. 
buadhair,-ean,8.2n. Conqueror,champion,victor. 
buadhairt,** -ean, st Hardship, trouble. 
buadhal,s. see buathal. 
,0. Victorious. 
achd, s.f.ind. Superiority. 2 Conquest. 
8 Flourishing condition, prosperity. 4*As- 
cendant. 5ffNature. 6fttLuck. Am buadh- 
alachd. in prosperity. 
buadhannan, pl. of buadh. 
| buadhar,-aire, a. see buadhmhor. 
buadhar, -air, s.m. Adjectivein grammar. 
fbuadharg, s.m. Victorious champion. 
fbuadharrtha, a. see tbuaidheirthe. 
buadhas, -ais, s.n. Victory, conquest. 
cession of victories. 
tbuadh-dharg, see tbuadharg. 
buadh-fhacal, s.m. Adjective, epithet, qualify- 
ing term. 
buadh-fhaclach, -aiche, a. Triumphant 
speech, expressions, or words. 
buadhghallan, -ain, s.m. Ragweed, ragwort. 


2 Suc- 


in 


puadngnatian 


—senecio Jacobaa. 
buadh-ghuth,s.7.Triumph- 

ant shouting. 2 Clamour. 
tbuadhlain, sm. Judge. 
buadhlan-buidhe, see 

buadh,, hallan buidhe. 

buadhmhoire, comp. of a. 
buadlimnor. 

—— ———-. ——achd, 
buadhalach i. 
buadhmhor, -oire, a. Vic- 
torious, tritunphant, suc- 

cesstul. 

—— ———-—Aüchd,** s. f. ind. 
Insuper: bleness. 

¢bunf, sm Toad. 2 Any 
ugly veuomous creature. 87. Buadhghallan 

tbhuaia, s.m. Serpent. buidhe, 

Tbuafach, a. Virulent. 

—d, 8.f. Poison. 

tbuafach, s.m Poisoning. 

fonafair, -e, -ean, s.m. Viper, adder. 

4buafan, s.m. Suake. 

buaf-athair, see buaf-nathair. 

buaf-bheist,(AF) s.m. Toad. 2 Adder. 

buaf-mathair, see buaf-nathair. 
tbuaf-nathair, s.f. Adder. 

tbhuag, -aig, -an, sf. Spigot, plug. 2 see buaidh. 
[** says s.m.] 

fbuagair, s.m. Faucet, pipe inserted in a ves- 
sel to give vent to the liquor, and stopped up 
by à peg or spigot. 

tbuagair, v.a. Tap, broach, as a cask. 2 Pierce. 

buaghach, a. see buadhach. . 

buaghair, -ean, s.m. Cow-herd, herd 2 Shep- 
herd. Thachair orra b. bhó, a cow-herd met 
the n. 

buaghal, see buathal. 

buaghallan, -ain, s.n. see bnadhghallan. 

————— ——— -buidhe, see buadhghallan-bzidhe. 

buagharra, a. Grieved, vexed. 2 Vexatious, 
oppressive. 38ttNulky. 4tfBoisterous. Mios 
buagharra, an oppressive month. 

buaic, -e, -ean, s.f. Wick of a candle, lamp, or 
torch. 2ffTallow. 3ffPinnacle. 4** rarely 
Wave. 5 for buac. 6(DU) Dirt lying thick 
anywhere. 

, pl.of buac. 

each, a. 
2 Having a wick. 
Fluctuating. 

buaicean, n.p/. of buaic. 

buaicean,** -ein, -ean s.m. Veil. 2 Lappet. 
8 Ltitle wick. 4ffOdd laughable little boy. 
5(AM) Untidy fellow. 

tbuaiceis, s.f. Small wick. 

buaichd, e, -ean, sf. see bnac. 2 see buaic. 

„v.a. Anoint, besmear, rub over with 
dung, mud, or oil. 

buaichdein, am. see buaicean. 

—————-— -iall, s.m. Piece of unmelted tal- 
low with which brogue-makers rub the thong 
they sew with. [lt nsed to be ina leather 
case in the shape of a horn, tied over the left 

alm, so as to be handy for sticking the awl 
into when making shoes.—J M] 

tbuaicin, see buaicean. 

t , v.a. Blindfold. 

buaicneach,|| s.f. Smalipox—Suth’d. [Always 
preceded by the article a’ bh—.] 

——-—, a. Skinny, tough. 

tbuaid,** s. Lamp. 

buaidh, e, n. pl. -ean -dheanan s.f. Victory, 
conquest, success. Thugadh buaidh "nam 
fhianuis 'sa bbiar, victory was obtained in my 
presence ton the battle-field ; faigh mo thoir 


see 











Bleaching lees. 
Of, or connected with. a wick. 
3 Giddy, thoughtless. 4 





134 
buadhghallan buidhe,§ s.m. Yellow ragwort, 


buail 


buaidh, obtain the victory or conquer; bhnidh- 
inn iad buaidh 'sa chómh-stri, they gained the 
victory in the strife; beannachd do t? anam is 
buaidh, a blessing toyour soul and success ; 
ma gheibh sibh buaidh, if you obtain the vic- 
tory: buaidh-chaithream,a triumphant shout; 
a’ deanamh bnuaidn-chaithreim, triumphing; 
buaidh leat, success to you ; buaidh no bàs, 
conquest or veut —motto of t! e MacDougalls; 
gheibh thu bnuam buaidh cnuic agus cò- 
dhalach, thou shalt get for me victory over hilis 
and oppoxition.—Duanaire, p. 124. 
buaidh,** v.a. Conquer, overcome. [Takes 
air, simple or compounded after it, as b. 
orra, conquer them.—‘‘thoir buaidh orra” is a 
more usual expression. ] 
buaidh-chairm, see buaidh-chaithream:. 
buaidh-chairt, s.f. Trump at cards. 
buaidh-chaithream, s. m. Triumphant shout. 
2 Song of triumph. 3**Triumph. 
—_———_———ach, -aiche, a Triumphant, 
uttering triumphant shouts. 
buaidh-chraobh,} sf. Spurge laurel—daphne 
laureola. Badge of the MacLarens. 





88. Buaidh-chraobh. 

tbuaidheal, see buabhall 3 & 4. 

buaidheam, -eim, s.m. Fits of inconstancy or 
unsteadiness. 

———— ——A&ch, a. Giddy, volatile, unsteady. 

tbuaidhean, see buidheann. 

buaidhear, sm. see buaidh-fhear. 

—achd,* $.J. ind. Triumph, victory, 

coming off victoriously. 

fbuaidheart, -eirt, s.m. Tamult,confusion. 

Tbouaidheirthe, a. Disturbed, agitated. 2 Pos- 
sessed. 

buaidh-fhear, -fhir, s.m. Conqueror. 

buaidh-fhacal, s.m. see buadh-fhacal. 

buaidh-ghair,-e, s.f. Shout of victory or triumph. 

— ———-——each,,a. Like a shout of triumph. 
2 Triumphant. 

——————-—eachdaich,** s.f. Continued shont 
of triumph. 

buaidh-ghuth, s.m. Voice of victory, shout of 
triumph. 

+buaidhirt,ft sf. Tumult. 2 Crosses, afflictions. 

buaidh-làrach, s.m. Decisive victory, gaining 
of the field, conquest. Buaidh-larach anas 
gach stri, victory in every battle. 

tbuaidhr, v.a. see buair. 

+ eadair, see buaireadair. 

f—————eadh, see buaireadh. 

+bnaif-bhiast, s.f. see buaf-bheist. 

fbuaifeach, a. Angry, fretting. 

+buaific, see buaifig. 

tbuaifig, s.f. Antidote. 

fbuaig, s.f. Cup, chalice. 

buaigh, see buaidh. 

t eal, -ean, s.f. see buabhall (81& 4)' 

buail, pr. part. a’? bualadh, v.a. Strike, beat 
smite, thrash. 2 Thresh, as corn ; beetle, a 





bnatt 


lint. 3 Thrust. 4 Strike up, asa tune. 6 
Attack. 6 Belabour. 7 Knock, as ata door. 
5**'l'euch ac. or land at. 9 Proceed. 10 Rush, 
used to doscribe rapid motion. 11 Win, asa 
raine at shinty, football, Ee, Bhuail e mi, 
e struck me ; tha iad a’ bualadh’san t-sabh- 

al, they are threshing in the harn ; tha iad a’ 
buala4h an lia, they are beetiing the lint; 
bhuail iad oirnn, they attacked us; bhuail 
chuige Dearg, Dargo rushed on towards him ; 
bhuail iad chun na beiune, they rushed to- 
wards ihe mountain ` bhuail e 'chruaidh "oa 
taobn, he thrust his steel int» her side ; buail- 
ibh clàrsach, strike wp the harp; an ceud fhear 
a bhuail an tir, the first mun that touched the 
land ; thuail iad chun a cheile, they attacked 
each other; bhuail iad chun a’ chladaich, they 
rushed towards the shore ; buail an dorus, 
knock at the door ; buailidh e brog ort fréin 
fhathast, he will hurt yourself yet (dit. strike a 
s hoe on you); buail as, thrash off; bhnail am 
pathadh mi, I became thirsty ; bhuail e air 
cleasachd, he began to play; bhuail na coin 
air cobhartaich, the Ga Sound prey ` bhuail 
mi chugam fo m’ aszall e, J tucked it under 
my arm ; bhnail mi mo chuaille ’uam dborn, 
I seized my staf in my hand ; bhuail mi bàir, 
I won a game. 

buail, st Step, degree. 

buaii-a’-chnag,(AF) s. Balm-cricket. 

buaile, pl. buailtean, s. f. Fold for sheep or 
black cattle. 2 Herd or number of cattle. 3 
**sStall, 4**Dairy. 5AM) Cucle, halo. Tha 
buaile mu n ghealaich, there is a circle round 
the moon ; a’ bhó an miosa "aa bhuaile, the 
worst emo in the fod; buailtean spréidhe, 
herds of cattle; bà 'sna buailtibh, cows in 
the folds. 

tbuaileach, -lichean, sf. Ox-stall, stall. 
Fold. 


ges 


-—, 4. Of, or belonging to, a fold. 

-—an,** -ain, s.m. (buaile) Milker of 
cows. 2 Place where cows are milked. 

buaileadair,** s.m. Assailant, assailer. 

buaileag,* s.f. Circlet. 2,DU) Small circular 
enclosure. 

-——— —— -thimchioll, sf. 
chioll. 


see bualagan-tim- 


buai'ear, fut. pass.of buail, Shallbe struck. 2 


ure! imversoually, as, buailear suasleam, J 
roce» ed upwards. 

1bua.l-zhlas, s.f. Mill-pond. 

buailidn,** at, Dairy, milk-house. 2 Stall 3 
Fold. A steach do 'n bhuailidh, into the 
mick ng-house. 

buajl- &, (for buail thusa) Strike thou. 

Tbua:l5,** sf Cabin. 2 Locker. 3 Niche. 

buailte, past pt. of buail. Struck, threshed,&c. 
Cna bin bail air fodar buailte, threshed corn 


is not spared. 
aca, -tiche, a. Liable to, subject to. 2 

Obnoxious to. 3 Apt to strike or thrash. 4 
Exposed to. 5 Quarrelsome. 6**Amenable. 
Buaitteach do iormadh Gunnar. exposl to 
many dangers ; cha'n'eil e ’na dhuine buail- 
teach, he is not œ quarrelsome fellow ; gun a 
Dhith buailteach, not given to striking; buail- 
teach do chis, liable to taz ; gu mireagach, 
bnailt-ach, playfully beating. 

buailteach, -eich, -e:chean, em. Summer 
booth or hut for shielings. 2**bairy-house. 

-——4d,11 s.f. Aptnesas, tendency. 

f—————an, -ain, sm. Flying caup. 

buailtean, n pl. of bhuaile. 

-——————, -eln, -einean, $.51.. Flail. 2 Supple, 
that partof a flail which strikes the corn. 3 
seo bualan, 4 One stick used in threshing 





135 


buaireas 
 Å— D. 


corri, similar to a carpet-beater. 

bua: ar, a.m. Thresher. 2**Racre for tem 
nis. 3(AF) ‘Thresher (tish.) A see bi ailtean. 
5 Any instrument for striking or beating. 

tbuain, sf. Equality. 2 Devrivation. a 

buain, gen. buaua, dat. buain, s.f. Reaping, 
cutting down, as of corn, mowing, harvest. 
?1iValue. A’ dol chun ua buana, going to 
reaping ; &' bhuain-edrna, the barley-harvest ; 
ain na buana, harvest-time ; tha larach buain 
fhóid air an athar, there ts a mark of turf- 
clearing on the sky, i. e. there will be a good 
day to-morrow; deireadh buana,harvest-home; 
ge b'e nach cuir 'san là fhuar,cha bhuain "aan 
là theth, he that sows not on a cold day shali 
not reap ona hot one. A’ b—, pr.pt. of buain. 

buain, pr.pt. & buain, [& a’ buaineadh] va 
Mow, reap, cut down. 2 Shear. 3 Pluck. 
pull, tear by the root. 4**Engage. A' buain 
na mona, cutting peats ; a’ buain shlat, cut- 
ting twigs; a’ buain chnò, gathering nuts; chs 
bhuain thu gu buileach, thou shalt not wholl 
reap ; buain a’ chraobh seo, cut down thts 
tree; a’ buain na h-àraich, cutting down [the 
files] of battle ; buainidh aon fhacal ceud, 
one sharp, bitter word may provoke a hundred 
retorts, or oneword may start a conversation 
which will extend to a hundred words, 

buaine, comp. of a. buan. More or most endur 
ing. Daraig a’s buaine dreach, an oak of 
hardiest Jorn. 

buaine, s.f. Perpetuity, durability, lasting- 
ness, continuance. 2 Hardiness. Buaine an 
ni seo, the durability of this thing. 

buaineachd, s.f. see buaine. 

buainead, -eid,s.f. Degree of durability, or sta- 
bility, durableness. 2 Hardiness. 

buaineadh,**-nidh, s.m. Reaping,cutting down. 
2 Enjoying, as the fruits of one's labour. 
A’ b—, pr.pt. of buain. **Muinntir a’ bhuain- 
idh." is given by ** for the reapars, but 
“muinntir na buana” is the correct form. 

——— —— , 8rd. sing & pl. of buain. 

buainear, fut. pass. of buain. 

buainiche, enn, s.m. & f. Reaper, shearer. Ri 
taobh naim buainichean, alongside the reapers, 

buainte, past part. of buain. Shorn, reaped. 2 
**Torn up by the root. 3**Hewn down. 

tbuaintear, -eir, -earan, s.m. see buanaiche. 

buair, gen. sing. of buar. 

-——, pr.pt. a’ buaireadh. v.a. Tempt, allure. 
2 Provoke, er, annoy. 3 Disturb, dist act. 
4 Madden. 5 Alarm. 6 Make muddy, as 
water.  'Nuair a bhuair bhur n-aithrichean 
mi, when your fathers tempted me; bhuair 
thu an t-uisge, you have made the water 
muddy. 

buair, sf. Rage. 

buaire’, see buaireadh. 

buaireadair, -ean, s.m. Tempter. 2 Disturber, 
one who vexes or troubles. Air teachd do 'n 
bauaireadair, when the tempter came. 

buaireadh, -ridh, -ridhean, s.m. Temptation, 
tempting. 2 Trouble. 3 Disturbance. 4 An- 
noyance, aggricvance. 5 Severe trial. € 
Maddening. 7 Distraction. &8{{Passion,rage. 
A’ b—, pr.pt. of buair. Mar ann an là a’ 
bhuairiih anns au fhàsach, as in the day of 
temptation in the wilderness ; chum a brair- 
eada, to tempt her ; air a bauaireadh, tempted. 

buaireanta, a. 'Pfewmptinz, euticing, trying. 2 
Iuflamiug. 3 Annoymg, hence, proovcative 
of strife. Duine b.. a quar: esome fellow. 

buairear,** s.m. Kindler. 

buaireas, -eis, -an, s.2n. Tumult, confusion. 
Anxiety, tronble. 28 Confusion of mind. 


9 
4 
Yerment, 6;fDismay, turrur. Fo bhuaireas, 


buaireas 


troubled, annoyed ; a’ cur buaireis am measg 
nan daoine, creating a disturbance amongst 
the people; fion a’ bhuaireis, the wine that dis- 
turbs the mind. 
buaireasach, -aiche, a. Turbulent, raging. 2 
Stormy, tumultuous. 3 Furious, fierce. 4 In- 
flaming. 5 Anxious. 6 Provoking. 711Dis- 
maying. Deoch bhuaireasach, drink that ın- 
fames; duine buaireasach, a man that an- 
noys, a tumultuous fellow ; geamhradh buair- 
easach, a stormy winter. 
—— ,$.f. Turbulence. 2 Storminess, 
tumultuousness. 3 Fierceness. 
buaireasaiche, comp, of a. buaireasach. 
buairte, a. & past part. of buair. Distracted, 
troubled. 2 Infuriated, enraged. 3 Tempi- 
ed. 4 Stormy. 5 Made muddy, as water. 6 
Disturbed, confused. 
buait,** -e, -ean, s.f. Lantern. 
bual, 3m. see buabhall. 
f—. sm. Remedy. 2 Physic. 
{tUrine. 
bualachd, s.f. Drove of cattle. 
bualadach,** a. Percutient. 
fbualadh, s.m. see fbual. 
bualadh, -aidh, s.m. Striking, beating, knock- 
ing. 2 Threshing. 3 Battle. Bualadh nan 
laoch, the batt/e of heroes ; bualadh arbhair, 
threshing of corn ; “bualadh a 1nach" a repe- 
tition of the first measure in cedl-mér. A’ b—, 
pr. pt. of buail. M 
bualagan-timchioll,| s.m. Ringworm. 
bualaidh, -ean, 8.f. Cow-stall. d 
fbualainle, sf. Sea-lark. 2(AF)Wagtail. 
bualan,§ s.m. Groundsel—sene- 
cio vulgaris. 
tbualchomhla, s.f. Sluice. 
rbualchrannach,s.m. Float,raft. 
bualghas, -ais, s.m. Mill-pond. 
fbuall,| sm. Healing. 
buallachd, s.f. see bualachd. 
bualtair, see buailtear. 
bualtrach,-aich, s.m. Cow-dung. 
buamasdair, see buamastair. 
buamastair, s.m. One who talks 
boisterously. 2 Vain boaster. 
3 Dolt, pompous biockhead, 
booby. 4 Sudden attack—W. 


Isles, probably from **buathan." The gene- 
ral idea expressed by this word in W. Isles is 
one having a mental defect.—J.M. 

Dbuamastaireachd, s..f. Boisterous talking. 2 
Vain boasting. [Not used iu senses 1 or 2 in 
W. Isles, but to signify the couduct or condi- 
tion of one somewhat mentally deficient.— 
J.M.] Ri b., talking boisterously. 

buan, buaine, a. Lasting, durable. 2 Long, 
tedious. 3 Hardy, tough. Cruaidh mar an 
fhraoch, buan mar a’ ghiuthas, hard as hea- 
ther, lasting as pine : rathad buan, a tedious 
way: cead buan, along farewell. ; bodach buan, 
a tough or hardy old man. 

fbuan, a. Good, harmonious. 

fbuan, -aine, 3. f. Nurse. 

buana, gen.sing. of buain. 

¢buana. s.m. Hewer. 2 Reaper. 

buanachadh, -aidh, s.m. Coutinuing, contin- 
uance. 2 Persevering, perseverance. 3 Ob- 
taining. A’ b—, pr.part. of buanaich. IN 
am brosnachadh nach "eil mo shùil a’ buan- 
&chadh P in their provocation doth not mine 
eye continue ? 

buanachail.ff -e, a. Perseverant. 

"buanachas,1i -nis, s.m. Perseverance. 

buanachd, s.f. Reaping. 2 Erroneously used 
for buannaehd. 

buanachdach, -aiche. o 


8**Water. 4 





89. Bualan. 


seo bvannaech] 


135 


buarach-bhaoibh 


buauachdail,-e, a. see buannachdail. 

buanaich, pr.part. a" buanachd & b .anachadh, 
Va. € n. Last, abide. 2 Persevere. 3 En- 
dure, contiuue. 4 Erroneously used for buan- 
naich. 

buanaiche, -an, s.m. Reaper, shearer. 

buanaichidh, fut.af. a. of buanaich. Shall last, 
shall persevere. 

buanaichte, pt.part. of buanaich. 

buanas, -ais, s.m. Perpetuity, durability, long 
continuance, duratiou. 2++Perseverance. 

buau-chuimhne, s.f. Lasting remembrance, me- 
morial, chronicle. 2 Retentive memory 

——— - ach, see buan-chuimhneachail. 

Exc achail, e, or -ala, a. Having a 
retentive memory. 2 That is long remember- 


ed. 
buan-dhürachd,** sr, Assiduity. 
—— o ach,** -aiche, a. Assiduous. 
buan-ghairdeachas, -ais, s.m. Continual or per- 
petual rejoicing. 
buan-mhair, v n. Last long, endure. 








en 





| buan-mbaireachdui:n, s.m. Enduring, contin- 


uing long, everlastingness, continuance, per- 
petuity. 2 Perseverance. 

buau-mhaireannach, -aiche, a. 
durable, perpetual, perennial. 

———— — —— d, s.f, Perpetuity aang 
ity, eternity. 

buan-mharthannach, see buan-mhaireannach. 

buan-mheal, v.a. Enjoy for ever. 

Wee, To pl. buauntaich, s.m. Child —PertA- 
sntre. 

tbuanna, chan, s.m. Billeted soldier. 2* Bil- 
let master. 3 Idler, straggler. 4fMercenary. 
Sé buanvachan deug MhicDhomhnuill, Mae 
Donald of the Isles’ sixteen billet-masters. 

buannachail, a. see buannachdail. 

buannachas,* s.f. Free quarters for soldiers in 
place of rent. 

buannachd, s.f. Gain, profit, acquisition. 2 
**Acquirement. 3** Availableness. 4 for 
buaineachd, see buaine. 5 Emolument. 6 
Erroneously used for buanachd. Ni gun bh., 
a profitless thing. A’ b—, pr.pt. of buannaich. 

—— — —— ach, -aiche, a. Profitabie, 

—ail, -e, a. Profitable, emolumentary. 

2 Available. 3 Useful. 4 Gratis, as a billet. 

buannaich, pr.pt. a’ buannachd, [& fbuannach- 

adh] v.a. Gain,profit, win, acquire. BA. iad 
clià, they won renown. 

buanuaiche, s.m. One who enjoys. 2 Winner. 

buannaichte, past part. of buannaich. 

buan-sheas, pr. part. a’ buan-sheasambh, v. *. 
Persevere. 21fStand steady. 

-——amh, s.m. Persevering. 2 Standing 
forever. A' b—, pr.pt. of buan-sheas. 

————— —mhach,-a!che, a. Firmly-footed. 2 
Constant, lasting, perpetual, stable. 

—— ——-—mhachd, s. Constancy. 2 Perse- 
verance, continuance, firmness, durability, 
stability. 

buantas, -ais, see buanas. 

tbuan-thosgach, a. Strong-tusked. 

fbuanuigh, gen. of buana. 

buar, -air, s.m. Cattle, oxen. 2 Herd of cattle. 
Buair air buailibh, herds in the folds. 

buarach, -aich, -aich»an, s.f. Cow-fetter, shac- 
kle bound round the hind legs of cows when 
being milked. 2tt¢stomach of limpet. 3ff 
Slovenly, spiritless fellow. 4**Cow-spaniel. 

buarach,** -aich, s.m. Early feeding of cows. 2 
Rising to feed cows. 

fbuarach, a. Early. 

buarachan, -ain, s.m. Cow-herd. 

bnarach-bhaoibh, s.f. Lamprey. 2 Kind of eel, 

Des e c4 i b&nit river, and to possess 


Everlasting, 





Se buarach-bhaoibh 


magical powers. 

buarach-ua-paoibn, 

buart, see buairte. 

1buas, Ais, s.m. Belly. 
Trade. 5 Art. 

t—— ach, a. Abounding in cattle. 

t—ach sf. Bluebuttle (plant) 

tbuasair.ff sm. Diaphragm. 

baath, -uatth, s.f. Rage, madness, frenzy,fury. 
2 Mad frolie. Tha buath air, hke is ina race. 

ach. -aiche, a. Subject to fits of madness. 

2 Apt to becuine enraged. 

adn, «ndh, s.m. Mad fit, fury. 2 Wild} 

raimbie. 3 Mad frolic. 4 Impetuousness, 

rushing. 

al. -ail, em. (AH)Stall in a byre or stable. 
2t* Boose. Dh'amais e air deagh bhuathal, 
he has found a snug berth. 

fbuatham, -aim, -an s.m. Bittern. 

buathun(J.M.)-aim, s.n. Sudden attack. B. 
dull, the sudden and furious way in which a 
blind man would attack anyone who offended 
him. 

buethar,** -air, s.m. Affidavit. 

buatharra,(J M) a. Impetuously raging. Duine 
b., aman of impetuous rage. 

büb, pr.part. a’ bùbail, v.n. Bellow, roar. 2* 
Blubber, asa child. 3 Weep in à most mel- 
ancholy way. 

büb, -a, s.m. Roar, bellow, yell. Leig e bib 
as, he u tered a roar 

— ail, -e, -ean, s.f. Roaring, bellowing, yell- 
ing, b ubbering, continued bellowing. 2 Lam- 
enting. A’ b--,pr. part. of bub. Ciod a’ UR. 
a th’ ort? what are you bellowing for? 
?übail tairbh, the roaring of a bull. 

büb.ire, sm. *Persou that blubbers. 
Common bittern, see corra-ghrian. 

—— achd, sf. Blubbering. 

bübau, -ain, s.m. Coxcomb. 

ach. -aiche, a. Coxcomical, like, or per- 

taining to, a coxcomb. 

achd, s.f.ind. Behaviour of a coxcomb. 

bübirsaich, s.f. see bübaireachd. 

büe,** s. Size, bul.. 

buca: bh. -aich,s.m Boy. prov. 

bucach, a :ee bücail. 

bucaid, -ean, gf. Pimple, 
a shield. 3 Bloteh. 4 
buck-t. 

tbuvaide, s.f. Palm. 2 Knob. 

bucaideach, a 
ing pimples. 2 Likea bucket. 3**Booming. 
Sgiath oh., & bo-ming shield. 

bücvl,** a. Bulky, sizeable. 

bücaill, gen.sing. «t n. pl. of bucall. 

bucia, see bucaid. 

bücall, -aill, pl. -aill & -an, s.m. Buckle. 
aill airgid, silver buckles. 

ach. a. Buckled, having buckles, wear- 
iug buckles. Brògan b., buckled shoes. 

bucur,** a. Compact. 

bucas, see bocsa. 

buchainn,(AC) s.m. Swelling. Mios buchainn, 

the menth of swelling, month of bursting forth 

(May) ; called also buchainn Muire, the swell- 

eng of Mary ; buenainn buidhe Mhoire nain 

buadh, the velluw swellin] mouth of Mary of 

th arvas’s ; buchainin Bealltainn, the swelling 

of Beltane: buchainn buidhe Bealtainn, the 

yellow swelling or Beltane. 

— ———, a. Melodious. 2 Warbling. ZF Net. 

ling. 


see buar.ich-bhaoibh. 


2 Breach. 3 Rout. 4 














(AF) 








ustule. 2 Boss of 
aelic spelling of 


Buc- 





c. 





each, a. sce buchainn, a. 

buchallae^, a. Nestling in the woods. 
Mel ois 

buchd, s m. Cover of a book. 2 see bic, 


2tt 


137 


Pimply. fnll of pimples, caus- | 


buidhne 


buchdail,¢¢ a. see bùcail. 

ach, a. see Lücail. 

bnehthuinn, see buchainn. 

buchuinn, see buchainn. 

bucla, see bücall. 

buclach,ff a. Buckled. 

buelaich, v.a. Buckle up. 2 Tuck up. 3 Trim. 

— — —ke, past part. of buclaich. 

bucsa, see bocsa & aigh-bàn. 

bucull, see bücall. 

ach, see bücallach. 

tbud, s.m. see fbudh. 

bid, see put. 

büdach, see pütaeh. 

budagoec, s.m. Snipe. 2 Woodcock. 

tbudh, see bu. 

fbudh, s.m. The world. 2 Breach. 3 Rout. 

budhag, -aig, -an, s.f. Bundle of straw. 

budhaigir, -e, -ean, s.m. Puflin or coulterneb, 
see fachach. 

fbudhail, s.m. Place, residence. 

budhailt, -e, ean, s.m. Recess on the inside of 
a cottage wall, wall-'**press.'' 

budragoc, see budagoc. 

büdraid, see butarrais. 

büdrais, see butarvais. 

bugair, for budhaigir. 

bugan,** -an, s.m. Unlaid egg. 

fbugh, s.m. Fear. 2 Leek. 3 see briseadh. 

bugha, s.m. (CR) Green spot by a stream, side 
form of **bogha,"'a bow,such spots being made 
bow-shaped by the windings of the stream.— 
Skye. 2t see bugh. 

ughall,* -aill, s.m. Pot-hook. 

bugsa, see bocsa & aigh-bàn. 

fbuibiollan, s.m. Coxcomb. 

buic, gen.sing. & n.pl. of boc. 

ibuicead, s.m. Mouthful. 

buicean, -ein, San. Young buck or roe. 2 Lit- 
tle buck or roe. 3 Pimple. 4** Bubble. 
Buicein bhinneach, the higk-headed young roes. 

ach, a. Likea young buck or hart. 2 


‘d 


Of, or belonging to, a young buck or hart. 3 

Pimply. 

——— -darach,* s.m. Nutgall. [With the 
article end 

buicein, see buicean. 

each, see buiceanach. 

buiceis, s.f.ind. Sportiug, as of a buck. 

each, -eiche, a. Sportive, frisky. 

tbnich, s.f. Breach. 

buichd,(AC) gen.siug. & n.pl. of bochd.—Jsles. 
[Not used between Sound of Barra and Butt 
of Lewis—J.M.] 

fbuichin, s.m. see buicean. 

buid, gen.sing. & n.pl. of bod. 

buideal, -eil, sm. Cask. 2 Anker. 3 Bottle. 
4ttSurly person. Marbhuideal anns an toit, 
as a bottle in the smoke. 

aich, -ean, s. J. Blaze of fire. "Na 

bhuidea.aich, on fire ;'s ann an sin a tha a’ 
bhuidealaich ! what a conflagration is there ! 
chaidh e 'na bhuidealaich, it blazed. 

buidealair, s.m. Butler. 

buidealaireachd, s. f. Butlership, business or 
occupation of a butler. Chum a bh., to his 
butlership. 

fbuidh, a. Grateful, thankful. 

fbuidhe, sf. Thanks. Mo bhuidhe ri Dia, my 
thanks to God, a short expressive grace after 
meat, common in some parts of the High- 
lands. [Now Hie / 

buidhe, part. of necessity, Glad to, had to. 

biidh:, a. Yellow, golden. 2 Grateful. 3 Agree- 
able. 4ttLueky. Grian bhuidhe, a golden sun; 
falt biudüe, yellow hair ; bu bhuidhe leat a 
dheanamh, you were glad to do it; d buidhe 











buidhe 


dhui*, it is fortunate for you; bn bhuidhe leis 
nit rùisg itheadh, he would fain rat the husks. 
buiihs, 8.an.ind. Yellow colour. 

bui Iheach,|| -ich, s.f. The jaundice. 
ded by the article a’ bh.] 

— — — —, -eiche, a. Thankful. 2 Well-pleas- 
ed, satisfied, satiated, content.  Cha'n 'eil e 
buidheach dhiom, he is displeased with me ; 
bi buidheach, be thankful ; bu choir dhuit a 
a binth buidheach, you should be thankful; tha 
mi buidheach air son sin, Z am pleased at that; 
cha'n fhaigh thu sin co dhiubh’ bhitheas tu 
bnidheach no diombach, you will not receive 
that, whether -you are satisfied or otherwise. 

buidheachan-bo-blioch, s.n. Cowslip, 
nmisean. 

tbuidheachar, |] e, Dr. Gillies says—** A disease 
tlut played havoc in Ireland about the mid-| 
dle of the 7th. cent. I have not been able to | 
form any opinion as to its identity. ‘The root. 
of the word is evidently bude (buidhe yellow, : 
as in our buidheach, jaundice, or yellow dis- | 
eus?, ‘The disease was evidently epidemic 
and violent, aud it would apply tu yellow 
fever with exactness, if we knew that dis- 
ease to have been, or to have been possible 
as, an epidemic in this climate." 

baidheacnas, -ais, sm. Thanksgiving, thanks, | 
gratitude, acknowledgement. 2 Grace after! 
food. 3 State of being bought but the bar- ' 
gain not concluded, in abeyance. Thoir; 
buidheachas, give thanks ; bnidheachas do 
Dhia, thanks be to God; fo bnnidheachas, 
auram buidheachas, in abeyance ` taing is 
builheachas, many thanks; bnidheachas an 
ino zharaidh, harvest thanksgiving. 

fimiditeachd, 67. Piety. - 

ouidavad, -eid, s.f. Degree of yellowness. A’ 
fàs am buidhead, growing more and more yel- 
low. 

b idheag, -eig, -an, &f. Goldfinch. 2 Linnet. 
3 Any smal bird of-a yellowish coour. 4 Any 
yellow flower. 5 Yellow seaweed. 6**Daisy. 
7** Lily S**Cow of a yellowish colour. Gheibh 
sinn a’ blmidheag ’san lon, we xhaJl find the 
daisy in the meadow, 


baidheag,$ -eiz, -an, s. f. 
Creeping crowfoot (ran- 
P unculus repens. 
Ze 
3 Yolk of an egg. 
90. Buidheag.t buidheag-an-arbhair,is.f. 
Scentless May-weed — maíricaria inodora. 


[Prece- 


see 


midheagach, s. m. see 
feamainn bhuidhe and 
feamainn bholgainn. 

buidheagan, nom. pl. of 
buidheag. 


--—, -ain, s. m. 





buidheag-an-t-samhraidh, s. f. 
Coru-inarigold, soe bile- 
bhnilhe. 2 Buttercup. see 
cearban 


b: idheag- bhealaidh, T -eig-, pl. 
buidheagan-bealaidh, 8.f. Yel- 
low-hammer— emberiza citrin- 
ella. A beantiful bird, but 
of very evil repute in High- 
iaud superstitions, 2łł} Yellow 
bunting—emberiza alba. ` 

buidheag-bhuachair, see buidhe- 
ag-bhealaidh. 2tf Yellow-ham- 
vrer—cenchrymus bellonit. 

buidheag-.hearbu, sf, Camo- 
rule, see camomhail. 

buidhean, -ain, s in, see buidhe- 

see buidheag-blieal- 





91. Buidheag- 
CN av-arbhair. 

sidh. s 
buidheann, f-einn &] buidhne, pl. buidhnean 


138 


buidhre 


A 


SS 


92. Buidheag-bhealatah, 


& buidhnichean], s. f. Company, troop, 
and, party. 2** Rulers. Buidheann shaivh- 
dearan, d company of soldiers: rinn na Caldé- 
ich tri bni:linean, the Chuldeans fo. med tives 
bands; tha mia’ faicinn buidhue, see a cnm- 
pany. 
tonidheannach, a. <Agminal. 
bnidhean-na-coille, s.f. Goldhaminer. Yelow- 
hammer a cording to tt, which gives “budhe 
nein-na-coille." 2 YWoodpeeker, see las- 
air-coille. 3 Bnulltineh, see corcan-coille. 
fbuidheannail, a. Agwinal. 
bnidhear-nan-ingeau,$ s. m. Sea-spurge—etw- 
phorbia paralias. 
buidhe-bhan, a. But? (colour.) 
Tbuidhe-Clionnaill,| see fbuidheachar. 
bnidhe-dhonn, a. Auburn colour.) 
buidhe-nan-ingean, see buidhean-nan-ingean. 
buidhe-ruadh, a. Bay (colour) 2** Auburn. 
Falt bnidhe-ruadh, auburn hair. 
buidhe-shoilleir, @. Amber 
(colonr.) 2 Fallow. 
buidhinn, buidhne, s,f. Gain, 
profit, emolument. 2*Qnar- 
rving of stones. Is don’ a’ 
bh. air na clachan sin, how 
badly those stones are quar- 
ried ; is beag do bill itin 
dheth, your profit of it is 
little. 






———, prpt. a’ buidhinn, 
va, Gain,get profit, win,ac- 
quire. 2 Conner. 3 Qnarry. 
Bh. sinn bair, we won a 





game ; bnwhnibh saorsa, We, 
gain liberty. 98. Buidhean-nan- 
buidninneach,* s.f. Quarry ingean. 


for stones, &c. 
buidhleis, (AF) s. £ Black or rock gobie. 
fbuidhlia, s.m. Puddle. 
bnidh-liath, a. Pale yellow (in colonr.) 
buidh-mhios,s.m. (dit. the yellow month) July. 
buidhne, gen.sing. of buidheann & of buidhinn. 
buidhneach. -eiche, a. Victorious,successful. 2 
Numerous. 3 In bauds or companies. 4 Ac- 
quiring, gainful, profitable. ^ Na laoich bA. 
mhóra, the high-minded victorious heroes. 
-—, -ich, -ichean, s.f. Band, company, 
troop, party. ‘Uile bhuidhnichean, all his 
bands. 

-—— ll s,f. see bnidheach. Swuth’d. 
buidhneachd, s.f. Victoriousness, snccessful- 
ness. 2 Gain, profit. 3 Aggrandizement. 
buidhnich, pr.part. a’ bnidhneachadh, v.a. Ar- 








range into companies or parties. 2 $íln- 
people. 
bnidhnichean, n.pl. of buidheann. 
buidhnichte, past pt. of buidhnich. Arranged 
or drawn into companies or parties. 
buidhnidh, fut. aff. a. of bnidhinn. Shall or 


will win, &c. 

bnidhre, sf. Deafness. 

nn romp. of bodhar. More or most deaf. 
Cluinnidh tu air a’ chluai- a's buidhre e, you 
will hear it in the deafest ear. 


bnidi'^tr 


vacid,tt st Office of a butler. 
buidire,,AC) s.m. Witling. Bueir b. breith ach 
co a bheir ceartas ? aen: may give judg- 
ment but who will give jee 3 
buidseach, see buitseach. 
—as, see buitseachas. 
—d, sf. see buitseachas. 
buidsvir, s.m. Great grey shrike or butcher- 
bird, see piozhail gulas. 2 Gaelic spelling 
of butcher. 
buig-5hninne, see bog-bhnine. 
buge, sf. Softness. 2 Humidity. 3 Effem- 
inacy. 
, comp. of bog. Softer, softest. 2 
Sinoother, smoothest, 
b:ligzachas,** -ais, s.m. Tenderness, pity, com- 
passion. Gun ath-thruas guu bh., without 
CUM pussion or pity. 
buigead, -eid, s.m. Degree of softness, &c. 
buigean, -ein, s.m. Soft, effeminate, unmanly 
feilow. 
——ach, see buigean. 
buizileaz. s.f. Bog, soft place, quagmire. 2 
Anything very soft. 3 Crab after casting its 
shell. 4ft Coward, soft unmanly fellow. 
Hi, bhuntàta. e soft, wet potato. 
bniginn,tt -e, s./. Morass, marshy ground. 
buigire, s. see budhaigir. St. Kilda, 
iach. -i = 
KOR am.) soo rte 
bu‘viinn, sf see buigileag. 
buigueach, -eich, sf. Bulrushes. 2 Generally 
any uc HI weeds or plants. 3 Quagmire. 
thuig-stubhin, s.f see bog-bhuine. 
Abt. ai, s.m. Little box. 
tbul, see boil. 
buil, æ, s./ Completion, perfection, 2 Conse- 
quence, effect, issue, eud, conclusion. 3 Suc- 
cess. 4 Applheution, use. DÉI Advantage, 
improvement. Bi.hida a’ bh. dhnit, the con- 
sequence mus’ be obvious in your case ; bheir 
thia’ bhul, you will reap the consequences ` 
fbithidh sin air banil, that will com: io pass ; 
is léir a’ bnnil, the re:v/t ig obvious ; buii 
gach aon taisbein, the effect af every vision ; 
tha a’ bhuil siu air, the efect of that is obvious 
on him ; an rud a nìthear gu ceart, chithear a 
bhuil, when a thing is properly done, the result 
will be s»en ; a thoirt gu b. 'fhacal, to complete 
his word ; à bheir a dhroch innleachdan gn 
puil, who will bring his evil devices to pass ; 
dean deagh bhuil dheth, make good use of it ; 
bnil cheart a dheanamh dheth, to make pro- 
-r use of it ; gu buil, (adv.) ahove; ni gun 
huil, @ vsel«s« thing ; tha a’ bhuil air, tha 
2' bhlath air, the mark ison it, or itis like it— 
& remark often used when good counsel is 
condemned, and one comes to grief because 
of the neglect, or it may be reversed to show 
that foolish counsel was not heeded, and the 
end justified the meaus adopted. 
bui'each, a. Coinplete, whole, total, entire. 
[Another forin of baileach—1 
, (1) adv. Completely, wholly, utter- 
ly, altozecher. Glanaidh e gn ro bhnileach, 
he shall tharoughlu purge; na tréig mi gu buil- 
each, do not forsik? m» alto: ther ; cna bhnain 
tan gu bnileach, thon shalt not wholly rean ` 
is buileach a dh'fbairtlich e ort, it ^as com- 
p ete y defied you ` is bnil ach a chaidh thn 2 
cholaidh, you are completely ruined ` gu bil- 
exch, buileach, pick and crum». 
-——adh. -aidh, s.m. Bestowing, giving 2 

















Assignment. 3 Improving. 4 Finishine 
emnpete v. 5**Presentation, asof a church 
living. 6$;Treatment, usage. A’ b. ort, bes-’ 


199 
buidileir,tt ean, s.a. Gaelic spel'ing of butler. 


bnfllarean 


towing on you ` chaidn a ^A. gu mor, he was 
much doused ` nach ano aiv tha ^m buileach- 
adh ? is he not bad y used ? —Suth’d ; buil- 
eacha th math, a good use ; droen banileach- 
adh, a bad us, A’ b—, pr.pt. of builich., 
buileachas,** -ais, am Frugality. 
fbnileamhuil, a. Raging, mad. 
buileann, see builionn. 
-————ach, see builionnach. 
bü'leasg, -eisg, see bùlas. 
buileastair, -e, -ean, s.m. see bulaí«tear. 
builg, gen. sing. d: n. pl. of balg.  21fDellows. 
3ttseeds of herbs. 
—, sf. Distemper among cattle through 
heat or want of water. 
builg,* v.a. see baig & balgaich. 2* v.n. Rise, 
as a fish in the water, rise to the fiy. 
-—each,} 3.m. Knobbed seaweed, see feae 
main bhalgaiun. 
-——eadh, s.m. Bubbling up, as water begin- 
ning to boil. 2 Blistering. 
bullyeag, s.f. see balgau. 
-——ach, a. see brilgeanach. 
builgean, -ein, -an, s.m. Blister. 2 P‘inple. 
3 Bubble, bell on liquor. 4 Little big. bad, 
der. 5**Beliows. 6. AF) Puia. Mar rimise 
eadh builgein. like the bursting of @ bubble. 
—— ach, -eiehe, a. Fullof blisters, pimples, 
pustules, or bladders, 
builgeanta, a. l'at and small, asa dog.—Gael. 
Soc. of Inv'ss, xv, 53. 
tbuilgeas, s.f. see builgleas, 
ach, -aiche, a. Spotted, 
builgein, -e, -ean, see bitilyean. 
—each, -eihhe, e, Full of pustules, blis- 
ters or small bubbles. 
builgeun, (AF) s.m. Pun, see fachach. 
Tbuilghionn, s.f. see builionn. 
fbuilgleas, s.f. Blister. 
t-———-acll, a. Spotted. 2 Blistered. 
builich, pr. pt. a’ b.ileaehadn, v.a, Grant, b3- 
stow, present. 2 Adniuister, manage. 3 
Spend, dispose of. 4 Improve. 5 Finish 
completelv. 6fffreat or nse oue well or ill. 
Gach ni a bhuilich Dia ort, everythin; God 
hath bestown on thee ; b. aula, finish the day 
completely ; b. an ùine, tinprove the time. 
te, past pt. of builich. Assigned, &c. 
fbnilid, for (am) bheil iad ? 
builioun, -inn, -an, &.f. Loaf of bread or sugar. 
ach, -aich, s.m. Baker. 
ach, -aiche, a. Full of loaves. 
aiche, s.m. see builionnach. 
buill, gen. sing. & n. pl. of ball. 
buill-bheirt, s.pl. Tackling, instruments. 
buille, pl. -an & annan, 8.f. Blow,stroke, strike, 
knock. Buille air son buiile, blow yor ow; 
fead am builleannan, the noise of (hir blows; 
buille thall 's à bhos, mar gum bitheadh 
duine a’ marbhadh radanan, a hit here and 
there, like a man killing rats—often applied 
by worthy “Moderates” in the Nortu to the 
Catechists' style of preaching. 
builleach, -eiche, a. That gives blows. 2 Prone 
to give blows or to strike, percntient. 
-—— — —— A3, -ai3, s.f. Act or habit of striking. 
2**Doxing 3 Bruising. 
builieanach, a. Striking, giving blows. Sàth- 
ach buileanach, giving thrusts and blows. 
builleasg, -eisg, s.m. see bùlas. 
buille-choilleag, sf. Blow given to the ball in 
playing shinty, sending it beyoud the goal 
and winning the gune. 
huillis, see buidhieis. 
buillsgean, -ein, -an, 8.m. 
Focus. 3 Core. 2B.’ 
the sea ; am buillsge.a 











" «'dle, centre. 2 

.4irge. the midst of 

an teine, ta the cen- 
L2 


biiliszean 


140 


buisean 


tre of the fire; b. srutha, the vortex ofa stream. | buiunse,** Gaelic spelling of bunch. 


bnasgcan, see buill-gean. 
luat, gen.stag. & w.pl. of balt. 
toulnie, 8.f. sce muime., 


WEN, s.m. see buiuailear. 
d 3 
fbnimpis, s.m. Pump. 


buin, pr.part. a buniitinn, v.a. & n, Belong to. 
2 Interfere, meddle wath. 3 Treat with, deal 
with. 4 ako away, tear from. 6 "ouch, 
handle. 6 Be relate! to. Na b. da sin, do 
yot ouch that ; buinidh iad d a chéile, they 
ar^ related to each otàer ; ’sanndo Dhia a 
lnuiueas slàirte, to God belongs salvution. 
b. gu cavim «neil rim’ ghaol, deal gently with 
my love ; co dha a bhuiueas seo? £o whom does 
this belong ? cha bhuin e dhuit-se, it dees nol 
becona to you ` an rud nach buin duit, na 
buiu da, do not meddle with what do-s not 
concern you. [I'he Irish beanaim is from the 
v. Lean, touch ; the Scottish Gaelic, which 
has the idea of relationship or origin (cha bh. 
e dhomh, he is not related (o me) seems to con- 
fuse bean and bun, »tock.—1] 

tbiinchios, s.f. Pension. 

baindeal, see buinnseal. 

buine,** sf. Set-off, in basket-making. 2 The 
thick welt or border finishing any wicker- 
werk. "isem, McL & D» Tap, spigot. 

1buineadhach, -aiche, o. Warlike. 2 Powerful. 

fbuinean, s.m. Sloot, twig, branch. 

t —a, 8. see boirionn. 

buinidh, Jut.aff.act. of buin. Shall or will be- 
Jeng, de, 

buirig, v.a. Conquer, obtain by conquest. 
buinigear buaidh le foighidinn, victory is 
won by patience 

,8.f. Superiority. 

bniun, gen.sing. & n pl. of bonn. 

büinne,* s.m. Statue, bust. 2 One who stands 
s.ock-still. Is tu am büinne, you stand stock- 
still, like a statue. 

buinne, -acnan, s.f. Border, hem, selvage. 2 
Spout, cataract. 3 Rapid current, stream. 4 
Strong tide. ^ Confluence. 6 Pool in a river. 
7itProp.  8SifTap,spigot. 9** Billow. 10 
rarely Sprout, twig. 11**Ulcer, boil. Air 
b. reidii, on a smooth stream ; buinnean àrda, 
lefu, .illows. 

ach, Ach, s.f. Looseness, diarrhoea, flux, 

dysentry. [Preceded by the article a’ bh.] 

ach, o Contemptible, abominable. 

Duine buinneach, a contemptible person. 

-— -nhór. &,f. Cholera-morbus. [ Prece- 

dedby the article o bh.] 2$ Osier-twig, see 




















fineamhuin. 
- ag, eig, -an, sf. Twig. 2 Germ. 3 
Sprout. ` AitDocken, 5 Young maiden. 6 


Familiar term in addressing a female. 7 Sole 
ofa shoe. tffHem, border. 9ftNorrel shoot. 
Cha chuir e b. air a bhrògan, it wi not sole 
his shoes. 

fbuinneamh, -imh, s.m. Effusion. 

buinnean **-ein, s.m. Shoot, young twig. 

bun:nean-beó, (AF) 8. m. Sea animalculsg, 
pnosphorescence. 

buinnean-leana, s.m. Bittern, see corra-ghrian. 

buinune-beó, san, Beginning of the flow of a 
spring-tide. 

buinne-shruth,** ¢.f. Precipitous stream. 2 
Cascade. 3 Rapid tide way. Mar bhuinne- 
shruth reamhairt (reothairt), like a spring- 
tide stream., 

buinn:g, v.a. & 8.f. see bnidhinn. 

—— ———ench, a. see buidhneach. 

—evethd, s.f. see buidhneachd, 

buinnir, ean, s.m. see bonnair (appendix.) 





——- ——A], -eil, ëm, Ream of paper. 2 Truss, 
8 Bünch. 

Luinnteach, a. Causing looseness of the bowels. 

-—, -elch, sm. One troubk d with a 

flux, one who is habitually troubled with 
looseness. 2 Leather fer shoe-soies, the 
thickest part of the hide. 

buiunteachd, s.f. Flux, dysentery, habitual 
looseness of the bowels. 

buintear, -eir, -eirean, s.m. Dunee. 

bnintinn, san, & pr.part. see buntuinn. 

bùir, pr. part. ai bùirich [& binreadh) v. m. 
Roar, bellow, as a deer or bull. 

buirbe, s.f. Barbarity, barbarism. 2 Fi»rce- 
ness, wrath, anger, rage, savageuess. 3 Sever- 
ity. 4 Crueity. 5 Turvulenee. 6 Boisterous- 
ness. Gun gheilt no bhuirbe, without fear 
or wrath; mnarbh sibh iad le buirbe, you kil- 
led them in a rage. 

, gen. sing. f., and comp, of borb. 

achd, $.f. same meauings as buirbe, 








buirbean, -ein, pl. -einean, s.m. ||Cancer. 21$ 
Savage. 
ach,** a. Cancerous. 


achadh,** s.m. Canceration. 

bàird, gen.sing. & n.pl. of, bord. 

bùirdeasach, -aich, s.m. Freeman of a eity or 
town, 2 Burgess. 3 Merchant, shop-keeper. 
4 Citizen. 5 Boarder. 6 Idier.  Büirdeas- 
aich sgiathach nan spear, the winged inhabi- 
tants of the skies. 

büire, s.m. see bùireadh. 

adh, s.m. Wailiug, loud weeping, burst 
of grief. 2 Roaring, bellowing, braying. & 
Rutting. 4*Rutting-place. Poll buiridh, the 
rulting-place of deer, see dàmhair. Bhris 
vaipe büire, she broke a loud burst of grief. 

tbuireadh, -ridh, s.m. Gore. 2 Pus, corrupt 
matter. 

Lüireadh, 8rd, pers. sing. ët imp. of büir. 

bùirean, -ein, s.m. Roar, bellow, as of a deer. 2 
Loud noise. 3 (AF) Bittern (dit. lowing bird) 





see corra-ghrian. An fhairg’ a’ teachd leb., 
the sea coming with a noise. 
ach, -aiche, a. Roaring, bellowing, 


noisy, t{mugient. 

büireinich, 8,f.ind. see bùireadh. 

huirgeiseach, see büirdeiseach. 

buirich, s.f. Roaring, asa bull, bellowing. 2 
Wailiug. 4**Growling. 3 Loud lament. 5 
Low murmur. 

, pr-part, &' bùrach [& a’ bürachadh] 

v.a. Dig, delve. 2 v.n. **Howl, roar, make a 

loud lament, 

e, s.m. Mattock, pickaxe. 2 Hoe. 3 

Spade. 4 Dibble. 5 One who delves or digs. 

6(AF) Bittern {lowing bird; see corra-ghrian. 

-idh, Tut of o, of Loi ich, 

büiridh, gen.sing. of büireadh. 

büirleadh, -idli, s.m. Language of folly or ri- 
dicule. 

büirling, s.f. see birlinn. 

bùirn, gen.sing. of burn. a 

büirseach, -ich, sf. Deluge of rain. SI Rous- 
ing fire— Hebrides. i 

bùirte, sf. Gibe, taunt. 3 Wit- 
ticism, repartee. 

buis,** f. Kit. - 

Tbuiscean, -ein, s.m. Thigh, haunch. 2 Thigh- 
armour. 

buisdear, (DU) s.m. Wizard. 2 Wicked fellow. 

buisdreach, see buitseach. 

— ——-.—d, see buitseachd. 

buiseal, s.m. Bushel. 

bui-ean, -ein, -an, s.m. (dim. of bus) Little 
mouth, 











2 Sarcasm. 


buisein 





buisein, see buisean. 

bui+voan, -e1n, 2.77. see buillsgean. 

buiszinn,** 3. Buttock. 

buisinn-iall,* s.m. ae buaichdein-iall. 

buisueachd,ff see buitseachd. 

-——ach,{! a. Incantory. 4 

fbüiste, an & -achan, $, zg. Pouch, pocket, scrip. 

fouistin, s.m. Fustian. 

bui:treacd, see buitseachd. 

bait, a. Badenoch for baitidh. 2 “Fugy” as a 
fowl, see pùt. 

fbuite, s.m. Firebrand. 

bàiteach, -ich, oan, sf. see buidealaich. 2 
tts.m. Threat.—Suth’d, n 

tbuitealach, «. Fierce. &£.f. see buidealaich. 

buitnre, see baidhre. 

bàitich, va. Threaten.—Suth’d. 

buitidh, -e, a. Bashful. 

+b ntse,** s.f. Icicle. 





bitwach, -ich -ichean, s.m. Gf. Wizard. 2. 


Witch. Is b.e, he is a wizard ; isb i, she is 
a twtch. ' 
-—as, -ais, 8.2m. Witchcraft, sorcery, ma- 





ic. 
d -—d, sf. Witchcraft, sorcery, enchant- 
ment. 

*baitsear, -eir, s.m. Gaelic spelling of butcher. 
2 Batener-bird, see pivghiid gulas. 
¢——arh:i, s.f. see fedladairzachd, Ag 
iounsa‘hadh na b., 

business. 
buitseir, see buitsear. 
fbul, em. Manner, fashion, mode. 
bul,* s.m. see bülas. 
bila, s.m. Bowl. 2 see bùlas. 





bnlag. see pulag 
buiaistear, see bulastair. 


bùlas, -ais, s.m. Pot-hook. 2 see jbülos. 

bulastair,tt -ean. s.m. Sloe, bullace.—prunus 
insititia, 2 Potato seed. 

eS Mono }(CR) Boulder—Perthsh. 

Oils, v.n. (balg) Bulge—Perthshire. 

bulz, builg, s m. Ship's bilge-piece, (see bata 
Fs, p. 72.) 2 Ship's hold. 3 Convexity. 3 
see haig 

——ach, a. see balgach. 2 Convex, bulging 
oat. 3 Capaciors. Ceud srian bulgach, a 
hundred capacious bridles, 

bu'gaich, v.a see balgaich. 

bulgan, see builgean. 

E s.m, Bowl. 2 Ball. 3 Bubble. 4 Pope’s 

u 

t—ch, a. 
bauble. 

f—ch s.m. Connor (fish.) 

fbülos,If xm. Prune, 

bulta, (AF) s.m. Colt. 

buinai:ear, -an. s.m. Bungler. 

— ach, t} -aiche, a. Loggerheaded. 


Globular, like à globe, ball or 





—achi, &.f.ind.. Bungling, clumsiness, | 


inexp -riness, awkwardness. 

bnmalair, see bum-ilear. 

bun, pl. buin & bunan, s.m. Root,stock,stump. 
2 Bottom, base, foundatiou, foot. 8 Socket. 
4 Mouth of a river & Squat, short person or 
animal. 6 Dependenve, trust, confidence. 7 
Affiance. 8{{Care, charge, keeping. Eun os 
ciona, upside down ; b. na cravith- the root of 
the tre» : b. na veinne, the bottom of the hill; 
b. na heaitrach, the foot of he altar ` spion as 
a biuin e, root it out ; na dean bun á gàir- 
dean feòla. place no confidence in an arm of 
flesh ` dean tun á Dia, place your confidence in 
G^ ; cha'n fhàg e bun no barr, he will leave 
neither root nor Lranch ; am oun an taizhy, 
taking cure of the house; aim bun nan caorach, 


141 





learning tke butchery. 


bunadas, -ais, s.m. 





bunamhasachd 
tending the sheep ; asad rinn ar sinnsearan 
bun, in thee our ancesiors viaced thew cour 
dence ; bun eich, an 04d stump of a horse ; bun 
na cìob, the ront of the mountain geass : bun 
balaich, a stout squat fallo ; v. a dhà sgéitne, 
the sockets of his (wo wings ; b. an earbaiil, 
the rump. 

bun,(AF) s.m. Nor.hern diver, see muir-bhua- 


cha iil. 

—abias, -ais, s.m. Element  2tt Buttock. 

—abhasach, a. Elementa. — ztfPertuining to 
& buttock. 

—ach, -aich, s.f. Coarsetow. 2 lare of flax. 
3 Sturdy little person. 4 Cutch, roots of woul 
to be shaken out of the tufis 5 Radical, in 
politics. 

ach, -aiche, a. Clumsv, not handsome, 2 
Squat,short,stampy. 3**Sturdv. 4¢tRadical, 
of, or pertaining to, a root. 5**Chopping. 

——achadn, -aidh, s.m = Establishing, founding, 
settling. 2 Taking root. AT" b—, pr.part. of 
bunsicn. 

——uüchaiunt, sf. Ktymology. 

bunachar, -air, -au, sm. Foundation. 2 Base, 
bottom. 3 Koot. 4 Authority. 5 Etyniolo- 
gy. 6* Dependence, contidence. trust.—IJslay. 
7**Radix. Na dean 6. sam bith á sin, place 
no confidence in that ; chan 'eil b. eil agam, 
I have nothing eise to depend on--Isiay; O "bh. 
luaisgidh an talamh, the earth shall quake 
fromits foundat-on. 

bunachas, ais sm. Foundation, root, prin- 

ciple, 2 Kryinoiogy. 3 Authenticity anthor- 

ity. Faclair bunachais, an etumoloyical dice 
tionary. 

——-ach, a. Authentic. 2 Well-fonnded. 

8 Etymological. 4 Radical. GttFundamental. 

see bunadh. 
bunadh, -aidh, sm. Origin, stock. 2 Root, 
fouulation  S8ttHabivation. 

fbunadiüias,** ai, s.m. Lnstirution. 

f——————àch,**a. lInstitnt?ionary. 





| bunaich, pr.pf. a’ buanaciadh va Found, es- 


tablish make firm. 2 Take root. 
on. 


3 Depend 














— — —-te, a. & past pt. Established, founded, 
rooted. 
bunaideach, «. see bunaiteach. 
---——d, sf. see bunaiteachd. 
bunaidh, s.m. Habitation, Gu bunaidh, fer 
ever, 
bunail, a. Radical, 
t, He 
teach, a. d 
teachd, s.f. see bunait 
teas, &m. 





bunain,{{ s.pl. Stubble. 

bunait, e, -ean sm. Steadiness, constanev. 2 
Basis, sure foundation 3 Indexibility, firm- 
ness. 4 Perseverance. 65f!Dwelling. Pun- 
aitean an domhain, the foundations of the 
earth. 

each, -eiche, a. Steady, grounded, fixed, 

stable. steadfast, iminovgble. ` Zeg Authen- 

tic. 3**-ee banaiteach. 

eachalh, -ailh, xm. Fonnding, estab- 

lishing A’ b—, pr.part. of bunnitich, 

eachd, sf Steadiness, tirmness, con. 

sta"cv. 2 Indexi i'ity. 3 Safety. 

-vas, -els, san. Same Meanings as bunait- 

eachd. 

ich, pr. pt. a’ bunaiteachadh, v.a. Found, 
establish. 2 Inherit. 3 Possess. 4 Fix aa 
&bode. 5* Inhabit. 

buna.nas, -ais, a.m. see bunrtamas. 

bunamhas,* -ais, 3m, see bun-mhas. 

achd,** sf. Radicality. 


























bunan, (pl. of bun) Stubble. 


bunan, -ain, s.m. (dinm. of bun) Little root or 


stump. 21iStubble root. 
buuanta, -ainte, a. Strong, stout, steady, 


sturdy, firm. 2 Well-set, having a good bot- 


tom or foundation. SttCounstant, steadfast. 
———chd, s.f. Firmness, steadiness. 
Sturdiness. 
bunasach, -aiche, 


Well-fuunded. 3 Authentic 4 Stout. 


bau-bhean, .declined like bean) s.f. Female of 


discreet yeors. 


bun- nuachaill,Js.m. Northern diver, see muir- 


biinashaill. 
bunchailleach, -eich, s.f. Old woman. 
bu :char, -a/r, -an, 8 m. bunachar. 
bun-chiall, -chéill, 
cealed meaning. 
—— — —a&ch, -aiche, a. Concealing a moral, as 
a fable. 


tbun-chis, sf, Chief rent, tribute paid to a 


monarch. 2 Pension. 
-——— —eàach,** a, Pensionary. 
bun-chi-ear,** s.m. Pensioner. 
tbun-chisiche, -an, $.m. Pensioner, 
bun-chüis,-e, -ean, 8.f. First cause. 
bun-chuisleach, -lich, -lichean, s.f. Foot-stalk. 
bun-dearg,(AC) s.m. Red swelling (disease in 
eattl-.) 


bun-dubh, -uibh, s.m. That part of a root which 
is underground and comes up by pulling. 2 


Lowest tiers of sheaves in a corn-stack. 3DU 


Roo.s of bracken, used as thatch for houses 


or corn-stacks. 


¢bundun, s. mm. Foundation. 2{{Fundament. 


3 Blunder. 
t wi a. Ungainly. 
run-feam, A 
ante ale see bun-feann. 
bun-feann, s.m. Tail, root of the rump. 
hun-fedir, s.m. Hay-stubble, orts. 
bun-fhath, -a, s.m. Primary cause. 
punglas,? Ais, s.m. Purple mealie-grass—mo- 
linia ceerulea. 
bun-luchd,s.pé. Original inhabitants,aborigines. 
bun-mhàs, -ais, s.m. Buttock. 

—ach, a. Having large buttocks. 2 Of, 
or belonging to, the buttocks. 3 Strong in 
the b ttom. 

thun., s.m. Work. 

bunna,(AF) s.m. Northern diver, see muir- 
bhurchaill. 

bunna-bbuachaill,f s. m. Great auk, see 
gearra-bhall. 2 Northern diver—W. Isles 
(M) see muir-bhuachaill. 

bnnnacha-bac,(AC) s.m. The horizon. 2(AH) 
Eaves of & thatched house. 

bunnschas,(AH) -ais, s.m Stability. 

bunnan, -ain, s. m. Bittern. 2 (AF) Black 
beetle, crawler. - 

büundaist, -e, -ean, $.m. Fee, wage, perquisite, 
bounty.  2tfThrashiung. 3ffGrassum. 4ft 
Weaver’s fee, paid in kind. 

bünnlum, -uim, s.m, Steadiness, solidity. 2 
Self-command. 

—-- ach, -aiche, a. Solid, steady. 

buz-nós, -nòis, s.m. Old custom. 

bünnsach, -aich, -a'chean, gf, Rod. 








4 Sudden rush. 


gTOW. b 
see bünnsach. 


bünusag, -^ig, -an, 8.7. 
ach, a. Twig 
büun-aida, -e, d. 
a good bottom. ' 
bunntair, AC) s.m. Foundation of a honse. 





bünaram, -aim, &.f. Solidity, stea:liness, Se: 


AL ees. 


Let: I 1412 





2 | bun-os-cionn, 


a. Firm, solid, steady. 21f 


sf Moral having a con- 





2 Osier 
twig, (see fineamhuia.) 3 Place where osiers 


gy. 
Firin, sol:d, strong, having 


bürn 





—— ———&ch, -aiche, a. Shrewd, sensible. 2 
Steady, sedate. 

1 —45,-ais, s.m. Deep discernment,shrewd- 
ness. 2 Quickness of comprehension. 3 Solid- 
ity, steadiness. 

bun-os-ceann, adv. Upside down, topsy-turvy. 

see bun-»s-ceann. 
bun-rannsachadh,** g.m. Analysis, 
bun-rannsachail,** a. Analytical 
bun-rannsaich, v.a. Analvze. 

bünsach, s.f. see bunn ach, 

Lüuasag, see binnsac:. 

bünsaidh, see bünnsaidh. 

buntais.** xpi. Perquisites. 

buntàta, sn. «8. & pl.) Potato, potatoes— sob 
anum tuberosum. Tha am buntàta bruich, 
the potatoes are boilet. 

-tachair, s.pl. Potatoes left in tbe 
ground during winter. 
— -talmhuinn, DU see bun-àta-tachair. 
buntuiun, (a') pr.pt. of buin. — Belouging to, 
meddling with, touching, taking away. Sté 
etae A’ b. ris gu nàimhdeil, persecuting 
im 





-—eas,** s.m. Adjunet, appendage, ap- 
purtenance. concomitant. 2 (AH) Blood or 
family reiationship. 

tbunudhasach, a. see bunasach. 

tbur, -üir, s.n. Boor, clown, boorish person. 3 
Swelling of anger. 3ttot. 

fbür, poss.pron. (now bhur: Your. 

bura-bhnachaill,1 s. m. Northern diver, see 
muir-bhnacsaiil, 

bùrach, -aich, s.m. Searching or turning up 
the earth, delving, digging. 12 Exploit. +3 
File of soldiers. +4 Swelling, tumour, sore. 

adh,** -aidh, s.m. Di-ging, delving. A’ 
b—, pr.pt. of bùirich. 'G a ùh. le'rüdanan, 
digging it with his knuckles. 

buraghlas,(AF) s.m. Large dogfish. 

boraich, v.a. see bùirich. 

e, $.m. büiriche 

te, past pt. for büirichte. 

buraidh,* a. Mouldy, as land, easily delved. 

—-——, s.m. see burraidh. 

— ———eachd,* sf. Mouldiness, 

fburba, see buirbe. 

burbaigh,(AF) s.f. Whistle-flsh, bourbee. 

burban, s.m. see burmaid. 

burbanaich,(JM) s.f. Irritation of any open 
sore. When a wound was too often probed, 
or an unsnitable remedy was applied, people 
said ‘‘bhurbanaicueadh an lot.” — Isles. 

bur-bhuacbai,l, -e,-ean, see muir-bauachaHl. 

bürd, see bürt. 

,' sm. see dùrdan. 

burdag,(AF) s.f. Minnow. 2 Shrimp. 

Ve hte 8.m. (MM)kind of chorus. 2 see dùr- 

an. 





me 














—ach, a. Pertaining to a chorus. 2 see 
dürdanach. 

burdanaiche,** s.m. Libeller. 

fburg, sm. Village, town. 2 Tower, fortress. 

burgaid, e -ean, 8.f. see purgaid. 

H s.m. Awkward or noisy fellow, 

each,tt a. Clownish, awkward. 

-ich, pr.pt. a’ burgaideachadh v.a. see 
purgaidich. 

burgair, -ean, 8.m. Gaelic spelling of burgher. 

bürlaia, see birnlam. 

burmaid,§ s.f. Wormwood—artemesia absinth- 





e 








ium. 

burmaill, sf. see burmaid. 

bùrn, -ùirn, s.m. Water, not applied to salt wa- 
ter. Sailis bùrn, salt water aud f esh water; 
ni büra saiaca lanhau gian. foul water 
mak-s clean. hands ; cho saor rib, as cheap as 


brn 


water ; chitheam am fuil 

do bh., would that 1 saw 

their blood as water..-A M. 

ach, -Riche, a. Watery. 

lam,tt -aim, s.m. Flood, 
downpour. 

fburr, a. Great. 

bùrr (CR) s.m. Pout, sulky 
mouth—Perthsh. 

burracach,(JM) -aich, s.m.  . 
Clownish person. S 

— fos &,f. Stupid or ail- "se 
y female. 

— ——, 3.m. Clumsy, awk- D 
ward fellow. 

Ee nee Clonn- 94. Burmaid. 
is 

burrach, see burras. 

burraghlas, -ais, et. Torrent of brutal rage. 

— ——-—a&ch, a. Brutally passionate. 

burraidh, pl. -nean, s.m. Fool, blockhead, sim- 
ple, foolish ESCH 2ttSurly, morose fellow. 
3(AF) Cat (bye-name. ) 

burraidheachu,AM er Folly. 

neachd, s.f. Folly, stupidity. 

burrail,* v.n. Romp, as children, play rudely. 

———eas, (AH) -ais, sf. Inarticulate jabber 
of a child or a deaf mute. 

barrais, gen. sing. & a pl. of burras. Also used 
as nom. sing.** 

burrait, a. Stupid. ?2ffBeastly. 

burral, -ail, s.m. Howl, bnrst of grief, weeping, 
clamorous grief, mournful and l'ud cry. 
mene, na glinn a bh., the glens heard his 

owl. 


-———ach, a. Crying. 2 Apt to cry, whine or 
howl. 3 Nulky. 

adh,* -aidh, s.m. 

play. 

aich, sf. Loud lamentation; loud, con- 
tinued crying or weeping. 2 Dog’s howl, 
in Uist'‘sgalartaich,’’ and there **burralaieh"' 
is applied to human beings—J.M. 
Thòisich e air b., he began to howl. 

burras, -ais, s.m. Caterpillar. 2(AF) Worm. 

——-—gailh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Burst of rage 
or passion. 

—gaireachd, s.f. Brutality. 2]1fFury. 

burr'caid, see burracaid. 

burrghlas,tt -ais, see burraghlas. 

— ———ach,tt see burraghlasach. 

burrsgadh,f s.m. Burst of passion. 

burruis, s.» see burras. 

bürsach,tt-aich, s.m. Stormy fellow. 
rent of rain. 

bursaid, sr. Worsted. 

bur-shnileach,(AC) a. Blear-eyed. 

birt, -üirt, s.m. Mockery, ridicule, quizzing, 
joking. Is fheairrde cuideachd cùis-bhùirt, 
a company is the better of a laughing-stock. 

burnrus, -uis, s.m. Warbling, purling noise, 
gurgling. 2 Infant lisping. Ri b. sèimh, 
warbling softly. 

ach, -aiche, o Purling, warbling. 2 

Lisping, asan infant. 8ffHarsh grating. 

bus, -uis, 4. m Mouth. 2 Lip. 3 Snout. 4 
Ludicrous term for the human mouth.  5** 
Mouth with very large lips. 6**Kiss. 7** 
Gaelic spelling of puss. SC" Pouting of the 
lips in anger. 9AM Cheek— Diet, Am feara 
dh'itheas an ceann dathadh e 'm bus, he rhat 
eatz the (sheep's) head let him singe the mouth 
hi:neelf ; chuir e bus air, he made a grimace. 

fbus,.1f v. shall be. 

busach, -aiche a. Suouty. 
moutn. 8 Blubber-lipped. 
Sullen. 

















Romping; rude, noisy 











2 Tor- 


2 Havinga large 
4 Porting. 5 


143 


büth-sheangan 


| busach,* s.f. Female having large lips. 

busachd,* sf. Deformity of b.ubber-lips. 

busag, -aig, s.f. Girl with thick lips. 2 Smack- 
ing kiss. 31fBlow on the lips. 

busaidh,** s.f. Gaelic spelling of pussy. 

busair,* -ean. s.m. Man having blubber-lips. 
2 Sullen fellow. 

bus-dubh, s.m. Surly, dark aspect. 2 Name 
for a dog (| **and a democrat(!)} (black suout 
or month.) 3ftIll-fate. 

busg, v.a. Thread a fishing-hook. 2**Hinder, 
f3Dres«, adorn. Gaelic spelling of busk. 

-——adh, -aidh, s.m. Threading a fishing-hook. 
2 Head-dreas. 8 Dressing. 4 Adorning the 
person of a female. 

busgaid, e -eau, 8J. Bustle, hurry. 

busgainn,** sf. Dressing. 2 Adorning. 
dubhain, the dressing of a fishing-hook. 

bus:aian,** pr.pt. a’ busgainn, e.a. see busg- 
ainnich. 

-————ith, v.a. Dress, adorn. 2 Buckle up, 
prepare. 3**Dress a fishing-hook. 

bus-iall, -éill, -iallan, s.f. Muzzle. 

- aich,* v.a. Muzzle. 

UR QD s,f. Small quautity, tuft, hand- 
ul. 

bustail, vr Puffing, blowing. 2 Discord, dis- 
agreement, fuss. 


B. 





bnstuil, see bustail. 

but, see pùc. 

tbita, s. Butt, mark, object. 2 Clown. 811 
Short ridge. 4ffTun. 

buta, emm, Differene:s in price. surplus—ZJs/ay, 
Athol, 2CR Luckpenny, dissonut—Arran, 


[Bata in Perthshire, only used in gu bata, 
which is eqnivalent to gu leòir; but strouger.] 

buta, JM) «i. Skin float to keep fishiug-nets 
and lines from sinking—Outer Hebrides [in 
Skye bolla.) 

bùta, s.m. Nometimes used for pit, (fledgling, 
young of moor-fowl.) 

butadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. see putadh. 

butag, -aig, -an, s.f. see pntag. 

-——oc, sf. Snipe, see gobhar-athair. 

fbutais, s2e bótuiun. 

ibutar, s.m. Gaelic spelling of butt^r. 

butarrais, s.f. Confusion, heterogenous mix- 
ture, hotch-poteh. 2 Filth. 3 Dross. 

bùth, -a, pl. bùthan, [-annan & bùithean, j s.m. 
Shop. 2 Tent, pavilion, booth. 3 Cob. 4 
Ant-hill. Shnidhiche a bh., he pitehed his 
tent; choimnnuicn iad am bùthaibh, they 
dwelt in tents; srol as a’ bh., crape from the 
shop. 

——-ach,łý -aiche, a Of,or pertaining to, & 
eottage. 

-——ach, (JM) -aich, s.m. Instrument to pre- 
vent calves from sucking.—Uist. 

buthaid, s./. Puffin (tish.) 2 Puttin or coulter- 
neb (bird), see fachach. 

buthaigre, sf. Puffin, (bird) see fachach. 

buthainn, ».m. see bithuinn. 

buthainn,* v.«. see hnthainnich. 

-— ———eachadh, -aidh, s.m. ‘Thumping,thrash- 
ing, beatiug. 


-————ich, va. Thump, thrash, beat. 
büthal,-ail, sam, Pot-hook. 2 Fulcrum. B. 
ràimh, the Tierm, of an oar, rowlock, (see 


bata, No. 49 p. 76.) D 
buthna-mucag, LAC) sf. Blue hyacinth. 
büthan,-ain, s.m. Little booth, pavilion. 

Tent. 3 Bothy. 

— ———, n.pl. of bith. 
büthlas, -aix, -an, a.m. see bithal, 
— —— —aàn, ».pl. of büthlas. 
bith-leighidhieachd, 72 s.f. Laboratory. 
-heangsu, zT s.m. Ant-hill. 





buthuinn 


— = 


144 


buthuinn, s.f. Long straw used for thatching, 


[sputhuinn in Argyll. } 


butrais, sf. see butarrais. 
butta,** s. Butt (measure.) 


C CS 


€, Coll, hazel ; the third letter of the Gaelic al- 
phabet now in use. When not aspirated, 
broad c; that i is x before’a, o, or tt, sounds like 
c in cub. as cu, adog; 'small c sounds like 
cin cube ork iu kick, as cir, a comb. When 
aspirated, it sounds like the Greek ch in 
chórdé,as moch, early; or small,like chéimón, 
as chi, see. 

e, ( for có ? cia ? ciod ?) pron. What ? C'ainm 
a th’ ort P what is your name lei ait’ an toir 
mi e P where shall L bring it? 

tca, s.m. House. p 

c’ à? adv. ( for c’ àite) Where ? C' à bheil thu ? 
where art thou } 

ca’ab,tt s.n. Concord in singing. 

cab, pr part. a’ cabadh, v.n. Indent, notch, 

as the edge of a bladed weapon. 2 Hack. 

3 Break Land, dig. Chab thu an sgian, you 

have notched the knife. 
tt pl. -achan, & -annan, s.m. Cap. 2 Cloak. 
cane "caib, s.m. Mouth. 2 Mouth ill-set with 
teeth. 3 Gap. 4 Head. 5 Hebrew measure 
equal to about 2 Scots pints. 6**Aperture. 
7iiDitofa bridle. 

caba,DU caibe, see caibe. 

cabach, -aiche, a. Toothless. 2 Ugly-mouthed. 
3 Notched, indented. full of gaps. 4**Long- 
toothed. 5** Babbling, garrulous. 61l1Hack- 
ed, irregularly cut. 

, SP Female with broken teeth. 27+ 
$.m. Toothless man. an drannudain, a 
peevish old woman. 

t——--, s.m. Hostage. 

adh, s.m. Indenting, notching, indenta- 
tion. 2 Growing indented or notched. A’ c—, 
pr.pt. of cabaich. 

fcabad, -aid, s.m. Head. 

cabadh, -aidh, s.m.  Notching, hacking, in- 
denting. 2 Breaking of land, digging. 3 
Gaping. 4ttGasping. A’ c—, pr.pt. of cab. 

càbag, -aig, -an, s.f. Cheese. 

cabag, -aig, -an, s.f. 'l'oothless female. 2 Tat- 
tling woman. 3 Any blunt or toothless in- 
strument. 4 Hacked iustrument, asa knife, 
&e. 5** rarely Struinpet. 

cabagach,tt -aiche, a. Abounding in cheeses. 

cabaich, pr part. a’ cabachadh, v.a. Notch, in- 
dent. 2 Make blunt. 

tenhaig, s.f. Piilory. 

teabail, s.f. see cabhlach. 

cabain, gen.sing. & n.pl. of'caban, 

cabair, gen sing. & n.pl. of cabar. 

—, "ean, s.m. Tatler: gabbler. 
less fellow. 

——ciie (d, sf. Custom of tattling, prattling, 
or b. ibbiing. 

cabairueacit,(JM) s.m. Garrulous little boy or 
m n. 

cibais, sf. see cabaireachd. 

——vachd, s; see cabaireachd. 

t, -e, sm. Gael ic xpelliug of cabbage. 

——te ach, - cua. Of, or pertaining to a 
eabuage or béi m 


cà 








2 Tooth- 











càbhruich 
—— —lich,ff v.a. Mash, as cabbage. 
teaball, see capull. 


i ctm -aill, pl. -aill (-llan & -llaichean,) 8. m. 


ach, a. Cabled, abounding in cables. 
tcaban, -ain, -an. s.m. "Booth, tent. 2 Cottage. 
3**Cottager. Gaelic spelling of cabin. 
càhan, “alli, 8m. Gaelic spelling of eapon. 
cabar, -air, ae -air & cabr.ichean, 8.m. Horn. 
2 Antler. 3 Stake. 4 Pole. rafter. 5 Emi- 
nence. height 6**Deer. 7**Rung. 8**Lazh. 
9**rarely Joint, confederacy. 10. A Fszse cath- 
art Cabar beinne, a movntain-top ; cabair 
féidh, a deer’s antlers, (the, war-cry, and one 
of the crests of the MacKeiizivs) ; c. ciéibh, a 
pannier's ri 
-——ach, -aiclie, a. & s.m, see cabrach. 
cabar-corra,(AH) s.n. Odd or superfluous pole 
orraiter in a house. Tha cabar-ccrra a 
Btaign, there is a superjous raf er in the house 
—a hint frequently given toa speaker to di- 
rect his atteution to the fact that a -uspected 
tattler is anong those listeniug to him. 
-—— -buaile,tt 3m. Fold-stake. 
—— -droma, -air-, s.m. Ridg«- ole (of house.) 
— -fraighe,tt a.n. Kave-veain, 
-—— -oisnre, s.m. Corner-pole. 
feabartha, a. Coupled. 
cabasdair, s.m. see cabsdair. 
cabasdan,** see cabsdair. 
eab- dheudach, -aici1, s.f. Broken teeth, inden- 
ted teeth. 
cabh, v.n. see c ith. 
see cathadh. 
cabhachan,* -ain, s.m. Cuckoo-titterer. (bird) 
cabhadh,* -aidh, see cathadh. 
cabhag, -aig, sJ. Hurry, haste, despatch, 
speed. 2 Straits, troubles, difficulties. 3** 
Kind of pillory. Dean cabhag, make haste ; 
tha thu 'nad chabhaig, you are in à hurry. 
ach, -aiche, a. Hasty, impatient. hur- 
ried, in haste, causing haste. requiring haste. 
2 Abrupt. Gnothach cabbagach, business re- 
que ring, "ed 
achd,* s.f. Hastiness. 2 Abruptness. 
mu—— v.a. Accelerate. 2 Precipitace. 
cabhaig, gen. & dat. sing. of cabhag. 
cabhail, ean. sf. Frame (of a cycle.) 
cabhair, caibhre, s.f. see cobhair. 
———, va. see cobhair. 
each, a. see cobharach. 
feabhan, -ain. s.m. Wield, plain. 
cabhanach. -aich, see camhanach. 
tcabhan-snail, s Í. Prop or stay of a building. 
teabher, -air, &m. Hawk, 2 Any old bird. 8 see 
ga 
fcabhara, see cathbharr. 
cabharnach,* -aich, Wicket,bar-gate, gateway. 
cabhartach, -aich, see cobhartach. 
cabharthach, see cobharthach. 
cabhlach, -aich, -aichean, s. m. Fleet, navy. 
'Na chabhlach làidir, in his strong Seet. 
ail, ft -e, u. Naval. 
———-an,** -ain, 3.m. Mariner. 
cabhlachdach, ** a. Of, or pertaining to, a fleet. 
2 Having a large fleet. 
cab!.laich, gen.sing. of cabhlach. 


—— ————e,* s.m. Admiral. 

cabhnadh, see cathadh. 

fcabhog, -oig, -an, s.f. see cathag. ?ffRan- 
sacking, plundering. 

eabhra, Md im en.sing. of cabhair. 

see cobharach. 

uL 8.m. see cobharach. 

cabhraich, v. see ccbhair. 

càbheuici,f sf. Flumwmery, a mess made of 
the boiled filtered juice of cora seeds. and 





-— a. 











eabbruich 


called by the Lowlanders sowens. 
cabhsaidh,* e. Snug, comfortable. 
spelling of cosy. XAH) Tame, docile. 
—#_\_——eachd,* s.f. Snugness. 2 Too much 
fondness for comfort. 3(AH) Docility. 
cabhsair, -e, -ean, s.m. Causeway, pavement. 
——each, -eiche, a. Abounding in cause- 
ways or payements, having à causeway or 
pavement. : 
—— ——eachd,* s.f. Business or act of making 
causeways or pavements, pavior's work. 
cabhsairich,f? v.g. Pave. 
oabnsairiche, -an, s.m. Pavior, maker of cause- 
ways. 
eabhsanta, a. Dry. 2 Snug, comfortable, cosy. 
8 Fond of comfort. 4 Effeminate, unmanly. 
eabhtair,| e -ean, s.m. Issue, drain in the 


Gaelic 


cabhuil, -ean, sf. Kind of creel for catching 
tish. 2 Hose-net. 3 Basket. 

fcablachda, a. see cabhlachdach. 

cáblaid,* -e, sf. Turmoil, tumult. 

—each.*a. Tumultuous. 

cablan, (for càbaill) pl. of càball. 

càbluich, v.a. Cable, bind with cables. 

cabog, see cabag. 

cabon. s.j. Capon. 2,AF) Young dromedary. 
Gaelic spelling of capon. 


¢eabra, s.f. Sepulchre. 
cabrach, -aich, s m. Deer, stag. 2 Copse, 
thicket. 3**Timber-moss. Au déidh chab. 


rach, tn pursuit of deer ; mar astar doill an 
c., a8 a blind man’s progress through a hedge. 

zess, -aich, $.f. Bold masculine female. 

cabrach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to, poles, 
rafters or antlers. 2 Branchy, branching. 3 
Like a rung or stake, full of rungs. Gu c., 
arell supplied with antlers, 

teabradh, s.m. Joining, coupling. 

¢eubram, v.a., 1 rish form of pres. aff. I couple, 
unite. 2 I concur. 3 I concert. 

fcabsanta, a. Dry, snug. 

cabs!air,-ean, 8.m. Kind of curb. 2 Bit. 
Bridle. 4 Muzzle. 

——each. a. Having a curb or bit. 
a curb or bit. 

ich,** v.a. Muzzle. 

cabsdanaich, see cabsdairich. 

cabstair, see cabsdair. 

cabstar, is 

eabull, -uill, see càball. 

ach, a. see caballach 

cac, -à, s.m. Excrement, dung, dirt, ordure, 
mire, filth. 

cac, v.a. & n. pr. part. a’ cac [& a’ cacadh] 
Go to stool 2**Avoid. 

cac,-a, a. Dirty, filthy, foul, vile, nasty. 

fcàca, s.m. Cake. 

caca, a. see cacach. 

cacach, -aiche, a. Filthy, dirty, miry, nasty, 
excrementitious. 

¢cacadh, -aidi, s.m. Yawl. 

cacadh,** -aidh, s.m. Voiding of excrement. A’ 
c—, pr.part. of cac. 

Maiti, fut. of To of cac. 

encail a. see cacach. 2 Shabby. 

cacan, D.U. -ain, 8. ut, Annoyance, anger. 
Chuir e c. orm, he annoyed me, made me an- 


3 
2 Like 


a 





HI 





gry. : 

f¢cacan, s.m. dim. of cac. 

cac-an-airgid ** s.m. Litharge. 

each, pron. The rest, others. 
each Mm or gach a chéile as McL & 
D nas it. Le chéile, ri 'chéile, &c prove that 
a stands for his, or we should have leis a 
chéile, &e., which is never hard, Gach is 
never aspirated, for example, **do gach fear,’ 


Cach a chéile 


i 
mn 


cadas 


cach is aspirated, for example, “thug iad na 
laoigh do chàch a chéile—J.G.M.] ; air thùs 
chàich, tn jront of the rest ` thoir do ch. e, 
give it to the rest ; tbàinig e roimh ch., Ae ar- 
"ed before the rest ; am measg ch., among the 
rest. 

cachaileith, -e, -ean, s. f. Gate, rustic gate. 
2**Temporary breach made in a park wall as 
a thoroughfare for carts or cattle. 

teachain, past v. Can. 

tcàchan, -ain, Advantage, profit, use. 2**Gate. 

icachd,** s.f. Maidservant. 2 Confinement. 
3 Fasting. 4 Clamour. 

cachdan, -ain, sem. Uneasiness of mind, vexa- 
tion, chagrin. 

cachlaidh, 

cachliadh, 

cachliag, 

tcacht, s.f. The world. 2 Exulting shout. 8 
see cachd. 

t , adv. Commonly, generally. 

T amhuil, a. Servile. 

eech, -aich, s.m. Filth, trash, nastiness, 

irt. 

cacradh, -aidh, s.m. Cacophony. Bad sound 
of worls (Fuaim searbli, neo-bhinn.) 

cac-shiubhal, -ail, s.m. Pius, diarrhea. 

tceicta, sm. Hunger. 

te’ad ? adv. How long since? (cia fhada ?) 

tead, -aid, s.m. Friend. 2 pron. see ciod. 

feàd, a. Holy. high, sacred, good. 

fca lach, sf. Affinity, frienilshiip. 2 Assistance. 

fcadachas, s.m. Expiation. atonement. 

fcadad, s.m. Suppression or ellipsis of a let- 

ter. 2**Kclipse 

cadadh. -aidh, s.m. 


see cachaileith. 








Tartan. 2 Kind of cloth 
particularly used for making hose. Còta de 
chadadh nam ball, a coat of spotted tartan. 
cadail, gen. sing. of cadal. 

,** v.n. see caidil. 
teadaim, s. Chance. 

cadal, -ail, s.m. Sleep, slumber. 





2 Delay. Is 
sèimh do chadal, gentle is thy slumber ; tha e 
"pa chadal, he is asleep; an cadal dhuit? are 
you sleeping ? chaidh iad a chadal, they went 
to sleep ; cha robh cadal mu ’n righ, the king 
was seepless. 

ach, -aiche, a. Sleepy, drowsy, heavy 
with sleep, dull, lethargic. 2**Causing sleep, 
narcotic. 3. Dilatory. Galar e, lethargy. 
—achd, s,f. Sleepiness, drowsiness, hea- 
viness. 

aiche,* s.m. & f. Dormant creature like 
a serpent. 

ag,(AF) s.f. Slug. 

au, -aiu, s. m. Suurt sleep, nap. 2 §White 
poppy, see codalan. 

-deilgueach,|| s.m. The pricking sensa- 
tion in a limb known as ‘“‘pins and needles.” 
[Preceded b: the article an.] 

-eun, -eóin. s.m. Mandrake. 
cadilan-traghad,JM s.m. Semi-dormant fish 
found on the shore. When any person was 
extremeiy slow at work, he was compared to 
the cadalan-traghad. 

teadall, s.m. Battle, confused skirmish. 
cadaltach, see cadalach. 

— ————d, see cadalachd. 

eadaltaiche, see cadalaiche. 

1cadam,-aim, s.m. Falı, ruin, destruction. 2 
Fork of the hair. 





























t ach, a. Destructive, ruinous. 

cadan, -ain, s.m. fsee codan. 2Pledget. 

teadarus, s.m. Contention. 

t P adv. Whither ? 

teadas,ft -ais, s.n. see codan, 2 Friendship. 
3 Honour. 4 Bombast. 


cadatn 


140 


carmareapn 





cadath, s.m. see cadadlh. 

oadha, s.m. Narrow p ss at the side or foot of 
& mountain, 2 Narrow ravine. 3 Porch, en- 
try. 4:CR) Pass—often occuring in place- 
naines, and erroneously translaced as '*brae'' 
in Sutherland, Ross, and Argyll. Dorus a’ 
ch., the inner door. 

fcadhachas, -ais, s.m. Reconciliation, 
agreement, 

cadhag, -aig, -an, 8.f. Swingle-tree wedge. 2 
TMagpie, see pioghaid. 8** Jackdaw, see 
cathag. 

teacdhal,-ail,s.m. Basin. 2 Hide, skin. SffRail. 

càdhal, sm, see cal. 

¢cadhal, a. Fair, beautiful. 

,$.m. Point of the compass, ''airt." 
Ciol e an cadhal as ai bheil a’ ghaoth ? 
what “airt”? is the wind from t — Suth'd. 

cadhan, -ain, s.m. see cathan. 

cadhas, -ais, s.m. Friendship. 2 Honour, res- 
pect. 3 Privilege. 4 Attention. 


second 








toucdhasach, a. Friendly. 2 Respectful. 3 
Honourable. 

t —d, s.f. Friendliness. 2 Respect- 
fulness. 3 Honourableness. 


teadhla, s.f. Goat. 2 Gut 8 Fat of the guts. 

¢——-—. a. Fair, handsome, beautiful, 2 Kind. 

ee SCH sm. Ges herd. 

cadh-luibh, s.f. see cat-Inibh. 

fteidhmus, s.n. Hanghtiness, pride, arrogance. 

cadhimus, -uis, -an, s.m. Bullet mould. 

teadhus, -uis, see cadhas. 

cad-luibh, see cat-lnibh. 

—eacli, a. see cat-luibheach. 

¢cado, sm. Blanket. ; 

teudos, -ois, san. Lawn. 

cadran, -ain, 8.m. .see cànran. 

*———ta. a. see cànranach. 

eafag, -aig, s.f. see cabhis. 

teagaidh, a. Just, lawful. 

————-,** sf. Strangeness, 

eagail, v.a. see coigil. 

cagailt, -e, -ean, s.f. Hearth. 2**Parsimony, 
frugality, economy. 377 Profit, advantage. 
Corra-ch., the sulphurous hue sven in hot em- 
bers on a frosty night; airgiod cagailte, 
hearth-money. 

eagainn, pr. part. a’ cagradh, fut.aff.act. cag- 
naidh, v.a. Chew, gnaw, champ, masticate. 
9**Backbite, Cha cragnainn cùl mo chom- 
panaich, I would not back^5ite my companion. 

cagair, v.n. Whisper. 2 Suggest. 3 Listen to 
a whisper. 4**Conspire. Trobhad, cagair, 
come, hark. 

, gen.sing. af cagar. 

cagal, -ail, sm. see cogal. 

„e a. Parsimonious, sparing, economi- 
cal. 

-———]ach, -aich. s.m. Penurious person, eco- 
nomical person. 





--——lachd, s.f. Parsimoniousness, penury, 
feagait, s.m, Frugality. 
—- —ach,** -aich, s.m. see cagallach. 2 Eco- 


noinical person. 

¢tcagauuach, -aich, s.m. Chew, materials for 
chewing. 

cagar, -air, -airean, s.m. Whisper. 2 Secret. 
3 Darling. 4**Pnzzing sound, hum. Gheibh- 
ear beau-chagair, ach is aioncamh bean- 
ghaoil, a dear-wite may be got, but à lov -wire 
is rare—mo ghaoil isa Wariner expression 
than mo chagair for “my darling." 

-——ach, -aiche, a. Whispering. 2 Auricular., 

cagaraich, e, see cagarsaich. 

cagaraiche, s.m. Drcather, whisperer. 

cagaran,-ain, s.m. Little darling. 


cayar-athair, s.m. Wireless telezraphy. 

cagarsaich, e, -ean, s f. Whispering, 2 Sng- 
gesting. A’ c—, pr.part. of cagarsaich. Ciod 
a’ ch. a th’ ort ? what are you whispering 
about 1 

-—, pr.part. a’ cagarsaich, v.n. Whisper. 

feaghaidh, s./. Right, privilege. 

cagnadh, -aidh, s.n. Chewing, gnawing,cham - 
mg, mastication, A’ c— pr.pt. of cagaiun. 

cagnaidh, fut.af.a of cagainn. 

caguar, fut.pass. of cagainu, Shall be chewed. 

caguinn, see cagainn. 

teiguunnach, see cagannach. 

teal, s.f. Road, way. 2 House. 
AF Cuckoo's bird. 

caibdeil, see caibideil. 

caibe, n.pl, -annan &-achan, s.m. Spade. 2 
Mattock. 3 The iron part of a cas-chron, or 
of any delving instrument, blade of aspa ie, 
41 Turf-cutter. Iasaid a’ chaibe run a caur 
fo thalamh, the loan of a spade that is not put 
in the ground. 

caibzal, -cil, -au, xm. Chapel. 
ial ground. 3ffChaplain. 

caibeineachd, et Gabbling, prattling. 

caibe- air, 2 (CR) san. Flauc iter-«*pgle, 

caibe-sgrath, $  breast-plongh. Che Eugli.h 
name ''breast-plough" is an absurd one, for 
the instrument never touches the breast. 
(Illustration vn appendiz.] 

caibheanach, -aich, s.m. see caimeineach. 

cribheis, sf. ‘Tittering, laughing. 

caibhne, s.f. see caoimhneas. 

caibhre, ( for coibhre) gert, Stiet, of c:bhair. 

———ach, -eiche, a. see cobharach. 

eaibaridh, ( for coibhridh) fut.af.act.of cobhair, 

clbhtiun, see caiptean. 

caib deil, -il, -ean, s.m. Chapter. 

tenibinesd. sf. Gaelic spelling of cabinet. 

teaibiunezcad, see caiveineachd., 

teaibne,** s.f. Mouth. 

teaic, a. Blind. 

tvaicmhe, s.f. Neck ornament. , 

teaid, sf. see cuid. 2 Rock. 8 Summit. 

fcaide, see c'àite P 

teaideacha, s.m. Spot, stain. 

caideag tAr) sf. Earthworm. 

Fa deal, -eii, -an, s.m. Pump. 

caidvarach, d. see caidreach. 

————---—d,_ see caidreachd. 

tcaidh,** a. Chaste, immaculate. 

t--——,** s. Mauner, method. 

fcàidhe, sr. Spot, dust, dirt, blemish. 

+ ach, a. Dirty, blemished, polluted. 

teaidheachd, sf. Chastity, purity of morals. 

¢caidheaimhuil, a Decent. 

tcaidnean, -ein, -an, &.m., 
goats. 2 Turtle dove. 

t -—, a. Alone, sclitary. 

teaidheil, a. Chaste, decent. 

teaidhidhe, a. Covered with a hide. 

+ -—, sf. Cover oi a house. 

teaidhle, s.f. Finishing. 

¢eaidhlich, v.a. Finish. conclude. 

¢eaidhliche, st, "Thick fur. 

teaidhlichte, past part. Finished, concluded. 





3 Titling. 4 


2 Family bur- 


2:1 Noble. 





Leader of a flock of 








tcaidhni, sf, Virgin. 


caidhtiche, a. Long-en:luring. 

caidil, pr.part. a’ cadal, pn, Sleep, slumber, 
repose. 2**Delay. Cha do chaidil mi neul, 
1 have not slept a wink; na caidil ach aotrom, 
let thy sleep be light. 

teaidiol, an. Suu-dial. 


caidir, v.a. «f n. fPermit, cherish. 2 Connive 


at. 3 *Kinbrace, hug, fondle, carress. 4 Iu- 
dulge in. 5**Converse. 


caidreabh, -reibh, s.m. Fellowship, partner- 


oridreahbh 


ship. 2 Familiarity, friendship, acqurint- 

anes, intercourse. 3 Vicinity. 4 Discourse. 

5 The erXbrace, the bosom. 6** Conimerce 

7** Assemblage. An c. à cliéile, in the Losom 

of each other. d 

—— ach, -aiche, a. Friendly, kind. fami- 

liar, affectionate. 2**Conversant. 3**l'ond. 

4**Social. 

ach, -aich, s.m. tCompany. 2**Ally. 

5**Aequai"tance. 4**Fcllow-iodyer. 5*Com- 

paniou, bosom friend. 

acai, sf. see caidreabhas. 

as, -ais, s m. Consauguinity. 2**Alli- 
ance, asof sta es. 3**l'ainiliarity, intimacy. 
4 Foudness. 5 Sociabiiity. 

cauireach, Ach. s.m. Spouse, partn r. 2 Com- 
panion, acquaintance. Mo chaidreach, my 
spouse. 

——, -aiche, @. see caidreachail. 

caidreaohail, -e, a. Friendly, fainiliar. 2 Kind, 
atfectionate. C. ri daoine anns gach dàimh, 

riendly to men in every station of ife. 
ealdreachd,"s./. Same meanings as caidreabhas. 

@aidreadh, -eidn, s.m. see caidreabh. 

caidreamh, -eimh, see caidreabu. 

ach, -aich, s.m. see caidreach. 

ach, -aich, s.f. Company. 

——Aaách, -aiche, a. see caidreachail.] 

oaidreamhatl,ft e see caidreamhach. 

caiireamhas, -ais, see caidreabias. 

oaidrich, v.a. Befriend, maky friendly. 2 see 
caidir. 

caifean,**-ein, s.m. Cypher. 2 Trifling, dim- 
inntive fellow. 3 AF (bird) Cnit-chat, chat- 
terer, wood-chatterer. 

ach,** a. ‘rifling, diminutive, pithless. 

caiz,tt -e, sf. Rush of conversation. 

caig,** pr. part. a’ caig v.a. Teaze, torment. 
Tha e a’ caig orm, he is teasing ma. 

eaige,** s.f. Teasing. 

fcaigeal, v.a. see caigil. 

caigean,** s.m. Winnowing-fan. 

caigeann,** v.a. Couple together, link together. 

caigeann, -inn, -an | & caignichean,] sf. Pair, 
couple, brace, (nsei only of animals and 
when bound together.) 21fCouple, machine 
fortaming wild goats by binding them in 
pairs. [Governs the sin.;ular.] 

—-—..tf -inn, $.m. Rough mountain pass. 
{An exa:nple of this as a place ‘uame occurs 
near Taigh-a'-chladha, Leadaiy. ] 

eaizil,** v.a. Gather up. 3 Cover the fire.— 
Arran (Same as coigii—CR.) 

caisionn, inn, An Té caignichean] see caig- 
eann. 

fcaigionn, v.a. see caignich. 
igleachd,** s.f. Commerce, intercourse. 

teaigne, s.f. Winnowiug-fan. 

Caigueachadh, -aidh, s.m. Coupling, linking. 
A’ c—, pr. part. of cai:nich. 

ecaizneadh, -nidh, sm. see caigneachadh. 

cag 1ean, pl. of caigeann. 9f dim. of caigne. 

[cxiznein, see caignean (2) 

Caiznich, pr.part. a’ caigneachadh, v.a. Bind, 
liak, conple together. 2**f an, 

—ean, pl. of caigeann. 

fou.l,i v.a. & n. Burn. 

cà l|, -e, -tean, s. f. Disposition, temper. 2 
Quality, property, conlition. 3 Life. 4 
Strength. 5 Sense, endowinent. 6 Consti- 
tution. 7 Vo«e 8 Anvetis, desire, lo'g- 
ing for food. v Look, appearance. 10*Pirn. 
11(AC) Anything. Cihwn 'eil càil air failbhe, 
there is nothing in th» t rmam^ it ; tha à chàil 
air falbh, hie constitution wears away ; cun 
chà'l, withovt sirength or emray ` "au taigh 
chaol guu chàil, in the narrow howe ( j"av? 


























*- 





147 


caileanta 


without power of motion, lifeless; mo «hail gam 
thré:zsinn, my constitution or strenjth faite; 
chan 'eil c. do bhiadh agam, J have no appe- 
tite for food ` chmn molaidh gleusaibh binn 
ur càil, to praise attune your voice ; chaill iad 
càil an léirsiun, they lost their sense of sesing ; 
gu'n faithnich nàimhdean a càil, that ene- 
mies may Jeel its temper ` 'nuair a thàinig càil 
an là, at the first sireak of dawn. 

teail, e, s.f. Spear. 2Shiell 3 Assembly. 4 
Ward 5 Commendation. 6 Name. 7 Back. 

fcàil, prep. Beliind. 

teailbhe, s.f. Month. orifice. 

cailbhe, -an, s.m. (calbh) Partition wall, wat- 
tle or clay partition. 27; House wail from 
within. 

feailbieach, a. Wide-mouthed. 2 Yawning, 
gaping. 

t 


ing. 
fcaillbhearb, s.m. Cow-herd. 
cailbhir,** s. Calibre. 
cailc, p’.part. a’ cailceadh, v.a. Chalk, mark 
as with chalk, 
3 Calx. 


—-, -e, sf. Chalk. 2 Limo. 

tvaile, «f. Shield. 2 Buckler. 

cailceach, -eiche, @ Like chalk, chalky. 

cailceadh, -idh, s.m. Chalking, describing or 
making out, as with chalk. A’ c—, pr. part. 
of cailc. 

feaileeamhuil, see cai!ceil. 

cailceanta, æ. Hard, Gr. 

cailceil, -e, a. Chalky, like chalk. 2 Hardy. 

cailcein, s.m. Disorder in the eyes. 2DU Islet 
formed when the tide recedes, usuaily in an 
estuary. 

fcailein, dim. of fcailc. 

ca .le-thochailtear,** s.m. Chalk-cutter. 

tuaile, see càil. 

caile, -an, s.f. Vulgar girl, quean, hnssy. 2 
P dii 3 Any young girl—Argyll & Perth- 
shire. 

caile,** st Capacity. 

calieabh,* s.m. see cailbhe. 

ca leach, s.m. Refuse. ? tusks of grain eat- 
en by mice,&c., ‘seeds, chaff. 21?tsee coileach. 

—, @ Of, or belonging to, disposition. 

» 2 Being well disposed or tempered. 

, can, 8f. Natural endowments, ge- 
nius. 2 Energy, ab.lity. 3 Temper, nature, 
constitution. 4**Afrection. Gun chron caàil- 
eachd, without blemish of temper ` gun fhaill- 
inn 'nur caileachd ged 'shirte sibh, without 
a failing in your naiure although searched — 
Moladh an Leoyhainn, Filidh, p.64. 

—— -——4daeh, -aiche, a. Having natural en- 
dowments, having genins. 2 Accomplished. 
8 Elegant. 4ffStrong, powerful. 

—— lan, n.pl. of càileachd. 

— ———ail,$f a. Constitutional. 

caileadair, -e, -ean, s.m. Philosopher, 
gazer, **dervish. 2 Calend r. 

each, -eiche, a. Physical. 
each, 8.7.ind. Star-zazing, prognos- 
tication, philosophy. 2 Cheiaistry. 
calleadh, Jslay for cailbhe. 

caileag, -eig, -an, s.f. Little girl, “lassie.” 

T sf, Black guillemot, see calltag. 

-àn, n. pl. of caileag. 

teaileamhuil, æ. Girlish. 

càilean,** s.pl. Mental powers. 

, ein, -einean, s.m. Seedling, husk. 2 
Prickle. OG "ua fhiacail, a seedling in hes tooth. 

càileanach, -aivh, s.m. Breeze. 

—, -aiche, à. Husky, s3edy, abonnd- 
ing with seeds. Min ch., mea! rul? of husks. 

eaileanta, a. Girlish, like a girl. 2**Fond of 





—d, s.f. Continued or frequent yawn- 








star- 








-- 








caileanta 





girls. 

calle nta, a. **Slow-paced. 2ttHard, firm. 

caileas, -eis, ëm. Lethargy. 

eaileasadh, see caileas. 

caile-bhalach st Romp, tomboy. 

eaile-circein,** s.f. Shuttlecock. 

ca l-éiginn, s find. Some, somewhat, 2 Small 
matter. 3**[n some degree, in «ome measure. 
Tha c. de mhath air, it is worth somethin i. 

P -e, ad Efteminate, womanish, quean- 
ike. 

cà ell,** a. Constitutional. 

caiigin, see cailean. 

teailein, s.m. Scalding of the eyes. 

as s.f. Cremation, burning of the 
aeacd. 

teailg, -e, s.f. Sting. 2 Resentment. 

f-——, v.a. Pierce, sting, prick. 

fenilgeamhuil, a. Pricking, piercing, biting. 2 
Pungent. 

cailibhear,** s, Bore of a gun. Gaelic spelling 
of calibre. 

enilidear, -eir, s.m. Rheum, phlegm, snot. 

fcailidheach, s.m. Humourist. 

fcài idheachd, s.f. Quality. 2 Genius. 8 Qna- 
Jitication. 

¢cailidheas, s.f. Disposition. 

cailin, pl. cailinean, sj. Girl, damsel, maid, 
nv:iuph. 2**Company of young women, Cai- 
lin ro mhaiseach, a very handsome damvy-l ; 
cuum beathachadh do chailinean, for the 
maintenance of thy maidens. 

terxiiindha, pl. Ca:ends (of a month.) 

cailis, -ean, &.f. Chalice, sacramental cup. 

cailise, s.f. Nime-pins, Kayle. 

caiil, pr.part. a’ call, v.a. Lose, suffer loss, 
forfeit Mn "n caill iad an treòir, ere they lose 
their strength. 

fcaill, s.m. Testicle. 

t- wa. Name, call. 2 Emasculate. 

erill’ chail, -e, a. see cailleachail. 

tcaill’chala, a, see caiileachail. 

tea lle, s.f. Hood, veil, cowl. 

caileach, -iche, pl. caideacha, s.f. Woman, 
single woman, old woman. 2 Old wife. 3 
Woman without off pring. 4 Nun. 5 Carlin. 
6 AC Superaatural or malign induence dwell- 
iug in dark caves, woods aud corries. 7 
Coward, spiritless, heartless man. 8 The 
last handful of standing corn on a farm. 9 
9 Circular wisp on the top of a corn-stacx. 
10 (AF) see cailleachag-cheann-dubh. 11 
see càileach Ged a bna mi air uiread cail- 
lica a dh'arbhar, thouyh I possessed no more 
corn than a wisp. Great emulation was dis- 

layed by all in harves’-time so as not to be 
ast. Upon hin came the cost of maintain- 
ing the other people if a dearth set in in the 
spring. The Cailleach was tied up with rib. 
bons, and hung up on à nail till spring. — On 
the first day of ploughing it wastaken down 
and given as a handsel fur luck to the hor- 
ses-—N.G.P. 

Cailleach, -lich, s.f. The week in spring after 
“Gearran,” i. e. from 12th. to 18th. April— 
i.e. First week of April Old Style. 2**see 
càileach. 

cgilleacnag, -aiz, -an, s.f. Little old woman. 

-——— -cheann-dubh, s.f. Cole-titmouse, 
cole-tit. 2% Black-cap,—parus ater. 

eailleachag-cheann-phorm,'l s.f. Blue tit-mouse 
—yarns voervleas. 

se a. Likeanold woman. 2 Cow- 
arly. 








ea llesch-an-düdain, (Zit. carlin of the mill- 
dust^ AC Curious character dance, described 


.&5 follows in Carmina Gadelica. 


143 


eailleacech a? eo? 





95. Caillea ha «.eann-dubh. 


cailleach*on dùdain (cont.)— 
"It is danced by a man and a woman. The 
man has a rod in his right hand, various!v 
called slachdan druidheachd, (druidic wan] * 
and slachdan g«asachd, (magic wand.) The 
man and the woman gesticulate and attiin- 
dinize before one auother, dancing round and 
round, in and out, crossing an recrossing, 
changin: aud exchanging places. The wan 
flourishes the wand over his own head and 
over the head of the woman whom he touch- 
es with the wand, and who falls down, as if 
dead, at his feet. He bewouns his dead 
“carlin,” dancing and gesticn-ating round 
her holy. He then lifts up her left hud, 
and looking mto the palm, breath s upon 1t, 
and touches it with the wand. Immediately 
th: linp hand becomes alive, and moves 
from side to side and up and down. He 
rejoices pd dances round tne figure on the 
floor. Having done tne same to the right 
haud. and to the left and rignt foot in sne- 
ession, they also become alive and move. 
Though the limbs are living, the body is still 
inert. The man kneels over tile wom «n and 
breathes into her mouth and touches her 
heart with the wand. The woman comes to 
life, and springs up confrontiag the man. 
Then the two dance vigoronsly and joyously 
as in the first part. The tnne varies with 
the varying plases of the darea. It is plav- 
ed by a piper or fiddler, or sung as a *port«a- 
bul" ,mouth-tune) by à looker-on or by the 
performers themselves. The air is quaiiit 
and irregular" and the words which are cur- 
ious and archaic commence as foliows : — 
“Cailleach an düiain, düdain, dù lain. 
Cailleach an dü lain, cum do dheireadh rium" 

eailleachanta, o. Cowardiy. soft, unmauly. 

cailleachantas,** -ais, see cuilleac!ias. 

cailleacnas, -ais, s.n. Conduct of an old wo- 
man. 2 Dotage. 3**Cowarl.ce. 
y —— -dubh,tf s.n. Nunnery (profession 
of. 

cailleach-baic,LAH) s.f. In cutting peats, the 
outside peat in a bank. " 

— -bnàn,fl s.f. Snowy owl, see comhach- 
ag-bhan 

cailleach-bheag-an-earbaill, (AF; Long-tailed 
titmou-e, see ciochan. 

chosach, see corra-chosag. 

«lubh, pl. -eachan- iubit, s.f. Num, 
XAF) Shag-cormorans, see sgarbh. 

cailleach-vidiiche, s. f. Common owl— triz 
uluis. 2 Tawny-owl. 3* Spiritless feilow. 
[see illustration 96. ] 

-—— ——— — bhàn, 

-— —— —  -gheal,** 3. E 
striz flammea. 

cailleach-oidh che-mhór,fl s.f. Eagle-owk—bulo 
maximus. [see illustration 971! 

cailleach-spuinge, s.f. Touchwood, soft tinder 
— tpulyporns fomentarius aud betulinus. 

cailieuch-uisg' (AC) s.f. Water-woman, wa- 











— 


see c—oidhche-zheal. 
White owl.— 








cailleach-oidhche 





97. Cailleach-oid hcl e-mhór. 
ter-carlin. 2 Diseased potato containing only 
water. 

cailleadh, -idh, s.m. Emasculation, castration. 
2 |:fteminacy. 

cailleag,* -leig, -an, sf. see coilleag. 2** 
Loss. 3**Detriment. 

— ———ach, -aiche, a. see coilleagach. 

teailleago, s.m. Gaelic spelling of calico. 

fcailleamhnach, a. Defective. 2 see caillteach. 

fenilleamhuinn, s.m. Loss, damage. 

càillean, -ein, -an, s.m. see cáilean. 

ach, a. see càileanach. 

cailieanach, -aich, s.m. Loser. 

teailleasg, -eisg, -an, s.m. Horse. 2 s.f. Mare. 

fcailliog, s.f. Loss. 3 Detriment. 

caiilte, past part. of caill Lost. 2 Ruined. 
3 Damned. 4**Gelded. Caillte is fa dhedidh 
air sgeul, lost and found avain. 

caillteach, -eicne, a. Ruinous, causing loss. 2 
Apt to lose, losing. 3ftHurtful. Brù ch.,a 
miscarrying womb. 

caillteachd,* sf. Ruination 2 Degree of loss. 

cwiiiteanach, -aich, s.a. Eunuch. 

cailltearnach, -aich, s.m. Sorubbery. 12 see 
coilltearnach. 

¢e.ilinhion, s.f. Light helmet. 

cu:lpeach, Aen, chean, s.f. see calpach. 

feaiipiz, 8m. Jug, mug. 

fcailte, sf. Hardness, firmness. 

„a. see caillte. 

fcailtean, see caillteanach. 

tcalltin, 2.m. see calltuinn. 

caim, 8.f. Stain, blot, fault. 2(AC) Loop, 
curve, circie, «auctuary, guard, imaginary 
circle described with the hand round nim- 
self by a person in fear, danger or distress. 

caim-beinl, -cdil, se» cam-beul. 

ea.nideal, eil, s.m. Prolixity, tediousness, per- 
plexity. 2 Objection. 

ach, -aiche, a. Tedious, round abont, 

perplexing, drawling. 








149 


cain” 





caimdealaiche, $J.ind. Delay, procrastination, 


| 


dilatoriness. 
caime, 8.7. Crookedness. 
eye. 


2 Blindness of one 


, comp. of cam. ‘ore or mo-t crooked. 
Tha ’m bata ni's caime na sin, the staff is 
more crooked than that. 

acan, -ain, ain, see caimeachan. 
achan, -ain, -an, s.m. Hump-backed per- 











Son, 
caimead,** s. Aduncity. 

caimein, -ean, 8.m. Mote 2 Small stain. 
**Reproof, blame, reproach. 

——,(AC} a. Small. 

each, -eiche, a. Full of motes. 2 Like 
a mote, 3 Bleivished. 4(AC) Saving, econo- 
mical, 5(CR` Mottled, srotted—Sihye, 

—— ——each, (CR) s. an, Small trout. Cho 
sona ri c. an sruth, as happy as a trout ina 
stream—Skye. 

fcaimíear, s.m. Champion. 

caimh, v.a. see caimhil. 

tcaimhdean, sm. Multitude. 

teaimheuch, san, Protector. 

caimhear,** -ir, -an, see caimfear. 

caimheineach, see caimeineach. 

caimhil, (AC, pr.part. a’ caimhieachadh, v.a. 
Confine. 

caimhleachadh,(AC) :aidh, s.m. Restraining. 
contining, Lemming in, entrapping. C. chaor- 
ach. hemming in of sheep; c. bhreac, gud- 
dling of tront. A’ c—, pr. part. of caimhil. 

caimir, AC s, Fold. stockad* 1n whieh flocks 
were safeguarded. 2 Sanctuary. 

feaimis -mse, sf Shirt, shift. Gaelic spell- 
ing of French chemise. 

canuleid. -e, s.f. Caml t, a kind of hard wors- 
ted cloth. 2 AC Crook. Anns g chaimnleid, 
in the crook. 

caimieir,-ean, 8.7. Bent stick used by butchers. 

Tcaiinneach, a. Chaste, pure, free frum obscen- 
ity. (geamnnidh.) 

feaimp«ar,** -ir, see tcaiimfear. 

Tcaimse, gen. of caimis. 

fcaimseaz, 3.f. Falsehood, false assertion. 

cain, pr.part. a’ càineadh, v.a. Traduce, slan- 
der, revile, dispraise. 2 Scold. 3 Satirize. 
4ttNumber, count. Caineam agus aoiream a’ 
bhaoibh a rinn an t-òran, let me traduce and 
satirize the fury that made the song ; chain e 
mi gu m’ bhrògan, or chàin e mi gu cùl mo 
dhroma, het a/luc-d me thoroughly. 

cain, cànach | & ttcàine], pl. càintean, sf. Tri- 
bute, tax, toll, kain, rent. 2 Fine. 3 Pay- 
ment iu kiud, given to a blacksmith. 4** 
Slander. A’ pàigheadh na cànach, paying the 
tribute; leig cain orra, make them pay tribute, 
punish thein. 





iu Ca (ap 


cin 
càin, -e, a. Whita. 2 Chaste. 8 Baloved, dear 
4AO Clear, bright, fair, pure. Cù cain [bàn]. 
a white dog. 
cain-acairseid,(AH) 8.f. Harbour or pier dues, 
Keelaye. 
cainb, -e, s.f. Hemp. 2 Canvas. 3łf Sack- 
c.oth, covering worn by penitents. 43 Hemp 
piant—cannauss sativa. 522 illust. 98. 
€a'ub-10daàca, -aic3. «fe Canvas, sack-cloth. 
eainneach,* s.f. [io'e-yarv. 
canibear, s.m. Tustrumeut for dressing flax. 
cAiib-theoárra,* sr, Tarpaulin. 
cainb-nisye.§ s. f. Hemp 
agrimony--cupatortum can- 
nubium. 
caiuchean, in, s.m. see can- 
aca. 
tcaindeal, see coinneal. 
c&.neab.* Islay for cainb. 
ach,* a. caineabach. 
càineach, a. ‘Tributary. 2 
dike a tribute or fine. 3 
S.tirical, dispraising. 4 
Prone to sla.der. 
dis- 


t-———-, sf. Satire, 
praise. 

~——-——-d, 8. f. Taxation, 
2 abit of slander, tradu- 
cing. 

caineadh, -idh, s.m. Reviling, traducing, slan- 
der. 2 Scolding. 3 ttSatire. 

fcaineag, -eig, -an, 83. f. see cainneag. 2 
¥arthing. 3 Barley and oats. 4ffMuliebre 
pudendum. 

caineal, -eil, 8.m. 
mum, 

cain-éisdeachd, sf. Act of listening. 

teainfic, see cainich. 

tcaingeal, $.m. Hurdle. 2 Reason. 

caingeann, Jonn, -an, 8. m. Prayer, supplica- 
tion. 2 Agreement. 3 Rule. 4 Cause. 5 
tiFine. 

Caingis, 8.f.ind. Whitsuntide, Pentecost. 

càinich, pr.pt. a’ càineachadh, v.a. Impose a 
tax, tribute or fine. 

1cainichein, see canach. 

cainichte, past part. of càinich. Taxed. 

càinidh, fut.aff.a. of càin. 

cainn, AU see cainnt. 

Tc vinaneabhar, s.m. Dirt, filth. 

eain*eaz, -eig, -an, 8.f. Mote, small matter. 2 
*ilaraver—Skye. XAF) Small moth. 4(CR) 
Plait of strawsfor making into bags.—Skye. 











99. Cainb-uisge. 


Cinnamon—laurus cinnamo- 


caiuueal, -eil, -ean, 8.f. see coinneal. 2** 
Cnannel, canal. 
jleaiunse, 8.f. The face. 


feaiansear, s.m. Scolder. 2 Dagger. 3t1[Gael- 
ic spelling of cancer. 

f¢eaiuuseircachd, «.f. Scolding, 

+cainnseoir, s.m. 163 Cainnsear. 

tcatunseoireachd, see cainnseireachd, 

caiuut, -ean, $8. f. Speech. language. 2 Dis- 
course, conversation. 3 Language, tongue. 
C. bnallsgaen, burlesque ; droch chaiunt, 
oaths anid curses. 

each, -elcue, a. Loquacious, conversa- 
ble. 2 Peevi:h, cross, malicious, carping. 
Gu c., peevishly. 

cainnteachas,** -ais, s.m. Protervity, peevish- 
ness, Wautouness. 

cainuteachd, s.f.ind. Pronunciation. 2 Talka- 
tiveness. 3 r'eevishness. 4**Asperity, hasti- 
ness. 5 Speaking. 

cainnteag, -eig, sJ: Peevish, cross young fe- 
male. 2**Canticle. 

cain;ztenl, -eil, 8m. Press, crowd. 2 Lump. 

cainutean, -ein, s.m. Peevish or cross person. 





150 





cairde 





cainntear. -e. -an, 8&.m. Censurer. 2 Reproache 
er. 3**Babbler. 4**Orator. 5**[inguist. 
achd, «,f.ind. Oratory, eloquence. 2 

Rhetorical expression. 3 see cann taireachd, 

cainut-fheur, see caiunt-ar. 

————_-——achd, see cainntearachd. 

teaintic, s.f. Song, canticle. 2 Song of Solo, 
mon so named. 

caipin, 8 Cap (of a cycle.) 

caiptean, -ein, -an, s.m. Captain. 

caiptein, gen. sing. of caiptean. 

eac''d, s.f. Capta.ncy. (ceannas-ceud ) 

càir, sf. Gum. 2 Red blaze. 3 for caoir. 4 
Grin. 5 Image. 6 sometimes used for 
*càthar,'" s.m. 

cair, pr.part. a’ càradh, v.a. Dig. 2 Raise. 3 
Prepaie. 4 Qird on. 5 Bury. 6 Repair, 
mend. 7 Lay up. 8 Send away. 9 Assert, 
aver, firm. 10 Persuade, make to believe. 
]1 Endear. [Also see càirich.] Cairidn ini à 
balla, Z will repair her wall; chàireadh e 
orm e, he would make ne believe it. 


fcairb, s. Jaw, gum. 

cairb, -e,-ean, sf. The bent ridve ofa girth- 
saddle. 2 Fusee. 3 Chariot. 4 Ship. 5 
Plank. 6 Plough. 

cairbean,** -ein s.m. Sailfish. 





-—ach (AH) -aiche, a. Rough, unsmooth, 

nodulated. Tha cas na :gine c., the handle of 

the knife is rough or nodwated. 

eil,** s.f. Large eel. 

ein, see cearban. 

cairbh,-e, -ean, s.f. Carcase, dead body, corpse. 
Cairbh spréidhe neo-ghloin, the carcase of une 
clean cattie. 

teairbh, v.a. Mana fleet. 2 Shake, quiver. 

cairbh-charbad,** s.m. Bier. 

feairbheacan, 8.93  Ship-»oy. 

cairbheach, a. Cadaverous, charnel. 

cairbhean, n.pl. of cairbn. 

cairbheiste, s.f. see cairbhist. 

+cairbhin, s.m. Little ship. 2 The gums. 

cairbhinn, -unean, s. f. Carcase of a person, 

corpse. 2 Lean meat. 8 Ciurion. Cairbhinn 

an rìghrean, the c«rcases of their kings. 

each,-eiche, a. Fuil of carcases. 2 
Of, or pertaining to, à corpse or carcase. 3 
**Cadaverous. 
eachd, 8.f. Slaughtering, massacring. 

2 Cadaverousness. 

cairbhist, -e, s.m.[* f] Carriage. 2 Load, bag, 
gage, bundle. 3 Feu-duty. 4 Personal ser- 
vice to à landlord. 6 Beating, dogging. 
Fhuair e deazh ch., he got a good floyging. 

cairbh-theine,** s.f. Bust. 

cairbinn, (a’) AC pr.part. Dragging. 

——-, -e, -ean, 8.f. Carbine. 

each, -ich, s.m. "Toothless person. 

each,** a. "l'oothless. 

fcairbne, s.m. Charioteer. 

cairb-srathrach, see cairb 1. 

caire,* s.f. Strait, predicament—Jslay. 2(AC) 
Flesh, person. "Sea bha 'na chairc, he was 
in a curious predicament. 

teairc, -e, sf. Hair, fur. 2**Eaceruess. 

t-——each, a. Hairy, rough. 2 Eager. 
cairceach, eagerly. 

teairche, s.f. Music. 

tcair: heas, 8.m. Little vessel. 2 Twist. 

caircheas, v.a. Twist. 2 Contort. 

càird, s.f. (contr. of càirdeas.) Gun ck., withe 
out partiality, without lenity ` fasgadh is c., 
shelter and kindness, 

càird, -e, 8.f. Delay, resnite. 2 Rest. 3 Scru- 
ple. Gun chàird, guick/y. 

cairde,AC a. Convenient, suitable, appropriate, 
as being of kin. 








ee 





Gu 

















oairae 19 L 





càirde, s.m. Bosom friend. 2 Relation. 31, 
Friendship. 4 nom.pl. of caraid (for càirdean): càir-yhoal, -ile, a. 


ach, -eiche, a. Related. connected by 





teairgh, pn. 


cart 


Abstain, forbear. 
White-fuaming, as a wave. 
Foaming wave. 





—, ghil, s.f. 


birth or marriage. 2 Friendly. 3 Kindly, | Cairghios, -is, xm. see Carghus. 


favourable. 
r-(ated to each other ; do na h-uaislean tha 
thu c.. you are related to the gentry. 

achas, -ais, s m. see càirdeas. 

alachd, s.f.ind. see càirdeas. 

alas, see càirdeas, 

càirdean, pl. of caraid. Friends, relations, 
cousius. [In the snape of cousins, bad.—*] 
Uairdean, mic an dà pheathar, cousins, the 
suns Of two sisters. 

càirdeas, -eis, s.m. Relationship. 2 Friendship. 
3 iXindness. 4 Fellowship, friendliness. 5 
tenevolence, goodwill. 6**Alliance, as of 
states. Càirdeas is comain is eòlas, relation- 
sip. obligation, and acquaintanceship —:; a 
formula to regulate funeral invitations. The 
“comain,” or obligation, is really an act 
of courtesy— you invite those who on simi- 
lar occasions have invited you } ; comh- 
dhaltas gu ceud is càirdeas gu tichead, Jos- 
tership to a hwndred, blood-reiation to twenty 
degrees. ‘The closeness of relationship estab- 
lished by fosterage among the Celts is almost 
without parallel, and this is one of the 
strongest expressions of Highland opinion on 
this» poiut.] Càirdeas fola, blood-relationship; 
c vosaidh, afinity. 

càirdeil, -e, a. Friendly. 2 Kind, affectionate, 
tender. 3 Related. Gu c., kindly. 
cair-dhearg, erg, s.f. Blush. 

——— — —- , -eirge, a. Red-blazing. 

cairdich, v.a. see caidrich. 

caireachan, -ain, s.m. Wide-mouthed person. 
teaireachd, 2.7. Quirks, sleight, cunning. 
caireachd tt s.f. Wrestling. 

cairvadh,{t -ridh, sam. Insertion. 


—-——-, past subj.of càirich— [ike éirich, fuir-' t 
ich, &c., càirich drops its ch in conjugation. | t 
"m bàta | 


'sud a’ chungaidh ’chaireadh 


cairid, 
cairidh, -ean, s.f. Mound or wall thrown across 


teairigh, v.a. 
cairin, x. m. & f. Darling, favourite. 2 see 








teairleacan, v. 


Tha iad c. d' a chéi!e, they are | cairgaeach, a. Knotty, having a rough surface. 


Sgian is eas chairgneach innte, a knife with 
a deer-horn han Jle—J M 


cairich, pr.purt. a’ càradh, v.a. Repair, mend. 


2 Order. 3 Affix. 4 Lay to one's charge. 5 
Aver. 6 Soothe. 7 Place. e meanings 
*8 Cajole. 9 Inter, bury. 10**Raise a monu- 
menta: mound," as given in the dictionaries 
do not apply to cdir:ch used by itself, but to 
its meanings in conjunction with other words 
in the context where it occurs.—this remark 
applies tu many words besides cdirich.] Air 
a chàradh, mended ; c. an altair, repair the 
altar ; na c, am peacadh oirnn, lay not their 
sins to our charge ; c. E an taobh e, place it 
beside them ; c. air talbh e, cajole him away; 
chàirich iad 'san uaigh e, they laid him in 
the grave’; chàirich mi orra, J set out (on the 
journey) resolutely and unflinchingly. 


càirichte, a. £ past part. of cairich. Repaired, 


mended. 2 Ordered. 
see caraid. 


the estuary of a river, stream, or arm of the 
sea, to catch fish, 2 Weir. 3 Tomb. C.a 
chàradh an éisg, a weir to deceive the fish ; 
thuz pailteas làmh gu cairidh e, @ suffici- 
ency of hands bore him to the tomb. 

see caraich. 


cairbhinn. 


cairioll,tt -ill, s. m. Cheerful note, carol. 2 


Noise. 


cairis, -e, -ean, s.f. Carcase, corpse. 
——each, -eiche, a. 
tcairle, a. 


see caithriseach. 
Tunibled, tossed. 

, $.m. Club, staff, stake. 

, v.a. Beat. 2 Toss about. 

see cairle. 


*choisiun buaidh, that is the instrument that | tcair-leum, v.a. Tumble or toss about. 2 Beat 


would shape (or mend) the boat that won fame. 


—Filidh, p. 76. 

caireag, -eig, -an, sf. Prating young girl. 
——ach, -eiche, a. Prating, applied to a 
garrulous young female. 

catreal, v. n. Carol, sing, warble. 

caireal, -eil, s.m. Noise, clamour. 2 Outcry. 
3 Sound of distant music. 4 Harmony, mel- 
ody. 5 Carol. 6ttChirping of birds. 
cair ‘alach, a. Noisy. 2 Harmonious. 
rolling. 4 Loud and cheerful. 
6ttUhirping. 

caireall, see caireal. 


3 Car- 
5 Musical. 


cairneach, Ach, 3.f. 


tcairpe, a. 


about. 


cairmeal, s.m. Tuberous bitter vetch, see carra- 


meille. 


cairn, gen. sing. of carn. 
-——each, Ach, -ichean, $.m. Druid, 


, icl T riest. 9 
Osprey, see iolair-iasgair. 3 Kingfisher, see 
biorra-cruidein. 


see càrnach. 2 see bàir- 


neach, —f3*Osprey. 
-— ————, -eiche, 4. see càrnach. 2**Fleshy. 
cairnean, -ein, $. m. Egg-shell. C. uigh, an 


ega-shell. 
see coirbte. 


——ach, see cairealach. tcairptheach, s.m. see cairbeach. 
caireamhachd, s.f. Sociableness. tcairptheoir, s.m. see carbadair., 
tea reamhan, s.m. Shoemaker. cobbler. cairreall, see caireal. 
ca'rean, -ein, -eineau, s.m. Gum of the mouth. | tcairrig, see carraig. 





2 Palate. 3 Chap.  i**Taste of the mouth. | t- each, a. see earraigeach. 

5**Grin. 6 (CR) erroneously used for càran. | tcairrthe, s.m. (carra) Chariot. 2 Pillar. } 

Tha cailean 'am chàirean, there is a seedling | tcairse, sm. Club. 

in my gum ; do m’ ch. ni's milse, to my palate | cairsealan, 3. pl. see cairtealan. 

swerter. cairt, gen. stng. of cart. 
cdireanach, a. Having gums. 2 Of gums, gin-|cairt, pr. pat. a’ cartadh, v.a. Muck, cleanse, 

gival. urge. 2 Tan, as leather. 3 Strip off the 
caireist, -e, see cairbhist. ark. Cairt an leathrach, tan th» leather ; 
tcaireog, see cáireag. tha "n bàthaich cairte, the byre ts cleaned. 
t-a.r-;hiadh. -fhé:dh. s.m. Hart. 2 Stag. cairt, cartach [& cairte: cairteach in Lewis] 
cairg, dat. sing. of carraig. D. cairtean, s.f. Bark. 2 Cart. 3 Card. 4 
Cairge, gen. sing. of carraig. Chart. 5 Charter. 6 Deed, bond, indenture. 
cairgein, s.m. Nea muss, Irish moss.—chondrus, 7°* rarely stone, rock There 

erisnus, | Alway- preceded by the article an. are five dixtinct Gaelic words here—i No 1, 

So called froin Carragheen (dim. of carraig ii No2, iii No 3, iv No4, v Nos5 &6._ ili, 

Co.;Waterford—.1 iv, & v are all from Latin charta ; v direct 





em 102 cairt-locha 


——— O O 
Troma, pl. tromachan—Lewts; S 4 
spògan; (AH)Speicean (‘‘Fionn”’ "ont 

Gairdean, pl. gàirleanan W. Isles,—JM 

5 Ceapaichean, top-sides, floats Sgiathan— 
Lewis. 

6 Cromagan na briogais, breeching-hooks. 
Dubhain na briogais,— Lewis. 

7 Stapull nan spéilearan, runner-staple. 

Ta Udalan, runner; Dubhan deiridh— Lewis. 

8 Cromag-tharruing, draught-hook. Dubh- 
an toisich, dubhan guaille— Lewis. 

9 Dorns cairte, dorus cùil, deircadh cairte, 
back. Deireadn—W. Isles & Argyll. 

10 Tarrang-aisil, lynch-nin. Bouta (Gaelic 
spelling of bolt] na h-aisil, oldie Sate A the 
bolt that goes through the sole-heams }; 
draught-pin or -nail. 

10a Pinne nah-aisil, azle-pin {Pins at each 
end to hold wheels on. ] 

11 Dromach, Saddle-chain,*'*rigbody."' — Perth- 
shire (CR); | Bann-droma, back-strap— 
Lewis. 

12 Urlar, bottom—W.Isles ; Màs— Lewis. 

18 Toiseach, front—W.Isles. 

14 Bord-taoibh, side-board— W.Isles ` Taobh- 
an— Lewis. 

15 Sail bhroillich, front cross-beam—W. Isles. 

16 Sail dheiridh, boz—W. Isles. 2 Hind cross- 
beam. ==" Nos. 15 & 16” connect the 
soles before and behind. 

17 Crann meadhon, pole between two horses 
in a coach or wa gon. 

18 Sglaigean,** beam. 

19 Beul, beulna cartach, (AH) rim of cart. 
(Corresponding to gunwale of a boat.] 

20 Sailthean màis, or sailthean ùrlair, (AH) 
stos [Heavy cross-beams below and sup- 

orting bottom. ] 

21 Coin IT a coup-cart. 

22 Cairt-thaomaidh, coup-cart— Lewis. 

cairt. Gan. fee cairteal. 

cairt-bhlair,* for cairt-lair. Common tormentil. 

cairt-cheap, -chip, 8m. see ceap-cartach. 

cairt-chluiche, st Playing-card. 

cairte, a. & past pt. of cairt. Cleansed, purged. 

2 Tanned. Leathrach e, tanned leather. 

cairteacn, a. see cairtidh. 

-— ————8,** 8. Deed. 

cairteadh, -tidh, s.m. & pr. pt. of cairt, see 

cartadh. 

cairteag, -eig, -an, 8. f. Small cart. 2 Small 

card. 3**Tumbrell. 

cairteal, -eil, -an, 8. m. Quarter (4.) 2**Gill. 

3**Lodging. 4**Chartulary. +5**Challenge. 

6** Edict. 

, eil, ëm, Water-mint—mentha aqua- 
tica. 
100. Roinnean na Cartach. ———achd,** s.f. Hospitality. - 
aiche,** sm. Boarder. ] 
from Latin, iv through English chart, iii | ————an, 8. pl.of cairteal. Quarters, lodgings. 

through French and Broad Seots.—CR] Cairt | cairtear, -ir, -irean, 8.m. Carter, waggoner. 2 

dharaich, the bark of an oak-tree ; ag iom-| **Barker, as of trees. _ 

airt air na cairtean, playing at cards. achd, s.f. Carter’s trade, cartage. 

NAMES OF THE PARTS &C. OF A CART: cairtearbhan, see caisearbhan. 

(Roinnean na cartach. Earrainnean cairt- | cairt-fhear, s.m. see cairtear. `, 

each— Lewis.) cair-thalmhainn.3 s.f. Yarrow, milfoil, see lus- 
1 Roth, pl. an. wheel. [for parts of a wheel| chogsadh-na-fola. ` 

see under * roth’’ teairthe, s.m. Chariot. 
2 Bocsa na cartach, body of cart. [bucus na! cairtidh, a. Swarthy, tawny, bark-coloured, 
cartach— Lewis. tanned, Truaill ch., a tanned scabbard. 











8 Cluasag, sorehan (DM) bolster — — emchd, s.f. Swarthiness. 

Brogan. clogs (AH) —Pieces of wood sev- | cairt-iùil, s.f. Sea-chart. 2 Compass. 

ering trams from axle. cairt-iair,} s. Tormentil, potentil. see leamh- 
8a Na bniun, the two beams or sole-beama, | nach. A 

on each sid» lengthwise— Lewis. cairt-lann, -lainn;s.f. Chartulary, chart-house. 
. 4 Lorg pl. luirg, Shaft DM cairt-leamhna, s.f. Tuberous bitter vetch. 

Luirg, pl. luirgean, } oe Ee eairt-locha,(J M) 6.f. Root of the water-lily the 


cairt -loch a 


juice of which, when boiled, was used to fix 
Lisch dye in wool. 

cairt-phostail, s.f. Post-card. 

ca:rt--hieamhna, (JM) Root of a small plant, 
used for tanning leather. 

feais, a. Spriice, trim, neat. 

t——.** s.f. Regard, love, esteem. 2 Hatred. 
S Ere. 

cais ** v.a. See cas, v. 

caisbheart, -e irt, s.f. Shoesand stockings. 2 
*"Greaves. (lt. foot-gear,as opposed to head- 
goar—ceann-bheart.) y 

¢ais-chiabh, -an, s.f. Curl, ringlet. 

—ach, a. Curly, having ringlets or 
tresses. , 

caisd, pr. part. &' caisdeachd, e. n. Listen, 
hearken., 2 Be quiet. Nach c. thu, will you 
not be quiet ; c. a sin thu ! be quiet you there ! 

¢aisd ! int. Silence! 

caisdeachd, s f.ind. Listening, act of listening. 
2 silencing. A’ c—, p part. of caisd. 

caisdeal, see caisteal. 

— ach, see caistealach. , 

càise, s.m.ind. Chee-e. Pailteas de im is de 
chaise, plenty of butter and cheese. 

caise, s.f.ind. Impetuosity, shortness of temper, 
passion. 2 Streain of water. 3 Wrinkle, fold. 
4 Natural curling of hair. 5** rarely Mush- 
room. 6**Discord. 7**Privy parts of a fe- 
male.  8*steepness. 9*Haste, shortuess of 
time. ’An caise, in hast? ; c. a’ bhruthaich, 
the steepness of the ascen! ; is i do chaise féin 
is cuireach, tt is your own impatience that is 
the cause; c. an t-srutha, the impetuosity cf the 








current; aghaidh gun sgraing, guu chaise, 2, 


face without frown or wrinkle. 
-——, comp. of a. cas. More or most steep or 


rapid. 

càiseach, -eiche, a. Abounding in cheese. 2 
Prolnetive of cheese. | Aranach, caiseacil, a- 
bounding in bread and cheese. 

caiseach, -eiche, a. Wrinkled. 2 Passionate, 
impetuous. 

d,* (gu) a. Crabbedly. 

caisead, eid, s.m. Degree of steepness, 2 of 
suddenness, 3 of rapidity, 4 of impetuosity, 
5 of crispuess. 6 Increase of steevness, &c. 
7** see casaid. Diridh mi a’ bheinn air a 
caisead, I will ascend the mountain, no matter 
how steep (lit. on its steepness. ) 

caiseag,** -eig, sf. Stein of a weed. 

caiseal, eil, -an, ¢.m. Bulwark, wall. 2 Cas- 
tle, garrison. 3 Hurdle. 4 Mound. 5 Cruive 
ina river for fishing. 6ffF¥ord. 7łtł Stone 
building. 

——-—ach, @. Having bulwarks, walled. 

—.—achd,s.f. Battlement. 

caiseamachd, see caismeachd. 

¢caiseamhan, -ain, sm. Shoemaker. 

caisean, -ein, -an, s.m. Anything curled, wrin- 
kled or hairy. 2 The dewlap or skin that 
hangs down from the breasts of cows. 3 Sur- 
liness. 4* Short-temmpered man. Co:nhar- 
radh caisein, a mark upon cattle by cutting 
the dewlap. [Dewlap in Uist i« ‘‘sprogan’’} 

fcaicean, s.m. Hoarseness. 2 Phlegm. 

cuiseanach, -aiche, a. Sour, short-tempered. 

, &f.ind. Fretfulness, peevishness, 

shortness of temper. 

cRisean-feusaig," -in-, -an-, s.m. Moustache. 

eaisean-suldhe,* -in-, -an-, s.m. Stalactite. 

eaisean-uchd,-in-, -an-, s.m. Tho breast strip 
ofa sheep killed at Christmas, or on New 





Year's eve. and singed and sinelle-! by each | 


meiber of the family, as a charin :ezainsó 
fairies and spirits. [MacAlrine adds “in 
Zsiay at any tiis, but uever fur the sake of 


153 


caste 


the fairies.” (!) 

càisear,** a. Cheesy. 

———— ,** E, s.m. Cheesemonger. 

— ———achd,** sf. Cheesenmongery. 

caisearbhan,} -ain, s.m. Dandelion, see béarn: 
an-Brile. 2 Chicory, succory, see lus-an-t- 
siücair. 

————— —— -nam-mue, {ft 8. m. 
see béarnan-Bride. 

cais'eart, -eirt, s.f. see caisbheart. 

caisein-clach, (AF) Stone chatterer, see cloich- 
earau. 

cais-fhionn, caisne,a. White-footed. 

—————.-—,** sm. White-legged cow. 

Càisg, gen.sing. Càisge, Càsg, Càsga, sf. The 
Passover, Easter. 2 Feast. Di-dòmhnaich 
na Càisge, Easter Sunday. [Always prece- 
ded by the article a’ Ch—.] 

caisg, pr. part. a’ casgadh v.a. & n. Restrain, 
cüeex, stop, still, calm, quiet, subdue, sub- 
side, put an end to. 2*S5taunch. Ch. an on- 
fhadh, the storm subsided; a chaisgeas fnaim- 
neach mara is tuinn, who stills the roar of 
sea and surge ; caisg an fhuil, staunch the 
blood. 

Caisge, gen. sing. of Caisg. 

Caisgeach, @ see caisgeil. 

caisgear, fut. pass. of caisg. 

caisgeil,** o Paschal. 

caisgidh, fut. aff. act. of caisg. 

caisiall, -ill, Jan, s.m. Shoemaker's strap. 

caisil-chró, (casaivf) Coffin, bier made of wick- 
er (dit. bed of blood.) 2 Circnlar paling. 

| caisiol, -il, -ean, s.f. see caiseal. 

achd, see caisealachd. 

-chra, see caisil-chrò. 

caisionu, see cais-fhionn. 

caisle, see cnisle. 

caisleac,** s f. Stream. 

caisleach,-ich, s f. Ford. 2 Foot-path. 3 Smooth 
place. 4**Smooth path. 

caisleachadh, -aidh, s.m. Stirring up, shaking, 
Té E. a feather-bed. A’ c—, pr. part. of cais» 
ich. 

ca sleach-spuing, s.f. Touchwood, spunk. 

tceaislean, -ein, s.m. Castle, garrison, tower. 

tcaislear,-an, s.m. Projector. 2 Castle builder. 
teais-li, a. Polished, made smooth 

caislich, pr. part. a’ caisleachadh & caisleadh, 
v.a. Shake, stir up, asa bed. 2 Rouse. 3ff 
Smoothe, soften. 4**Polish. 

caislichte, a. d: past part. of caislich. Shaken, 
stirred up, roused. 2 Polished, smooth d. 

caisineachd, -an, $.f. Alarm, warning. 2 Hint. 
3 Highland march or war song. 4* Beating 
time to an instrument with the foot—Is/ay. 
C. bhuadhach, shouts of victory, 

-—ach, a. Alarming, that alarms. 2 
Taat gives warning or notice. 

caismeart, -eirt,-an, s. f. Heat of battle. 2 
Armour. 3 Bandof combatants. 

—ach, «ch, -ichean, s.m. Armed man. 
caisne, comn. of a. cais-fhionn. 

caisnich,ttpr. part. a’ caisneachadh, v.a. Shake 
roughly, crush. 

cai-rea»h4chd, s. f. Legerdemain, juggling 
conjuring. 

caisreabhitiche, s.m. Juggler, conjurer. 

caisreag, -cig. -an, s.f. Curl, ringlet. 2 Wrinkle, 

caisreagach, -aiche, a. Curled. 2 Wrinkled. 
3 Shrivelled. 4**Bushy, as hair. 

——— d,** s.f. Crispation. 

exisreag^ich,** v.a. Curl. 

caisreagan, pl. of caisreag. 

GU st, v.a. see coisrig. 

| —- ic^, see caisrcagaich. 

| caiste, d. & past. part. of cas. Twisted, curled, 

M 


Dandelion, 

















- 


eaiste 





twined. Snàth caiste, &^c/n3 thread. 

caisteal, eil, an, s.m. Castle, fort, tower, g^r- 
rison. 2 Tu:retolinansion 3 Trunk of the 
bodv. Bu chaisteal] dhomh thu, thou wert a 
castle to me ; caisteal w chuirp, the trurk of 
the body. i 

-deiridh,** s.m. Qnarter-deck of ship. 

-toisich,2$ s.m. Forecastle of ship. 

caistean,** om, s.m. Crarty feilow. 

càit’, see c'aite. 

cait, gen. sing. of cat. 

Zeait, sf. Sort, kind. 

caitcheann,(J M) s.m. Land common to all the 
crofters in a township—Z'iree. 

eaitchinn,(CA C e, Tiree for coitehionn. 2Stri- 

ed. cat-head like. 

C'aite P (c'àit before a vowel) adv, for cia àite P 
where ? in what place? C’ait’aa.cbi thu ? 
waere were you ? Cait’ anl Lueil e ? where és 
he? c'ài an d'ihuair thu e? where did you 
get it ? 

càite, a. & past part. of cath, Winnowed, siited. 

caite, a. & past part. of cuth, (for crithte.) 

càiteacii, -ich, 1chean, s.f. Cha, buss, 2 Re- 
fuse. 3 Measure made of ruxhes, basket. 
4++Winnowing sheet. 

, -1ene, a. Full of chaff or vusks. 

teaiteach, s./. Sirp's mainsail, 27% Main-sheet 

caiterch, see caithteach. 

as, see caithterenas, 

caiteag, -cig, -an, sf. Lusket. 2 Butter pot. 
&* Leather pot. 4 Basket tur trout—Jstuy. 5 
**Canister. 6 Place indo of straw, to con- 
tain oats or barlev in a barn. 7 Small but. 
s**Butter. 4A) see cniveag. 

feaitean, -ein, sm. Chain. 

caiteai,§ -cin, s.m. Clas-es of plants called 
amentifere and cupulifzre. 

,-elu, s. see calveln. 
8iiLitüle cat. 

ach, see caiteineacb, 

caiteas, -eis, s.n. Caddis, scrapings of linen 
applied to wounds. 2 Refuse from carding 
wool 8(AF) Caddis worm. 

caitein,-ean, s.m Shag, nap on cloth. 2 Ruf- 
fling of the sea surface. 3 Sprin,zing breeze. 
4 Dad temper. 5(DU> Eifeevoi wear ou cloth, 
Tha caitein air an aodach, the cloth has a nice 
nap on it; thoir c. air an aolach, raise the 
map; thoir c. air an due, rouse the man’s 
temper ; caitein gaoithe, a springing breeze. 

caiteineach, Gut, d. Shagey, hairy, rongh, 














QBlossom of 





osier. 











nappy. 2 Hurlled, as thesea. 3** Rougn- 
skinned. 4**Curle l, frizzl.d. 

-- ,** s.m. Liasrdresscr. 2 Cloth-dres- 
ser, 


caith,* gen. catha, s f. ‘‘Seods,’? husks of corn. 
t2 Chat, ztBlemnish. mugh na catna, juice of 
the seeds for ana ig sowens. 

eaith,"* san, radentun virile. 

caith, pr. pa t. a’ caithoan.h & caitheadh, v.n. 
& a. Speud, wear, cousume, exhaust. 2 
Waste, syuinder 3 Cast. 4 Shoot. 5**Drive, 
&saship. Chaith e '; haibhrzezs, he Sat: 
dered his weasth; chaith e 'aodach, he wore 
out his cothes ; a’ caitheamh casvig, wearing 
acloak ; cha tha’ choinneal, the cale i8 con- 
sumed ; chaitheadh œ, it is consumed; a’ 
caitheadh chiaca, throwing stones ; a’ caith- 
eamh air commarradn, shootine at a mars ; 
gwm meal’s gn’n caith thu e, may you enjoy 
Qd wear it—said to anyone WHO puts OL a 
new article of clothing for the tirst tune. 

fczith, a. see ca:ch. 

teith, ma. Witinow, sitb. 

enith-bneart, -eirt, -an, $.f. Pattle-armour. 

caith-bura,nad,s. Kiug’s evil—-.dvera. 


'"M 


eaithriseach 





caicheach, -eich, -eichean, a.m. Speridinriit, 
prodigal, profuse, extravagant. : 

——— —, -eiche, a. Prodigal, profuse, extras 
vagant 

caitheadh, s.m. d pr.part. see caitheamh. 

caitheanih, -eimh, sn Spending, consuming, 
2 Wasting. 3 Casting, putting, shootine. 4 
**Extravagance, <A’ c—, py. rart. of caith. 
Thug iad tri laithean aig a critheanin, mney 
took three days driving her (the boa'.) e" 

caitheamh,||-ci:2h, s.f. Ccusumyption. 2**Asthe 
ma. [Preceded by the articie oi ch— .] 

-aimsire, -ainsreach, st Puctime, 

sport, diversion. 2 Waste of time. 

-heatha. s.f. Moral candnet, bekavie 
onr, conversation, mode cf living. 

caithear, fut quss. of caith. 

,caithearra, a. Just, woli-Festowed. 

teaiti fear, v. irr. & def, One mu«t. Caithieam 
we must: caithfidh mi &c), 4 7 &c.? must. : 

feaithio_hil-aimsire, see eai heamh-aisire, 

vaithir, -tureach, pe. caitiirignean [& -thricce] 
see cathair. 

cài.hivaen, ich, s.m. see edileach & catha. 

caithiean, -em, see eulean. 

—--——fsch, see cà:leanach. 

cad enue -dn,-ean, s». Soldier, war- 
ET 

caithie.§ s. Strawberry- 
tree—arbutus uneto. 2 
(AF) Two-year-old hei- 
fer. 

caitaream,-eim,s m.[«t f.] 
Joyful noise. 2 Ap- 
planse. 3 shout of tri- 
umph or joy. 4 Loud 
noise. 5 Shkoni. 6 beat- 
ing. as of a drum at re- 
gular iniervals ls. 
[**synmrhony, »** 
(JGM) C reering pace 10**Triumph Chum 
€. à üheananubi ani ad cilii, to roaie im thy 
praise; is c. brtin aw benl ar bà rt, and tre 
shout cf death in the nota af our bird 5 war 
ch. chiar, ck» the symuhony or horns : sgeul 
‘tha dubbach le m’ inutinn, nach robu ah 
anus a” Chaiil:ch fo caaitiürcam an (xa, 
what a pity vou were no in the Corryvreckan 
when the Keini neap tuae was in full career— 
Filidh, p. 44. 

caithreauiasch, -aiche, a. Victorious, triumph- 
aut. 2 Shouting, maning a loud shouv. 3? 
Beating at regmar 1ntervais. 

adh, -a'dn, s.m. & pr. rart. Tri- 
mmphiug. 2 Suontinz. 

teritrreamadh, ssm. I:jformation. 

caithrcama.ch,tts f. Suousing. 

caltnrolin, see ce'Uinrear., 

——ich, v.a. fn. Triumph, conquer. 2 
Shout. 

caithriz,DU) v.a. ‘Lake refuse of straw out of 
giaia with the hand. 

ean,(DU) s.m. Broken straw separated 

from grain. 

caithrinn,* s.f. Refuse of straw taken out of 
corn after being thr shed. 

--—ich,* v.a. Shake straw before bund- 
ling it, or making trusses, 

caithris, s.f.ind. Watebieg. 2 Cireumsgpection, 
attention, 3 Watch by night. 4*Excessive 
fatigne from watening incessantly. 5/AC)La- 
bourre;nired of à crufter holding under a 
tacksnmian. o** Ball (dance.) 

—, pr. part. a’ caithris, v.d. Watch, 

guard, defend, keen, 2 AC) Wake, harass. 

each, -ejehe, a. Watchfni, attentive, 

circuiuspect. o*Fatizued by cunvinual watch 





— 














101. Ca! hne. 
Iuforma''on, norice. 9 




















caithriseach 155 calg-bhealaidh 


of materials for a tweed suit—llb wool 
an ell of cloth (a little less for ladies’ stuffs); 
7 Ib clean wool makes 3 yards of drugget; 14 
Ib warp, ilb good indigo. Carding and spin- 
ning, 8d. P lb., ; weaving, 7d. $ yard.] 

calann,ft s.m. see calum. 

fcalb, see fcalbh. 

enlba, s.m. see calpa.’ 

calbh, cailbh [& cailbhe] s.m. tHead. [2 Erro- 
neously given as “Headland, cape." by t— 
CR.] 3 Bald pate. A Hardin.ss. 5 see 
colbh. 6tfScalp. 

calbh, cuilbh [& cailbh], s.m. Shoot or rising 
tree, especially of hazel. 2 Rib of an osier 
basket, &c. 3 Continuous gush or pouring of 
any liquid, from a cleft or cranny. C. fola 
streaming of blood from a wound, 

-——, a. Bald. 

-——ach. a. Causing baldness. 

-——achd, s.f.ind. Baldness. 

calbhair, -e, a. Eager for food, voracious. 
Suth’d.t 

fcalbhthas, s.m. Half-boot, buskin. 

cal-bloinigein, s.m. Spinach. 2 Colewort. 

calc, pr.pt. a’ calcadh, v.a. Caulk. 2 Full, 
diive, beat, ram, cram, push violently for- 
ward. 3** Drive a wad into a gun with a 
ramrod. 

»**a. Hard, obdurate. 

—, 8.f. see cailc. 

——ach,§ s.m. Eider-duck, see lach-Lochlan- 
nach. 

calcadair, see calcair. 

caleadh, -aidh, s.m. Caulking, driving, beat- 
ing, ramming, cramming, pushing viulently. 
2** Driving witha rammer.  3** Oakum. 
Luchd-calcaidh, caulkers. A'c—, pr. pt. 
of calc. 

caleadh-bàth,( AH) s.m. Calking. 

caleaich, v.a. Same meanings as calc. +2 Har- 
den by traping. 3**Grow obdurate. 

— ————te, a. & past pt. of calca:ch. Caulked. 
2 Hardened. 3**Obdurate. 

calcaidh, fut. af. act. of calc. 

caleair, -ean, s.m. Caulker. 2 Rammer. 

——-—eachd, s.f. Caulking, occupation of a 
caulker. 2 Ramming. 

calcas,* s.m. Oakum. 2(MMcD) Tarry hemp 
used for caulking.— Lewis. 

cà! ceanann, -ainn, s.m. Dish of greens and 
potatoes boiled and mashed together, 

cal-ceirsleach, -eich, s.m. Cabbage. 

fcàl-chearcain, e.m. shuttlecock. 

càl-colaig, s.m. Cauliflower. 

cal-colbhairt,§ s. m. Sea-kale or -cabbage, 
colb? ,xtalk+art, flesh) see praiseach braidue. 

caldach a. sharp-pointed. 

teald'ch, see criidach. 

cal-ditheanach, s.m. Cauliflower. 

calg, cuilg, ann, Awn. 2 Prickle, point. $8 
Any sharp-pointed thing. 4 Sting. 5 Beard 
of corn. 6 Spear, shaft. 7 Arrow. 8 Sword. 
9 lair or fur of animals, especially pile of 
black cattle, and bristles of pigs. 10**The 
grain. 11 see colg. 12* Refuse of lint. An 
aghaidh a’ chnilg, against the bristle; an 
cluaran a’ calla chuilg, the thistle losing 
its prickle ; iumairt nan calg, the contest of 
spears. 

calgach, -aiche, a.  Bristly, sharp-pointed, 
prickly. 2 Piercing. 3 Having awns, as ears 
of barley. 4 Shaggy. 5 Barbed. 6***pright- 
ly. 7**Passionate, ardent. Le siataib c., 
with piercing lashes ; armach, calpach, ul- 




























ing. Gue., watchfully. . 
caithriseachd, s. f. Watchfulness, attentive- 
ness, circumspection. 2 Continued or fre- 
qu: nt watching. s 
eai'hrisich, v.a. & n. see caithris. 
caithte, past. pt. of calth. Spent, wasted, ex- 
hausted, squandered. 2 a.Lean, lank. E 
ach, -eiche, a. Lavish, wasteful, prodi- 
gal. 2 Consumptive. 3** Wearing. aith- 
teach air duine, apt to wear one down soon ; 
duine c.. a wasteful person ` tinneas c., a wast- 
ing disease. Á . 
achas, -ais, s.m. Lavishness, profusion, 
prodigality. 2 State of wearing or exhaust- 
Ing. 3* Liability to be worn out. 4**Wast- 


ing. 
x achd, s.f. see caithteachas. 

caithtein, see caitein. 

oaithtiche, -ean, s.m. Spendthrift, waster, pro- 
digal. ?f1Wearing garment. 

caitin, see caitean. 

each, -ich, s.m. Cloth-dresser. 

fcaitinn, -e, sf. Often frequenting. 

each, a. Much frequented. 

caitleacach, a. see catholach. 

eal, càil, s.m. Kale, cabbage, colewort. 9** 
Name for all sorts of cabbage. 3** Scotch 
broth, of which kale isa principal ingredient. 
4**Dinner. 6 rarely Joke. And’ fhuair thu 
do chal ? did you have your dinner (kale.) 1 

feal, s.m. Sleep, slumber, insensibiliiy. 

teal, v.a. & n. Burn. 2 Keep safe. 3 Sleep, 4 
Get into harbour. 

oal,** s.m. Condition of body. 2 Grief, des- 
pondency. 3 Darkness. 4ft see ceal. Is 
math a chal, he is in good condition ; mu'm 
fas air t'inntinn cal, ere grief falls on thy mind. 

cala, s.3n. see caladh. 

fcala, a. Hard, thrifty, frugal, saving. 

caladair, -ean, s.m. Calendar, register. 2 Ma- 
chine for calendering cloth. 

caladh,** see cal. 

fcaladh, a. see fcala. 

caladh, -aidh, -aichean [calaidh & calachan] 
s.m. Harbour, port, haven, road for ships. 
2 Shore. 3 Ferry. 4 Porch. 5 Bay. 6*Land 
in the distance, as at sea.  Fhun^ir sinn an 
caladh,we gained the harbour ; cha d' thug 
thu do long gu caladh fhathast, you have 
not brought your shin into harbour yet ; thog 
sinn c. air an tres là, we descried land on the 
third day ; na Coig Calaidh, the Cinque Ports; 
an c. ait, the joyful shore; cala-dhireach 
an long, IM e, 

eala-lhireach, a. see calg-dhìreach. 

calaich pr.pt a caiachadh, v.a. dan, Bring 
into har onr. 2 Reside. 3 Contioue,remain. 
4 *Moor, anchor. 

fcalaim (for cailleam,) I am sleeping. 

fcalunn, s.f. Couch. 

calainn, -ean, see colann. 

fcalair, sm. Crier. 

t eachd. s.f. Burying, incterring. +2 
Shouting. +3 Proclamation. 

tcalaiseachd, af Juggler. 

tealaist,** s.f. Gaelic spelling of college. 

calaman, see calman. 

calaineilt,3 Calamint—calamintha. 

calamh, see Caladh. 

calanas, 8 f. Spiun'ng of wool or fax. 2 Work- 
ing at wool, flax, heinn, &c. For technical 
terms employed s-e under ''beart-fhichea- 
daireachd,” **enidheall - sniomh,” “cuigeal’’ 
&c. [Usual measurements—Five ells, or 
seven yards ace a smu of men's clothes ;|. lamh, armed, ardent, and ready. 
6 ells, a lady's costume ; S ells a costume, f| fcalg-ard, a. Straight, high. 


including outdoor cloak or jacket. Amount | calg-bhealaidh,§ cuilg-, s.m. Butcher's broom, 
MÀ 























calg-bnea:axin 


—ruscus aculeatus. [Said to be the badge of | callais,** s.f. Buffoonery. 


156 


calman-vorm 





the Sntherlands, but it is not indigenous to | tcallait, see gairm. 


the Hizhlands, and it is doubtful if a plant | fcaAllamh, a. 


of it existed there when this clan was power- 
ful 500 years ago. | 





102. Calg-bhealaidh., 

calg-bhior, a, -2n, s.m. Barbed weapon. 
Point of a spur. 

———~—ach, -aiche, a. Barbed, crenated. 

calg-bhrudnainn, s.m. Butchers broom, 
ca'g-bhealaidh. 

calg-dhireach. -eiche, a. Direct, straight as an 
arrow. Z**Contrary, against the grain. 

-—————, adv. Directly, quite. 2*Slack 

sheet, rignt Lefore the wiod. Calg-dhireach 
an aghaidh a chéile, directly opposite each 
other. 

ca!-gruidhean,§-ein, s.m. (gruidhean, grain- 
like foxers) Caulifiower. 

dp dh. see càl-gruidhean. 

call, -a, s.m. Losing, dropping. 2 Loss, dan- 
age, detriment, 3 Calamity. 4 Privation, 
destitution. Is mér mo chall ris, great is my 
loss by (t4; call ùine, loss of time ; a’ call na 
h-aimsir, losing time ; & call air, losing by it; 
a’ call airgid, dropping money. A’ c—, pr.pt. 


of caill. 

tea'l, -a, sm. Church. 2 Veil. 3 Hood. 

calla, a. Tame, quiet, not wild, domestic. 
Beathaichean calla, domestic animals. 

tealiach, s.m. see cullach. 2 Bat. 

— — —adh, -aidh, s.m. Taming,domesticating. 
A’ c—, pr.pt. of callaich. 

eallag, sf. see calltag. 

callaich, pr.part, a’ callachadh, v.a. Tame, 
maxke quiet, domesticate. Callaichidh am 
biadh fiadh na beinne, food will tame the 
mountain deer. 

——te, a. & past pt. of callaich. Tamed, 
domesticated, civilized. 


2 


see 





callaid, -ean, sf. Fence, partition, hedge. 2 
Lurking-place. 3 Cap. 4 Wig. 6 Funeral 
ery. 6 Elegy. 7**Wrangling noise. An ti 


a bhriseas callaid teumaidh nathair e, he 
that breaketh a hedge a serpent shali bite him ; 
c. dhroighinn, a hedge of thorns. 
callaideach, -eiche, a. Fenced, hedged, par- 
tiuioned, 2 Surrounded. 3 Wearing a cap 
or wig. 4 Of, like, or belongiug to, a fenco, 
hedes, or partition. 5**Ubstreperous, 
calla'dh, -e, a. Active, nimble, quick, agile, 
* eicver."' 
tcabaidhe, -an, s.m. Partner. 
calia.dheachd, s.f. Activity,nimbleness.agility, 
quiekness, *cleverness." 2 Tameness, 
callaid-thogail,áft -ean-togail, s.f. Circumval- | 
lation. t 
callag, see calluinn. | 
callaigue, -an, s.m. Divider, distributer. 
call-aimsir, sm. Loss or waste of time. 
callainn, 8.7, see cau an. 
icadair, s.m. Gaelic speliing of caller. 


x Supple, flexible, pliant. 

callan, -ain, s.m. Noise, clamour, shouting. 2 
Prating, babbling. 3* Absurd hammering 
atanytning. 4(AH‘Constant repetition of a 
word or phrase. 5 DU) Noisy gronp, applied 
to & gossiping assembly. Sometimes used 
for caltn.] 

callanach, -4iche, a. Noisy, clamorous. 

callathar,(CR) Gaelic spelling of ‘‘caller.’’ Cho 
callather ris a’ bhreac, as hvalihy as the trout. 

call-chircein, s.m. Shuttlecock. 

callda, a. see calla. 

calldach, -aich, -aichean, s.m. Loss, detriment, 
damage. 2 Calamity. 3 Succession of loss- 
es.  Niesuas an c., he will makejup the loss. 

,* a. Losing, ruinous, 
d,* see calldach. 

calldaich, v. see callaich. 

calldain, -e, s.m. see calltuinn. 

cal liath-ghlas,} s.m. White goose-foot, see 
praiseach fhiadhain. Argyllshire. 

calloid, -e, -ean, A see callaid. 

callta, a. see calla. 

ch, -aich, -aichean, see calldach. 

calltag, aig, -an, s.7. Black guillemot—uria 
grylce.*i 

teAlltarnaeh, s.f. Truss of weeds. 

calltuinn, -e, s.m. Hazel—corylus avellana. 
(Badge of Clan Colquhoun.] — Slatan deg 
ch., hazel rods; preas ch., hazel bush; cnò ch., 
hazel nut. 

Calluinn,-e,s.f. New year’s 
day. 12** Collection of 
dressed victuals made all 
over the country by the 
'ocron New year’s day- 
3**Christmas box. [Gen- 
erally preceded by the ar- 
ticis a’ } Gillean Call- 
unne, Hogmanay lads— 
carollers who perambu 
late the townland at 
night at the New year. 

can, d. see calma. 

,* s.m. Thic! - ct, stont- 
ly-built persun. 2 Prop, 
pillar. 5"*Champion. 

calma, a. Brave, stout, daring, resolute,strong. 
2 Thick-set, brawny, robust. 

chd, s.f. Stoutness, courage, strength, 

bravery, personableness. 

dachd, see calmachd. 

das, see calinachd. 

idh, see calma. 

il, see calma. 

calman, -ain, -an, s.m. Dove, pigeon. 

———— -cathaidh,f s.m. Hoopoe- upupa epops. 
Gob a chalinain-chathaidh, bithidh tu gie 
mu 'm pos thu, beak of the moul.ing dove, you 
"H be well before you marry. The saying 1s 
applied to sick children—N.G.P. ‘'Calman- 
cathaidh” is rendered “hoop” in A. 
Donald’s vocabulary. 

-————— -coille,(McL & D) s. m. Wood-pigeon, 
ring-dove, cushat. 

-coille-fearan,f  Ring-dove, 
man-fiadhaich 1. 
— —— -creige,(AF) Rock-dove. see smùdan. 
————- -dé, SA. Butter? 
tiadhaich, T s.m. 
geon—co/umba palumbus. 
calman gorm. 

—— —— -gobhlach,(AF) Fan-tailed pigeon. 

-gorm,S s. m. Stock-duve.— cocum ja 
qnas. 











108. Calltuinn. 

















Maec- 
see cal- 


GC Dee — wood-pi- 
2 Stock-dove, see 


calman-catnaidh 157 camas 








107. Cal-Phddruig. 


torted. 2 Diiud. Cham thu am maide, gott 
bent the stick. [càm in. Gairloch, &c—DU.] 
cain.gen.m. caim, comp.caime,a. Crooked,awry, 
distorted, curved, bent. 2 Blind of an eye. 
8 Il-directed. 4 Tricky, dishonest, deceit- 
ful. Tha e cam, he is blind of an eye ; maide 
cam, @ crooked stick; cha roba cam nach robh 
crosda, the one-eyed was ever cross. [Càm in 
some places.] 
cam, see caim. 
team, s.m. Deceit, fraud, artifice. 
cam,* -aime, St, Fe.nale blind of one eye. 
Teams, a. Strong, courageous, daring, bold, 
brave. 
tceamabhil, e, st Camomile. 
camcag, -aig, s.f. Trip, sudden tripping of the 
heels Leig e mi le c., he tripped me up; cuir 
¢., trip. 
fcamach, 3.f. Power,inflnence. 2 Ability. 
camachag,tt -aig, an, sf. Small bay. 
cama-ch:ódan, see cnòdan. 
cama-chraos,(AH) s.m. (lit. wry mouth) Men- 
dicant expectancy, condition in whtich one 
makes a poor mouth. 
camadh, -aidh, s.m. Bend, bendirg. curve, cur- 
ving, crook.  A'c—, pr.pt. of cam, Air 
106. Calman-gorm. chamadh, adv. aside. e 
-mara, s.m. Rock-dove, see smùdan. caman n 8.f. Arm-or thizh-bone. 2 see 
an- - >k- smüdan.| Cam-dnubn. ; 
"e CO d dig iin n deen " camag, -aig, -an, $.f. Curl, ringlet. 2 Crook. 3 
-tüchan. (AF) Turtle-dove. see turtur.| Clasp. 4 Side of the head, ternple. 5 Club. 
en!mar,H s.m. Kind of fish. 6 Bay, arm of the sea. . T Anything crooked 
@iliiarra, see calma. or curved. 8 Comma, in writing. 9**Quib- 
¢ealimas -ais, 8 an. see calmachd. ble, quirk. 10 Anything undesirable. 11ff 
calm-lann, -à, -an [& -lainn**?, sm. Dove-cot.} Curve. Bhuail e "aa chamaig e, he struck 
calmunnpach, -aiche, a. see calma. mss CN M bed moni Hase 
na- d 2 raiseacn- P 9. y e , 
zcv Ka PR "NEE ringlets. 2 Crooked. 3**Winding. Do chùl 
enlp,* sf. Rivet nail. for calpa 6. c., thy tressy ringlets. 
calpa, pl. -an [& -annan] s.m. Calf of the leg. an, pl. of camag. ` 
2 Pillar. 3 T-er or ply ofa rope or cable. 4] ctmagan-sréine, s.m. Bit. — 
Shrouds or standing rigging of a ship. 5|camag-ara, see camag-gharaidh. 
Cenital (of money.) 6 Nails, see bata p. 76. | camag-gharaidh, s.f. The temple, hollow above 
7 Snank of an anchor, see under bata, p.77.| the eye. 
C. na tàirnge, a halliard or hoisting rope ;|camaich,tt v.a. Bend. 
c. is riadh, capital and interest; meall a’ chal- | camaichte,** past part. Bent. 
pa, the calf of the leg; caol a’ chalpa, the|camalag,(JM) s.f. Curl, ringlet—W. Isles. 
small of the len. feam-all, see càmhal. `` d 
calpach, -aich, -aichean, s.m. Lë f.] see colpach. | cama-lubach,(AF) Sandpiper, see trileachan- 
—, -aiche, a. Stout-legged, strong-legged.| tràighe. M 
-—-, @ Devious, winding. 

















calpannach, a. see calpach. we ee d 
calpanta,** a. Bony. camamhil, see camomhail. 
s,** .ais, gan, Brawniness. caman, -ain, pl. -aia [& camanan,] Club for 


eal-Phadruiz.§s.m. London pride, Peter's kale,| playing shinty, hurley, or golf. Not a crick- 
none-so-pretty—suzifraga wnhrosa. et-bat, as given in some dictionaries, as cam 


c&'-phleadhag, -aig, --n, *.f. Gardener’s dibble.} an must havea curve in it. 2(DU) see cam. 





cal-shalainn,** s. Alkali. ag, 4. : 

caltninn,$ s. Southernwood. see meath-chal- | achd, s.f. Shinty, hurley, golf. 
tuinn. [caimar ** s.m Fool, idiot. 

calum, -uim, s.m. ||Corn, harduess on the skin! ——— an, see Camar. i , 
from working with spades, oars, &c., cal-|camart, -airt, s.m. Pain or spasmodic affection 
losity. of the neck, causing the patient to look a 

ealunn, -uinn, see calum. wry. 2 Wry neck. 


cam, v.a. Bend, curve, make crocked or dis- | camas,* -ais, 8.31. Mould for making bul:ets. 2 


camas 


158 


oan 





see camus. 

ach, see camusach. 

cambar,(AC) s.m. Place of bnrial. 

eam-bheul, -edil, s.m. Distorted mouth. 

—ach, a. Wry-mouthed. 

cam-bhileach, a. Wry-lipped. 

cam-bhuidhe, a. Yellow-curled, yellow-waving. 
T'fhalt cam-bhuidhe, thy yellow curled hair, 

Teain-braie, s.m. Wry mouth, 

fcam-ceachdta, s.m. The North Pole. 

cain-chas,** et, Bandy leg. 

ach, -aiche, a. Bandy-legged. 

eam-chónihdhail, s.f. Unlucky foregathering or 
meeting. Cam-chomhdhail ort ! bad luck to 
you ! 

eain-dhan, -ain, pl. -dana, s.m. Iambic verse. 

————ach.tt a. Iambic. 

cam-dhubh, pt. cama-dhurena. s.f. F re-leg of 
cattle and sheep. There is no white on them, 
even When the beasts are fat.—J M 

tca-mead, see cia meud ? 

eam-glas,fT s.f. Red-shank. 2(AF) Red-start, 
red-pule, purple sandpiper. 














108. Cam-ghlas. 
cam-ghob, sr Common crossbill, wrybill,— 
loxia curvirostra. 





109. Cam-ghob. 


fcamh, -aimh, s. m. Power, might, ability 
strength. 92 Influence. 3 Gaelic spelling of 
ca ve. 

camh,* contr. of camhanach. 

teamhach, s.f. Might, power, influence, 

caluhach, -aiche, @ Loquacious, garrulous, 
prattling, talkative. * 

-— — — as, -ais, $.f. Loquacity, garrulity, talk- 
ativeness. 

càmbair.** s, f. see camh-fhair. 

càmhal, -ail, s.m. Camel. Deich càmhail, ten 
camels, 

cawhan, -ain, pl. camhanan, s.m. Hollow plain. 
2**[ittle cave, cove. Feadh nan lub 's nan 
camhanan, among the bays and coves. 

camhinach, -aich, sf. Dawn, early morn, 2 
Twilight. 

fcamhaoir, see camh-fhàir. 

camh-fhàir, æ, sf. Dawn, daybreak, 

eamhlach, -aich, see cabhlach, 

camhul, -uil, see càmhal, 


camlag,(CR) s.f. Skye for camag 1, see camalag 

————ach, a. see camagach. 

camlaid, -e, see caimileid. 

cam-lorg, -luirg, sf. Crooked staff. 2 Circut 
tous road. 8**Crooked or meandering path. 
Am fear nach gabh comhairle gabhaidh e c., 
he that takes not advice will go astray. 

cam-lüb, s.m. Curl. 

—— —— ach, fțł -aiche, a. In curls. 

cam-luirgneach, a. Bow-legged, bandy-legged. 

Tecam-mhugarlach, see c— -luirgneach, 

cani-mhuin, see cam-mhuineal. 

cam-mbuineal, eil, s.m. Wry neck. 2 The bird 
wryneck. 

—— — ach, a. Wrynecked. 

camog, -oig,-an. see camag. 

fcamoga, s.pl. The temples of the head. 

camogach, a. 





see camarach. 





e 5 A 


110. Camomhail. 

camomhail, s.m. Camomile—anthem’s nobilis. 

—— ——.— -fiadhain, s.m. Scentless May-weed, 
see bnidheag-an-arbhair. 

camp, a & caimp, pl. -aichean, ;-an & -annan;] 
xm. Camp. Am meadhon a’ chaimp, ia 
the middle of the camp. 

——--ackadh -aidh, san, Encamping, encamp- 
ment. A’c—,pr.pt. of campaich. Tha ain- 
geal Dhé a’ campachadh, the angel of God en- 
(Qn DS. 

-—— dh. pr.pí. à campachadh, v.n. Encamp. 

tceampaineach, a. Of Champagne. 

campair, -ean, s.m. Camp-master. 

campar, -air, s.m. Auger, grief, vexation, nn- 
easiness, sorrow.  *** Camphire. Na cnir- 
eadh e c. ort, do not let it vex you ; c. inntinn, 
vexation of spirit. 

ach, -aiche, a. Angry, grievous, vexa- 
tious, troubled, fretting. 

camparaid,* s.f. Bustle. 

fcamp-thuaim, sf. Entrenchments. 

cam-rath, -a, -an, s.m. Sewer, gutter, dyke. 

cam-riaghailt, -ean, s.f. Anarchy, confusion 
without rule. 

cam-sgriobach, aiche ff a. Curvilinear. 

cam-shron, -oine, -an, s.f. Crook- or hook-nose, 

——— ———aách, a. Hook-nosed. 2 Crook-nosed. 

cam-shuil, -ula,-shuilean, s.f. Squint-ecye. 

each, a. Squint-eyed. Cailleach 
chrosda, cham-shuileach, a cross-grained, 
squinting dame. 
camus, -uls, 8.m. Bay, creek, harbour.  2** 
Crooked rivnlet. 3 The space between the 
thighs. 4(AH)Stern-seat of a boat, see bata, 
.76. An camus Clutha nan iomadh stuadh, 

tn the bay of Clutha of many waves. 

-——ach, d, Abounding in bays, creeks, or 
harbours. 2 Like, of, or belonging to, a bay, 


creek, or harbour. , ] 
can, pr.pt. a’ cantuinn, by cantail] v.a. Sing, 
Can oran, sing & 


rehearse, say, name, ca 
song ; can sin fhathast, repeat that—Glendale. 
tcan, a. White. 
¢can, ade. Whilst, when. 
tcan, -a, sm. Moth. 2 Lake, 8 Whelp, puppy. 
càn,(AC) see càin, 








can 15 


9 cann aireach 





can. C) s.m. Pusiness—Lerthehire. Tha e. 
ara chan fen. he is 
ec unt [Sevts—he is 

cata pl Can, s.m. Little whale, grampus. 
y "en HrërOn, porpeise. 3 Order of pocis 
third iuferivr tu au oam. 

eursbeas, -ais, am. Sacncloth, G 
Of «G*! aa. 

cana li} -aich, ai Dan, s. f. {m**"] Cotton- 
Sm ae e est’s-tait--eriomhorum CODINA UM., 
ama erioplo em pe!ystach yon. [Given by 
eae wx the helve o£ Cian Suthcriand.) 2 
ftUotton. ?izsvown. Crann caraiclu, « cot- 


Art 
Läieiree, 
R 
Eh 


on h's own can.) 


aelic spelling 


bag aep, s.m. Standing water. 
e Poubat. S Dcceit. A Stu.- 
geon. 5 Vorpoise. 

, a. vee caprach, 

cànzh, men. sing. of càin. 

eenscnal. -e. 6. Cotiony. 

cànacren, ia, see eanacbd. 

canachi. s.f.tu.d. Tax.ng, pacing 
umter tribute. 

Cclunchus. see catackd. 

caralh, see caa. 

canadh,** s.m. Chant. 

caualb, see ca'nb. 

eanxich.** s. Lirt. 

canaichean,** s.m. Cotton, bog- 
cotton. 


cànaichte, ses cà/n'chte. 


caraidh, frt. af. a. of can. 

fen asl, xf. Lirt. 

cànain, e, eam, S.T Tanenace, dialect, speech, 
tenge. 2 Pronnrciation, accent. 

each, -iche, chean, s.m. Linguist, phil» 

ologist. 

«2cb,1f a. Thi'ologicai. 

canainieche, fett, sing. of eàna neach. 
fame mearing as càraíreach. 

canal, ail, see caineal. 

canam, v. Let me say. 2 I shall say. 

canampuinn, see (kaain. 

tcanan, -ain, s.m. Cauron. 

cavapach,** -aich.s.m. Canon. 2 Canonist. 

canar, Eur nm, of con. Prionnsa na sioth- 
chainut canar ris,he shall Le nuned ihe Prince 
of mace, 

cana-*iogach,(AF) Wolf cnb. 

Met, -e, -ean, 8.m. Gaciie spelling of can- 
itr 








Jil. Canach. 








also 2 


71 


fcaníam, for canaidh mi, fuf.aff. a. of can. 
can-fbonn,** -fhuinn, s.m. Sorg. 2 l'recept, 
cancn. 


canegsirnich, pr.na-* a’ cance*rneachach, v.n. 
Suppurate, gatr;renre, caule. 

Cangacnich, pr. *art. à! cang1rechadh, v. a. 
Pret,"ex, agitate, 

canelniun, -e, -can, EE Vexation, trouble, un- 
easiness, 

e— ——— —each, -e:che, a. TronLlescine, teasing, 
itnportuneate, 

- —eachd, s.f.ind. Uncasincss, importu- 

nitv, ton bulenee, 

cinmhninn, sce cana‘n., 

caumbhuipniche, see cavairerch, 

feanr, a.m. Reser oir € Vessel. 8 Tw moon. 

feauna. chan, s.m. Can. 2 Cup. 3 Morh. 4 
see tean 3. 

c, a. Frottv. 2 Soft, miid. :**Kind. 

attsweeb. Gris-dhearg. e., vei v and erseety, 

cannach, -aich, s.m. * we t-wi'low. *t Dog- 
Dro 3 Ao v fragrant shinb. 

earen sidh,’ sf. Ouiic spelling of candy. 

CcanL:an, see Calal. 

tarut, sm. Lake, pucdie. 








in business on his own carntall, -e, -ean, s. f... Singing. 


tearntach a. Irrty, nasty,tlthy, miry,puddly. 
d 2 Voting far, 
axatan auction. 3 Auction. <A’ c—, pr.pt. 
of can. 


canniair,-e. -ean, sm. Chanter, singer. 


- egchd, sf. Chanting, singing, warb- 
ling. £**Melodion-n.ss. S**Sone-s.nging 4 
**Merrnvent. 5 She ancient Biehland man- 


ner of noting ciassical pipe-inusic by a con- 
bination of deunite sy.Jables, Py which 
means the various tunes could be tue mora 
easily recollected by the learner. 

Yhrough the kindness of Chas. Rarnatrre 
Esq., M.B., C.M., Salsburgh, Holy‘own, we 
are able to give here the only systematic key 
to this ancient system of notation for “e ol: 
mór” ever published. As MacLeod of Gestio, 
who published the MacCrimmons’ tures in 
canntaireachd, took them down pbonet'cclly, 
it is rather difficult to describe the systeru 
winntely. This must not be lost sight of in 
translating tunes. The complete key is 
here given. A few of the noies resemble 
one another very closely, but the changes 
used are indicated, and the pronunciativns 
are given approximately, in brackets. The 
key note, "low A” is always represented in 
this notation by in, probably a contraction 
of “an dara aon,” the seeond one, to distin g- 
uish the key note froin the first note of the 
chanter—“low G.” “High A" is aiways 4, 
but in a canntaireachd word it is eften 
denoted by a preceding 7, thus, liu, and so 
confusion is avoided. “Low A" is either in, 
en, em, or simply n after some notes. ‘lhe 
alternatives seem to have been useu for the 
sake of enphony. D note isa and B ncte 13 
a, but the qualifying effect of the grace notes 
—''hith G” represeuted by h, aud D revre- 
sented by dor h (the latter a contraction 
of [a';chorag, the finger playing D) prevects 
any confusion. The note E is represented hy 
i. At the beginning of most of the MacCrim- 
mon tunes and variations is J, which gives 
the key note. It stands for E (;oh)the domi- 
nant of the “low A” (doh.) Where it dues 
net eccur, the tune will be found to stzrt 
with a word like hien, which denotes E with 
‘high G” grace note, and then ‘low A." 
The vowel for F note isie, and it also is al- 
ways mace certain by its grace note d or k. 
“Righ G” is u, often distingui-hed by a 
preceding A. “High A" is often vi, tu dis- 
tinguish itfrom E note. When F succeeds 
“high A" in a tune, the word is often vie. 
Regarding grace notes, k, the aspirate, qual- 
ifies all notes down to ‘low A," but often 
where ha obviously means "BI" note, it rust 
be concluded that it should have been writ- 
ten cha. Similarly ho ho shouid be o cho. 
‘he letter d, is used, as is t, to denote both 
“high G” and D grace notes, but an exami- 
nation of the notation word, makes a mis- 
take unlikely, thus, dieliu means F with 
"high G” grace note, and then “high A" 
and G. Tihi meanstwo E’s played with two 
G grace notes. T andd resemble each other 
very closely in Gaelic, but the context in 
canntaireachd makes it always easy to see 
whether “high G” grace note or D ia meant. 
It is necessary to explain the compound 
grace note systems. Dr is donbling of “low 
G” by a touch of D grace note, drin is doub- 
ling of “low G” by a touch of D grace note 
ard open “low A'" and so on over the whole 
scale. The letters dr are obviously a con- 
traction of dd uair, ‘‘two times” or twice. 




















RIVA . 
KE 
KT? 
KIM 

m 

‘SMUD; 

yous ri 
sv 

b» 


D 





GALETA] 


4 
0821s X 


D 
D 
A 


WI 


"uowul y : 


jresog § 
SO . 








e 


bd 
c 
irea 
ta: 
ann 

Ca 

eachi 

€ 

tair 

ann 

C 





ce 
dee 
(t? by F RW? 
Or geg Sch ry 
: go lde ath ling o This 
lin ed, ulua b ill 
oub pen Wei dou te. ;wi 
sd WEN CO C no les a 
oo as E SI ut 0 or unes where a 
Ké, an first, om i ese es ya. e 
oe E. CS "9H tun Per 
[6 a s r ni 
z^ aad e same, a a inach sly when trar d tim 
di ü y 'pe aH he 
3 Qe y. C rd rest ir ^ à a E is v we 
ET A5 is the enrs, 'e s mi h rt. ta z 
D ake oc ay he: “hig by re rr 
wa Sa E "s type uly ae à on m kes uid onm 
S RE: "EI SE ed e GER) sha ction noe 
Sip ° mg e re o tra a y à sir 
e Es GEZ x n be The re ts "on of by a In 
COE EU on r : sa ea e ch ‘ad 
EE" E E og Ce the to bea presented “low G” 
S zu EE] Š other Where the sim} Ve, eng P with 
P 2 - Ic CS ing SC always Fep dw wA te 0, 
E? = Tc ~ ~ pe Ae eee. a ce, touched "lo C no be. 
2 E IM GE SCH a ing t in i» ra 
ER FEE ¢ dÉ ol E DESEN SE ler Zi AE € 
p eg TE dd Gr e SCH ‘that Mr esand grace 
é m ES le r. s e 0 te ; an © 
E LEX | | - s ae fo H "e tes hey 
EC : e : ion be o e 1 Ove t hey 
Q 22 St: O e SI lag) ote. rac A cen 18, T Cc. 
8 S E lüc e 5 "Ania hat lish. ra 
E Ze SEI Un AN ( rac igh Iso All t l »9 ith 
2 so E 3 = Pe = E" © "i e 3 E Lipi" trokes, aver note whi le 
E wd r^ T2 NB Ka e e wi Dn are forest they aver note , KS e 
PET = - do grace note the SC ante d 
ae BE E - ^u r ! demie n Ca 
E pP B =o : e gr te ty B t Tas ( sem ce ons cu le 
T EE a E Lo befo jatu mi- gra bye by sea e 
E p. E EIE © r S de U u or ot 
kt Ss RE St E MUT teet 
ro "ege — "e z = £ EE; " ) 1 r D Ww 
= Hp JE ER Vi VU m 
= ; m E e ha a ( bz 'ont: 1 
E d Zei SS SE e CS 
= = T3 S.B E. U sent a o n 
= 2 & ja f. ki o0 ò H eo gle res in d . D Cor lou 
zR Re S x AL CH = EG KE e op T if, ie S 
EN Se |; E e Eu otes with tes no ings je. 8. ir, elf ail 
E adi T £ Kë f rms ce Yo trip phe by d Me 
~— "E Is] E [6 ra A dr, i o te by 
Ei k sl 36 G ian E d ed 
= a 3 S = Ee 6. Galatin ve clos ind 
= os 5 E mo sen mb e re isd otes for 
E E = ie CH C pes ON the ee m ma, 
St i -|o typ ab re it. lings Gra d e for lle 
ES d ELE HN C3 ings he Met op d and ple fori 
=. 8 EI. : T bo do Gg EE, ble 
E Fe E S om en E 
Gë d Ki - t fo (e, lu E a d. 9 
B IT AME B =) ings, cte ing inc 3h le h. hre 
SE SS IS Te Gua m Ee FC of Ww. 
m By o O c GC G sist le g the DE eit ose ce n Anu 
E E er E SIS 2 o pe P run MU lable 
MM. E S de e E d ther le 1D h ch is nd lishe yl d 
E n e i-lug i-lu a a} S ‘alle 
Ss? > EREEB qu KEE, CR 
E B ER g E ER E ae Diino” i Ke? 
E PES * IE zn z Pi A d Dg E T y sui MM 
SS Dë J = oe D WAS recedes Er s opposed wi ve ig 
Gei Rc LG te s Ww s is n er e 
È e SÉ Bëss b | 
SZ : am en, sed ? no 
er ae xa ing op AES se a he be 
K MERT Oo or SE pur T 
c MA M e ~ Jo r “hi le, is sc ta re tt Ms- 
ES SIE CS Get ACHEN are ned are al io 
SS =. Je ke d xd or wh ips ame not h Th 
a a =. 5 tpm m es last, mam thi osed 
- E a - E E EG Zu e odes AS types a r SCT éi “RP 
EEF: e+ Si a The DENT Mines eler or 
a: EX |. SE played, T pos te ou the 
= ERG d S C 1 Tho cr d we. Uu T ting 
— EH ua i”? is s 1 Gr e e 
S g : = Co is lso J dati ual M eg. 
g 5 d Aë o D a to hadarni’ o beca Woptl e, 
R E ES bw = e to "he is & hgager in ipe he eg ting seve as 
£g H ^ E = iriri f fing ag bay] nt thei the e ta 
5 D. E Co tir lo is eng in fro ted id in y WÉI ` 
S Er = - ree eri ed mite at MA) ej D 
» er kn e c nt on. m 5 CU TUM d " th v 
= = er e ES: AN 1] Mo c rs insae yed t A 
SR S Ss a a f fingers en -h à it. 
Ei E E: "ER E S are are ald E. Mes p ge it 
Bd E 5 SS and SE Wer is nes ned (8 The 
@ & sg P358 A Ko an nur a tu — ble ex Bs 
d Lo? = e uen SÉ exa G, rie Tos 
: TEEF ad a D then gna 
Se Em SA N he a Ar E 
SS e c f en d, xa 
W S : ER 
B S F$ 3 E Gs 
ftro SE a = Wl 
2.5 2, e. X 
SS SES EI a 
A E ~ CG. mdo ke: = 
E SS au * 
B ot vi 
B 
e 
e 
ps 


eanntaireachd 


Z2 
p 
SS 
ats s 
AS - 
e —À & 
3 gB 
a S 
2 TY 3 
[md - 
2 8 3 4 
a g . 
9 2 BE. 
vd $ 2s 
rei $a =~ 
E e SE 
bet 
B g Pa 
" 2», d 
La E o 49$ 
5 e A9 t i- 
^ cos 33 
Ki gota = aZ 
BS SS2a 65 Es 
2 8 - © 36 
E 8. 22 
= - o lul - 3 
+ — 3 = 2.9 
: Ris et 
g EROR m 
E (ss; se 
e e Ze 2 WW 
S h SÉ 3 
o wc v3 
- Ti Ee gB’ 
= E e =A 
e ES = Ge? 
ke P CR SG ow 
E es = = - 
B 2+ 4° d 
E ca "zs = 
La eA 
Ses t1 E 
E a [» 
59 s+ d 
eg tam 
EZ o 
TES ae e 
ZEN c vd 
Dea nD 
-O CO ei 


playing of two low A'shy touching low G 
twice with the little finger is ‘“‘virin” or *'ru- 
rin." ‘The prosodie quality of the syllabies 
forming the nota?,on, together with the spa- 
cing and punetmation, give the time and 
rhythm of the tunes. Want of space for- 
bids onr followihg thi- important and fas- 
cinating subject fnrther.] 
fcanntal, v.g. el by axei on. 


jeaun-thigh, sf. Strawbery. 
Fann, -e, -ean, s./. Rule. 2 Song. 8(MM; 
Cauon. 


cànran, -ain, s.m. Contention, broil, quarrel. 
2 Grumbting, wnrmnnring, mntterinz, wrang- 
ling. 3*HRetlecting iucessantly. 4**Purring. 
5**Cackling of geese. 6**Chattering, as of a 
bird. 7* Lickering. scolding and refiecting 
incessantly. Mar a’ ghaoth ch., like the 
murmureng wind. 

cànranach, -aiche,a. Grnmbling, murmuring, 
res, 2 Cross, fretful, peevish, bicker- 
ug. 

—d, s.f. Fretfulness, contention, peev- 

ishness. 

eanranaich, pr.pt. a! canranachadh, v.n. 
tend, grumble. 

—-—, &Jf. Continual grumbling or mur- 

muring. 

cant,** s. Dirt. 

teanta, 8./. Qnince-tree, 

feantach, -aiche, a. Dirty, puddly, miry. 

cantach,** a. inging. 

foantaig, aan, tJ. Canticle, song. 


Con- 





*2 Lake. 3 Puddle. 


161 
ee 


caochlaideach 








tcantaighear, -eir, -an, 8.m. Accent. 

cantail, pr.pt. of can. 

cantair, see canntair. 

cantal, -ail, s.m. Grief, weeping, lamentatiom 

fcautaoir, -e,-ean, s.m. Press. 

Tcantlamh, see cantol. 

Cantoir,-e, -ean, see canntair. 

tcantol, s.m. S.rife. 2 Grief. 

cintuunu, -e, $n. Singing. 2 Saying, speaks 
ing. A’c—. pr.pt. of can. 

cànu chte, (for càinichte) past pt. of càinich. 


fcauur, see canach 

caob, -aoib, -an, s.m. Clod. 2 Lump, as in 
thread. 3 Nip. 4 Bite. 5 Bit. 6 Piece of 
auything cit off, as with the teeth. 7 Glebe. 
Caob sneachdaidh, @ snowball. 

——, pr.part. a’ càobadh, v.a. Clod, strike with 
clods. 2 Bite, as with the teeth, nip. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Full of clods, like à clod. 2 
Biting. 

—ailh, -aidh, s.m. Clodding. 2 Biting. A’ 
c—, pr.pt. of caob. 

feaobainn, sf. Prison. 

fcaobh, s.m. Bough, branch, twig. 

cavbhan,** -gin, s.m. Little boughfor twig. 

fcaoubhan, -ain, s.m. Prison. 

caobte, past part. of caob. Clodded. 2 Bitten, 
cut, as with the teeth, into small pieces. [see 
note at foot of p. 53.] 

caoch. caoiche, a. Empty. 2 Blind. 3 Hol- 
sow. 4 Blasted. 5 (MMcD) see cuthach. 

cacch, -oich, s.m. see cuthach. 

caochad, -aid, sf. Dliuduess. 

cacchadh, -aidh, see cacgadh. 

caochag, -aig, -an, 8.f. Nut without a kernel. 
2 Wiwpty shell. 3 The game “blind man’s 
but.” 4 Pufi-ball—iyc perdon gemmatum. 5 
** Mushroom. Frequently applied to the 
whole family of the larger fungi.] 6(AF) 
Grampnus. 7(AF)Mole, blind beast. 8(AF) 


Spiral shell-fish. 

2 —ach, a. Fullof nuts 
without kernels, 2 of turn- 
ed shells, 3 of mushrooms 
or puftballs. 4 Like a hol- 
low nut, turned shell, mush- 
room, or puff-ball. 

caochail, pr.zt. a’ caochladb, 
v.G.& n. Change,alter. 2 Ex- 
pire. [Used only of human 
beings in this sense.]  3** 
‘Travel. 4**Pass away. 
112.Caocha}(4)  ———:—ear, fut.pass. of caoch- 
ail. shali be changed. 

eace. an, -ain, pl. cacehanan, s.m. Eddy of 
air. 2 Whisky in its first process of distilla- 
tion (Scot. wash.) 8 Streamlet, purling ml. 
4 Purling noise, like the sound of worts fer- 
menting. 5(AF) Bird—Dean of Lismore. 6** 
Eddy on the surface of any liquid. 7**Mole. 
Srzlhe fundament. Tosgaid chaochain, @ 
vat or wash-tub, for fermenting worts. 

ach,it -aiche, a. Brooky. 

caoch-chuuasich, -aich, 8.11. Empty nut. 

caochlach, -aich, a. Changing, inconstant, 
variable. 

caochladh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Change, tal- 
teration. 2 Death, dying, passing away. 3 
Putrefying. 4(DU) Variety. <A’ c—, pr.pt. 
of caochail. C. tnineachais, a change of 
dweiling ` c. an t-soluis, the phases of the 
moon ` air chavelthulh dreach, in a different 
Jorm; e, sheorsachan, several kinds; ann. an 
c. aiteal, tn various places. ` 

caorblaideach, -eiche, a. haiei yari- 
able, inconstant, tickle. Uair ch., changeable 
weather ` duine c., u fickle peroon. 


2 Emptiness. 





caochlaideachd 


caochlaidezchd, s. f. ind. Inconstancy, muta- 
bility, chaugeableness, fickleness. 

caochlaich, fert.afia of caochail. 

-—each, tt -eiche, a. see caochlaideach. 

-——ich,ji v.a. Interchange. 

caochlan, -ain, pl. caochlanan [& -ain**], s.m. 
Swift rill or rivulet. 
caoch-nan-cearc, 8.31. Henbane, see gafann. 

teaod, s.an. St. John's wort, see eala bhuidhe. 

teaod, v.n. Come. 

tcaoca P adv. How? 

re i D -ain, 8. m. Infant beginning to 
walk. 

caod-aslachan-Chaluim-Chille, s.m. St. John's 
wort, see eals-bhuidhe. 

cacd-Chalnim-Chille, s.m. 

teaod e? for ciod e? 

Teaodh, s.m. Tear. 2 Gcod order, condition. 

*eaodhamhlaehd, s.f Competency, suitable- 
ness, adequateness. 

reaodhan, s.m. Person in good order or con- 
dition. 

“20g. pr.pt. a’ caogadh, v.n. Wink. 2 Connive. 
3 Take aim by shutting one eye. 4**Beckon. 

eaogach, -aiche, a. Winking. 2 Squint-eyed. 
o** blinking  4**Twinkliug. 

saogad, -zid, a. Fifty. Phill iad nan caogad- 
albh, they returned in their fifties. Tri mios- 
an cù, còig caogaid cat, three months a dog, 
Jorty-fve cays a cat—rcferring to the time 
of going with young—4the translation of this 
as "five times nine days" in N.G.P. is pure 
conjecture, the correct reading being ap- 
parsutly *'cóig A caogad,” five frum jifty, i.e. 


45—CR 
anil, -aimh,a. Fiftieth. 

cacgadh, -asdh, son. Wink, winking. 2 Con- 
nLirance,connivirg. 3 **fcckon. A’ Cc—, pr 
yi. of caug. A’ caognGah shùl na bitheam, let 
me nat wrnkri!h the eye. 

caugath, 8rd. pers. sing, d pl. imp. of caog. 
Unogadh e, let hime wink. 








see eala-bhuidhe. 





exozal,-e, sf. Winking, squinting. 
CROZAT, GD, AM. Pliakard. 


ceogluidheachd 1f s.f. see caochlaideachd. 

€.10:;-snuil, -shul, s.f. Eye that wiuks. 2 Squint- 
vye, 

cetug-shuileach, -eiche, a. 
2 Nqumi-eyed. 

caoi, (AT) see caolag. 

Toun, see caoiih. 2 Ways and means. 

eaoibean, (AC) s.m. The first five or six in- 
ches of warp nncrossed by the weft at tue be- 
ginning of the web, thrum. 

tcacich, a. Blind of an eye. 


Winking, blinking, 





t e, SI sve eaoichead., 
f——--ead, s.f. Blindness. 
caoichealachi, s.f.ind. Noisy, turbuleut, ob- 


streperous or clamorous mirth. 

caoicheil, -e, a. Mad, iusane. 2 Abounding in 
noisy merriment. 

cavideag, s.f. see cuiteag. 

caoidh. -e, s.f. Lamentation, weeping, wailing, 
mourning. 2 Lamert,wail,moan. 3**De- 
eency, A’ c—, pr.pt. of caoidh. 

caoidh, pr.pt. a’ caoidh, v.n. Lament, mourn, 
bewail, weep, wal. Cha chaoidh am prios- 
anach, the prisoner shall not mourn. 

caoidh-chómaradh, -aidh, s.m. Mournful ex- 
pressions, 2 Wailing voice. Db’fnadnich a 
c.-ch, her wailing voice ceased. 


eaoilh-chórauh, see caoidh-chomhradh. 

eaoidnecach, -eiche, a.  Mourniul, wailing, 
wecping. 

easidueadh, -idh, s.m. Mourning, wailing, 


lamenüng,deploring. A’ c—,pr.pt. of cavidh. 
Turlach a’ c.a chioinne, Turlach iaw enting Jo» 


162 


caoin 


his children. 

caoidhcag, see caoineag. 

c&oidhear,** s.m. DBemoaner. 

——an, -ain, s.m. Wailisg. 2 Low mur- 

muring sound. 3 Mournful voice. 

——anach,ff a. Mournful, plaintive. 

caoidh-ghuth, gan, Plaintive voiec. 

caoidh-ran, -àin, s.m. Moauing. 

caoidhrean, -ein, s.m. see caoirean. 

caoil, gen. sing. & n. pl. of caol. 

caoil,tt -ean, s.m. Twigs, wands. 

caolie, comp. of caol. 

-, &.f.ind. Leanness. 2 Smallness. 3 At- 
tenuation. 4 Narrowness. 5 Deartb, want 
of fodder for cattie. 6 ||Starvation. 7**Troue 
ble. 8**Destruction — $**Listemper among 
sheep and goats. l1CflW ast. Fhuair e bas 
leis a’ chaoile, he died of siarvaiion ; crodh 
leis a’ chaoile, the cattle starving for want of 
fodder. [in senses 5. 6, & 9, it is preceded by 
the article, o ch—.] 

eaoilcad, -cid, s.n. Smallness, slenderness, 
leaL.ness, 2 Lineness, as of Lncn or yarn, 
8 Progression in leanness. A’ dol an caoil- 
ead, getting leaner and leaner. 

caoilicitt pr. pt. a’ cavileachadch, v.n. Make 
slertter, attenuate. 

fcaoille, sf. Land. 

cavillean, -ein, cao Heanan, sm, Small twig 
cr osier used in wicker-work. 

caoiltean. pl oi «aol, s. 

eaoimh, a. see caomh. 

caoimh, gen. sing. m. of ccomh. 

cavituhle, comp. Or Camii. 

een, -aich, sn. see caorhach. 

acu, -eicke, a. Ei, polite, friendly. 

F athan, -ain, am. Muterfamer, 2 hose 
pitable persou. 3 belovet person. 

acuas, s.m. Society. 2 Sucial love. 8 
Hospitaiiy. 

caoinmne s.f sce caioimbneas. 
ort, be ventle, be affaule, 

eaoimhneag, sce caomhuag. 

caoitLhuesiacLd, sf, Kuwness, benevolence, 
atability. 2 Coirtcousness. 3 Agrecable- 
ress to the touca. 

caoimnnea as, -ais, s.m. see caoimhneas and 
caoiiahineaiaciud. 

caoimbneas, in, San, Kindness, mildness, 
aŭ®a2b lity. 2* Kind tura. Dean c. duvinh, 
Show kitudness (0 me. 

— ach, -aiche, a. Kind, mild, affable, 
2 Benevo.ent. 

caoimhneil, o, a. Mild, Find, courteons,e-nial, 
geuile, fayourau big, 4Z4b'e, hu ent. 2 Priead- 
lv. 3 Obtivmug. 4 Arte ccionate, Co tach 
ris a’ Chuan-an-Tar, mar ^s ercsd’ i ’s ann a’3 
cao inheile. i2 (he Western s a, the wilder 
the kirnder—this is literal!y trus, for tho more 
uusettied the sea. the inrecer are the quanti- 
ties of drift-ware ard wro ave cast asnore 3 
an samliradu cavimhictl, the genial summer; 
LUCA sell koar. 

Shiell. 


v 
caoich- gia n, -sgé th, -an, 8.7, 
Teaodinhiticacil sue, tomare. bed-fellaw lodger. 
CALI UTHER IS, iy S20 CLINE. as 
Të, bail. d. s.f. Proiecoon. 2 County. 
te:cimin sJ. isyebrignt Daut) 2 The nur 
rain, 
+- eren, ef. Cowon for cattle. 
caoin, pr. part. 2’ ep adn, v.a. & n. 
wat, deplore, 2 bewi. 3 Regret, 
chiaoin ohana, virgins shall not weep. 
,-e, 6. Kind, wild, pleasant, gentle, 
tender. 2 Pelghtful. 3 Dry, seasoned, 88 
hay. sheaf-corn, &e. 4 **Miuootli ataoutb-g 
polished. 6 ** Suft, meilw. 6** Luwiy. 

















Caoimhne 





Weep, 
Cha 





caoin 


Mar aisling ch., like a pleasant dream ; caoin- 
chnainh, a polished bone; a’ taghadh chlacha 
caoin, choosing smooth stones ` caolmn-si&n, 
a gentle shower. J 

€aoin, -e, $.f. The exterior surface of cloth, vul- 
varly called the ''right" side z Rind. 
iindness. 4 Sward. Caoin uaine, green 
sward ; bhris e caoin an leathrach, Ae broke 
the surface af the leather ` caoin is as-caoin 
an aodaich, the “right” and “wrong” sde of 
the cioth; chuir mi cavin air as-cavin, J got in- 
io a great rage. 

caoin-air-aseaoin, adv. Inside out. 

caoin-chaithlinn, s.f. Name of a star. 

caoin-cheann,} s.m. Cotton-sedge (plant, see 
canach. 

eaoin-chronachadh,$ s.m. Admonition. 

càoin-curonaich,* v.a. Admonish. 

caoine, comp. of caoin. 

dcaoiuencn,-ieh, s.m. Stubble. 2 Moss, 
coinneach. 

caoineachadh, -aidh, s.n. Drying, as of hay, 
exposure to the sun's heat for the purpose of 
drying. A’ c—, pr.part. of caoinich. , 
cavineachadh na saidhe, drying the hay. 

caolhreachag, see caoineag. 

teavineachan, ain, s.m. rolisher of stone. 

caviseachis, ai, $n. Peace, mildness, tran- 





See 


quilty. 2 sce caoimbneas. A 
€caoluea.h, -idn, sn. W Peping, crying, lamen- 
tation. 2**Waihng,howling. A’c—, pr pt. 


of caoin. 

caoineag, AC) DG. weeper] sr Naiad who 
fortelis the death of, and weeps for those 
slain in battie. 

caoinear,* s.m, Sheer indifference. 

ach,* a. Indifferent, careless. 

caoineas,** -eis, sm. Lamenting. 

¢eavileasgar, -air, s.m. Fort. z**Garrison. 

caviveis,* s.m. Taking off, gibing, jeering. 

each,* a. Indifferent, apt to gibe or 

take off. 

eachd,* s f. Assnmed indifference, fas- 
tidiousness, foolish pride. 

caoin-gheal, a. White and soft. Do chanach 
caoiu-gbeal, thy soft white mountain-auun. 

caviuicn, pr.part. a caoineachadh, v.a. Dry, 
expuse to dry, season. 2 Make sniooth. 

teavinich, gt Cotton. 

cauin-iochdach, -aiche, a. Compassionate. 

cavinleacn,** -lich, sam. Corn-stnlble. 

Ccaoin-inholadh,1T -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Blan- 
dation. 

gavin-shuarach, -aiche, <. Indifferent, careless. 

d, sti. Indifference, care- 

















lessness. 

eaointeach, -eiche, a. Sad, sorrowful, mourn- 
ful, melancho'y, Whining. Kha ’acain cavin- 
Eegen, his mont was mournful ; c. fad na h- 
oidnche, m: urnful all the niolt. 

—, -tich, gan. Mourncr, whiner. 

-—,* s.f. Female fairy or water-kelpie, 
whose particular proviuce it was to warn the 
members of her favourite clans of the up- 
proach of death, iby weeping and wailing 
opposite the kitenen-door. 

eaointeachag, see caoineag. 

caointeacu&n, $m. see caointeach, s.m. 

cavointeag, (AC) see caoincag. 

caoir, -e, -ean, 8. f. Firebrand. 2 Blaze of 
tre, tlercely burning, accompanied by noise. 
3 Rapid torrent. 4 kom witi sparks o! tire 
in it, a» 1n a stormy sea, phosphorescence. 





amm 





67t Coal.  6** Gicanis, flames, dashes. 7** 
"Ihumlerbolt. 8 (AF) see caora. tff Red- 
h.t iron. Na tonfan 'nan caoir, the waves 


lake flame ; a" choille'na caoiribh, the woud in 


163 


3 | caoi-ran, 


saol 





flames; caoir dhealan, gleams of lightning ; a’ 

mhuir 'na caoiribh geala, the sea in white 

foam; slios na b inne ‘na aon chaoir ghcal, 

the hili-side one mass of white foam \because 

the rain had so .rcreased the rivnlets.) 

see Cuollu-ràu. 

caoir-bianag, MMcD: s f. Phosphorence, gleam 
in the sea, 2 Eftulgence thrown off by decay- 
ing fish. 

csvir-chon,} Gneld«.r-rose, see céir-iccan. 

da dumm -e,.8f- Toicket of thorns or bram- 

es 

caoireach, a. Sparkling, gleaming, flashing, 
flaming. 2**Ficry, impetuous. 3 F agrant. 

cavireag, -eig, -eagan, LS. Small dry pat, 2 
Small piece of coal. 3 Small peat or piece of 
coal on fire. Cha tuit caoireag á cliabh fal- 
awh, fuel will not fall from an empty «vec, 

——— —uch, a. Full of dry peats or small pie- 
ces of coal. 2**Crumbled, like peat or coal. 

cavireall, see caireal. 

caoirean, -ein, -reanan, s. m. Plaintive song, 
plaintive sound. 2 Soft sound, purling sound. 
3 Wailing, mournfnl voice. 4** Mnrmur, 
moan 65**Cooing ofa dove. 6**Brawl. 7 
see caoireag. C. na coille, the murmur of 
the wood ; ri siur-chaoirean, making à con- 
tinual plaintive sound, wailing. 

-———-aen, a. Moaning, murmuring, gurg- 
ling, purling. 2**Brawling 

achd, s.f. Freqnent or continued mur- 
muring or meaning, purling noise. 

caoir-gheal, -ghile,a Glowing hot,bright flam- 
ing, white-hot, heated to incandescence. 2** 
Emitting sparks. 

———— —.—JQ ATI) 3. 
gale. 

caoiribh, see eaoraibh. 

caoirich, see caoraich. 

teaoirin, s.f Little sheep. 2 Little berry. 


cavirin - leana, 5. J. Marsh or 
Se 





White crest of waves ina 


dwarf valerian—zaleriana dio- 
ica. 
tea.irl, va. Beat with a club 
caoir-lasair, - asrach, -l sraich- 
ean, s.f. Flaming coal. 2 
Sparkliug flume. 
teaoirle, xan. Club. 
teasirle:chd, s.f. Tossing or driv- 
ing with clubs. 
cauirnean,-eln,-ean, s.m. Globule 






of sheep or goats’ dnng. 2ft 
Drop oi any uquid 
caoir-sholus, -nix, sm. Gleam 


ing baht. 2 Etruigence. 

eaoirtlieaeh, -eiche, a. Fiery. im- 

vtuons. 2 Sparkling, gleam- 

ing. Sruth c. bho chruaich ` -leana. 
natu beanu, a fiery stream from the brow ef 
the mountains. 

caoir-teiue, AC) 8./f. Fire sparkles, blaze of 
fire. 2 Firebraud. Tha 'n duine 'na chaoire 
dear à teine, the man is in red sparkles of fire. 

caoir-theinnutidh,** 4.7. Thunderbolt. 

fcaois, sf. Farrow pig, young pig. 2 Furrow. 

tcaviseachan, -ain, s.m. Swine-herd. 

fcaoitein, -ean, s.m. Gaelic spel ing of kitten. 

icaoithearan, -ain, see caoidhearan. 

caol, caoile, a. Small, slender. thin, lean, lank, 
attenuated, narrow. 2** hril-toned. Dh’ 
fhighinn bre-can a bhiodh caol dhnit, J 
would weave tartan for you that woud suit 
you well; ecol caol, shrill high-tone « music ;is 
caol an teud as vach seinn e, it tsa slender 
string that he cunnt take a tune from. 

caol,caoil, p/. caoiltean, s.n. [& -aoil,? Narrow 
strait, sound, firth. 2 *Narrow part of ari 


118. Caoirin- 


caor 


ver. 
Osiers. 5łtPile. Fo chaol nam marbh, under 
the pile of the dead ; &' seòladh troimh na 
caoiltean, sailing through the straits; caol 
an droma, the small of the back; caol an 
dùirn, the wrist; caol na coise, the ankle ; 
ceangail a chaoil, bind him hand and foot ` 
an taigh caol, the narrow house (grave) ; 
caol a’ chalpa, the small of the leg. ‘‘Caol 
ri caol,” a rule observed by most writers 
of Gaelic. It prescribes that the vowels 
which flank any consonant, should, if narrow 
on one side, be narrow on the other also, as: 
bua/iteach (liable) not buailtach ; oillteil, 
(shocking) not oilltail. 
dle of osiers. 

caol-abhainn,** s.f. Narrow river. 

caolach,** -aich, s.m. Wattles. 

caolach, s.f. Fairy flax. 2 Worst part of corn. 

-alfrinn, s.m. Prayer - or mass-bell. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Act of making small, 
thin, or slender. 

tcaoladh-adhbhair, enn, s.m. Less cause. 

caolag, (AF) st Cuckoo, 

-riabhaich, cubhag. 

caolaich, pr.part. a’ caolachadh, eo Make 
or grow small or slender. 2 Attenuate. 3 
Diminish, lessen. 4 Taper. Caolaichidh 
tu a chasan, thow wilt make his legs slender. 

te, past part. Made slender. 

caolan, -ain, s.m. Small gut, tripe, entrail. C. 
-cait, cat-gut. 

ach, a. Like guts, of, or belonging to a 
gut, made of guts. 2 Intestinal. 

caulas, -a18, -an, $. m. Firth. 2 Strait. 3 
**Ferry. Snànhaiche a chaolais, the swim- 
mer ofthe strait. 

caol-chasach, -aiche, a. Having small or slen- 
der legs. 2 Slim-footed. 

caol-chónihnuidh, s.f. Narrow abode, grave. 

caol-chorpach, -aiche, a. Slender-bodied. 

caol-chromadh, -aidh, s,m. Narrow curve. 
C. na gealaiche, the narrow curve of the moon. 

caol-chruth, an, s.m. Slender form. 

ach, -aiche, a. Slender-formed. 

caol-dearrsa, s.f. Name of a star. 

teaol-fail, s,f. (caol, slender+fail, spite, malice) 
Nettle, see deanntag. 

caol-fairge, s.m. Strait, firth, narrow part of 
the sea. 

caol-ghealach,** -aiche, s.f. The New Moon. 
2 The Oid Moon. A’ chaol-ghealach troimh 
neul, the new moon (seen) through a cloud. 

caol-ghleann,** -ghlinn, san. 
glen. Air astar an caol-ghleann, travelling 
in the narrow valley. 

caol-ghidireach, see caol-ghuthach. 

eaol-ehlorach, see caol-ehnthach. 

caol-zh:u:gach,** a. Thin-manede 
ghiuagach, a thin-maned horse. 

caol-ghuth,** s.m. Shrill voice. 

-—ach, -aiche, a. Shrill, having a shrill 

voice. 

caol-mhala, pl. mhalaichean, s.f. Finely-arched 
and narrow eyebrow. 

-——ch, -aiche, a. Having narrow eye- 
brows. 

¢caol-mhaor, s.m. Apparitor. 

¢cavl-mhiosachan, s.m. Purging flax. 

cu um s.m. Fairy flax, see lion na 
lius- ith. 

caol-1huingeach, Siche, a. Small or narrow 
maned. 

caol-pbeirceallach, a. Chapless. 

cxol-sh-ath, -a, -an, s.m. Narrow plain, strath, 
or valley. 

ceavl-thearnadth,(AH) s.m. Narrow escape. 








see 

















Each caol- 





164 
8**Smaller part of anything. 4(AC) bw caoimh, s.m. Friend. 2 Beloved object. 


Grinne caoil, a bun- | 


Narrow valley, | t 


caomhnadh 


Kindness, friendship, hospitality.  4** 
rarely Feast. An tog mimo shiùil ’s gun 
chaomh am fagus? shall I hoist my sails with- 
out a friend being near ? caomh mo theach, 
the hospitality of my house. 

caomh, v.a. see caomhain. 

tcaomh, s.m. The follicle or seed-vessel which 
some fruits and flowers have over them. 

caomh, -a [& caoimhe,] a. Kind, meek, gentle, 
mild, tender. 2 Dear, beloved. 311 Hand- 
some. +t4ttNoble, Labhair e gu caomh ris a’ 
ghruagaich, he spoke kindly to the damsel; cha 
chaomh leam e, J do not like him. 

Tcaomh, a. Little. 

tcaomha, s.f. Skill. 2 Knowledge. 8 Poetry, 
versification. 

caomhach, -aich, 8.m. Friend bosom friend. 2 
Associate. 8 Bed-fellow. 4**Stranger. Gun 
mhac gun ch., without son or friend. 

-——— DË -ais, s.m. Chambering, sensuality, 
dalliance. 

caombhachd,t} see caomhachdas. 

--——_—_—-—as, -ais s.m. Attection, sociality, 
kindness. 

caomhag, -aig, -an, 8.7. Mildly-tempered, kind 
female. 2 Affectionate girl. 8(DU) Form of 
sa ldressing a female. A chaomhag ! my lassie! 

caomhaich, pr.pt. a’ caomhachadh,v.a.Cherish, 
fondle. 2ttPacify, sooth. 

+caombaich, s.m. Man expert in feats of arms. 

caomhail, -e, a. see cavimkneil. 

caomhain, pr.part. a’ caomhvadh, v.a. Spare, 
protect, save. 2 Reserve.  3** Economize. 
C. gus am màireach e, save it till to-morrow; 
na c. e. donot spare it. 

caomhainn, see cacmbain. 

eaombhalach, -aiche,a. Kindly, of a mild, gen- 
tle disposition or marner. 

—— —— —— d. s.f. Kindness, affability, gentle- 
ness. 2ttMildness. Lagh na c., the law of 
kindness. 

caomhan, -ain, s.m. Noble,affable,kind, friend- 
ly man. 2 Beloved person. 3 Friend. t4 
Nobleman. A chaomhainu ! my dear sir! 

-——_——a ch, -aich, s.m. Friend, companion. 

ach, -aiche, a. Mild, merciful, benevo- 








lent. 
tach, -a:che, a. Saving, frugal, eco- 
nomical. 2**Protecting. 3* Stingy. 
tachd, s.f.ind. Frngality, economy. 
2 Parsimony, saving disposition. 
*caomhchladh, see caochladh. 
--—ach, see caochlaideach. 
caomh-chridhe, -eachan, s.n, Tener or affec- 
tionate heart. 
—_—- ach, a. Tender-hearted, kind, 
affectionate. 
caomh-chruth, s.m. Slender form or person, as 
of a female. 














ach, -aiche, a. Slenderly formed, 

fcaon:hdha, 8.1. Poetry, yersification.% 

caomh-ghradh, -ghràidh, s. m. Tender mercy, 
compassionate kindness. 

c&omh-lasair, -lasrach, -lasraichean, $.f. Pleas- 


ing flame. 

caomb-leus, -eóis,'s.f. Pleasant blaze. 

+caumhna, see caomhan. 

cacui:nach, -a'ch,s.m. Friend. 2 Feeder. 

— aiche, see caomhantach. 

caomhnadh, -aidh, 8.1m. Economy, saving. spar- 
ing, parsimony, frugality. 2* Reserving. 
£**rarely Protection. <A’ c—, pr. part. of 
caomhain. Dean e, spare: c. math air a’ 

heagan Beurla agus a’ Ghalltachd gu léir 

romhainn ! use vour little English sparingly 
with the whole of the Lowlands before us ! 





caomhnan 165 


tc ombnam, v.a. I spare, save, reserve. 

¢eacihnasgar, sm. Defence. 

cuomh-strath, -a, -An, 8.m. Pleasant valley. 

cawuhuinn, see caomhain. 

¢caon, caoin, s.m. Resenblance. 

tfcaon. v.c. Resemble. 2 Refer. 

son. SS v.g. Conceal. 

¢cavvaran, -ain, see aonaran, 

eaou-biuidhe, sf. Gratitude. — 

tenon alùrachd, s.m. Leve, devotion. | 

cacnn.v, “aig, an, sf. Fight, skirmish, fray, 
squabble. 2°* Boxing match. o**Next of 
wild bees. Daoine nach t mnn caounag, men 
who fovght not ` dheanadh thu caonrag ri q’ 
dhà lurrainn, you would quarrel with your 
oun fico shins. 

eaoanagach, -aiche, e. Fond of fighting or 
boxiug. 2 Riotous, quarrelsome. 

taonta, a. Private. 

caunutach, -aiche, a. see cacmhantach. 

—d, see caomliantachid. 

caer, gen. caoire, dat. caoir, pl. caoran, see 
caoir. 

e»or. -a [& caoir**], -an, s,/ The berry of the 
mwan or mountain ash. 2(AC) Ar y red ber- 
ries, or red bodies of a globular furm. 3 see 
CAU. 

eaura, s.f. irreg. Sheep. 2 (in derision Sheepish 
person. Declineathus:— 
Aum. Sing. caora, pl. caoraich. 





Gen. caorach {caoire}} 

cacir,**] caorach. 
Dat. caora, cacia.th. 
Foc. a chaora 1 a chrorsich ! 


Am bun nan cacrach, looking after ihe sheep ; 
© chro pan caorach, from the sheep-tolu. 
NAMES OF SHEEP AT DIFFERENT AGES :-— 
G.is for Gaelic name ; S. for Ene. naire in 
Scotland ; E. for Eng. namein Erglaud.] 
MALE & FEMALE before weaning -— 

G. uan. (s.m. —never &,f.)5 & E lem 
uan firionn, a male lamb ` uan boirionn, 
a female lamb. 

FEMALE, after weaning till Ist shearing : 

G. òthaisg. Ciora, uan—Lewis. 2 (I? it had 
a lamb), fiar-othaisg, a crooked hogg. 
the lamb being called, uan va Dat: 
òthaisg. Jf small or inferior, òthaisg 
iscallad, seot. Sé E. ewe-teg, ewe-houg. 

after 1st shearing : 

G. caora bhliadhnach. Tiaraineach, óthaisg 
bhoirionn— Lewis. 2 (If with lamb, 
othaisg, the lamb being caled. uan 
othaisge. S. gimmer,E.gimmer, theave. 

after 1st. shearing, if not put to ram :— 

G. Dionag. 

after 2nd shearing, if with lamh :— 
G. caora uain. Da bhliadtinach—Lewis. S. 
twinter ; E. two-shear ewe. 
after 2nd shearing, if not with lamb :— 
G. caora sheisg, S. barren twinter; E. two- 
shear ewe. 
after 2nd shearing, if not put to ram :— 

G. Dà bhliadhnach seasg. Caora-chiatain, 
(MMcD)— Lewis. S. eild qimaner ; E. 
two-shear ewe. 

after 3:d shearing :— 

G. Tri bbliadhbnach. In Lewis if barren, crog- 
ais ; if with lamb, ccora vain. S, win- 
ter ewe ` E. three-shear ewe. 

after hth shearing :— 

G. crog, Al s. aged ewe, three winter ewe. 

when crasing to give milk :— 

G. caora *Feasg, S. veld «ce. 

when taken [rom the breeding flock, regard- 
less of aye :— 


G. crog, AH) S. draft ewe. 














caora 


when taken from the breeding flock as unfit to 
breed from :— 

G. Gro, S. draft gimmer. 

MALE (not castrate.) 
from weaning till first shearing :— 
G. uan reithe, S. wp-hogg ; E. hogg, hogget, 
hoggerel, tup teg. 
after 1st shea inj :— 

G. reithe, bliadhnach reithe. Aona bhliadh- 
nach reithe, — Lorn. Tiaraineach, tiar- 
aineach raid, MMcD)—Lewis. S. dimm- 
mont tup; E shearling, dimmnont tup, 
one shear tup. 

after 2nd shearing :— 

G. dà bhhadhnach reithe. 
rüid,— Lewis. 
shear ram, 

after 3rd shearing :— 

G. Tri bhliadhnach reithe, seann reithe’ AH.) 
Rud, seanniud.— Lewis. S. aged tup ; 
E. three shear ram. 

after Lth shearing :— 

G. Seann reithe, ceithir bhliadhnach reithe. 
Ceithir bhliadhnach rùid, seann rüd— 
— Lewis. E. Jour shear ram. 

MALE (castrated. \ 
from weaning till first shearing :— 

G. Uan firionn, uan spothta— Lewis. Othaisg 
fhirionn, (s.f.)—L rn. S. heteg, wether 
hogy: E. wether teg. 

after Prst shearing :—, 

G. B.ixdlhnach mult, Othaisg fhirionn, tiar- 
aincach mult— Lewis. Còig ràitheach 
mult, JM)—Skye. Sé ràitheach muilt, 
(spelt according to local pronunciation) 
bliadhnach muilt, (rt. yearling of a 
wether—DM) after Ist. Hallowe'en O.S. 
—Lorn. S. dimmont; E. shear hogy, 
wether hogg. 

after 2nd shearing :— 

G. mult,— Lorn. Da bhliadhnach mult— 
Lewis, S. two shear wether; E. two 
toot wether. 

after 8rd shearing :— 

G. Tri bhliadhnach mult— Lewis. S. wether; 
E. three tooth wether. 

after Lth shearing :— 

G. ceithir thliadhnach mult— Lewis. 
tooth wether. 

Sheep are often described in LORN as :— 
Aona bhliadhnach caoire, one yearlin' of a 
sheep ; dà bhliadhnach caoire, two yearliny 
of a sheep, &c. 

In Lewis. attcr 8rd. shearing, the females 
are genera ly Lames according to the nuni- 
ber of times they have lambed, till the 7th. 
or Sth. lamb, wheu the, are called seann 
chacra, and are taken away to be killed. 
The castrated male after 4th. shcaring, is 
called ect. hir bhliadhnach ainult to seacha or 
ochd bitiachnach mult, when they become 
useless for woo! &c. In Ness, and neis - 
bourhood, the uncastrated male is callec 
Hee after 2nd. shearing for the rest of ics 

ife. 

In PERTHSHIRE the following are the most 
usual names :— Uan boirionn, uan firionn, 
uan reithe, til Nov. 11 then òthaisg bhoir- 
ionn, òthaisg fhiric nn, othairg reithe, then 
bliadhnach muit, dìonag, re the. Ath-dio- 
nag. 3-year old; cama ceithir bhitadhnach, 
L-year old; crog. cart ewe, sé raithexch, six- 
quarter oid cimmer; deat, unshorn year-uld 
sheep or wether. 

OTHER NaMES:— 
caora bhainne, milk ewe. 
cavra bheannach, 4-horned sheep of Uist & 


Da bhliadhnacii 
S. two shear tup; E. two 


E four 


caora 166 cap-dheudach 


St. Kilda. of peat. 5 Ember. 
caora bhrogach,(MMcD) Speckled or spotted | caora mhaol bhan,(AH) s.f. (lit. white Cheviot 
akap. sheep) Skittish, timid, poor-spirited person, 
caora càraid, sheep with twins. milk-sop. 
caora cheaslach, coarse woolled sheep. caoran, n. pl. of caor, 


caora cheannan (ceaun-fhionn) white-faced | Caorann, see caorunn. 
sheep. caora-staoin, for caor-aitinn, see aitionn. 
caora chileach, piebald or speckled sheep.— | caor-bheirteach, a. Producing berries, rich in 
Lewis. berries. 





caora dhubh, black sheep. ceaor-chon,? ag Dogberry— 
caora dhubh-cheannach, black-faced or} viburnum opulus. 2 Guel- 
Highland sheep. der rose. 3 Water elder. 
caora gheal, (AH) white sheep, in contra- caor-dhromain, see caora- 
distinction to the smeared or dipped | dhroinain, 
members of a flock. caor-feannaig, see lus-na- 
caora mhaol, (dit. hornless) Cheviot sheep. feannaig. 
caora mholach, heavy feeced sheep. caor-;heal,**.ee caoir-gheal. 
caora Nollaig, fat sheep for butcher at Xmas. | tcaor-lann, s.m. Sheep-fold. 
caora reamhar, fat sheep for butcher. canrnag, -aige.  8.f. Wild 
caora Shasunnach, English sheep. hive. 2 see caonnag. 
caora sheasg, a yeld sheep. caor-thalmhninn, see caor- 
caora uain, a breeding sheep. unn-thalinhuinn. 
ceireag, see ciora. caor-theine, see caoir- 
ceireagan, see ciora. Crd nan ceireagan, theine. 
(from old port-a-beul.) e&or-theinntidh,**see caoir- 
ciora, pet ewe-hogg or sheep. theinntidh. 115. Caor-chon. 
cireag, see ciora. caorthuinn, for caoruinn. 2 Sometimes used 
ciridh, see ciora. for the nom. caorunn. 
crog, (AH) cast ewe, age depending on breed | c&orunn, -ninn, pl. -uinn & -uinnean, 8. m. 
and kind of pasture. Mountain-ash or rowan tree. 2 ::Wood of 
crog,t+ sheep past bearing, the mountain-ash tree, [lhe berry is call- 
deata, year-o/d unshorn ewe hogg. ed caor, and the tree caorunn. In Gairloch, 
dìonag, do, after first shearing. 2tt| de, caorunn is the berry, and craobh-chavur- 
2-year old sheep or goat. uinn is the tree—DU.] 
feirmize, ram with one of its testicles want- | caorunn-cao eh, -uinn-, pl. -uinn- & -ean-, s.m. 
ing.— Lewis. j Species of cranberry supposed to be puisonous. 
leth uan, twin lamb. caoruun-tahuhuinn, 8m. Earth mut. 2 Will 
reige, ridgling. strawberry. 
rige, ram oniy partly castrated,— Lewis. caoth,** s.m. Shower. 
reithe studhach, see rùda studhach. caothach,|j -aich, see cuthach. 
rü.àu, -ain, -an, little ram, ridgling eaothach-nau-cearc, 8. ilenbano, see eafann. 
rida studhach, ram with short tail.— Lewis. | caothail(AF) sf. lit. waiier) Long-tailed duck, 
sazart— Lewis, see feirmige. see eun-:.nenainn. 
sdxan, pet lamb. | feaothruadh, sf. Mildew. 
feaora fer caoran) Bunches of berries. 2 Grapes | fcap, -a, s.m. Rr. 9 rarely Cart. 3 Tumbrel, 
caora-Dada-miann,} sf. Stone-bramb!e—rubus| 4 Mouth. 5 Old person. 
sarat lig. cana, pl. -chan, sm. Cav. 2 Top. 
cavra-beanach, (AF) see under caora. tcapaireadh, s.m. Capering, cuti iag capers. 
caora-bheanan, for cacra-bheanavh. capalan-a -chinn-whdir, 8.2. Kind of fish. 
eaorach, ven. sing. & gen. pl. of caora. capall, see capull. 
caorachd,** s.f. stock of sheep. 2 Sheep. 3/tcapan, -ain, s.m. Littlecup. 
Cattle. 4 Sheepishness, capar, -air, -airean, s.m. Caper, kind of pickle, 
caora-diromain, st, Elder berry. tcapat,** at, s.m. Head. 


caora-feannaig, -aig, -au, 8J. Crowberry, see|cap-dheudach, -aicue, a. see cab-dheudach, 
lus-na-feannaig. 

caora-feullain,*® sf. Ivy berry. 

caora-fialbag, see ca ra-feannaig. 


caora-titiieh,tfT see lus-na- e 
feann1 z. Zu i 
caorag,** -aig, An. 8. f. VÀ A 
Smail dry peat, dry clod WA o p 


or turf. NC 
e&ourag-leana,S s. f. ( lit. i Yä 
marsh spark) Ragged- 
robin, see currachd-na- 
cubhaig. 
eaoraibh, dat.pl. of caora. 
caoraich, n. & dat. pl. of 
caora. 
caora-mhadaidh, see caor- 
chon. ; 
c&oran, -ain,-an, s.m. Third V 
or botton row of peat = 
cut from a bank withthe 114. Caora-bada- 
*toirsgian"—ZLewis (M. miann, 
MeD.) 2 Dry clod. 3(DU) Sall shoal or 
school of fish, as haddock, Ze, 4 Fragment 116. Capull-coille, 





capar-c wile 


c»par-coi'le, see capni!-coille. ] : 

tsa. -foia D, -fhinich. s.m. Comman«der-in-chief. 

c vpull, -uilt, gan. Mare. 2 in some paves Morse. 
3 Colt. [Forineréy horse broken to the bit. | 


c»Duil-abhainn. x4. Hippopotamus. 
capull-coille, -uili-, s.m. “Capercaillie, great 


cock of the wood—tetrao urvyalius. (iilust. 
en p. 166.) : 

c. oull-lia, -uill-in, s.m. Lirt-heetle. 

car, Crire, a. Ist comp. cara, Friendly. 2 Rela- 
td to. 

Ca‘, -àr, s.m. Friend. 2 Relation. 3 *Mossy 
plan, fen, Mar chanach càr, like the moss 
cotton ; gu'n cluinn mi mo chara, that 1 may 
hear mu iri-n ; bi'nad chara do n righ, be 
an ally tothe kina. 

cgs, prep. During, for, whilst, near about, in 

“ference to time. Car tiota. for a moment ; 
ear oidnche, for the space of a might ; car 
uzir, for a time, soinetiines ; car mìosa, for a 
month: car yrs, Jor a while; car ùine bhig, 
for a litt'e whit. 

Car, cuir, a.m ‘Twist, bend, turn. 2 Winding, 
meanderiis,asof a stream. 3 Trick, fraud. 
4 Way, course. 5 Barof music. 6 Motion, 
movement. 7 Revolution. & Case, in gram- 
mar. 9*Stving of beals, vearls, &c. 10 Cun- 
tact, Deighbouriwel, 11 Direction. 12 Une, 
13 Circular moticn. 14**Care. 15j;iPlait, fo! d. 
Anc. à bis hoas 'san t-sean mhaide, is dio- 
cair a thoirt as, tt tx tan »os-ihle to straighten 
th» twist that is in the old stic ; gach car a 
tu’ ann is claws, all his wiles and tricks ;thrg 
e an car asam, Ae cheated me ; car a’ mhuil- 
tein, a samersauii ; thug thu mo char is mo 
leth-char asau, you have cheated me in ear- 
nest, to all intents and purposes ; na cuir car 
dheth,do not overturn it; yuu aon char a chnir 

' dneth, without moving it; car chneap, a string 
of beads; car neanihauidean, @ string of pearls; 

» thoir an car as, creat Aim; thoir car mu'n 

, cuairt, take a turn round; tha car eile an 

. adharc an daimh, there is another bend in the 

| block's horn; car eil’ air ruidhl a’ bhodaich, 

, Qnother turn in the old man’s reel—this say- 

* ing, and the one before it are often used when 
anything unexpeczel happezs ; théid sian an 

. Car seo, we wiil g9 this way; car an aghaidh 

| Cuir, twist against turn, diamond cut diamond; 
gille nan car, an arifud dodyer; cha robh car 
ach car gu call, everytriny that was done made 
matters worse; a’ cur nan car dheth, davcing, 
very busy; cha robt car air an t-sangnal a 
b'fhearr leam seach &., there was nothing in 
the world I was so fond of «s de, 

fear, s.m. Cart, car, raft for carrying things on, 
2 see carr. 

¢car, $.m. Care. 2 Jaw. 3 Fish. 4 Stone. 5” 
Scab, mange, itch. 6**Chariot. 

tcar, a. Brittle. 

car,** a. see carach. 

cara, @., comp. of car, akin. Bu chara dhuit t' 
obair a dheanamh, it would better Lecume you 
to do your work.—J.G.M. 

¢cara, s.m. (ceathramh) Leg, haunch, 2 Jaw, 
hog's creek. 

càra, for car, friend. 

carach, -aiche, a. Cunning, sly, wily, tricking, 
deceiviug. 2 Meanderinz, whir'r g, circling, 
winding, torring. 3 Changeable, uns.uble. 
4 Acute, 5**3ee cArracü. 
c., this world is deceitful ; fear c., a d csctfedl 
person ; Cloc. risa iinad wl rudi, «x atten 
Qs the fox ; am measg osnn'eh ch., amd the 
circling brezze; Ain feara D oiturea €, "sa bliaile 
Bed, bitb^l. ea "ni Damda nd trab, Ge hat 


--- 


à 


ts tricky in this town will be tricky over there | cázaian, -aimh, 


167 


Tna ^n «orba: senl 








càramh 





too. 

carachadh, -aidh, s.m. Moving,stirring,motion, 
moyement. A’c—, pr.pt. of caraica. Car- 
achadh céille, insanity ; oiteaga’ c. an duil- 
lich, a hreeze stirring the leaves. 

càrachadh,** -aidh, s.m. Act of burying. 

Cargcuail, ff -e, a. Motory. 

caracnair,™* s.m. Motor, mover. 

carachd, s.f.ind. Wrestling. 2 Sparring. 3 De- 
ceiinuness. 4 see carachadh. C. an t-sacghe 
ail seo, the deceitfulness of this world. 

carachdach, -aiche, a. Athletic. % Of, or be 
longing to wrestling. 

caracháaich, -e, s.f. Wrestling. 

tearach-ullainh, s.m. Upper garment. 

caracin,| see cairgein. 

tvaradach, see cairdeach. 

càradh, -aidh. s.m. Mending, repairing, ade 
justing. 2 Usage or treatment, whether yood 
or bad. 3 Condition, 4 Cheatimye, deceiving. 
5**Way, course, direction, 6**Abuse. 7** 
Turn, ,winding,twist. Fear-caradh a’ bhoun, 
the repairer of the breach ; is truagh mo char- 
adh, sad is my condition ; is don’ an caradh 
a dh'fnàg thu air, you have loft him in a sad 
condition ; an duine a’s miosa càradh, the 
man of worst condition. A’ c—. pr.pt oi càr- 
aich, 2 pr.pt. of càir. “Making”, as of a 
bed. Tha i’caradh na leapa, she is '*mak- 
ing" or shaking up the bed. 

caraibh, (dat. pl. of car) An caraibh a chéile, 
in contact, im grips ; aom 'nau caraibu, bend 
in their direction ; an caraibh a bhroclairn, 
in tle direction of his den ; gach uia thig 'ad 
charaivh, everyihing that comes near you ; au 
caraibh a chéile, in contact with each oiher. 

caraiveach,** -eiche, a. Hairy. 2 Eager, keen. 

crriceag.** eis, -an, s.f. Pancake. 

caraich, pr. part. a’ carachadh & a’ carachd- 
ainu, v.a. Move, stir. 2 Remove. 3 see car. 
Na c, e, do not move it ; cha ch. thu as a sso, 
you shall not move out of this; ch. iad, they 
moved; mar a charaicheas iolair a nead, as 
an eagle stirreth up her nest. 

e, @., comp. of carach. 

e, -an, s.m. Wrestler. 2 Tumbler. 3 
Sharper. 4**Pugilist. 

— ———te, past part. of caraich. 

caraid, dat. caraid, pl. càirdeaa, s. m. Mala 
friend or reiation. 2**Cuusin. Mo dheadh 
charaid, my dear friend; caraid, mac piuthar 
athar, cousin, Lie son of a father’s sister. 

càraid, -e, -ean, 38. f. Pair, couple, brace. 2 
Twins. 3 Married conple. 4¢+Defence. "Na, 
càraidibh, two by two; càraid each, a pew } 
horses; càraid-rann, a covplet ; càraid aa 
maoislich, roes that are twins. 

each, a. Paired. 2 In couples or braces. 

tearaidheach, a. Wrestling. 2 Of, or belong- 
ing to wrestling. 3 Debating. 

d, s.f. ind, Debate, 
Wrangling, wrestling. 

cáraidich, pr.part. a’ caraideachadh, v.a. Cou- 
ple. join together in couples or pairs. 

caraint-can-Gaidiieal, (AF) sm. Gannet (bird) 
see tabhs. 

fearaigh, see caraich. 

car-aingeal, -eil (& -gil,] z/.-glean [& -gle]s.m, 
Guardian angel. 

caraianean, wäi, Refuse of threshed barley, 3 

cir air char, adv. see ear mu char. 

caraist, s.f. fCuütechiun. 2** seo cairbhist. 

Coralie. see ewicohist.? 

t- ach, -eich, s.m. Carrier. 

Cardi ve -Aisz, St, Contes. 2 Confusion. 

Caraciieaia, see carmi-nreriie. 

see ca.alh, 

















dispute. 2 





caramh 


caramh, adv. see carai bh, 
cara-mhil-a' choin,} s. Common tormentil, see 
braonan-fraoich. 
cara-mhill, s. Mandrake. 
car-a’-nhuiltein, s.m. Somersanit, 
tcaran, -ain, s.m. Crown cf the nead. 
caran,(CR) s.m. Beloved person, dariing.(dim. 
of càr, friend, relation.) 
caran-creige, s.f. Sand eel, conger eel. 2(AT" 
Shrimp, prawn. 3 AF sticxleoguck. 4 Ouly 
appliel to the shoemaker Dan in Lochalsh, 
Western Isles &c., aud nov to the conger-eel. 
carantach, a. see carthannach. 
d, sf. see carthannachd. 
carantas, -al«, s.m. see cartnanns. 
carannich, v.a. Separate. 2 Stir np. 
Tearas, -ais, s.m. First-rate ship. 
carasan, -ain, s.m. Hawking. 
aich, 8. 25 
¢carb, cairbe, -au, 8. f. Basket. 
(cairb.) &**Plauk. 4**Shir. 
carbad, -aid, -&n, a.m. Chariot, coach, chaise. 
2 Waevou. 3 Litter. 4 Bier. 5 Any pleasure 
vehicle. 6 The jaw, upper or lower. 7 Jaw 
oí à queru. Araon e agus inarc-shiua h, 
both chariot? and horseman; bagil am ba.ach 
air a’ charbad, agus buail am balgair air au 
t-sròin, stik» the clown on the jar and the dog 
on the nose; c gaidh, a wa-ckaríiot ; fiacal 
carbaid, jaw- or eho»&-tooth ; e. uachdar, the 
unner jaw; c. locndar, the lower jaw; c. màl- 
aidh, a mail each dt 
carbadacb,*t -aiche, a. Jawed. 
- d,1i s.f. Aurigation. 
8. m. Charioteer, .driver, 








2 Chariot, 








carbadair, -ean, 
coachman., 

—eachd, sf. Business of a charioteer 

or eoachnuian. 

carbul-farraidh, sm. Fly. 

carbad-smuide,*s.m. Railway carriage. 

c4 bair, see corb.ur. 

¢earbal, $.m. Eoof ofthe mouth. 

¢earban, -ain, son. Unincky person, 

carb wach. -aich, see carbhanach. 

c r beag, adv. Rather little. 

tcurbh, -airbh, s.f. see cairb. 2: AF) Carp (fish.) 

carba,* v.a. Gaetic spelling of ca ve. 

carbhaidh, s.f. Caraway— aye 


tearm carui. 
*» AS 
d WAE 
U M 
MA s 
ES CA 





carehaig, see carbh. 

ca: buainn, see carohiaidh. 

carbnair, -ean, s.m. Gaelic 
spelling of carver. 2 En- 
graver, sculptor. 

————eachi!, s.f. Carving, 
occupation ofa carver. 2 





EE 8 Mangling, d 
niucilating. 4 Massacriug. 3o 4 
earhhiist, s. J. Heriot. S Eh AE 
** Drubbing. Vi UR a 
carbbhan,** -ain, -Anan,s.7n. A v f 
Little ship. 2 Carp. 
acn,s.m.Sea bream. 117. Carbhaidh. 


2ttCarp. 

tear. hanach. -aich, s.m. Master of a ship. 

Ga. b..anaeh-uisge, s. m. Carp,—eyprinus ear- 
pio. (illust. 118.) 2 (AF) Fresb-w iter bres n. 

+Ca-bhas, -ais, s.m. Lent, see Carghus. 2 In- 
ten perance. 

fc-bhodach, -aich, $m. Clown. 

car-ohriathar,** s.n. Autipnrasis, 

ear-bhriathraca,** a. Antiphrastic. 

t-arbair, e, an, 8m. Coachman. 

carbancul, -nil, s.n. see carinhozal. 

t are, cane, s.m. Caro, Anxistv. 

cure, AC) v.a. Put in a cell, Cha charear mi, 
i sha.l not be put in a cei. 


9 Sailor. 


168 


car mu char 


Prison. 2 Coffer. 8 


circoir, -e, -ean, s. mM. 
Sink or sewer in a byre. 

carcais, -e, -ean, see cairbh. 

carcilsench, -sich, San. Carcase, see cairbh. 

carcir,** see carcuir. 

teurcnaill, v.a. Destroy. 2 Abuse. 


-U187e. 


118. Carbhanach 





car-chni!eac,A/ AF) s.f. Humming or singing fly. 

càrd, -a [& càird], -an, s f. Wool-card. 2 Eng- 
H-h gallon or four Scots pints. 3 see cart. 

càrd, pr.part. a’ càrdadh, v.a. Card wool, cot- 
tou or fiax. 

cirdvih, -ailh, s.m. Process or act of carding 
wool de, 

teardaigh, s.f. Flesh. 

card.ur, sem Carder or teazer of wool &c. 

eaciil, sf. E:nployment of a carder or 
comber. Ris a’ ch., at the wool-combing trade. 

cirl-«ich,* s.m. Currycomb. 

cw fada. adv. Rather long 

car-fuacal. -ail, pl. -fhacian [& -ail],s.m. 
ble, prevarication. 2 Antiphrasis. 3 
ble entendre. 4 Pun. 

car-fhaclach, a. Quibbling. 
3 Antiphrastic. 
prevaricate or pun. 

car-fh«4claiche, s.m. Quibbler. 2 Prevaricator. 
3 Punster. 

targair, v.n. Congratulate. 

Carghus, -nis, sm. Lent [Preceded by the ar- 
tice on l 2t Torment. An deireadh a’ 
Charghuis, at the end of Lent. 

Carghusach. a. Lenten, quadl*agesimal, 

*earia, -ai. carlan, s.m. Wool-card. 

tearlach, -aich, s.m. Cart-load. 

t- an, ain, 8.m. Carder or comber of 
wool. 

càriag, -aig, -an, s.% Lock or tuft of wool. 

carlag (AF) sf. Black guilleniot, see callcag. 

caslasach, a. Like a tuft of wool. 2 Oi tufts 
of wool. 

f'arlair, -ean, s.m. Carder. 

tear'amh, a. Excellent. 

carvlas, -ais, sm. Exc llence. 

carm&sg. see carainasg. 

eirmh wach, see carbhanach. 

tearmhogal, sam. Carbuncle (stone.) 

f ————-—ach,** a. Carbuncurvar. 

car mu char, adv. Round and round. 2 Over 





uib- 
Qu- 


| 2 Prevaricating. 
4 Disposed to quibble, 





ear mu enar 


Currardeaci 


geg — 
and over. Thuit e car mu char leis a’ bhruth- | càrnag, -aig, -an, sf. Sand-eel found unter 


aich, he fell down the slope, turning over and 
over. , , 

Tcarn, cairn, s.m. Quern, handmill for grind- 
ing corn. 

fcà-n. carna, s.f. Flesh. 2 Booty. 

‘earn, cairn [& cùirn]. s.m. Cairn, heap or pile 
of stoues loosely thrown toge:her. 2 Peat- 
barrow. 8 Rock. 4 Sledge, car. [Cairns 
and barrows are very numerous in the High- 
lands, Ireland and Wales, as well as parts 
of Norway, Sweden, and other Continental 
«countries, and there are a few in America. 
Some of them measure 300 ft. in cir.untfer- 
euce at the base and 20 ft. in height. They 
«consist of loose stones, and the whole is in 
the shape of @ cone. In many instances 
where they have been opened, they contain- 
ed sepulchral urns, which show that they 
were memorials of the dead, Many of these 
piles consist entirely of earth, and this gave 
vise to the opinion that ston: cairns were in: 
tended ior malefactors, while those of earth 
wero for the victorieus and brave. We learn 
from ancient authors that inalefactors were 
‘buried under heaps of stone, and it wasa com- 
mon practice amoug the Druids to erect 
cairns on spots where criminals had been 
burnt. Hence ‘‘fear air chàrn" means an 
outlaw, “tha e air a chàrn,” he isan outlaw. 
Is oil leam nach robh do luath fo chàrn, / 
«do wish your ashes under a cairn; bh fhearr 
kam a bhi fo chàrn, [ ^ad rather be undra 
«airn, (i.e. be punished .- an outlaw.) The 
‘ceremony in later times was continned in 
the Highlands, but its meaning was altered. 
A sudden death was bhs gun ca jart, and the 
dead person's sonl was believed to be iu the 
"hottest part of purgatory, so every passer by 
was expected to puta stoue on the cairn and 
to pray for the repose of the soul of tae de- 
parted —hence the saying ‘‘cuirsdh mi clach 

nad chara,” Z will add a atone to your 
cairn, which betokens a friendly iutention 
‘and ineans that one's remeinurance shall 
fbe kept alive. When the remains of anyone 
were carried a long distan:e for interment, 
ani the bearers had to take some rest on the 
may, & cairn was put up there also, and those 
^"ho passed by were expected of their charity 
to puta store on it, and pray for the soul of 
the deceased. Cairns are still frequently 
erected to mark the spot in which a funeral 
has rested, and on whatever spot & person 
is found dead, a few stones are immediately 
ut together.—**] 
ioinall nan caru. from the edge of the rocks. 

«Arn, cairn [€ cùirn), sm Horning. (The 
Gaelic seeins a confusion between corr horn, 
Eug. horn, put to the horn, and cårn—}] 

Zeg n, sm. Province. 

earn, pr.part. a’ càrnadh, v.a. Heap, pile, ac- 
euraulate, throw together. A’ carnadh air- 
gid, accumu-ating wealth ; chàrnadh le Daor- 
gnlas an t-seilg, oe g was piled up by D: 
Se chara e airgiod, though he accumulate 
silver, 

earnabhan,(AF) s.m. Beetle. also ceardabhan. 

carnach, -aich, s.m. Heathen priest. 2 Stony 
ground. 8 Quarry. [Used as the names of 
E places having & stony or rocky situa- 

ion. 





,** -aiche,, a. Rocky, stony. 2 Like 
& cairn, aboundingin cairns. 3 Shelvy. 

eàrnadh, -aidh, sm. Heaping, piling up, ac- 
nce 2**Riddance. A’ c—, pr. part. 
ef carn. 


stones on sea shore, 2 Conger-eel— Locha/sh. 
8. AF) She-terrier. 

càrnaid, s f. ind. Carnation. 9 Cochineal. $ 
*Flesh-colour. 4 Certain tint of red, much 
used in the Highlands. 

———-ich,* v.a. Incarnatine. 

tcarnal, -ail, e.f. Mole or small heap of stones, 

carnan, AF) s.m. Cockroach. (cearnan) 

càrnan, -ain, -an, s. m. Little cairn. 2 Any 

2 Inhabitante 


small heap of stones. 
aich, s.pl. Highlanders. 
of any rocky or mountainous countrys 
càrnan caochaig, see càrnan-caochain. 
càrnan-caochain, s.m. Mole-hill. 
càrn-aolaicn,** s m. Dunghill. 
càrn-cuimhne, s.m. Monument. 
carn-eaglais, s.m. Excommnnication. 
car-neamhnuidean, s.m. String of pearls. 
caro-slaodaidh,* s.m. Hurdle, drag, sledge. 
càrn-sl]laoid,* see càrn-sl«odaidh. 
carnta, a. & past part. of carn. Heaped, piled 
up, accumulated. 
carr, carra, 8.f. Itch, mange. 
ous roughness on the skin. 
tatoes. 4 Rocky shelf, projecting part ofa 
rock. 5 Scald. 6* Scurvy. 7* Leprosy. Së 
Dray, chariot, slelge. 9 Flesh of a whale or 
seal—H+)h ides. 104 Scabbiness. 11 Bran. 
19( AC) Flesh, coarse tiesh. 
Duine aig am bheil e, a man that has the 
scurvy ` plàigh na càrra, the plague of lenrosyz 
each anns a’ charr, œ horse in the dray or 
sledge; o chàrr monaidh, from a mountain 
TOC 
carr,** càirr, s.m. Boz, fen, morass, moss. 2 
Spear. 3 AC) Udder. 4 (AC) Shingle on 
mountain tops. Mar chanach carr, like the 
muss en fon, 
tca.ra, pl. -chan, s.m. see carragh. 
carrach, -aiche, a. Itchy, mangy, scorbutic. 
2 stony, rocky. 3 Of uneven surface. 4 Cross 
tempered. 5 Crustaceous, as potatoes. 6*9 
Curvated. 
carr.chhs,-an, 8.2. Shell-fish that grows on 
the lowest part of & rock. 
carrachan, -ain, -an, 8. m. Shoemaker fish. 
2 Frog-fish, chub, or fcobbler. 3 Wild liquor- 
ice root. 4 AF Small angler or devil-fish. 
5 Swivel—Levwts, see bata No. 28 d 76. 6° 
Little old-fashioned fellow. 7(DU) Group, 
small crowd 
————— -cnnacach, s.m. see carran-creige. 
carrachd,** s.f. Ascendancy. 
carraith, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Forming of scab 
or scurvy 2**see carragh. 
carragh, -aigh, -aighean, s.f. Rock. 2 Pillar. 
3 Erect stone. 4 Monument. Far an d’ung 
thu a’ c., where you anointed the monument ; 
a tnamhaisg nan carrigh ! O spectre of the 
rocks ! carragh nan tonn, (be rock of the waves; 
carragh salainn. a pillar of sait. 
Aach,ff a. Monumental. 
———a il, a. Monumental. 
carraicean, -ein, -ceanan, s.m. see carra-meille, 
2ttKnotty stick. 3ffThick man. 
carraich, v.a. Crust. 
carra d, -e, s.f. Conflict, strife, riot. 2 Dis- 


tress, troubl:, grief. 3* Fatigue and anguish 
from watching a sick person. C. nan sian, 
the conflict of the elements; le c. ghéir, with 
sore fatigue. 

carraideach, -diche, «a. Troublesome, turbu- 
lent, quarrelsome. 2* Fatigued with watch- 
ing a sick person. 3 Grieved and fatigued. 4 
*Afllicting. 6t{tDistressful, adm "n ote 





2 Any crustace- 
3 The curl in po- 


carraideach 
Conflicting, Vs 


earraideach, -eich, s.m. 
.Some person. 


Turbulent, quarrel- 


———— , af. Fatigue. 

fcarraidhin, s.f. see carraighin. 

carraig, -e [& cairge,] -ean,s.f. Rock, cliff. 2 
Pinnacle. 8 Rock jutting into the sea, serv- 
ingasaquay or fishing station. 4 Knot of 
wood. 5ftTimber ball used in club playing. 
6e AF)Cockroach. 7*Headland. C. mo neart; 
the rock of my strength; mar thuinn mu ch., 
as waves round a rock. — 

each, -eiche, a. Rocky, abounding in 
rocks or cliffs, of or belonging to a rock or 
cliff. 2**Rugged. 

carraigeaz, -eig, -an, s.f. Sort of pancake. 

carraigean, -ein, -eanan, s.m. Knot of wood. 
2ttsee cairgein. 

carraigeineach, -eiche, a. Knotty, as timber. 

Rocky. 

carraighin,** s. Thick part of butter-milk, 

carraigneach, -eiche, a. see carraigeach 

carraid,§ Gaelicsp. lling of carrot, see curran. 

carra-meille,f s. Wild liquorice, wild pease. 
heath pease, §tuberous bitter veteh—orobus 
tuberosus. 

carran, -ain, $.m. 

» among corn, see cluain-lin. 23 Scurvy grass, 
see am maraich. 

,-ain, sm. Shrimp. 2 Prawn, 3/AF` 

Angler-fish. 41fSillabub. 65 rarely see cor- 

ran. 6(AF) Field-bug. 

ach, see carthannach. 

achaich.(AF) s.f. Carp. 

—achd, see carthannachd. 

-buidhe, s.m. Charlock. à 
carran-creige, s.m. Lump-fish. 2 Con-er-eel. 
8 Sea-porcupine (flsh.) 4**Shrimp, prawn. 

carrannachd, see carthannachd. 

carrantach, see carthannach. 

———— ———d, see carthannachd. 

carrantas, -ais, s.m. see carthannas, 

carrasan, -ain, s.m. Hoarseness. 2 Wheez- 
ing in the throat. 3| Catarrh. Casdisc., a 
cough and hoarseness ` c. a’ thais, death-ratile, 

-——— Ach, a. Hoarse. 2 Wheezing. 

——————Aàich, s.f. Continued wheezing in the 
throat. 2 Catarrh. 3 Effects of a catarrh. 

fearr-fhiadh, -fhéidh, s.m. see cair-fhiadh. 

carr-fhiodh, -a, s.m. Kuot in timber. 

carroid, s.f. see carraid. 

carrs,(AC) s. Buttereup, see cearban. 

carrsan, see carrasau. 

———ach, see carrasanach. 

carrtha, see carragh. 

———-nas,ff -ais, s.m. Kindliness. see car- 
thannas. 

carruchadh, -aidh, see carachadh. 

carruich, see caraich. 

Tcarruidhe, s.f. Scabbedness. 

carruig. -e, -ean, s.f. see carraig. 

carruigeag, see V Am d 

cars, s.f. Gaelic spelling of carse, (level fertile 
tract of country.) 

earsan, -ain, 8.0». see carrasan. 

ach, -eiche, @ see carrasanach. 

car-shuil, -shul, s.f. Rolling eye. 

each, a. Having rolling eyes. 

c'ar son? atv. Why ? for what ? wherefore ? 
€'ar son a ghabh na cinnich boil ? why did 
the heathen rage ? 

càrt, càirt, pl. -an (& -àirt],*./. Quart. 2 One 
fourth part of any measure, as of & peck or a 
yard. à Lippy. f4 Cart. 

eart, v.a. see cairt. 

———aoh, gen. of cairt. 

D, -aidh, a.m. Act of cleansing any plece 





Spurrey, à weed growing 




















170 


cas 


of mire, as a stable or byre. 2 Tanning of 
leatner. 8 Barking of trees. A’ c—, pr.part. 
of cairt. 

cartair, see cairtear. 

cartan, -ain, -an, s.m. Sleek brown insect that 
eats into the flesh, flesh-worm(AF.) 2*Heath- 
mite. 384t Sour-tempered, crabbed person. 4 
Cattle-bot—a@strus bovis, 56 Crab [Gadelici- 
sed form of partan.) 





119. Cartan (4) 





ach, -aiche, a. 
pered. 

cartaran, -ain, s.m. One-fourth of a stone, 
(measure for butter, &c.) 

carthadh, -aidh, s.m. see carragh. 

carthan, -ain, s.m. Charity, friendship, affec- 
tion. 2**Prawn.  Luchd-carthain, charita- 
ble people. 

——— — Ach, 

— ———Achd, 


Quarrelsome, ill-tem- 


see carthannach. 
see carthannachd. 

carthaunaen, -aiche, a. Kind, charitable, af- 
fectionate, friendly. 2* Polite. 

-—————d, s.f.ind. Charity, friendship, af- 
fection, tenderness. 2* Politeness. Blàths 
isc., warmth and friendship. 

carthannas, -ai«, s.m. Same meanings Ba car- 
thannachd, C. fuar, cold /riendship. 

carthanta,* a. see carthannach. 

chd,* see cartnannachd. 

cartuuinnich, v a. Separate. por A asunder. 
2 Dwell iu à cave. 3 Riddle, winnow. 

cart- Uil, see cairt-iùil. 

cart-iair,3 s. Common tormentil, see braon» 
an-iraoich. 

car-tuathal, -ail, s. m. Wrong turn. 2 Turn 
to the leit, or contrary to the sun’s course. 
3 Ill-chance, mishap. 4 Uuprosperous course. 
Tiis term is said by some to have had its ori- 
gin in Druitical superstition. On certain 
cevasions they moved three times round 
their stony eircles or temples. In perform- 
ing this ceremony thev Kept the circle on 
the right. ear-deise) and consequently mov- 
ed from E. to W., this was called tie pros- 
perous course. The car-tuathal, or movin 
with the circle on the lefi, was deemed fata 
or unprosperous, being contrary to the course 
of the suu. Car-tuathal t’ aimbleis ort | the 
left-about unlucky turn to you! 

car uair, adv. Sometiines. 

varvcuadh, -aidh. see carachadh. 

caruibh, alv. Beside, near. [Generally 'an 


caraibh.] 
caruich, v.d. see caraich. 
caruill, see caireal. 


car tine, adv. For a time. 

caruinnc?n, see carainnean. 

haruinnich, v. see carthuiunich. &}Winnow. 

tearnll, sm. see caireal. 

cas, yen. coise, dat. cois, pl. casan, s.f. Foot. 
2 Leg. 3 Snaiw baft, handie. 4 Stem. 5 
Stelx. 6 Ply or plait iu thread. 7 Curl. 8 
Wrinkle. 9**"Money. Taobh do choise, the 
sid» of your foot ; cas na sgéiue the handle 
of the Kure ; cas an ùird, the shaft of the 
hammer ; aig cois na beinne, atthe foot of 
the hid ` glum ceann do ehasan, wash your 


cas 


Jeet ` glan do chasan, wash your legs (or 
your feet); casa’ falbn agus cas a’ fuireachd, 
ene foot going and the other poot staying, 
—said of one who is undecided ; fo chas- 
&ibh nan an-laoich, under the feet of ruthless 


warriors. 
teas, sf. Case. 2 Hair of the head. 
cas, caise, a. Steep. 2 Wrea'h-d, curled, 


twisted. 3 Sudden, quick, rapid 4 Hasty, 
irritable. 5 Rash, passionate. 6 Headlong, 
abrupt, eager 71IWriukled. Duine cas, a 
passionate man ; sruth c., a head!on] stream, 
an impetuous current ; cas air a chéile, ciose 
upon each other ; bruthach e, aonach c, a 
steep or headlong acclivity ; cas gu còmhraig, 
eager for baie; cul fainneach, cas, curled, 
wreathed hair ; eas-thalt, curled locks ` gu c, 
quickly. 

cas, pr.part.a’ casadh, e.a. Gape. 2 Gnash. 
3 Turn against. 4 Be angry with. 5 Oppose, 
thwart. 6 Curl,frizzle. 7 Fire or cast, as 
&stone 8* Approach. 9 Brandish.  10** 
Wreathe, twist, bend. 11**Climb. 12ft{Shoot 
out the lipininsult or derision.  13jf Stop, 
hesitate. l4łt Become wriukled. 15ffWinud, 
wind up. Cas an t-sreang, twist the string; 
chas e m’ a laimh e, he twisted it about his 
hand ; chas e 'fhiaclan, he gnashed his teeth; 
chas e 'bheul, he gaped with his mouth; a’ 
casadh air a’ bhaile, approaching the town; 
chas e ris, he was enraged against him; chas 
e 'shleagh, he brandished his spear ; chas e 
braoisg air, he screwed up a grimace ; chas 
iad oirre, they closed upon her. 

cas, -àis, -an, s.m. Difficulty, emergency, 
hardship. 2 Plague. 3 Distress. 4 Case. 5 
Trying or difficult situation, dilemma, pre- 
dicament. 6**Anxiety. 7 Respect. &** rare- 
ly rear, pity. 9**Appetite. 10**Misfortune, 
evil event. Bha e an cas gun tigeadh tu, 
he was anxious that you would come ;anns gach 
cas, in emergency; cha’ne sin an Cas, 
that is not the dificuity; cna ’n ean cas e, it 
is no dificulty ; 's aun dhuit is léir mo chàs, 
it ws thou that seest my distress; an cas air, 
eager for him or it. 

fcasach, -aich, s.f. Ascent. 

casach, -aiche, a. Having feet. 2 Many-footed. 
3ffCorrupant. Gu c., lamhach, exerting legs 
and hands. 

casach,” -a:ch, sf. Outlet of a lake. 2 Ford. 3 
Hook-line. 

casachaiu-gré.ine,(AH) s.m.pl. Long shafts of 
ligat radiating from the sun, and betokening 
unsettled weather. 

teasachdaich, see casadaich. 

Wa chdaighe,s.f. Coltsfoot, see gallan-greann- 
chair. 

t¢casacndas, see casadaich. 

casa-corrach, s.f. see cas-chorrach. 

,-aid,e.m. (Cough. 2 see caisead. 

„tv.n. see casadaich. 

ach, -aiche, a. Coughing, ill of a cough. 
2 Causing a cough. Am miosc., the cough 
producing month, 

casadauh,** -a:dh,s.m. Coughing, act of cough- 
ing. 2% Cough. 

casadaich, pr.part. a’ casadaich, v.n. Cough. 

,84.ind. Cough. 2 Act or habit of 

eoughing. 3* Gripes in cattle, making them 
strike their belly with their feet. 41[Cold,r 
any disease causing a cough. Ciod a’ chasad- 
aich a tu’ ort ? why do you cough so ? 

Gëtt, -aidh, aidhean, s.m. Grinning, gap- 
ing  z Gnashing. 3 Turning against, oppos- 
ing. 4 CorrugatLion, wtinkle. ` 5**Braudi-h- 
ing. 6**Wreavuing, twisting, curlivg. 7** 








171 


eas-bhardachd 


Climbing. 8*Approaching. Sleagh a’ c. 'n 
a iàimh, a spear brandishing in his hand. A’ 
c—, pr. part. of cas. 

casa-feannag, pl. Crow'sfeet. 2 ‘*Crow’s-foot” 
stitching. Fuaigheal chasa-feannag, the an- 
gular stitching on blanket selvidges known as 
“herring-boning.”” 

casag, -aig, -an, s f. Long coat, cassock, as op- 

sed toa short coat or jacket. Luchd nan 

casag, Scottish Lowlanders. 

ach, a. Wearing a long coat. 2 Of, or be- 

longing to, long coats. 

aiche, s.m. Man with a long or skirted 


coal. 
-mharcachd,1f s.f. Riding-coat. 
casa-gearra, see casa-goirid. 
casa-gobhlach, a. & adv. Astride. 
casa-goinid, s.pl. Short spatter-dashes, spats. 
casa-gorach,(DU) see cas-chorrach. 
casaid, -e, -ean, s.f. Complaint, accusation, 
grumbling. 2{{Suit-at-law. Dean casaid, 
complain; na gabh casaid, receive not an accu- 
sation. 
, See casaidich. 
each, -eiche, a. Apt to complain, ac- 
guse, or grumbte, complainivg, accusing. 
eachadh, -aidh, sam. Arraignment. 
eachd, s.f. Complaining, proneness to 
make complaints. 
easailich, pr. pt. à casaideachadh [& a’ cas- 
aidich,] v.a. Accuse, arraign, lodge a com- 
plaint. Ch. e orm, ke accused me. 
—— ———e, -an, s.m. Accuser, complainant. 2 
Grumbler. 
casair, -e, -ean, sf. Sea-drift. 2 Phosphorie 
light proceeding from old wood when in the 
da see teine-sionnachain. 
1easair, casrach, s.m. Thorn. 2 Clasp, buckle. 3 
Slaughter, carnage. 4 Shower, hail. 
easan, -ain, -an, s.m. The supporting beam of 
à house-top. 2 Path, road. 3 Name given to 
the Parailel roads in GlenRoy. 4tftTreadles 
of à loom. 5i{Prickle. ott Post or stick in 
the inside of a wall. Taigh chasan(AH), o 
house built of wattle-work. 
casan, n. pl. of cas. 
ach, -aiche, a. Having foot-paths, like 
a foot-path. 2 Parallel in grammar (IL? 
casap-cairbe,ff{ s.pl. (lit. chariot spokes) Sun's 
rays as seen breaking through masses of wa- 
tery clouds. Called ‘‘casan cainbe,” hemp- 
en legs in Uist. 
-culma, 8.pl. Bow-legs. 
-corrach, pl. of cas-chorrach. 
-eunain,f{ s.pl. (lit. little bird’s feet) 
Shoots from a hazel stump. 
-labhach, s.p/. Pigeon toes, (feet having 
the toes turned inwarits. ) 
-lügach, s.pl. In-knees, knock-knees, 
-spagach, s. pl. Splay-feet (tlat feet 
having the toes turned outwards ) 
cas-an-teannachaidh,AH) s.f. In roping a 
house after thatching, the side of the loo; or 
rope which is to be tightened and secured. 
cas-an-uain,} sf. Kidney vetch, see meòir 
Muire. 
casan-uchd,** s. m. see caisean-uchd. 2 Knee- 
strap,—MacFariane’s Vocab. 
cas-aodanuach, -aiche, a. Wrinkled-faced. 
tcasar, 6.22. Little hammer. 2 see cabisair. 
t —nac^, 8&.f. Lightniug. 
tfcasbanach, -aiche, a. Side by side, parallel. 
'cas-bhucaig, s.f. see camachag. 
Te4s-bhà.rueach, sf. see bàirneach 
| cas-Dhar t, -Lhaird, 8.2. Satirist. 















































| — ———-—Aacin, SG, Saure, ive ctive, lam 


pooai.g. 
Ad 


cas-bhardail 


————ail, a. Satirical. 

cas-bheag,(AH) s.f. One of the fore-legs of a 
young dog, which is tied up toits neck in or- 
der to impede the animal's movements. Air 
an cois bhig 'san tarsuinn, ‘in reference to 
the words in a printer's proof) with the letters 
upside down and obliquely set, or out of the 
v line (technically known as ‘‘not rang- 
ing." 

eas-bheajirt, 

cas-bheart, j sf. seecais-bhearf. 

cas-bheirt, 

eas-bhonnach,** -aich, a. Antipodal. 

cas-bhonnaich, s. Antipodes. 

cas-bhrat, -ait, -an, s.m. Carpet. 2°’MM)Mat. 


ceas-bhriathar, -air, s.m. Hasty, unguarded, or pf 


cross expression, intemperate language. 
cas-bhriathracb, a. Hasty, or iutemperate in 
speech. 


eas-bhuidhe, a. Having yellow feet. 2 Having | 


curled yellow hair. Cuach fhalt cas-bhuidhe, 
curled yellow hair. 

tcas-cailliche, 8.7. Shaft of a fir-torch. 

tcascar, 8.m. p. 

cas-chaibe,t+ see cas-dhireach. 
chrom in Gairloch, dc. 

fcas-chailliche, see tcas-cailliche. ] 

cas-cheum, s.m. Foot-path. 2Steep, or diffi- 
cult way. 38**Stride, long pace. Cas-cheum 
nan gann, a great stride. 

————ach, aiche, a. Steep. 2 Difficult to 
pace. 3**Striding. 4**Having a foot-path. 

eas-chiabh, -au, s.f. Curled lock, ringlet. 

————ach, -aiche, a. Having curled locks. 
2 Tressy. 

cas-chlüd, s.m. Door-mat. : 

cas-choirbeil,tf s.t Roof conple, couple-legs. 

eàs-choisgeach, -eiche, a. Autipestilential. ` 

cas-chorrach, -aich. pl.casan-corrach, SP, Stilt. 

eas-chreag, an, $.f. Steep rock. 

—ach, a. Abounding in steep rocks. 


2 for eas- 








120. Cas-chrom. 
cas-chrom, cois-chruim, s.f. 'The crooked spade, 
an implement of tillage peculiar to the High- 
lands, used for turning the ground where a 
plough cannot work on account of the stony 
ground. It is of great autiquity, and is des- 


cribed as follows by Arinstrong. ‘‘It is very 
inexpeditious in comparison with the plough. 
eight men being uecessary to digas much with 
it in one day as a horse would plough in tke 
sametime. It is chiefly used for tillage, and 
consists of a crooked piece uf woo.i, the low- 
erend somewhat thick, about two-and-a-half 
feet in length, pretty straight, and armed a 

the end with iron made thin and square to 
cut the earth. The upper end of this ins: ru- 
ment is called the shaft, and the lower, the 
head. The shaft above the crook i. pretty 


172 


casgairt 

upwards to the end which is slender. Just 
below the crook or angle, there must bea hole 
wherein a strong peg must be fixed, for the 
workman’s right foot in order to push the 
instrument into the earth; while in the mean- 
time, standing on his left foot, and holding 
the shaft firmly in both hands, when he has 
in this manner driven the head far enough 
into the earth, with one bend of his body he 
raises the clod by the iron-headed part of the 
instrument, making. use of the heel or hind 
Ki of the head as. a fulcrum. In so doing 

e turns it over always towardsthe left hand 
and then proceeds to push: for another clod 
in the same form. ‘o see six or eight men 
all at work with this instrument, standing 
all on one leg and pushing with the other, 
would 5e a curious sight. to a stranger. With 
all its disadvantages, the cas-chrom is, of all 
instruinents, the fittest. for turning up the 
ground inthe eountry, for among so many 
rocks a plough can do little or nothing, and 
where there are no rocks, the earth is gener- 
ally so marshy that cattle are not able to 
pass over it without sinking in deeply.” It is 
of pretty general use in the Western Isles 
one man being able to turn over more ground 
with it in a day than four are able to do with 
& common spade. 
Peg of cas-chrom, sgonnan. 
caschuing, -e, -ean, 8.f. Anti-asthmatic. 
cas-eüirn, sf. Draught-tree or tram of à car 

see casad. 


or sledge. 
An triugh-chasd; the 
whooping-cough. 


casi, s.m, 
——, va. £n. see casadaich. 
fcasda, a. see casadach. 
vasdach, a. see casadach. 
casdadh, -aidh, see casadadh. 
casdaich, see casadaich. 
vas-dhireach, s.m. Straight delving spade used 
in the Hebrides. 
ca--dhubh, s.f. Stem of 
the mircean (kind of 
sea weed.) 
teas-dlavi,ft 3. f. Curled i 
hair 


air. 

cas-dubh, -uibhe, a. Hay- 
iug black legs or feet. 

—— —— , -nibh, s.m. [& f.] 
Black-legged wild goose 

cas-fa-chrann, s. Honey- 
suckle—Skye, see uill- 
eann. 

cas-fhionn, a. White-foot- 
ed, as of cattle. see 
cais-fhionn. Bha ic, 121%. Cas-dhireach. 
she was white-footed. 

cas-fhliuch, a. Wet-foot. Gille cas-fhliuch, & 
memoer of æ Highland chief’s retinue who 
carried his master over streains, fetched home 
water, de, 

CASE, -à, 8m. See cosg, &. mM. 

casg, v.a. see caisg. 


Càsg, 1 gen. sing. of Caisg. 


Casya, 

easgach, @ see coisgeach. 

CD em -aicb, s.m. Red-shank, see cam- 
ghlas. 

casgadair, s.m. see cosgadair. 

casgadh -aidh, s.m. & pr.part. 

casgaidh, see cosgaidh. 

casgair, pr. part. a’ casgairt [& a’ casgradh] 
v.a. Slay, slaughter, butcher, massacre. 2 
Mangle. Cò achasgras an torc ? whe will 
slay the boar ? 


see cosgadh. 


straight, being six feet long, and tapering; —————4$, 3.f.ind. Slaughtering, butchering, 


casgairt 


massacring,slaughter,massacre. 2 Triumph, 
rejoicing. A’ c—, pr.part. of casgair. as- 
gairt ort ! may death take yeu ! 

easgan-long,(AF) -ain-, sm. Black guillemot, 
see calltag. 

easgarrach, -aich, sm. Kite. 2 Sanguinary 
person. 3 Conqueror. 

cas-ghaosaid,( DU QE Plaited horse-hair at- 
tached to a hook. 

eas-ghruagach, -aiche, a. Curly-haired. 

càsgoil,* s./. Dilemma, predicament. "An càs- 
goil, in a dilemma—Zdslay. 

oasgrich, -aiche, a. Slaugntering, massacring. 
2 Of, or beiouging to, slaughter. 3 Destruc- 
(m 4 Sanguinary. 5 Victorious. 6ttMang- 
ing. 

—— ——4d, s,f.ind. Victory, triumph. 

casgradh, -aidh, s.3n. Same meanings as casg- 
airt. Al c—, pr.pt. of casgair. Mheasadh 
sinn mar chacraich chum a’ chasgraidh, we 
were esteemed as sheep for the slaughter. 

Casgraiche, -an, s.m. Queller. 2 Conqueror. 
3 slanghterer. 4 sanyguinary person. 

casgrair, s.m. see casyraiche. 

Casy-thuiteamas i -ais, sf. Anti-apoplectic. 

cAsgu.rt, see casgairt. 

trasla, 8 f. Frizzled wool. 

¢vaolach, -aicn, sm. Chiltren. 9 Clan, tribe. 

easlachidlan,** -ain, $.3a. I avery. 

eesbudh,** -aidh, s.m. Frizzled wool. 

fias lnoidh, sJ. see cas-dlaot. 

cus-leapa, SE, Bedpost. 

casae ann, @ d ro:l-footed, web-fouted. 

eas-lighe, -an, 8.f. water of a tord that israpid. 
2 Act of ug. 

cas-lom, a. Bare-tooted. 2 Bare-legged. Cas- 
lom, ceann-lom, Lare-footed and bare- headed. 

ens-luath, -luaithe, a. sSwift-footed. 

eas-lubucn, -aiche, a. Thickly-curled. 

eas-maigniche,§ sf. Hare’s foot clover—trifo- 
vium arvense. 

c&s-niu-seaeu, adv. Heads and 
thraws. 

cas-nabui ih, -ean, s.m. Walk- 
ing companion. 

casnaid, s.f. Spli wood, chips. 

Cas-ua-tunnaig,§ s.f. Charlock, 


wild mustard, see marag- 
bhuidae. 
caspanach, a. Parallel. 


¢.asrach, sr, see casgairt. 
cas-rop,?} -an, s.m. Stirrup. 
casrulsg, v.a. Make bare the 
fest or legs, put oif one's 
sdves and stockings. 
-———-, 0. see cas-ruisgte. 
each, a. see cas-ruisg- 122. Cas-maigh- 
iche. 
te, a. Bare-footed. 2 DBare-le:ged. 
Lomnochd is cas-ruisgte, naked und bare-foot- 








te. 





ed. 
¢ceassal, s.m. Storm. 
cas-shiigiie, -an, sf. Foot-path. 


cas-stol, -stoil, s.m. — Foot-stool. 
teast, a. Pure, chaste, andetiled. 
casta, d. Sce caiste. 


cascn, -ain, -an, sm. Chestnut. 

castaran, -4in, &.m. see cirtaran. 

castearbhian, sf. Chicury, succory. 

castreaghainn, s.f. Straw on which grain is laid 
to be kiln-dried. 

feasuigh, a. lleadlong. 

casur,** am. Knocker. 

cas-urla, see cas-urladh. 

ca+urlach. -aich, a, Having curla, eurly-locked. 
T" or-chül 'na shlamagau cas-urlach, your yel- 
tow hair in curled tvesses. 


173 


S 


cathadh 


cas-urladh, -aidh, s.m. Curled lock, ringlet. 

cat, cait, s.m. Cat. Faodaidh cat amharc air 
an rìgh, a cat may look at the king. 

cata, -n, s.m. Sheep-cot. 

tcata, càtan, s.m. see cata. 

catachadn, -aidh, s.m. Taming, domesticating, 
soothing. A’ c—, pr.pt. of cataich. 

catadh, see catachadh. 

catadh, -aidh, s.m. see catachadh. 

catag, -aige, -an, s.f. Potato-cellar. 

ach, -aiche,a. Abounding in potato-stores, 
Of, or belonging to, a potato-store. 

cataich, pr.pt. a’ catachadh, v.a. Tame, de 
mesticate, soothe. %2**Honour, reverence. 

te, past pt. of cataich. Tamed, domes 

ticated. 

cataidh,** v.a. Domify. 

fcàtaidh, sf. Generosity, nobility. 

4—__——,** a. Generous, noble. 

ceatail,** a. Cattish, cross, crabbed. 

catalach sm Sleepy person. 'Nuair a théid 
crodh a’ bhaile dìosg, 'san anna ni c. càise, 
not until the milch cows have rundry, does the 
sleepy-headed person think of making cheese. 
[it appears to mein that a ‘‘sleepy-head” 
would negiect the opportunity of —— 
cheese while the cows were giving a plentifu 
supply of wilk, and that CSN wnen that sup- 
ely ceased would he think of making cheese. 
The word <. may be intended for cadalaiche, 
sleeper or procrastinator. | 

catanach, -a:che, a. See caiteineach. 

cata , -ais, -au,s.m. see caiteas. 

cat-cinn.(AO;8.1n. Catkin; inflorescerce on trees 
and shrubs, 2 Spots in the hair of animals. 

ecat-cnaive,* s.m. Mouse-trap. 

teat-crainn, -oinn, s.m. Rat-trap. 

cat-criadhaich,(DU) s.m. Plaster made of clay 
or gravel and straw or chafi, laid on parti- 
tions. The partition consisted of upright 
posts closely interwoven with straw- or twig- 


ropes. 

cat-cutnaich, (AF) s.m. Wild cat. 

cat-dubn, s.m. Black cat (fi-h)— Lewis. 

cat-fiadhaich, s.m. Wild cat. 

cath, -a, -an [& annanj, s.m. Battle, fight, 
struggle, contest. 2 Company of soldiers. 
3 Battalion. 4 Army. Chuir iad cath ind i 
they struggled against him; n'anteichiun fhéia 
o "n chath, should I myself fvefrom the bat- 
tle; 'gar fvitheamh le seaehd cathan, await- 
ing us with seven companies. 

cath, pr.pt. a’ cathadh, «v.n. Fight, carry on 
war. 2 Contend,strive. 3 Drift, as snow. 

cath, va. Riddle, winnow, sift, fan. 

cath, catha [& caithe] gen.pl. cathunn(DU) s.f. 
Seeds, husks of coru. 2 Bran, pollards. 3** 
Chatt. Poea cathunn, a bag of husks. 

cath, adv. Continually. 

—a, sm. see cada. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Warlike, of, or pertaining to 
war, fighiing. 

cathach, a. Chaffy. 

aca, äich, s.m. Warrior, soldier, champion. 
Seac.id cathaich, seven warriors. 

cathach, a. Chatty. £tlHusky, seedy. 

catnacuadn, -aidh, s.m. Fighting «act of fight- 
ing, battiing. 2 Strnggling, scriving, trying. 
3 Tempting, provoking. A’ c—, pr. pt. of 
cathaich. A chur cathachaidh, to provoke. 

cathachail, -e, a. Militant. 

càthadh, -aidh, s.n, Winnowing, riddling,s:ft- 
ing 2 Breach. 3 Detile. 411 Provocation. 
A’ càthadh 'san t-sabhal, winnowing in the 
harn. A’c—, pr.pt. of cà ^. 

cathadlh, -aidn, 8.7m. Snow-diift, snow driven 











cathadh 


about by the wind. 2 Sea-drift. Tha cur 
agus c. ann, it is snowing and drifting; thig 
joma-chatliadh, a whirling drift shall come; 
dorus cathadh, middle dour of a kitchen pass- 


age. 
4 ach,** a. Drifty, like a drift, of, or be 
longing to, a drift. ] 

cathadh-cuir,** s.m. Falling snow. 





— —— -fairge, 8.m. S2a-drift, sp-ay, spindrift. 


-làir, (AC) s.m. Ground drift. 

-mara, sm. see c—fairge. 

-sian,(AC) s.m. Visible storm of rain, 
white sheet of rain. 

cathag, -aig, -an, sf. Jackdaw—corvus glad- 
arius. 





uu 


128. Cathag. 
cathagach, e. Abounding in Jackdaws. 2 Of, 
or lixe, a jackdaw. 
eathag-dhearg chasach,fI s.f. Chough, or red- 
legged crow—fregilus graculus. 








194. Cathag-dhearg chasach. 


f#cathaghadh, -aidh, s.m. see cathachadh. 

cathaich, pr.part. a’ cathachadh, v. a. Fight, 
engage, carry on war. 2 ttStrive. 311Tempt, 
try,prove,provoke. 4 Accuse. 5 see cothaich. 

cathair, cathrach, cathraichean, s.f. Chair, 
seat, beuch, throne. 2 Town, city. 3 Forti- 
fied city. 4 Gig. 5**Bed of any garden stuff. 
6**Stock of colewort or cabbage. 7**Plot. 8 
**Sentinel. 9**see càthar. An creamb 'na 
chathraichean, gentian in plots or beds; each 
na cathrach, the gig horse. 

fea'hair, sm. Guard, sentinel, warder. 

càthair, gen.sing. of càthar. 

cathair-bhreitheanais, s.f. Tribunal, judgment 
seat. Air a’ chathair-bhreitheanais, on the 
judgment seat, 

SÉ ER ee, s.f. Cathedral, 2+tEpiscopal 
chair. 

eathiiriche, an, s.m. Citizen. 

cathair-iomchair, -thrach-, -thraichean-, 8. J. 
Sedan chair. 

eathair-righ. see cathair-rioghail. Chi gach 
sùil a chathair-righ, every eye shall see his 
throne. 

eathair-rioghail, -thrach-, -thraichean-, 8. f. 
Throne. 

eathair-shuidhe,-thrach-,-thraichean-, s.f. Seat. 

eathair-thalmhuinn,} s.f. Yarrow, see lus-chosg- 


174 








cathal, v.a. 











cathamh,** s, 
cathau,* s.m. Yarn on the warping machine. 





cathlum 





adh-na-fola. 


cathair-thalmhunda, see e— -thalmbuina, 
teathais, sf. see caithris. 
cathaiseach, o Brave, stout. 2 Warlike. 8 


Noisy, clamorous. 4**Quick. Gu c., bravely. 
see callaich. 

(AF) (bird) see caothail. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. & pr. pt. of cathal, 
callachadh. 

ta, a. d past pt. of cathal, see callaichte. 
see cathadh. 





H -ain, $.m. Bernicle goose, a species of 
goose having a black bili—anser leucopsis. 





225. Catham. 
cathan, n.pl. of cath. 





ach, -aiche, a. see cathach. 

-aodaich, s.m. Web. 

càthar, -air, s.m. Mossy, soft ground, bogey 
ground. 21Dry part of a peat-moss. O chàth» 
ar ’s o chruaich, from marsh and from mount- 
ain. 

càthar, a.. Husky, seedy, full of seeds or husks, 
2 emi soft. Gu gleann càthair, to a mossy 
glen. 

cathara, see catharra. 

càtharach, -aiche, a. Mossy, spongy, boggy, as 
in hilly ground. 

fcatharnas, -ais, s.m. see carthannas. 





catharra, a. Strenuous. 2 Fighting bravely or 


resolutely. 31tMilitant. 4{tCivil. 5 Refor- 
med. An creideamh c., the Reformed (Pro- 
testant) religion ; cath c., a civil battle; creid-. 
eamh e, militant faith; an Eaglais c., the 
Church militant. 

-————chd, s.f.ind. Resolution, bravery. 

feath-bhàrr, s.m. Helmet, headpiece. Bhris e 
an cath bharr, he broke the helmet. 

fcath-bharun, -uin, s.m. Commander, officer. 

cath-bhruich, -e, s.f. see cabhruich, 

cath-bhruith, see cabhruich. 

cath-bhuadhach,-aiche, a. Victorious, triumph- 
ant in battle. 

cath-bhuidheann,-dhinn, -dhniehean,s.f. Party, 
company or battalion of soldiers. 

eath-bhuidhneaeh, a. Regimental. 

cath-chrith, -e, $.f. Impatience for fighting. 

cath-eun, (bird) see cathan. 

— ——— leadain, see cathan, 

cath-fhear, -fhir, s.m. Warrior, hero, cham- 


pion. 

eath-labhar,ft s.m. Inciting speech. 2 Loud 
and angry a 

cath-labhradh, -aidh, -aidhean, 8. m. Th 
speech of a general before or after a battle. 

t+cathlach, a. see catholach. 

eathlach-dearg.? s. m. Corn-poppy—papaver 
rheas. (see illust. No. 126) 

eath-làgain,** vm. Corn seeds, of the juice of 
which the Lowlanders make flummery. 

cath-làrach, -aich, -aicbean, s.f. Field of battle.. 

cathlum, s.m. see calum. 


cathlum 


175 


eeadalach 








126. Cathlach-dearg. 

cathlunn, s.m. see calum. 

c&th-mharcach, -aichean, s.m. Cavalry soldier, 
dragoon. 

eath-mheal,(AF) s.m. Charger, war-horse, 

eath-mbileadh, -mhilidh, s.m. Military com- 
mander. 32 Officer of high rank. 3 Field- 
officer. 

càthmhor, -oire, o Chaffy, husky. 'Se am 
foghar gaothmhor a ni an coirce cathmhor. it 
te the windy harvest that makes the oats husky. 

$fenthoir, see caithearr. 

eatholach, a. Catholic, universal. 

cathrach. ge — of eathair. 

D as a 


a m, e DOBBY. 

cathraichean, n.pl. of cathair. 

fcathraigheoir, s.m. see cathairiche, 

cath-reim, -e, s.f. see caithream. 

cathu (AC) s.m. Offensive smell, especial- 

eathudh } ly from fi-h newly salted, or frou 
skate when long taken. 

fcathughadh, a o. see cathachadh. 

cat-luch, cait-, 82n. Mouse-trap. 

Be, s.f. Cudwort, cudweed, see luibb-a'- 
chait. 

-——_——each, a. Abounding in cnd weed. 

eat-mhara, (AF) Catfish, sea-cat, sea-devil, 
wolf-fish. 2 Fishing frog, angler—lophias pis- 
catorius. 

featoil, -e, a. Luxurious. faring sumptuously. 

eatran,* -ain. s.m. The fourth part of a stone 
of butter, cheese, wool, Ee —Jslay. 

fca-trath, ade, When? at what time? 

Se pron. interr. sing.& pl. Who? what ? (for 
coe? or ciae ?) Who is he? what is it ? Also 
adverbially, (let me see it.) C’ e do làmh, give 
me, or reach hither your hand. see cia. c' e 
mar, erroneously used for cia mar? how } ei 
e fath ? why ? how ! 

cò, céithe, s.m. Cream. 

eé, s.m. & f. Spouse. (contr. for céile.) 

06, s.m.ind. Theearth, the world, see cruinne- 


cé. 
œ. s. Night. 2 Pier. 
ceaba, ceibe, ceabannan, s.m. The iron part of 
& spade or other implement for digging or 
turning over the ground. 2 Old-fashi ned 
kind of spade.—Jslay, (see ilust, 127.) 3 
see caibe. 
ceabag,(DU) s.f. Cheese. 
oeabain, s.m. Gaelic spelling of cabin. 
ceaba-sithe, s.m. Fairy-stone. 
ceabhac dach,** a. Arch. 2 Crafty, disingen- 
uous. 
eeabhachdair,*9 s.m. Bubbler. 
varicator. 
—-eachd,** s.m. Disingenuousness, 
imposture, prevarication. 
ar,-air,-an, 8m. Light breeze, gentle 
breeze. 2*State of being slightly intoxicated. 
ac) Sky, cloud, upper clouds, 
ceabhcach, see ceabhachdach. 
ceach | int, Expression of dislike, 


2 Knave, pre- 





disgust, an 


tipathy, abhorrence of filth, or other disa- 


greeable object. 








127. Ceaba (2.) 


teeach, o. for gach. 

t--——ail, v.a. Dig, excavate. 
Destroy. 

t--——aing, a. Hard to march, inaccessible. 

t--——air, s.f. Dirt, filth. 2 Penury. 

ceacharra, a. Dirty,sordid, scurfy, mean, sorry, 


2**Hackle. zeg 


worthless, stingy. 2(AC) Obstrenorous, un- 
manageable, headstrong.  3tiCowardly. 4 
(AH) Simple, gullible, inept, vacant. Cha 
robh echo e, he was not so green or so silly: 
duine c., & headstrong man. 

— — — —chd, s. f. ind. Dirtiness, meanness, 
worthlessnuess. 

—n, -f&in, ‘8m. 

mous person, 

—nach, -aich, s.m. see ceacharran, 

tceachd, s.f. see cumhachd. 

lach, -aich, aam. Coal-black. 

ceachladn, -Aidh, s.m. Digging. A’ e—, pr. 
pt. of ceachail, 

ceachrach,** a. Dirty, filthy. 2 Penurious, 


stingy. 
,** 8, f. Dirtiness, filthiness. 3 

Penuriousness, stinginess, 

teeacht, s.m. Power. 2 The circle of sciences. 
8 Instruction, lesson. 

ceacntadair,** s.m. Lecturer. 

cead, s.m.ind. Leave, permission, license. 2 
Farewell, adieu. larr cead, ask liberty or 
leave; guu do chead a’ gabhail, without ask- 
ing your permission; an d' fhuair thu cead P 
have you got leave ? thoir dhomh zs, give me 
permission; thoir a chead dha, set him about 
his business; c. dol dhachaidh,permission to go 
home; c. fuireachd, leave to remain; gun ch. 
withovt leave; gabhaidh mi mo ch. dhiot, 1 
wil: tace my leave of you; c. buan, a lon a- 
dieu :leig c. dhiot | enough of you ! ; gun a 
chuir "num chead, without asking me first > 
tha mo chead aige !I am very gad he is doing 
80, well done he! 

teéad, see ceud. 

ceadach, e. Talkative, forward. 

,-8ich, s.m. Coarse cloth. 2 Veil. 8 
Mantle. 

ceadachadh. -aidh, s. m. Allowing, permit- 
ting, permission, granting, liberty. 2 Dis- 
missug. 3(AH) Perplexity, bewilderment, 
"nut to crack.” "Tha e 'cur c. orm cia mar 
a fhuair e an t-airgiod, it perplezes me how he 
obtained the money. A’ c—, pr. pt. of cead- 
aich. 

ceadachail. -e, a. Permissive, lawful, allowable. 

ceadachas, -ais, see cead. 

ceadach 1, s.f.ind. see ceadachadh., 

ceadaich, pr.pt. a’ ceadachadh, v.a. da Al- 
low, permit, let, grant, give permission. 2 
Dismiss. [This verb has the prep. do, sim- 
ple or compounded, construed with it in its 
first sense, as, ceadaich do t’ òglach, permit 
thy servant.) 

—idh, fut. aff. act. of ceadaich. 

-—————te, a. d past pt. of ceadaich, Permit- 
ted, suffered, lawful. Am bheile c.? is it 


lawful 1 
fceadal, s.m. Story, narrative. 2 Malicious 
report. 3 Singing. 41fEducation. 


ceadalach, a. Malicious, asa story. 2t1 Crazy. 





Worthless, pusillani- 





t- 











ceadalach 


81f Subjectto fits of sickness. 
eeadalaiche, s.m. 
stories. 
eéadamas, tt 
finding. 
——, adv. In the first place. 
eeadan, -ain, -an, s.m. Bunch, lock as of wool. 
?tt Burden. 
€éadaoin, æ, s.f. see ciadaoin. 
eead-bhileach, -lich, sf. see ceud-bhileach. 
eead-fadh, -aidh, -an, see ceud-fath. 
——ach, a. see ceud-fathach 


-ais, 8.9. 





3 





$ceadfaidheas, -eis, ¢.m. Sensuality, voluptu- 


onsness. 
ceadha, -dhan, s.m. Share-beam, the 


ceithe. 
eeadhal, -ail, a. Blistered, full of sores. 


*$ccadhraoidheachd, s.f. Geomancy, art of diy- 


ining by figures. 
¢cea:l-lomaidh, see ceud-lomaidh, 
ceadna, see eeudna., 
$ceadoir, s.f. see ceud-usir. 
¢cead-thonialt, -ailt, s.m. see ceud-lomaidh. 
*cead-thuisneadh, s.m. Firstling, firstborn. 
qvead-thus, -uis, s.m. Prineiple, element. 
eeaduichte, 3. £ past pt. see ceadaichte. 
eeafan,t -ain, s.m. Frivolous person. 
eéaird, -e, -ean, £f. Trade, profession, oceupa- 


= 


tion. 9 Handicraft. 3 Ari, skill. Ciod e 's 


ceàird dhuit P what is your oecupation 1! cha'n 

uaisle duine na a ch., @ man is not higher 

than his trade. 

, gen sing. & n. pl. of ceàrd. 

-————each, -eiche, a. Professional. 2 Having 
atrade. 3 Expert, dexterous, ingenious. Is 
an-uasal mac an uasail mur bi e c, without 
parts the son of a noble is mean. 

eeasirdealachd, see céardalachd. 

eeairdeal, see céardail. 

eeairidb, (AC) s.f. Cirrus elouds. 

eeairsle, -ean, s.f. see ceirsle. 

ach, æ. see ceirsleach. 

eeairslich, see ceirslich. 

$ceal, a. False. 

qceal, v.g. Eat. 2 see ceil. 

ceal, a, -an [.& -aichean,] s.m. Concealment. 
2 Forgetfulness. 3 Stupor, torpor. 4 Stupid- 
ity. 5 Expression of countenance. 6 Hue or 
colour. 7 (AC) Cliff, ridge 8(AC) End, fn- 
ish. completion. 9**Powder. 10ffSocket. 11 
Muliebre pudendum. 12(AH) State of being 
lostin thought, preoccupied, or abstracted. 
Is bochd an c. a th’ ort, what a miserable 
expression of countenance you have ; na ceal- 
aichean, the cliffs; cuirc. air, put an end to it. 

eeal, (AC) a. Same, similar. 

fceal, -à, s.m. Death. 2 Heaven. 3 Use. 4 
Joint. 5 Fine flour. 6 Covering. 7 Sickness. 
8 Prophecy. 








eealach, -aicn, -aichean, s.m.  Fire-place of ai 


kiln. C.na h-ath, the fire-place of the kiln. 


— n $.m. seeceileadh. 2 Eating. 
2 Eat. A 


eealaich, v.a. Perthsh. for ceil. 
chealaich m’ aran, who ate my bread. 

te, past pt of cealaich. 

eealaideach,* s. m. [£ /.] Miserable-looking 
person. 

eealair, see ceallair. 

eeal-chobhair, -e, -ean, s.f. Sanctuary, asylum. 

eéaldair, s.m. The Z-like instrument used by 
housewives for forming hanks of yarn. [also 
called crois-iarna.| XAG) Gnarled old fellow 
of slow movements.—Suth’d. 

et? l-fhuath, -fhuatha, an, s.m. Private grudge. 








«91g, ceilge, dat. ceilg, s.f. Hypocrisy, deceit, 


176 






One who raises malicious 


(eeud tamas) First 







cealga 


rt of a 
plough on which the share is fixed. 2 see 





ceanaltas 


treachery. 2 Malice. 


Spiorad cei 
spirit of deecit, proved calles, a 


-—-, v.@, Beguile, deceive. 
cealgach, -aiche, a. Crafty, cunning. 2 Hy- 


pocritical, tre&cherous, deceitful, false. 8 

**Malicious. Tha ’n crìdhe c., the heart is 

deceitful, 

ir, -e, -eAn, dm. see cealgair. 

—eachd, s.f. see cealgaireachd. 

cealgadh, -aidh, s.m. Alluring, deceiving. A’ 
c—, pr.pt. of cealg. 





.cealgaich, see cealaich. 


cealgaiche, -an, s.m. see KH 

————, comp. of a. cea!gach. 

cealgair, -ean, s.m. Hypocrite, deceiver, rogue,. 
cheat, traitor. ^ Básaichidh dòchas a’ ch., 
the hope of the hypocrite shall perish. 

— ———eachd, sjfind. H risy, fraud, de- 
ceit, treachery. Bithi air bhur faicill 
o thaois ghoirt nam Pharasach, eadhon c., be- 
ware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees, even hy- 
pocrisy; ric., practising deceit. 

fcealg-aonadh, s.m. Dissimulation. 

cealg-chòrdadh, -aidh, s.m. Collusion for fraud- 
ulent purposes. 2 Private understanding. 

teealzuldhe,}¢ see cealyaiche. 

ceall, s.f. Mast-step. 

teeall, cille Lë **ceallaj dat. sing. cill, n.ph 
Sieg, sf. Cell. 2 Church. 3ft Burying- 
place. 

ceali,| s.f. Stupor. 

fceallach, -aich, s.m. War. 2 Contention,strife. 
3 Churchman. 4 Monk. 5 provin. Peat-cart, 
creel placed on a sledge to carry peats, man- 
ure, &c. 6**Contention. 

fceallada, s.m. Custody. 

ceallaich, see ciallaich. 

ceallair, -ean, s.m. Superior of a monastery. E 
¢tCellarer. 3 tiTalker. 

ceall-ghoid, -e, $.f. Sacrilege. 

teeallmhuin, s.f. Oracle, prophecy. 

cealloir, see ceallair. 

- -dlach, s. m. Mean or nasty person. 

¢ceall-phort, -uirt, s.m. Cathedral church. 

ceall-shlad, shlaid, s./. Sacrilege. 2**Simony.. 
ceall-shlod, see ceall-shlad. 

tcealltair, sm. Spear. 2 Cause. 3 Castle.. 

tceal-stol, s.m. Close stool. 





'tcealt, s.m. Apparel, clothes, garments, dress, 


cealt, (AF) s. Kelt (tish.) 

-——ar, -aire, s. Thick broad-cloth, generally 
of a grey colour. provin. 2DU) Web of any 
kind of cloth. 

icealt-mhuinnleir, s.m. Fuller. 

fceamar ? see ciamar ? 

cean, -e, s.m. Love, favour, fondness. 2 De 
sire. 3 Fault,crime. 4**Elegance. 51fDebt. 
Tha mo ch. air an og-mhnaoi, my love is for 
the virgin. [same as apad 

ceana ? adv. (for œ ionad, cia an t-ionad P) 
Whither? 2 see cheana, and a cheana. St 
Even. 4 Lo, already. 

fcéana, see ceudna. 

ceanail, -e, «€. Mild. kind, loving. 2 Civil, 
well-bred. 3 Elegant. 4**Faulty. 5**Fond, 

fceanair, a. Hundred. 

ceanal, -ail, s.m. Kindness, mildness. 2 Polite- 
ness, gentility. 3 Elegance. 4++Pleasantry, 
merriment. 5**Fondness. Beui a’ chean- 
ail, the mouth of mildness. 

ceanalta, -ailte, a. Kind, mild, amiable. 2 
Polite, genteel. 3 Handsome, comely, fair, 
clean, seemly. 4 Auspicious. 5ft* Humour 
some. Gille c., a handsome lad. 

ceanaltachd, s.f.ind. Kindness, mildness, 

ceanaltas, -ais, s.m. urbanity, complais- 
ance, 2 Handsomeness, comeliness. 3. Polite. 


ceanaltas 





ness. 

eeanann, a. see ceaun-fhionn. 

tcean-sois s.f. Old age. 

eéandachd, s.f.ind. see ceudnachd. 

eeandail(AF) spl. Lice. ` 

cean-fhionn, see ceann-fhiorn. 

feean-fidhne, see ceann-feadhna. 

eean-folaidh, see cion-falaich. 

eeangail, pr.pt. a’ ceangal [& ceangladh,] v.a 
Bind, tie, fasten. 2 Fetter. 3 Article, asan 
apprentice. 4**lighte . 5** Oblige.  6** 
Restrain. Ceangail teann is faigh tearuint, 
Jast bind fast find. 

te, a. & pt.pt. of ceangail. Bound, con- 

fined, restrained, tied, fastened. 2**Obliged, 

compelled. 

teach,** a. Astringent. 

teachd-cuim,] s.f. Constipation. ` 

e@eangal, ail, pl. -ail (-laichean & ceangaltaich- 
ean], s.m. Tie knot, bond, fetter, ligature, 
bandage, fastening. 2 Restraint. 3 O: liga- 
tion. 4 Binding. Act of binding. 6**Arti- 
culation. Fo cheangal aig duine sam bith, 
under restraint to any man; am fear a cheang- 
las 's e a shiùbhlas, he that ties (hi: bundle) 
fast can walk without stopping; ceanglaichean 
pósaidh, marriage-bonds, betrothal; ceangal 
nam mionn, the obligation of oaths; A’ c—, 
pr. pt. of ceangail. 

eeangalach, -aich ', a. see ceangaltach. 

eeangal-pósaidh, s.m. Betrothal. Ni thu ceang- 
al-pósaidh, thou shalt betrothe a wife. 

eean-altach,-aich, a. Binding. 2 Connecting. 
3 Obligatory, obliging. 

ceangaltaichean,* n.pi. of ceangal. 

ceanyaltas, -ais, s.m. Tying, binding, fastening. 
2ttObligation. 

@eanglach, see ceangailteach. 

— an, -ain, -an. 3.2. Bundle, truss,bale. 
C. airgid, a bundle of silver. 

eeangladair,** s.m inder. 

cean.ladh, -aidh,s.m, Same meanings as ceang- 
al. A c—, pr.pt. of aer) 

eeanglaiche, -an, s.m. Binder. 

——— -——an, n.pl. of ceanglaiche, & ceangal. 

ceanglaidh, f/ut.aff.a. of ceangail. 

eeanglair,** s.m. Binder. 

ceanzlar, fut. pass. of ceangail 

Qeanionn, see geann-fhionn. 

ecann, cnn, sm Heat. 2 Point. 3 Hilt. 4 
To . 5 End. 6 Chief, commander. 7 Head- 
land. promuntory. 8 Extremity, limit. 9 Per- 
ixl, ex ipatjion. 10*Genius, iugen ity. 11° 
Attention. 12 Head of yarn (4 to 6 cuts or 
banks, 13°*Harvest-home. LA AH) Head of 
@ plou; h, on which sock is fixed. Thog tuinn 
an cinu. wares reared their heads; sleagh a's 
géire ceann, a spear of the shar pest point; c. 
nan laoch, the chief of the heroes;’au c. biiadh- 
na. at the expiration ofa year; mu cheannaibh 
nan crann, aout the tops of the trees; bi ’nad 
ch mhath dha, be kind (good) to him; "pa 
dhroch ch dhuit, very bad for you; is dona an 
c. ~in dhuit, that is against your health; bha 
e 'nà dhroch ch. dha, he behaved very ili to 
hi a’ dolair cheann ghnothaich, going on 
business; cha'n 'eil an droch ch. aige, he is not 
d-stitute of genius; air ch. dha tighinn dhach- 
eidh, preparatory to his coming home; ane a 
sò qe. at long last; "ane a chéile, mixed, as- 
sembled;'s ann agad a tha an ceann ! how 
shrewd youjare ! shiubhail mi Ile bho ch. gu 
c., I walked from one extremity of Islay to the 
other; na cuir c. ‘na leithid sin, do not at- 
tempt such a thing; thoir an ceann dheth, be. 
head him; a chur e air stri, to conclude the 
strife; àm a bheir ar n-àmhgbhar gu c., a tim» 














177 


ceannalr 


that will bring our ouodles to a close; c. na 
ciche, the nipple, av c. tiotaimh, in a littl 
while; an c. tacain, in a little while; c. nan 
lann, the hilt of the swords; ciod e an c. a rinn 
e dbuit ? what attention did he show you ! gus 
an liath do cheann, till you are grey-headed; 
liath thn mo ch., your conduc: has turned my 
heir grey; ghabh e 'n saoghal im’ a ch., he 
took the range of the wide world; os ceann an 
athair, above the firmament ; an c. shios, the 
farthest of extremity; an c. à bhos, the near 
est extremity; an c. shuas, the upper extrem- 
ity; air mo cheann, awaiting me; os do ch., 
above your head, over you; air a’ cheann thall, 
at long last 

ceanna-bhàrd, sm. Head bard. 

ceannabh.rd, s.m. see ceannard. 

ceanna-bharr,tt om. Head-dress, hat, cap. 

ceanva-bheart, -eirt, -an, s./. Covering for the 
head. 2+¢ftHelmet. 

ceanna-bhiorach,tt a. Conical, pointed at the 
to 


p. 

ceanna-bhrat,tf-ait,s.$m. Head-dress. 2 Canopy. 

ceannach, -aich, pe Hire, price, wages. 2 
Purchase, purchasing, bnying. 3**Bargain. 
4 Reward. 5 Bribe. 6**Cuvenant. 7 Enough. 
Ceaunach geal ‘nuaira thig an sneachd, & 
white present when the snow comes | meaning 
that markets will be cheap]; bu c. leam 
t' ugh air do ghloc, your egg is dear for 80 
much ca, kling ; is c. ort an gnothach, you bo- 
ther me tco much about the business; tha c. 
agad air, you have had enough of it, it is a bo- 
ther to you, or you will pay dearly for tt. A’ 
c—, pr.pt. of ceannaich. 

-—————üachd, see ceannachd, 

adh, -aidh, san, Buying. 3 Act of buy- 

ing. 3 Purchase. A' c—, pr pt. of ceannaich, 

-—air,** see ceannaiche. 

ceannachd, s.f.ind. Cominerce, trade. 2 Mer- 
chaudise. 3**Buying, purchase. Agus ni 
sibh ceannachd 'san tir, and ye shall trade in 
the land ; oir 's fhearr ac. na c. airgid, for 
her merchandise is better than the merchan- 
dis» of silver. 

ceannachdair, -e, -ean, see ceannaiche. 

ceannachdrach, -aich, s.m. Upper part of the 
throat. 

ceann-a'-chnac, 3.m. Thwart-brace of a boat— 
Lochbroom. see p. 76. 

ceanna-chnàmhan, s.m. Head or ribs of boat 
see bàla, G 16, p.73. 

ceann-achra, s.m. Epiphany. 

ceann-a’-chraidh, sm. Thwart-brace of boat— 
Lewis, £c. see p. 76. 

ceann-adhairt, s. m. Pillow. 2 Bed-head. 
Cnamhadh a’ chinn-adhairt,a curtain lecture. 

ceannaz,-aige,-an, &J. Wisp. 2ttHead-rig. 

ceann-aghaidh, 8. f. Forehead. 2 Counte- 
nance, physiognomy. 

ceannaich, pr.pt. a’ ceannach [& a’ ceannach- 
adh} v.a. Buy, purchase. 2*Redeem. $ 
Traffic. A cheannaich sinn cho daor, which 
we purchased so dearly. 

ceannaich,** -aiche, s.f. Strife. 
for supremacy or superiority. 

ceannaiche, -an, 8.54. Purchaser. 2 Shopkaep- 
er. 3 Merchant, trader, whether buyer or 
seller. 4 Pedlar. 

ceannaichte, past part. of ceannaich, Bought 

fceannaide, s.4n. see ceannaiche. 

fceann'aidh, see ceann-aghaidh. 

ceann-aimsir, cinn-, s.m. Date, epoch, era. 2 
Term, period. 

ceann-aimsreach (JM) s.m, Term-day. 

ceannair,** .ean, s.m. Driver, goadsman, 2** 
Leader of plough-horses. 








2 Contention ` 


í ceannairc 

seannairc, -e, s.f. Rebellion, sedition, mutiny, 
insubordination. 2**Conspiracy. 3 Perverse- 

" mess, 4f Turbulence. (C. bas no pl} Lan 
ceannairc, full of rebellion. 

—,** v.n. Rebel, mutiny. 

——each, -eiche, a. Rebellious, seditious, 

insubordinate,mutinous. 2 Perverse. 3 Tur- 

bulent. 

Daoine dall agusc., blind and rebellious men. 

eas, -eis, $.m. Proneness to rebel. 2 

lnsubordinateness. 3ff*edition. 

ich, v.a. see ceannairgich. 

coann-air-chrith,? s. m. Quaking grass, 
conan. 

ceannaird, gen.sing. of ceannard. 

ceannaire, -an, &.m. see ceannair. 
nair. 














See 


2 see gean- 





—achd, s.f.ind. Occupation of a goads- 
man, 2 of leading horses when ploughing. 

ceannairge,8.f. see ceannairc. 

ach, a. see ceannairceach, 








-—— achadh, -aidh, s. m. Contention, 
strife. 2 Rebelling. A’ c—, pr.pt. of ceann- 
&irgich. 


ceannairgich, v.n. Rebel, contend, revolt. 

ceann-airm, $.m. General, head of an army. 

ceannainhág, (DU) s.f. Part at end of a field 
where the horses turn in ploughing (lit. end- 
rig)—W. of Ross. 

eeannamhagan, s.pl. iom of grass adjacent 
to growing corn.—SutA'd. 

ceannamhaide,(AH) s.m. Couple-leg in roof of 
& house. 

ceann-aobhair, -e, -ean, s.m. Prime cause, first 
cause. 

ceann-aodach. -aich, ' s. m. net 
Mitre. 3**Turban. 

ceannarra.(AC) a. Strong-headed. 

ceannarach, s.m.pl. Scraps of grass adjacent 
to growing corn—Argyll. 

ceannard, -aird, -an, s.m. Chief,chieftain,lead- 
er, commander-in-chief. 

ceann-àrd, -àirde, a. High-headed. 

ceannardach, -aiche, a. Commanding, ambiti- 
ous, arrogant, proud, imperious, dictatorial. 
2 Contident, dogmaticai, infiuential. 3}f 
High-headed. 

—— —— ——4, 3.f.ind. Arrogance, pride, imper- 
io'"sness, ambition. 2 Superiority, chieftain- 
ship. 

RN ir lei, -ais, $.m. see ceannas. 

cean-armailt, s.m. General, commander of an 
ariny. 

ceannas, -ais, s.m. Superiority. 2 Chieftain- 
ship. 3 Haughtiness, superciliousness, a ro- 
gance, forwardness, imperivusness. 4 The 
upper hand. 6**Ainbition. 6 Vausting. 

— — —Aach, -aiche, a. Superior. 2 Amb:tious, 
aspiring. 3 Authoritacive, commandi:g. 4 
**Haughty. 5**iieadstrong. 

—achd, s.f.ind. Superiority. 2 Ambition. 

3 Haughtiness, imperiousness. 4ffDespotisiu. 

-ciunidh, s.m.  Chieftainship». 

-feadhna, 8. am, Chicftainsuip of a clan 

or trib-. 

-fine, see c— -cinnidh. 

ceannasg, -aisg,-an, 8. m. fi'he forshead. 2 
Coif, hair lace, 8**Cap. 4**Headstali, 5 
Band. 6**Governinent, rulinz. 

*teeannath, son. Bargain, a :reement. 

ce .nu-ban-a’-.nhonaidh,) sm. Cotion-sedge, 
see ceumnach, 

ceann-barrach, -aich, 8.41. Jack-fish. pike. 

coann-beag, gen. cinu-Lhig, n.p’. cinn-bheaga, 
4.14. 
wages. 2 Certain proportion of crop, dress- 
ed in harvest in order to ascertain the pro- 


Head-dress. 














178 


Sheaf out of eaca shock as cottazers'! |. 


ceann-dubh 


b&ble quantity of the whole, generally called 
a “proof.” 

ceann-bhàrr, -a, -àn, s.m. (& /.] Hat, bonnet, 
cap, any male head-dress. Ceann-bharr eas- 
buig, bishop’s mitre, 

ceann-bheairteach, a. ceann-bheartach. 

ceann-bheart, -bheairt, pl. an [cinn-bheairt & 
cinn-bheartan, js.n, Helmet, head-piece. 

ach,a. Wearing or having a hel- 
met or head-piece. 

ceann-bheirteach, see ceann-bheartach. 

ceann-bhiorach, -aiche, a. Conical, pointed at 
the head. 








———— — —— — , -aich, s.m. see ceann-biorach. 
ceann-bhrat, -ait, s.m. Canopy. 
ceaun-bhriathar, -air, -thran, s.m. Adverb. 
ceaun-bhriathrach, a. Adverbial. 
ceann-bhriathrail, see c— -bhriathrach. 
ceann-bhruit, (for ceann-bhrait) gen. sing. of 
ceann-bhrat. 
tceann-bhurgaid, see ceann-phurgaid. 
¢ceann-bhurgair, 8.m. Burgomaxter. 
Tceann-biorach, 8.m. Prow of a ship, generally 
called *'ceaun-caol." 
ceann:biorach-na-doinionn, (AH) see ceann- 
biorach-na-stoirm. 


ceann-biorach-na-stoirm, (AH) s. m. Stormy 
petrel—cellaria pelagica. 
ceann-buidhne, ciun-bhuidhne, $. ?n. Captain 


of a company or party. 

ceann-caol, pl. cinn-chaola, s.m. Droe of a ship. 
2 Tapering or smaller extreinity of anything, 
distinguished from ‘‘ceann-garbh,”’ the thick- 
er extremity. 311 The head, in co..tra-dis- 
tinct.on to the lower extremities. 4(AH) The 
legs in contra-distinction to the head. Seas 
air do cheann-caol, stand upon thy head; tha 
duine a tha mach air a cheann-caol fad an là 
feumach air tois 'nuair à thige dhachaidh, a 
man who 18 out on his legs all day requires rest 
on coming home. 

ceann-carach.$f s.m. Jack (tool.) 

ceann-charr,** s.m. Dandriff. 

ceann-chathair, -thrach, -thraichean, s. f. Me- 
tropolis. 

counu-cheoladair, -e, -ean, s.m. Chief musician. 

ceann-cheud, s.m. Centnrion. 

ceann--hlaon, a. Headlong. 2 Steep. 

cvaniu-chuaz,(DU) see ceann-tobhta 1. 

ceann-cnoire, -ean, s.f. Capital otf.nce. 

tceann-chunn, s.m. Goad. 

esann-ciuneil, see ceann-cinridh. 

ceann-cinnidh, s.n. Chief, chieftain, head of 
& clan, cnief of a tribe. 

ceann-comhraidh, cinu-chomhraidh, s.m. Topic, 
subject of discourse. d 

ceann-connspoid, cinn-chonnspoid, s.m. Topis 
of debate. 

ceaun-ciiche, cinn-chriche, 3.m. Goal, end of 
a journey. 

ceaun-dà:z, «dàna, a. 
headstrong. 

—adas, -ais, s.m. Pertinacity, stubborn- 

ness, obstinacy. 

cvann-dearg, ere, a.m. Red-start, red-pole— 
12h anicura ruticilia [** gives motacilla 
phonicurus.]see iilust. 123. 211Redness of 
an evening sky, 

ceann-deargan,fi s.m. Redstart, see ceann- 
dearg. 2 Common redpole, see deargan- 
seilich. 3 (AH) High dawn, redness of à 
morning sky betokening unsettled weather. 

ceaun-deividh, sm, Quarter-deck. 

ceann-iubh, -uibhe, a. Black-hevaded, black- 
haired. 

ceann-dubh, s.m. Black-cap—currvca artica- 
pilla, 2 Marsh-titmouse—parus palustris, $ 


Pertinaciou;, stubborn, 


ceann-dubh 
(AF) Black red-start. 





180. Ceann-dubh (2) 
ceann-dubhag, see ceann-dubh. 


eeann-dubhan, s.m. Black-headed gull, see 
ent 

eeann-dubh-fraoich,(AF) 3.m. Reed-bunting, 
see gealag-dubh-cheannach. 

ceann-éideadhb,-idh, s.m. Head-dress. 2 Turban. 
3** Mitre. 

ceann-eudach, see ceann-aodach. 

ceann-fàth, ceann-fatha [& cinn-fath] $.m. see 
cion-fath. 

ceann-feachd, cinn-fheachd, o, om. see ceann- 
feadhna 2. 

ceann-feadhna, cinn-fheadhna, s.m. Chief. 
2 Captain, leader, commander, general. 

—————— ——chd,**s.f. Captainship. 

ceann-feadhnas, -ais, see ceannas-feadhna. 

ceann-ieodhna,** see ceann-feadhna. 

ceann-fhacal, -ail, s.m. Adverb. 

ceann-fhiodh, a, s.m. Roof timber, rafters. 

ceann-fhionn, a. White-headed, white-faced, 
as a cow or sheep. 2 Bald. 3 Grayish. 

»**3.m.é f. Name given to a white- 
headed or white-faced cow. 

eeann-fine, cinn-fhine, s.m. Chieftain, head of 
a clap, chief. Chaill iad ceann-fine no dha, 
they lost a chieftain or two. 

ceann-fineacha,** s.m. Head of a clan or tribe, 
head of a natiou. 

ceann-finid,(AH) s.m. Consummation, culmi- 
nation, finish, conclusion. 

ceann-fiodha, sam. End of a ship timber. 

+ceann-fuirt, ( for ceannaird) Chiefs, leaders. 

fceann-ghalar, air, s.f. Any disorder of the 
head, dolor capitis|. 2**Dandriff, scales on 
the head. 











— —— ach, a. Subject to diseases of the 
head. 2 Subject to dandriff. 

ceann-gharbh, -airbhe, a. 
Rough- or ragged-headed. 


179 


Thick-headed. 2 | 


ceannsach 


ceann-garbh,tt s.m. Thick end. 

ceann-gheal, Ale, o  White-topped, 
headed. 

ceaun-ghlas, -aise, a. Grey-headed. 

ceann-ghorm, -uirme, a. Blue-headed. 

ceann-ghràbh, s.m. Motto. 2 Superscription, 


title. 
adh, see ceann-ghrabh. 


ceann-Ileach, -Ilich, s.m. Sword-hilt of a shape 
peculiar to those manufactured in Islay. 

ceann-iüil, cinn-, $.1n. Guide, leader of the way. 
2**Chieftain. 

ceann-labhairt,{{ s.m. Eloquence. 2 Topic of 
discussion, 

ceann’-laidir, see ceann-laidir. 

ceann-laidir, a. Headstrong, stubborn, opin- 
ionative. Tha ic., she is headstrong. 
—— —— ——eachd, 3.f.ind. Stubbornness, ob- 
stinacy. 2 Opinionativeness. 3**stiffness. 
ceann-liath, -léithe, a. Grey-headed. 2 Grey- 
haired. 

ceann-litir,ceann-litreach, ceann-litrichean, s//. 
Capital letter. 

ceann-lon, a. Bare-headed. Mo nighean 
mhiog-shuileach cheann-lom, my smirking 
bare-headed maid. 

ane: ceann-mhaide, s.m. Block, block- 

ead. 

ceann-mathain, sf. Name of a star. 

ceaun-mathon, see c— -mathain. 

ceann-mhag, -aige, ceann-mhaga, s.m. Head- 
ridge in a ploughed field. 

ceann-molach, s.m. Tufted dun bird, see cur- 
racag. 

ceann-muinchill,1f cinn-mhuinichill, s.m. Cuff. 

ceann-nan-sith-uihaor, s.m. The Lyon-king-at- 
arms. 

ceann-paib, s.m. Tow-head. Chuir thu ceann- 
paib air mu dheireadh, you have put a tow- 
head on it at last. [MacIntosh in Gaelic Pro- 
verbs says, "said of those who destroy all 
the good they have done by an ill-deed."] 

ceann-phollan, -ain, an, s.m Tadpole, 

ceann-phort, ceann-phuirt, s.m. Head port. 

; pl, cinn-phuirt, s.m. 1fFounder, 
author. 2 Director of a choir. 

ceann-phurgaid, pl. ceann-phurgaidean, s. f. 
Gargarism, gargle. 

ceann-pluic,** s.m. Block, blockhead. 

ceann-puist, s.m. Chapiter, capital of a pillar. 

ceann-ràcain, cinn-racain, sm. R&ke-head. 2 
prov. Small portion of land. 

ceannrach, -aich, -aichean, s. m. Halter. 2 
Horse-collar. 3 Tether. 4 Snare. 6 Fillet. 
6tBridle. 

fceannragh, s.m. Head-stall, halter. 

ceannraig, s.m. see ceannrach. 

tceann-reiteachadh, -aidh, s.m. Propitiation. 

ceann-riabhach, -aiche, a.  Brindled in the 











head. 

ceann-roinge, s. Head or rib of a boat, see bata 
G16, p. 73. 

ceann-ruadh, -aidhe, a. Red-headed or red 
haired. 


ceann-ruadh, s.m. Celandine or swallow-wort. 
[Preceded by the article an.] The flower is 
yellow and not red, although called ruadh 
in Gaelic. see illust. 131. 

ceannruisgeach, see ceannruisgte. 

ceaunruisgte, a. Bare-headed. 

ceannruitheach, -eiche, a. Headlong, preci- 
pitate, rash. 

ceannsa, see ceannsach. 

ceann3ach, -aiche, a. Continent, temperate. 
2 Mild, gentle. 3**Bashful 4 Under au, 
thority, subordinate. 


ceannsachadh 





181. Cvann-ruadh. 

ceannsachadh, -ai.lh. s.m. Sukduing, command- 
ing, taming. 2 ixeeping under authority, 3 
Reducing, subjugatiun, subjection. A’ c—, 
pr.pt. of ceannsaich. 

ceannsachd, wt ‘Temperance, continence. 2 
Milduess, gentleness. 8 Anthority, govern- 
mont. 4 Subo:dination, condition of being 
kept under. 5**Docility, meekness Le c., 
with meek.iess, 

eeaunsaich, pr. pa-t. a’ ceannsachadh, v. a. 
Quell, vame, subdue, conquer, train, disci- 
pline, keep under. 

-—ear, Fut. pasg. of ceannsaich. 

-—idh, Jut. «jf. of ceannsaich. 

———-—tu, past part. of ceauusaich. Quell- 
ed, subdned, conqu red, disciplined, tamed. 

e»annsailh,"* a. Crement. 

ceanusal,-ail,s m. Rule. government, sway, 
authority «%*subjection. Loc.eannsal, sub 
jected ; do m’ ch. géillibh, yield (ye) to my Git: 
thority. 

-— ————a&ch, -aiche, a, Anthoritative, cour 
Manding. 2 Fit for rule. 3 Prone to rule or 
govern, 4 Swuyiiy. 5 **Ac ive, 6**Nupreme. 
Ceannard c., a coonmuanainj chi-f. 

-————ach, -aich, s.m. Commander, active 
leader. An c. mileauta, the brav» coiumuader. 

-—achd, s.f.ind. Rule, government, sway. 
2 Supremacy. 3**Authoritativeness. 4 Tyr- 
anny. 

ceannsaladh, -aidh, s.m. Dominion. 

ceaunsalaiche, -an, s.m. Con gerot, governor, 
subduer. 2**Overbearing mau. 

ceannsgal, -ail, sm. see ceannsal. 

--ach, a. & 8.m. see ceanusalach. 
ceann-sgalpan, -ain, s.m. see ceann-ghalar. 
ceann-sgriobh, see ceann-sgriobhadh. 

-= adh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Motto. 
2 Title, subject of MES C 

aichean, n.pl. of ceann-sgriobh. 

eeann-sgur, -à, ciun-sgur, s.m. Period, full stop 
in gram. ?1TtEnd. 

ceann-simid, s.m. Tadpole. 

ceaun-sithe, cinu-shithe, sm. Peace-maker. 2 
fi! Membrun virile. 

ceann-snaodh,(AC) einn-, s.m. Head of band 
of carol-singers who used to go about at 
Christmus-tune. 

ceanl-sprea:thach, -aiche, a. Headstrong. 

ceann-s.uaidh, -e, -ean, 3.m. Arch. 2 Gable 
top or head. 

ceann-«suxe, -e, cinn-shuic, 8.21, Share-beain, the 
part of a plouza to which the share is tixeu. 

ceann suidhe, cinn-shuidhe, sm. President. 

ceanu-taighe, cinn-taighe, s.m. Chiettaim. 2 
Head of a family. 3 Master of a house or 
household. 

——_—_—--——achd, ft s.f. Chieftaiuship. 

ceann-tala, ».m. Bard. 

*ceanntar, s.m. Hundred. 2t{Side of a country. 

ceann-teagaisg, ciun-theagaisg, 8. m. Text, 
subi.ct of di-conrse. 

ceann-teurma,(Ali) e, m. Death-stroke, acci- 














MË 


180 


e i 


ceapaire-Saileach 





dent or act of carelessness which results, 
sooner or later, in the death of a person in- 
volved therein. 
ceann-tire, cinn-tìre, s.m. Headland, promon- 
tory (it. land’s end.) 2 Peuinsuia. 
ceaun-tobar, 8.51. Well-cover. 2 Mother spring. 
cvann-tolihta, ciun-thobhta, s.m. Knee of time 
ber in à vessel, which connects the bench 
with thegunwale, thwart-brace. 2 Bench- 
head. 3t+Beam-end. 
ceaun-toiseach luinge, s.m. Prow or fore part 
of a ship. 
ceann-treuu, -@, a. Obstinate, headstrong, 
seif-conceited, foolhardy. 
ceann-trom, -truime, a. Drowsy, sluggish, 
heavy-neaded, dull. 
ceanu-troman,(AF) gan, Gurnet, gurnard.(fish) 
ceann-uaisgineach, -eiche, a. Rash, incautious. 
Ceaun-ualiach, -aiche, a. Proud, haughty, vain, 
ostentatious, silly. 
ceann-ubhall, cinn-ubhaill, sm. The bowl,ball, 
or ¿lobs on the top of a pillar. 
ceann-uadhe, cinn-uidhe, s.in. End of a journey, 
r)al, terminus, destination. 2 Hospitable 
andlord. 3 Dwelling-place. 4**Stage. Ceann- 
uidhe na bàigh, the dwelling-place of mercy; 
ceann-uidhe na féille, the head stage of hos- 
pitality. 
ceanuuigheachd, prov. for ceannachd. 
ceann-ür, s.. Paragraph in grammar (.) 
ceann-ürlair, see under bata, Al, p. 73. 
ceannus, see ceannas, 
tceausal, see ceannsal, 
ceap, cip, pl. cip ceapa & ceapan, 8.m. Block. 2 
Snoanaker's last. 3 Top, as of a hill. 
4 Stocks. 5 Trap, snare. 6 Sign set up, as à 
rallviug point in time of battle. 7 Cap. 8* 
Clog or stumbling block on a beast's foot. 9 
Sort of sofa or couch forined of peats, placed 
between the fire and the bed in the bothan- 
diridh, and used as a seat. 10 Nave of a 
wheel. 11**Head. Leag iad e, they (aid a 
snare ; peanas a’ chip, the punishment of the 
stocks: ceap nam 'mór chruach, the top of the 
lofty hills. 
ceap, pr.pt. &' ceapadh, v.a. Catch, stop, in- 
tercept, obstruct, keep. Ceap e, intercept him. 
ceapach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to, stumps 
or trunks of trees, or lasts. 
- , “aich, s.m. Tillage plot of land. 2** 
s.f. Decayed wood. 
ceapadh, -aidh, s.m. Intercepting, catching or 
stopping, a flying or falling body, whether 
avimate or inanimate. 2 Act of lasting, 
binding, or fettering. 3* Carping. A’ c—, 
pr.purt. of ceap. A’ c. chuileag, catching flies; 
bithidh e cho math dhuit an cothrom sina 
cheapadh, it will be as well for you to make 
the nvs? of that opportunity. 
-raun,tt s.m. Scanning. 


| ceapag, -aig, -an, 8f. Catch, verse or verses 


composed impromptu. 2 Wheel of a wheel- 
burrow. 8 Small pair of stocks.  4ff3mall 
turf, or sod. 5ttBlock. 6tCarelessly sung 
Verse, 
ceapaich,** v.a, Cap (catch.) 
- ean, 8.pl. Top sides or floats of a cart. 
ceapaig, (CR ;v.n. Catch, stop.—Perthsh. (Scot. 
kep.) 
ceapail, s.m. see ceapadh, 
ceapainn, v.a. see ceap. 
ceapaire, -an, 8m. Bread covered with butter 
and cheese. 
-Caluinn,(MM) s.m. Christmas ban- 
nock of saine kind as c— Saileach. 
-Sàileach, -an-, s.m. (lit. the Kintail 
piece) Slice of cheese covered with butter 


ceapaire-Sàileach 


of equal thickness—C.G.I. xiv, 148 

ceapan, -ain, pl. -an, 
stump, block, or last. 2 Pin. 

ach,tt-aiche, a. Of, or pertaining to, 

little stocks, blocks, or lasts. 

ta, a. Stiff. niggardly. 2*Snatching, 
8 Carping. 4ttThick, strong. Gu c., tn @ nig- 
garily manner. 

eeap-cartach, sm. Nave of a cart-wheel. 

oeap-ciun,(MMcD) s.m. Peat cut with a spade 
leaving tne grass on the top. 2 The surface 
cnt with a spade when cutting a new peat- 
bank.— Lewis. 

ceap-sgaoil, v.a. see craobh-sgaoil. 

ceap-tuislidh, s.m. Stu:nbling-bluck. 

tear, s.m. Blood, offspring, progeny. 

evar,(AF) s.m. Stag, roe, hart. 

fceara, a. Blood-c^!cured, red. 


> dd AN í 
Y ES 














182. Cearacan. 


eearacan,S e, m. Skirreis,—daueus carota and 
sium sisarum. Nam» applied to the roots of 
these and curran earraich. 

fcearach, s m. Waucderer. 2 Indigent person. 

adh, s.m. Wanderiug, straying. 2 
**Deliriousness. (not t in **) 

fcear4char, s.m. Grave. 

cearb, cirbe, dat. cirb, pl. cearb n, af, Rag, 
fatter. 2 Skirt. 3 Piece of cloth. 4 Imper- 
fect or ragge:l piece of dress. &*Corner. 6 
Defeco. 7**Lappet. SifExcrescenes. Rug 
e air chirb, he laid hold ofa skirt; òran gun c., 
a sony without defect; faigh c., cavil, rail, 
slander; a’ faghail c. orra. railing at them; c. 
nan neul, the skirt of the clouds. 

teearb, s.m. Cutting. z Slaughtering. 3 Mo- 
nev, silver. 4t{Contribution, subsidy. 

cearbach,-aiche, a. Ragged, imperfect in dress. 
2 Awkward, cluinsy. 3 Not neat, not coni- 

act, untidy. 4*Unfortunate. 5 Afterwise. 
Ts c. nach robh thu an seo, it is a pity you 
were not here; is c. an gnothach e, it is an un- 
fortunate affair; cho e ris a’ chuileig a 
chaidh ain bainne MhicCodruim, as awkward 
as the fly that went into MacCodrum’s milk, 
iM. the Uist bard, while ona visit to some 
ouse, received one day for dinner a barley 

bannock and avery small quantity of milk. 
A fly happening to go into the bowl, M. took 
advantage of the incident to draw attention 
to the scarcity of the milk; ‘“I'ubaist ort, a 
chreutair chearbaich,” ars’ esan, ‘‘a dhol 
g’ ad bhàthadh fhéin far am faodadh tu 
grunnachadh ?” “plague on you, you awk- 
ward creature," said he, “to go and drown 
yourself where you might easily have waced’’; 
the host thereupon said *'thoir an corr bainne 
do 'n duine,” ‘ ‘give the man more milk;" M. 
replied “tha diol an arain a dh’ annlann 
agam," “I have enough milk for the bread" — 
meaning 4 have very little bread either.) 





eearbachd, sJf.ind. Awkwardness, clumsiness. | tcearchall,-aill, sm. Pillow, bolster. 


181 


cearchall 


2 Raggedness. 3 Want of neatness, 


[& -ain] s. m. Little|cearbadan-dé, see dearbadan-dé. 


cearbayan,** s.m. Frippery. 

cearbaiche, see cearbachd. 

cearhail,-e, a. see cearbach. 

cearbair, -ean, 8.m. Awkward or spiritless per- 


son. 

——— ——eachd, 3.f.ind. see cearbachd. 

cearbalachd, 8.f.ind. see cearbachd. 

cearban, -ain, -an,s.m., Sail-fish, basking-shark. 
23 Buttercup, crowfoot—ranunculus. 

cearbanach, 8.24. see cear- 
bhanach. 

cearban-fedir,§ s.m. Up- 
right meadow crowfoot, 
—ranunculus aeris. 


cearbhachd,tt sr In- 
correctness. 
tcearbhal, a. Deceitful. 


hurtful. 

teearbhall, s. m. 
cre, carnage. 133. Cearban-: dir. 

cearbhanach, s.m. Mullet. [With article an.] 

awe -e, -ean, 8.f. Gaelic spelling of car- 

ine. 

tcearbusair, s.m. Banker. 

cearc, gen. circe, dat. circ, pl. cearcan, s.f Hen. 
Ceann ciree, a witless head; cridhe circa an 
gob na h-airce, a hen's heart in the mouth of 
poverty. 

--——ach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to, a hen 
or hens. 2 Like a hen. 

cearcag, -aig, -an,s.f. Littlehen. 

cearcall, -aill, -an, s.m Hoop, circle, ring. 2* 
Circumference. C. fuileach na ré 's i lan, the 
bloody circumf-rence of the full moon ; ged a 
chuireadh tu c. air Albainn, though you should 
include all Scot/and. 

ach, -aiche. a. Circular, resembling a 
hoop, hooped. 2 Havinv hoops. 8 Rounded. 
411 Curled. A braghad c. bàn, her rounded 
fair neck. 
aich, v.a. Circle, surround. 

— ——&Bichte. past.pt. Circled. 

—— —— —- Aanàis, s.m. Lower hoop, as of a cask. 
Is math an c-arcall-màis deagh bhean-taighe, 
a good housewife is as necessary to a family 
as the bottom hoop to a cask; thilg e a chear- 
call-mais,—he threw off all restraint,—refer- 
ing to the important par the bottom hoop 
plays in holding a cask together. 

—— —— -nan-sül, s.m. Iris of the eye. 

cearc-choille, gen. ciree-coille, dat.circ-choille, 
pl. cearean-coille, see cearc-thomain. 

-chrulhach(AT) s.f. Partridge. 





Massa- 








—— Eo N } (AF) Crested hen. 
-feucaig, see c— -pheucaig. 








-Fhrangach, gen. circe-Frangaich, dat. 

circ-Fhrangaich, pl. cearcan-Frangach, 8. f. 

Turkey-hen. 

-fhraoich, gen. circe-fraoich, dat. ciro- 

fhraoich, pl. cearcan-fraoich, sf, Moor-hen, 

female of the red grouse. 

-ghlopach,** gen. circe-glopaich,dat. ciro- 

ghlopaich, pl. cearcan-glopaich, s. f. Hen 

whose head is covered with down. 

-ghreannach, s.f. Rough-feathered hen, 

called Russian hens and French hens in parts 

of the Highlands and Isles, and ‘‘frizzles’’ by 

fanciers. 

-ghur, gen. circe-guir, dat. circ-ghuir, 

pl. cearcan-guir, s.f. Brooding-, sitting-, or 
*elucking-" hen. 

teearchaill, -e, -ean, s.f. Pillow, bolster. 2$3 
Clumsy man. 














—o—— 3 





cearc-Innseanach 188 beàrr apes 


eearc-Innseanach, **  oirce-Innseanaich, pl.|cdardabhan, s.m. Beetle. (also carnabhan.) 
cearcan-Innseanaoh, 8. f. Indian hon.  2|cóardach,-aich,-aionean, s.f. Smithy, forge, 
(AF,Guinea hen. smith's sbop. 

cearclach.** a. see oearcallach. , &f.ind. Bnusinessof a tiuker. 3 

oearclag,** s.f. Circlet. Forging. 8 Mechanics. 

oearolaiche,** s.m. Hooper. cdardaich, dat. sing. of cóardach. 

cearclaichte,** see cearcallaichte. 1céardaiche, -an, 8.m. Mechanic. 

oearciair,** s.m. Hooper. céardatl, a.  "linker-ike 2 Of, or belonging 

tcearc-lann, A, -an, sJ.  Hen-house. $**| toatinker. S**Artificial. 4**We!l-wrou ht. 
Poultry-yard. 5**Commercial. 6 Tradesmau-like, business- 

cearo-lobhta,** s.m. Hon-roost. like. 

t¢cearo-loch, s.n. Hen-roost. céard-airgid, 8.m. Silversmith. 

fcearo-mhànrach, s f. Hen-coop. cóaralacnd, 8.f.ind. Handicraft. 2 Ingenuity. 

cearo-otrach,( AE) &f. Common or barn-door| 3*sShamefulcouduct. 4fflinkerishness, 5** 
Artificialuess. 6 Skilfulness, tradesimau-like 
manner. 

céardaman,* -ain, see cóard-dubhan. 

tvéardaiobnil, a. Artificial. 2 Well-wronght. 

coardamnatachd, tt s.f.ind. see céardalachd. 

céard-dubhan, -ain, s.n. Dung-beetle 2 Sca- 
rabeeus. 3 Hornet. 4 see céarr-dubhan. 

céard-fhiollan, see céarr-dubhan. 

ceard-oir, 8.m. see or-cheard. 

céard-staoin, s.m. Tinsmith. 

ceard-.imuna, 8.m. Coppersmith. 

tevaricur, s.m. Graye. 

tcearl, v.a. see ceirslich. 

teearla, pl. -n, 8.m. see ceirsle. 

tceariach, a. see ceirsleach. 

cearmanaich,(CK) v.a. Tidy—Perthsh. | 

cearmanta, a. Tidy, spruce, trim, succinet, 
compact, collected. 

—————chd,** s. f.ind. Same meanings as 
cearmanéas. 

—8, -&is, s.m. Tidiness, trimness, com- 

pactness, succinctness. 

cearmontan, -ain, 3.2. Kind of herb. 

fcearmnas, -ais, s.m. Lie. 

cèarn, -a, -an, 8.f. Corner, quarter, region. 2 
Kitchen. StfMan. +4t{Victory. 61lExpense, 
611Hold of a ship. 7 Rectangle. Céarnan 
iomallach, remote corners; sluagh bho gach 
c., people from every quarter; có an c. de 'n 
t-saoghal am bheil e ? in what quarter of 
the world is he 1 tc. duais, an athletic laurel. 

tcéarnabhan, -ain, an, s.f. Corner. 2 Hornet. 
8, AC) see céarr-dubhan. 

céarnach, -aiche, a. Angular, cornered. 2 
Square. t3 Victorious. 4**Of, or belonging 
to, a kitchen. | 

-—— ———,* -aich, 8.m. see ceàrnag-ghloine, 

fcearnach, s.m. seecarnach. 

oé&rnadh, see cearn. 

céarnag, -aig, -an, sf. Narrow or small corner. 
2**Little square. 3**íittle kitchen. 4**Cor- 
ner-stone. 5 Square ina town. Céarnag an 
Leas-righ, Regent’s Square. e 

———ach,++-aiche, a. Of, or pertaining to, 
little corners, or to squares. 

——— -balia, -aig-, -an-, 8.f. Corner, or exter- 
ior angle of a wall. x 

-ghloine, -aig-gloine, -an-gloine, s. J. 

Pane of glass. 2 (MM) Quarry of glass. 3 

Lozenge of glass. 

-léigh, s.f. Tablet. 

cóarnaichte,** past part. Angulated. 

céarnair, s.m. Conqueror. 

tcéarn-airrdhe, s.f. Trophy. 

céarnan, -ain, An, &.m. Quadrangle, square. 

cearnan, (AF) s.m. Cockroach. 











hen. 
oearc-pheucaig, tt st Pea-hen. 
cearc-riobach, s.f. Argyll for c— -ghreannach. 
cearc-shealbhag,(Al) s.f: .Hen or fowl paid of 
old to the falconer of the Jord of the mauor. 
cearo-thomain, gen. circe-tomain, dat. circ- 
thomain, s.f.-Partridge.—Yperdiz cinerea. p 
gives tetrao peraiz. | 









184. Cearc-thomain. 
cearc-thomain dhearg-chasach,fi s.f. Red-leg- 
ged partridge—perdiz rufa. 


oct 


1$5.Cearc-thomain dhearg-chasach. 
cearc-thopach,** gen. circe-topaich, dat. circ- 
thopaich.s.f. Tufted hen. 
cearc-thopanach,(MM) see o— -thopach. 
ecearc-uisge,f sJ. Water-hen.—gallinula chlo- 
ropus. 9 Moor-hen. 8 (AF) ™*hchick. 











loe v urc-uiége. 

céard, cdaird [& ciùird], pl. céardan [cidird,** 1 
càirdinnean & céairdinnean,] s. m. Tinker. | tcéarn-dhuaichd, &.f. see cearn-(uais. 
2 Smith, brazier, any tradesman working | tcéarn-duais, s.f. Prize, athletic laurel. 
at smith-work of any kind. 8 Mechanic. 4|tceéarn-fearnadh, -aidh, s.m. Destroying. 
Blackguard. The word céard is seldom used | fcéarn-luach, am. Prize. e 1 
in seuxe No. 2, except in composition, as, | cearn-riaghailt, -e, -ean, s. f. Square, (joiner's 
fear-céaird, a tradesman; céard-airgid, a eil-| tool.) , 
versmith; brathair-ceaird, a fellow tradesman., | tceurr, a. Woundinyg, cutting. 3 


céarr 


còrr, -a & ciorra], a. Wrong, awkward. 2 
Uniucky.. 3 Left. 4 Left-handed. +6{tCnt- 
ting. té${Woundivg. 7 Astray. An taobh 
C., the wrong sive; chaidh e c., he went wrong; 
deilg "oan gualaibh c., pins in their left 
shoulders; a’ bheart sin nacu faighear ach c. 
is i foighidinn a's fhearr a dheanamh ritha, 
what cannot be helped should be borne with 
patience ; is fhaid’ an làmh ch. na 'n làmh 
cheart, the wrong (left) hand is longer than the 
right—a n way of saying that & person 
is a thief; tha sinn c. '8 gun fhios agaiun, we 
are astray and have lost our bearings. (The 

_ form cearr given iu dictionaries is prov.] 

j-——,° adv. (i.e. gu cèarr) Improperly. Is c. 
a - m bhu, you have acted very impro- 
periy. 

a,* s.f. Impropriety, wrongfulness. 

,cearr&can,** s.m. Carrot. 

i eéarraoh, -aich, -aichean, s.m. Gamester, dex- 

| terous player of games, gambler. 

; -àiche, ga. Expert, skilful. 

— — —4, s f.ind. Dexterity, skill in playing 

games. 

còarradan, (AC) see càarr-dubhan. 

céarrag, -aig, .an, s.f. The left hand. 

ea -aiche, a. Left-handed, 
céarra-ghob,(AE) & Avocet (bird.) 











137. Céarra-ghob. 


fcéarraiche, s.n. Master of one's art or pro- 
essivun. 2 Gatester, gamt ler, dicer. Cha 
cheilich c. a dhisnean, a gambler will not con- 
ceal hir dice, 

cèarraman, see céarr-dubhan. 

céarran, see céarr-dubhan. 

céarran-eré, (AF) s.m. Clay- or earth-beetle. 

cearrbhach, -aich, -aichean, s.m. see creach. 

céarrbhach, see càarrach. 

cearrbliag, s.f. see cóarrag. 

tcéarr'eniall, sf. Madness, insanity. 

céarr-daolag, see céarr-dubhan. 

céarr-daolan, see cdurr-dubhan. 

céarr-dut.han,(AC) s.n. The sacred beetle. 

céarr-fhiollan, see céarr-dubhan. 

céarr-lamhach,a. Left-handed. 2 Awkward. 
Fear o., a left-handed inan. 

céarr-mrarcach, -aiche. a. Obliquely riding. 

ceacrsach, (AF) s.m. Corn-craik, see treun-ri- 
trenn. 


cearsall,** s. f. Clew. (ceirsle) 
ceart,-eirte, a. Eji:ht. 2 Just, honest, up- 
recht. 8 Proner, 4 Certain. 5 Fair. € 


Correct, exact, identical. Tha'tbu c., you are 
correct; baa Noah "ua dhuine c. agus iomlan, 
Noch wasa just man and perfect; ane. duine, 

*a’ ch. duino.) the identical man; an c. ni a 

ha diitb orin. the very thing I wanted: air 
a'ch Iå, on the very rame day; an c. uair, 
(pronounced an ceaitair] this very moment ; 
c. mer «in, just «n. i« c. cho math leam seo ri 
siu, Zirk? this just as well as that. 


——^ eut em. Right, justice. $ Propriety. | ———— sch, -aiehe, a. see 


183 





ceart-nil.e-ulhonaeh 


3°*Righteonsness. 4**Hedrcss. Agus rinm 
ean c., dnd he exccuted Zug (ve, cuir C., rectify, 
correct; bayn ceirt. justice. 

-—,* adv. Equaly, 2 Just, exactly, precise- 
ly. C. cho math, cquad well; c. mar a thud 
airt thu, exact/y as yor suid: c, mar Pach tUg- 
adh bia faincar, justus thoryh God did not 
008^rvé; C. iuar gu m bitbeida, just as it it 
were. 

t—-, $m. Refection. critical remark,  £** 
Ray, oid gariuent. St: iept, due. 

cearta, (DU) af. Ball of string, twine or yarn. 
Gairloch for ceirsie. 

ceartach. -aich, -aichean, 8.m. see ceartachadh. 
Ceartaichean, little doines.ic jobs. 

-————adh, -aidh, 8. m.  Adju-tine, rectify- 
ing. 2 Mending, trimning. 3 buteiuy into 
order. 4 Little domestic Jub. — 5**Pariug, 
pruning, dressing. 6f.Itebuang. 7**Accoin- 
modarion, SfyAmendment. A’ c—, pr.part. 
of ceartaich. 

-———— ail, -e, a. Reotifiable. 2 Reclaimable, 
S Ready to rectify or adjust. 4[iCorrective. 

-— ———air,-ean, s.m. Adjuster. 2 Bee rr, 
8 Regulator. 4**F4litor. 6 Printer’s reader. 
C. uaireadair, a watc’- or clock regulator. 

———————à,'* SE Adaptation. 21;Allomable- 
ness. 

ceartaich, pr.pt. a’ ceartachadh, v.a. Adjust, 
recoify, put torights, amend. 2**Uut, prune, 
trim, 

-———e, -an,a.m. Adjuster, correcter. 
eartair adv. (geueral'y “an ceartair’) The 
present time. Thig ean c., he will come ina 
moment— future time)— Lewis & most parts ; 
baa e au seo au C., he was here just now (past 
time— Harris. 

ceartais, grn.aing. of cenrtas. 

ceartas, -A)8, s. m. Justice, equity. Dean c., 
decide tinpartiacly; 's iad e. agus breitheanas 
aite-taiml do iizh-chaitbreach, justice aad 
judgment are the habitati n of thy throne: tha 
do ch. ard, thy justic: is hi h; c. na e'éir ri 

béile, the redress that the clergy give to euch 
other. 

ceart-bheirt,tt s.f. Good turn. 2 Good deed. 

ceart-bireith, e, -»an, 8. f. Righteous judg- 
ment, just decision or sentence. 2**Pirth- 
right. [Generally cofr-bhreth.|) Bheir e c. 
air do shliagh, he skall pronounce a right- 
eos judgment on thu people. 

——— —-——-each, -eicue, a. Righteous or just . 
in judgment. 

—— —-— -eumh,-eimh, pl. -an [-nan & -a] s.m. 
Just judge. 

———-— vanas, -ais, 4.7. Just or righteous 
judgment. 2 J ist retribution or visitation. 

ceart-c-ndnaabd.gf a.f.ina. Identity. 

ceart-chainnteach, -eiche, a.  Grammatien].* 
ceart-choimeaa,** -eis, s.m. Just resemblance, 
just compar’son. 

My ic. $.m.ind. Sound faith, ortho- 
Qoxy. 

ceart-chreidimhich,**s. «ee ceart-chreidmheach 

ceurt-chreidmhe. ca, -eiche, @ Orthodox, of 
sourd faith. 

—— ———— ——, eich, sm. Orthodox peor- 
son, one of sound feith. 

— i,t} sind. Orthodoxy. 

ceartla, see ceirsle. 

ich, see ceirslich. 

fceart-lann, sz, House of correction, 

tceart-iar, s.m. Ceitre, middle Joint. 

ceart-lugheacud, sf. Just recouipense or re- 
ward. 

ceart-ujhiea&dhon, -oin, -an, see teis-meadhon. 


teis-mea- 












E -~ 


ceart-inheadhonach 


dhonach. 

eeart-sgriobhadh, -aidh, 8. m. 

| corr ct writing. 

ceart-sgriobhaiche, s.m. Orthographer, correct 
writer. 

evart-sgriobhair, s.m. see c— -sgriubha'che. 

weart-thomhasadh,** -aidh, s.m. Admeasure- 
ment, admensuratiou. 

eeartuair, adv. see ceartair, 

‘ceartuich, see ceartaich. 

eeng, s.m. Gaelic spelling of case (receptacle 
only ; and 2 kiss. 

fceas, -a, $m. Obscurity. 2 Irksomeness. 3 Sad- 
ness. 4łtVision. 5 Ore, metal. 

fceas, ad oeas, (for it chunnacas ) Was seen. 

céas, tt -an, s.m. Coarse tuft of matted wooi. 

—ach, -aiche, a. (DU)Matted. 2 Of, or per- 
taining to, matted wool. 8 Ungainly, awk- 
ward. Cloimh ch., matted wool, 

——ach, -aich, s.m. Ungainly figure—A rgyU 
RR. d 

oeasach,* -aich, s.m. Temporary bridge or foot- 
pato over bogs—ZJslay. 

——~d, see casaid. 

eeasad, -aid, -aidean,s.m. see casaid. 2(AH) 
Conceaiing or denying one's good fortune or 

rosperity. 3*Itepining, grumbling at one's 

ot, or share of anything. 

ach, -aiche, a. see casaideach. 2*Repin- 

ing, whining, discontented, displeased with 

o1:e's «hare of anything. 

air, s.m, see casaldiche. 

fceasadh,-aidh, see ceusadh. 2** Vexation, 
puuis. ment 

eeasan, see ciosan. ' 

céanan,** -ain, s.m. Coarse wool of the flank. 

Coarg, 8. J. Tufe. 2 (AC) Floss, au animal 
wiih long flossv hairor wool, sheep. ` 3 Su- 
pernatural creature of great beauty, half wo- 
mau, half gils. 4 Fresh-water mermaid 
with long and flossy hair. C, lin, @ tw/t of 
fue lint; c. sioda, a tuft of fine silk; c. 
cloiiane, a £ft of fine wool, 

fceusiach, -aica, sf. Coarse wool on the bor- 
ders of a fleece. 2**Fine wool. 

tceaslaid, s f. see ceall-shlad. 

fecusna, sm. Necessity, want. 

feceasnacn, a. see casaideach & ceasnacbadh. 

ceasuachadh, -aidh, s.m. Examination by ques- 
tious, questioning, scrutiny, searoh. A‘ c—, 
pr.part. of ceasnaich. 

ceasn&chail, e. Taterrogatory, inquisitive. 2 
lm ertinent, 

ceasnuchair,** s.m. Catechist, catechizer.| 

cea-nacnd,** ef. Inquisitiveness. 

Goasn. ich, v.a. Examine, catechize, question, 
search. 








te, past pt. of ceasnaich. Examined. 
catechized, questioned, searched. 

fceas-naoidhean, s.f. Infant weakness, kind of 
disease, 

ceasnuicn, 





see ceasnaich. 

-——te, see ceasnaichte. 

tceast, s.m. Girdle. 2 AF,Sheep. 

*tceata-cam, s.m. The seven stars ‘‘plough,” or 
"great bear.'' 

ceatain, see ceitein. 

ceatal,** Gaelic spelling of kettle. 

fceatfàdh, s.m. see ceud-fath. 

Ach, &. see ceud-fathach. 

1— — —&chd, s.f. Lust. 

evatach, a. see ceutach. 

fceoat-eca m, see ceata-cam. 

tcvath, sf. Cream (see cé.) 2 Quay. 3 Show. 
er, (ceatha.) 4 rarely Sheep. 

*- ër va. Skim, a» milk. 

ceath,(AF) Jackdaw, see cathag. 








And 


Orthography, | ceathach, -aich, 


ceathrar 





tecwiha, 8J. Shower. 

$.m. Mist, fog, vapour. Aa 

c. a’ sediadn, the mist gliding; mar ch. ah 

beanntaibh, as mist on the hills: uisge cea 

aich, misty rain ; coire a’ cheathaich, 

misty corrie. 

ail, -e, 
smoky. 

ceathair, a. see ceithir. l 

— ——— -bheannach, a. see ceithir-chèarnach. 

-chasach, @. see ceithir-chasach. 

-ohéarnach, a. see ceithir-chéarnach. 
-chosach, @. see ceithir-chasach. 

— -deug, G. see ceithir-deug. 

fceathair-dhüil, s.f. The world as consisting 
of four elements. 

ceathairle, -an, sf. see ceirsle. 

——-àch, -eiche, a. see ceirsleach. 

ceathairleag, -eig, -an, LI. ses ceirsleag. 

ceathairlich, v.a. see ceirslich. 

—— — —-——-te, see ceirslichte. 

ceathairne, sf.ind. Peasantry. 2 Yeomanry. 

8 That portion of the male population that is 

fit to bear arms. 4ttParty of men. 6ftStout 

men. 


a. Misty, foggy, vapoury, 











-—ach, s.m. see ceatharnach. 
-——achail,ft a. see ceatharnachail. 
-——achd, s.f. see ceatharnachd, 
-chuille, s.pl. Freebooters, outlaws, 

persons under hiding. 

Tceatharb^, see ceatharn. 

fcea hardha a. Belonging to four. 
ceatharlagach, -aiche, d. see ceirsleagach. 
ceatharn, -airn, -airne, sf. Troop. 2 Guard. 

8 Fighti.g band. 4 Party of freebooters. 

Sa a dh'rüeitheas ceathairne, as freebooters 

wait, 

-—ach, -a.ch, 8 m. 
2 Hero. 8 Stout, trusty peasant. 
robust man. 5* Freebvoter, robber. 
Boor. 

-—achail,t? e. Plebian. 
oecatharnach-coille, s.m. Freebooter, outlaw. 
ceatharnachd, s.f.ind. Valour. heroism. 4 

Deed of strength or courage. S**Freebootíng. 

4**Peasantry. 5**Yeomanry. 
ceatharuail,ff e @ Peasant. 
ceaiharnas, -ais, &.m. see ceatharnachd. 

——— —-.— -coille, -ais-, s.m. Outlawry. 

fceathar-ràmhach, see ceithir-r——. 

ceathmaid, see ceath. 

ceathnaid,(AF) s./. Sheep. 

be pl. Four-footed animals,cattle, quad- 
rupeds. 

¢ceathrachdamh, a. Fortieth. 

ceathramh, &. Fourth. An e mìos, the fourth 
month; anc. bliadhna, the fourth year. 

, aimh, -an L-ambnan 

-annan]e.w. Fourth part, quarter. 

2 Measure of 8-fourpenny lands. 8 

Firlot or four pecks. 4**Bushel. 8 

Thigh. 6 Stanza. 7 Leg of beef, 

Meier, gg, 8** Lodging. 9(A 

) 
fy 














Soldier, guardsman. 
4 Strong 
6 





see ceathra. 10 Quarter in herald- e 


1$8.Ceathramh. 
ceathramban, -ain, s.m. Quadrant. 2 Cube. 
ach, a. Quadrated. 2 Cubical. 


ceathramhan-eaorach, -ain-, 4.m. Com- 








ceathrainhan-luain-grioilag, asna. Com- 
mon orache, see praiseach-mhìn. 

ceathrambnach, e. Quarterly in ke- 
raldry. 

veathramhnan, s.pl. Quarters, lodgings. 

ceathrar, a. Four. [Generally used of 
persons only.—Followed by — 189.Ceathram- 
genitive plural.] C. mhac, nech. 


mon orache, see praiseach-mhin. =, 
Ki 


ceathrar 185 
Jour sons: c. Lhan, four women ; c. ag éirigh 
mu ràmhan, four men rising at his vars. 

, sm. & f. Fourpersons. ;'lhainig c. 
& staizn, Jour (persons) came «n. 
cé.chruathaenaddhb, s.m. Cusmogony. 

te daa adv. At first, see air tus, 

ceideach,(AF) s. Pet lamb. 

ce-eolas, -wis, sm. Geography. 


















eé-ghrabhachd,**s.f. 
cé-chrabhadh,-aida, s.m, f Geography. 
có-ghràbhair,** s.m. Geographer. 


ce h-àm? (for ce’n t-àm) adv. At what time? 
when ? a 

ce h-uair ? (force 'n uair) edv. At what hour? 
when ? 

ceibe, gen. of ceaba. 

fcéide, s.f. Market, fair. 2 Green. 

t -eideamhain, see Céitein. 

tceilghrinneachd, s.f. Ripeness of age. 

ceidhe, -an, s.m. Quay, pier. 2ttCouiter-hol-. 
der of a plough. 

fceidiol, s.m. Duel, eonflict. 

evig, -e, -ean, s.f. Mass of matted wool or hair. 
ZttLuump, bunch. 3 Clumsy, useless append- 
age. 4 Gaele spelling of kick. 

. vV.Q. & H^. Colicc, into bunches er knots. 
2 Gaelic spelling of kick. 

——each, a Squat, low of stature. 2 Shape- 
less, clum-ily formed. 3 Inactive. 4(AC) 
Shaggy, uaving long 1natted hair or wool. 5 
**Canting. 6ttLumpy, bunchy. Dhanns- 
adi na gobhair ch., the shaggy goats would 


8 Hillock. 





dance. 

—each,(AC> -gich, s.n. Sheep. 2 Goat. 

— eadh, -idh, s.m. Clotticg. 2 Jumbling. 3 
Gaelic form of kickiny. 

ceigean,-ein,-an, s.m. Diminutive and urhand- 
some person. 2 Corpulent man, ciumsity 
formed and of low--tature.  8** ‘Turd. Ar 
Tuft of shag. 5** Affected person. 6ffClot 
of fat. gttGundle, burden of hay, straw, &c. 

ach, a. Squat, diminutive in person. 2 

Affected, canting. 3**Likeaturd. 4{tMat- 

ted. 5ff{Corpulent. 6**Trifling, tidgety. 

-ach, -aich, s.m. Small squat person. 2 

Unkempt person.  Ceigeanach dubh, ceann 

gun chireadh,—said to an unkempt person in 

Lewis. 

achd,** 
2 Diminutiveness. 

ceigein, see ceigean. 

— each,** see ceigeanach. 

eachd, see ceigeanachd. 

ceighe. an, s.m. see ceidhe. 

ceigicn, n.pl. of ceigeach. 

ceig-rüsgach,ff-aiche, a. Thick-fleeced. 

ceil, pr. part. a’ cleith [a' ceileadh, a’ ceilt- 
cadh, a’ ceilteach dh, & a’ ceiltiun,] v. a. 
Conceal, hide, z*»5helter, screen. 3**Deny. 
Ma cheileas sinn 'fhuil, jf we conceal his 
biood. {Ceil is generally construed with the 
prep. "uir," simple or compounded. Cha chei! 
sinn e air ar cloiun, we shall not conceal it 
nm our children; na c. orm t’ àitheanta, 

idenot from me thy laws. | 

eéil, see céill. 

céile, s.m. & f. Spouse. 2 Husband. 3 Wife. 
4 Equal, match. 5 Servant. Athairc., a 
father-in-law ; màthair ch., a mother-in-law ; 
céile-cómhraig, a» antagonist, a match in 
combat ; c. & h-òige, the husband of her youth; 
a céile, her husband ; a ch. chadail, the wife of 
his bosom; as a ch., asunder, disjointed: a 
chnm a ch., towards each other ; dh fhuath- 
aich iad a ch., they hated each oth 7; miadhai 








s.f.ind. Sqnatness, stoutness. 
8 Affectation. 








m’ ach., fond of each other; cuir r' a ch. iad, | céilidh, v.n. 
join then, make them fight; bho (or 0) chéile, | céiiidheach,** a. Companionable. ^ 


tevile .Liwadh,-aidh, s.m. 


ceileann, 
ccilear, s.a. Ier 











tceile-de, s.m. Preserver of the fires. 

















ceilg, gen.sing. of cealg. 


céilidh, -ean, s.f.[m. in some places. ] 


mc | 


eéilidheach 


asunder.separate; a pdgadh a ch., kissing each 
other; a’ brosnachadh ach., mutually urging 
one another; thoir o c. iad, separate tien ; 
cuni o ch. lad, keep them separated ` mar a’ 
clir-mhealasilidh do bhilean, ach! as the 
honeycomb thy lips drop sweetness, O spouse P 
a’ gabhail d a eh., belabouring each other ; 
thar a chéile, at variance; Clanna nan 
Gàidheal an guallaibh a chéile ! Descendants 
9f the Gael, shoulder to shoulder ! (lit. in the 
shoulders of each other), also often written. 
“ri guallaibh a chéile.” ['lhe term Gdidheal 
is frequently erroneously translated “High- 
lander," which is only a political Sasunnach 
word invented to keep Gaels asunder and 
consequently comparatively helple-s.] Ai 
measg a ch., confused, huddled; chaidh iad am 
badaibh a chéile, they fought tooth and naii; le 
chéile, together ` troimh a chéile, in disorder, 
in confusion, mixed, stirred about. [As. 
"match" céile is never used with personal 
pronouns.] 


céile, adv. ( for a chéile) Across. 
fceileabhair, v. n. Bid farewell. 2tt Greet. 3 


Celebrate. 
Leave, farewell. 2 
Salutatiou. 3 Conference. 4 resivity. 


ceileach,t a. Martial. 
———adh, 
céileadach,** a, Abditive. 
cé. lesadail,** a. Abditive. 
céileadair,* s.m. 
ceileadh,-lidh, s.m. Concealing, hiding, sereen- 


pr.part. of ceil, see ceileadh. 


see cileadair. 


ing, covering. Q2** Denying. 3** Conc.al- 
ment. 4**Hiding-place. 5**Purloining. A’ 
c--, pr. part. of ceil. 

see cilean. 

Light, lively musie, cam- 
monly applied to the singing of birds, war- 
ble, warbling. 2**Sonnet, melody. 3**Cun- 
cealer, coverer, screener, shelterer. Cluinn- 
idh Gall an ceilear 'na cheò, Gaul shall hear 
their warbling and be stupified therewith. 

— ach, a. Musical, warbling, melodious. 
2ttChirping. 

ach,** s.m. Warbling, melody. 

achd,* s.f. Chirping. 

2 Cul- 
dee. [fanciful word.) 


Tceilegheall, v.a. Betrothe, affiance. 
ceileir, s.m. 
— —, pr,part.a' ceileireadh, v.n. Chirp, war- 


see ceilear. 


ble. 2 Sing sweetly. Mar smeòrach a’ ceii- 
eireadh, warbling like a mavis. 

each, a. see ceilearach. 

eachd, see ceilearachd. 

eadh,tt see ceilear. 2 pr.part. of ceileir, 
ean, -ein, s.m, see ceilear. 

ich, v.n. see ceileir. 


ceileiriche, s.m. Warbler, songster. 2% Blue- 


throated warbler—phænicura suecica. 
[Sometimes used as 


the nominative. ] 


céilich, v.n. Participate, share in. 2 Eat. 3** 


sev cealaich. 4**:ee ceil. 5**Purloin. 

Gos- 
siping. visiting, visit. 2 Sojournmy. 3 Pil- 
grimage. Air chéilidh, on a visit, gossiping 3 
an fheadh 's [* erroneously gives * Kei & 
bhitheas tu an céilidh an t-saoghail, while 
your earthly pilgrimage lasts; earrag chéil- 
idh, the gossiping sti oke (said of a per on 
who is hurt on a visit. ; c. nain ban Sléilh- 
teach, the visit of the Skat 2wumen—they stay- 


ed too long. 
Visit. 


ceilinn 


ceilinn, 1st. per. sing, fut. subj. of ceil, (unaspi- 
rated form used in composition) Na'n ceil- 
inn, If I should conceal. 

——-—,** gm. Large codling. 

tceiliubhra, s.m. Concealment. 


oéill, dat. of ciall. [Sometimes used as the 


nominative. } 
céille, gen. sing. of ciall. 
fceilleachd, 8.7. Large piece. 


k 
fragments. 


céillidh, -e, a, Wise. 2 Sober, steady, sedate. 


8 Prudent, discreet. Gu c., soberly ; b’fhearr 
dhuit bhi oe, it were better for you to be pru- 


doi f. Kel 

ceilp,t ef. Kelp. 

ceilt,** s. f. Concealment, 
cealment. 

ceilte, past part. of ceil. 
creted. A ghaisgich c., his heroes concealed. 





lent. 21f Penurious. 


oéilteach, -eiche, a. Fond of gossiping or visit- 


3 Cha 
robh c. nach robh bradach,tthere never was a 


ing. 
- * eich, 8.f. Gossiping female. 
tale-bearer that would not steal. 
ceilteachadh, -aidh, see ceileadh. 
ceilteachd,11 sf. Latitancy. 
ceilteadh, -tidh, see ceileadh. 
céiltidh, a. Wise. 2 Sober. (—*bad) 
ceiltinn, s. f. Concealing, covering, 

Concealment. A’ c—, pr. part. of ceil. 
ceilt-inntinn, -e, see cleith-inntinn, 
ceim,** gen. sing. of ceum. 
céim, v.a. see ceum., 
———ich, v.a. see ceum. 


céimeadh, -eidh, ëm. & pr. part. of ceim (for 


ceumadh.) 


fceim-dhealg, -eilg, 8.5. (ciabh-dhealg) Hair 
n. 


bodki 
ceimbleag, -eig, -an, 8.7. Fillet. 


ach, a. Like a fillet. 2]Abounding in 


fillets. 
tceimh-mhileach, s.m. Hair bodkin. 
fceimh-phion, s.m. Hair bodkin. 


céimncachadh, -aidh, s.m. & pr. part. of ceim- 


nich, (for ceumadh.) 
ceinmich, v.a. see ceumnaich. 
céin, -e, a. Distant, remote, removed, far off. 


186 


















ach, -aiche, a. In large pieces or 


secrecy. 2 Any- 
thing concealed or hidden. An ceilt, in con- 


Concealed, hid, se- 


ach, -eiche, a. Concealing, reserved, si- 


hiding. 


ceirsleach 


that the person spoken to would fashion a 
wooden beam as only as & piece of wax. 

——, pr.part. a’ céireadh, v.a. Cover with 
wax, seal with wax. OG an litir, seal the 
letter. 

——- -sheulaidh, s./, Sealing-wax, 

eéir-aodach,{{ -aich, -aichean, 8.m. Cere-cloth. 

eéir-lyheach, $s.f. Bees’ wax. 2 Honeycomb. 

tceirbheadh, -aidh, s.m. Gaelie form of carving. 

céir-bhrat,** s.m. Cereiment. 

céir-chluais, see céir-cluaise. 

eéir-chuachag, -aig, -an, 3.f. Waxen cell or cup. 

céir-chümhnant,1] -aint, -an, s.m. Indenture. 

céir-cluaise, s./. Cerumen, ear-wax. 

céird, -e, -ean, &.f. see céaird. 

-——each, «. see eéairdeach. 

céirdinnean, (for céairdinnean) pl. of ceàrd. 

céire, comp. of a. ciar. 

céire,** s.f. Buttock, haunch, breech. 

céire, gen. sing. of céir. 

--——ach, -eiche, a. Waxy, waxen, abounding 
in wax, of or belonging to, wax. 

céiread, -eid, &.f. Duskiness, hoariness. 

ceirean,-ein,-an, sm. Appendage, tail. 2 Plas- 
ter, medicine, poultice. 3* Wafer. 4tClout. 

~ Aich, (CR) v.a. Fondle, make much of, 
make comíortable— Perthshire. 

céireil,-e, a. see céireach. 

ceirein, 8.1m. see ceirean. 

-croin, s.m. Leviathan. (McL) 

eéir-gheal, Ale, a. White about the buttocks, 
as deer or roe. : 

céirich, v.a. see céir, v. 

te,** a. & pt.part. of céirich, Sealed. 

céir-iocan,§ s.m. Guelder-rose or water-elder. 

—viburnum opulus. 

fceirn, s.m. Plate, platter, trencher. 

f-——in, s.m. see ceirn. 

ceirseach,(AF) s. Woodlark, see uiseag-choille. 

céirseach, s.m. Lightstand, old-fashioned form 
of candlesticks known as carles or peer-men. 








2 Foreign. Duthaich chéin, a foreign country; 
an aimsir chéin, remote time. (Oblique form 


of cian.—1) 

céin (an)** adv. Far off, far away, afar. 2 
Long since. 3 From afar. An céin tha mad- 
uinn na h-uaighe, far off is the morning of 
the grave. 

céiu-chagair, s.m. Telephone. 

ceinide, comp. of ciùin. More benign. Gu 'm bu 
ch. mo chruth, that my face be more benign. 

fceiniol, san, see cineal. 

céiu-thir, s.f. Distant land, foreign land. 

cach, 8.m. Emigrant. 

ceinn,** s. Laxity. 

tevinn-liath, a. Grey-headed. 

tceip, $.m. see ceap. 

céir, -e, sf. Wax. 2 Wax candle. 3 Buttock. 
Mar leaghas teine c., as fire melts waz; coinn- 
eal ch.. a waz candle; c. an fhéidh, the deer’s 
buttock ; gu ma h-ann ‘corruption of gu'm bu 
ann," an old optativesubj.] bhios do leac gun 
fhuaim chlàrsaich, gun lasair chéire, may 1 
your fire-side be without music of harp, or light | ceirsle, pl. ceirslean, sf Clew or ball of yarn. 
of candle,—Filidh, p. 51; bu choidheis(coimh-| 2 Stock, stalk. C. chàil, a stock of cabbage; 
dheas) céir leat no cabar, all the same toyou| c. snàtha, a clew of yarn, ball of yarn. 
whether it $$ wax or a wooden beam—meaning ach, a. Round, asaclew, resembling a 










140. Céirseach. 
| céir-sheillein, s.f. Bees’ wax. 





ceirsleach 


clew. 2 Abounding in clews ; 

achadn, -aidh, s.m. forming of yarn into 
clews. A’ c—, pr. part. of ve rai.ch. 

——ailh, -lidh, s.m. see ceirsie. 

ag. -eig,-an, &f. Litt.eciew. 

agach, -aiche, €. Of little clews, abound- 
ing in little clews, s 

ceirslich, pr. part a’ ceirsleachadh, va. Wind 
up, form into clews. 2 Coil. 3**Couglomer- 
ate, conglobulate. 

te, a. & past pt. of ceirslich. 

into clews. 

ceirt, gen.sing. of cart. 12 s.f. Apple-tree. 3 

wah’, 

ceéirte, a. & past pt. Waxed, covered with wax, 
sealed with wax. Aodach e., waz-cloth; litir 
ch., @ sealed letter. 











Formed 


ceirte, comp. ofa. ceart. More or most ju«t or 


righteous. Ni bu ch. na mise, more righteous 
than I. 
fceirteach, a. Kam Gu c., reggedly. 
$-— ——, sf. Rag. 
tceirteachd, sf. Tawdriness, ragzedness. 
feeirteag, -eig, -an, sf. Ragged girl. 
ceirtle, -an, s.f. see ceirsle. 
ach, see ceirsleach. 
ceirtlich, see ceirslich. 





ceis, -e, -ean, sf. Gaelic spelling of case. (re- 


ceptacle only.) 

cés,11 -e, -ean, 8.f. Creel, basket, hamper. 

cis, s.f. Farrow sow org, 2 Gruuibiing. 3 
Loathing. 4 Lance. 5 spear. 

ceis-chrainn, 8.f. Puiypody, -ee clach-raineach. 

ceisd, -e,-ean, s.f. Question. 2 Problem, dis- 
pute, controversy. 8 Darling. 4 Regard. 5 
Anxiety. 6**Puzzle. 
a chur air, and no question was nut to hin: 
tha, gun ch., yes. indeed, undoubtedly; tha, a 
cheisd, yes, darling. 

ccisde:cha:lh, -aidh, s.m. Questioning, exam- 


inatun. — A'c—, pr. part. of ceisdich. 
ceisdealachd, 8. Fond;iess. 2 Flirting. 3 

Gal.antry. 4* Questionableness, 
eisdicala:chte,** a. Capsulated. 


ceisdean, n.pl. of ceisd. 

ceisdean, s.m. Person secretly beloved, sweet- 
heart, admirer. 

ceisdear,** -eir, an, s.m. Catechist. 


187 












Axu: cha robh c. air’ 


ced 


——eachadh, s.m. see ceisdeachadh. 

——eachan,tt s.m. Catechism. 

——-ean, see ceisdean. 

——ennaiche,** 8. Catechumen. 

—vil,tt -e, €. Chaste, modest, of a good 
character. 

—— ein, see ceisdean. 

--—eir, -ean, see ceixdear. 

——1ch, pr. part. a’ ceisdeachadh, see ceisdich. 

ceistich, see ceisdich. 

Cé.t, poetical contr. for Céitean. Madainn 
chübüraidh Chéit, a fragrant May morn. 

fceitean, s.m. Vehicle formed of twigs. 

Céitean, -ein, s.m. Month of May. 2 Beginning 
of summer. 3 Spring. 4{{Fair weather. 5 
iiFavourable season. 'Sa' mhadainn bhoidh- 
ich Ch., on the beaut:ful spring morning; C. 
na h-óinnsich, Apri: 19th. to May 12th. 

-———ach, -eiche, ae. Belonging to May or 
the bepinning of summer. 

ceiteanach,* ach, s.m. Coal-fish of next size 
larger than a cuddy. 

ceiteineach,ff see ceiteanach. 

ceithe, San. see ceidhe. 

ceithir, o. Four. C. taighean, four houses. 

ceithir-bheannach, a. see c— -chéarnach. 

-chasach, a. Four-footed, quadruped. 

-chasach, s.m. Quadruped. 

-chéarnach, a. Four-square, quadran- 
gular, quadratic. 

-——— -chéarnadh, -aidh, s.m. Squaring. A’ 
c—, pr.part. of c— -chéarnaich. 

-chéarnag, 8.f. Canton in her- 

aldry. 

-chéarnaich, pr. part. 8’ c— 
chéarnachadh, v.a. Square, shape 
into a square. 

-——— -chéarnaichte, past part. of c— 
chéearnaich. Squared, formed (141. Ceithir- 
into a square. chéarnag. 

-leug, a. Fourteen. 

-fillte, a. Fourfold, quadruple. 

oe ach, @ see ceithir-fillte. 

-——— -ghobhlach, a. Four-pronged. 

ghobhlanach, see ceithir-ghobhlach. 

-oisinneach, @ Quadrangular, having 
four angles. 

- —— -ràmhach, a. Four-oared. 



































ceisdeil, -e, a. Questionable, suspicions, | - -ràmhach, sp, Quadreme, fonr-oared 
doubtful. 2 Beloved. 8{}\Worthy of regard.| boat. Syzioba na c., the crew of the four-oared 
4ttChaste, modest. C. air fiona, fond of |-~ boat. 
wine. - -shlisneach, @. Four-sided, quadrila- 


eachd, see ceisdealachd. 
eeisdein, see ceisdean. 
each,** a. Amorous. 
—— —-eachd,^* s.f. Amorousness. 
ceisd-fhacal,ff-ail, ge, Luterrogative. 
ceisdich, pr zort, a’ ceisdeachadh, v.a. Ques- 
tion, examine, interrogate. 
—te, past rart. of cvisdich. Questioned, 
examined. 2** a, Capsulated. 
4ceixdiughadh, s.m. see c»asnachadh. 
ceisd-leabhar,-air,-bhraichean, s.m. Catechism, 
quection-book. 
cceisd-phunc, s.m. Note of interrogation (?.) 
(éisvacn, -ich, -ichean, s. f. Large corpulent 
woman. 
,it-eiche, a. Full of compartments. 
ceiseag, «1g -an, &.f. Small pannier or bas- 
ket. 2 Hurdle. 
cé seag, -vig,-an, &]f. 1iSlip, sapling. 2 Gael- 
ic diininutive of case. (receptacle only.) 
ceisean, -cin, -An, 8m. sce ceiseag. 
ceisean, (AF) s. Young pig. 
tevisueamb, s.m. Whining, complaining. 
ceist, see ceisd. 
——each, s.m. see ceisd-phunc. 











tera]. 





-shlisneag,** -aig, 
figure. 

tceithreachad,** a. Forty. 

ceithreamh, see ceathramh. 

--—nan, see ceathramhnan. 

ceithreannach, @ see ceathramhanach. 

ceithr»annan, (for ceathramhnan.) 

ceitleag, (AF) st Catfish. 

ean, a Cé:tein. " 

fcél, s.m, The mouth. Cél-faisdine, prophecy. 

tcel,|| s. Death. get. 

teel-faisdine, 8. Prophecy. 

cé-mheas, -a, s.m. Geometry. 

ach, a. Geometrical. 

——-——ach, -aich, -a:chean, s.m. Geometer. 

ced, gen. ced & cedtha, pl. ceòtha, sm. Mist, 
vapour, fog. 2* Amazement.  3** rarely 
Miik. Chaidh e 'na cheò, he got quite ama- 
zed ; Gall 'na cheò, G. amazed (lit. in his 
mist); c. teas, vapour, steam: anc. a dh'fhàs- 
as an seann solus, 's e sneachd no gaoth a 
sgapas e, the mist left by the old moon will be 
clvared away by wind or snow; sléii.htean c., 
air an lear, mountains of mist on the sea. 

Q2. 


8. f. Quadrilateral 








ced 





ceò, s.m. Milk. 

¢ced, sced, conj. And. 

ceó'ach, -aiche, a. see ceòthach, 

ceó'achd, 8.f. see ceòthachd. 

ceo’ar, -air, @. see ceómhor. 

ceob, -a, -an, 8.m. Dark nook or corner. 
Drizzly rain. see caob. 

——ach, -aiche, a. Cornered, awkward. 

f¢cedbach, s. Drunkenness. 1 

ceòban, -ain, (ceó--boinne) s. m. Small driz- 
aling rain, accompanied by mist. 2+ Small 

ay. 

——-—&ch, -aiche, a. Dewy. 2 Misty, driz- 
zly, moist. - 
ge ei -aich, s.m. Drizzling rain, moist 

mist, 


9* 


, &f. Frequent or continual driz- 

zling. 

ceóbhach,** -aich, s.m. Drunkenness. 

ceobhainne,* s.m. see ceò-bhraon. 

eeo-bhran, -ain, s.m. see ceò-bhraon. 

ceò-bhraon, -aoin, s.m. Dew. 2 Mist. 8 Driz- 
zling rain. 

cedbnach, a. see cedbanach, a. 

e age ha. see cedthach. 

ced-eididh, s.m. Shroud of mist. 

ceó-ghlas, a. Grey, as mist. 

ceó-ghorm, d. Blue, as mist. 

ceòl, ciùil [& ceòil} sm. Music, melody. 2 
Song. Ise Dia mo ch., God is my song; gabh 
c., sing a song; fear-ciùil, musician, singer. 

ceòlach, -aiche, a. Musical. 

ceolan, -ain, s.m. Faint musie. 2 Tender soft 
air. 3* Humdrum of a person, one quite be- 
wildered. (ceothallan.) 4**Little bell. 5 see 
ceolan-cuilc. Taibhse le 'n e., ghosts with 
their music; fhad's a rinn an c. fuireach, as 
long as the air lasted. 

ceólan-cuile,(AF) s.m. Warbler, reed-warbler. 

ceolar, a. see cedlmhor. 2 Peculiar, odd, ec- 
centric—W. of Ross. Duine c., a peculiar, ec- 
centric man. 

ceol-beag, s.m. The music of marching and 
dancing, the time being strictly rigid in uni- 
son with the beat of the foot. 

eedl-bhinn, a. Melodious. 

cedl-chuilm, -e, -ean, s.f. see cedl-chnirm. 

ceol-chuirm, -e, -ean, s.f. (lit. a musical feast) 
Concert. 

cedl-garbh, see ceol-mér. 

ceol-meadhonach, s.m. The musie of a /song 

layed in the free time of singing. 

ceol-mhoire, comp. of ceolmhor. 

ceòlmhor, -oire, a. Musical. 2 Melodious, 
abounding in harmony, harmonious, tuneful. 
8 Funny, queer. Duine c., a funny fellow— 
Harris, Suth’d. 

-——-——achd, s. f. Melodiousness, harmony, 
harmoniousness. 

ceól-min, see ceol-beag. 

cedl-mér, s.m. The classical music of the bag- 
pipe which is symphonic, that is, consists of 
an urlar (thema), and variations. It is gen- 
erally called piobaireachd. Its time is very 
free like that of a song. 

ceolra, see cedlradh. 

eeolradh,-aidh,-aidhean, s.f. Muse. 2 Musician. 

ceolraiche,** s.m. Chanter. 

ceolraidh, end. The Muses. 2**Musicians, band 
of musicians. Sguir na c. Ghreugach o 'n 
dàn, the Grecian Muses have ceased their strain. 

fceól-reim, v.a. Modulate, play music. 

fceol-reimeadh, -aidh, s.m. Modulation, musi- 
cal arrangement of sounds to produce har- 
mony. 

eeomhor, -oire, a. Misty, foggy, obscure. 


188 


ceoinhorachd, s.f.ind.  Mistiness. 


ceud-bhileach 


fogginess, 
obscureness, 

ceó-mhii, -e, sf. see ceó-mhillteach. 

ceo-mhillteach, eich, s.m. Mildew. 

ceópach, -aiche, a. see ceóthach. 

ceopan, -ain, 8.m. see ceóban. 

ceópanach, see eeóbanach. 

ceopanachd, see ccóbanachd. 

tceor, òir, sm. Mass, lump. 

ceós, -edis, -an, s.m. Hip, posteriors, buttock. 

cedsach,tt a. Havin: hipsor buttocks. 2 Hav- 
ing Jarge hips or buttocks. 

ceosach,** -aich, s.m. Perinseum, posteriors. 

ceósan, -ain, s.m. Light down of feathers op 
flowers. 2**Burr. 3**Prickly head of bnr- 
dock. Mar ch. air sgiath an fhireoin, like 
bur clinging to the eagle’s wing. 


eeosnach, -aiche, a. Broad-skirted. _ 2 Bulky, 


clumsy. 


,ceó-soillse, s.m. Misty light. 


ceòtha, gen. sing. £ pl. of ced. Cearb nan c., 
the fringe of mists. 

ceothach,** -aich, s.m. Drizzling rain. 

ceòthach, -aiche, a, Misty, foggy, drizzling, 
cloudy, obscure. 2 Of, or belonging to, mist. 

eeothachd,tt s.f. Mistiness. 

ceothaich,{} v.a. Cover with mist. 

ceothaireachd, s.f. see ceómbhorachd. 

ceothallan, s.m. Dullard, simple person. also 
ceolan. 

ceothallanach,** a. c 

ceothar, -aire, a. see c»ómhor. 

GEN s.m, Steam, vapour aecompanied by 

eat. 

ceothmhor, -oire, a. see ceómhor. 

—— — -—Aachd, s.f.ind. see ceomhorachd. 

ceothragach,* s.m. see cedthran. 

ceothragach,* a. see eeóthranach. 

ceothragachd,* s.f. see ceóthranachd. 

ceothran, -ain, s.m. Small drizzling rain, gen- 
tle shower. (eeó-bhraun) 

ceothranach, a. Showery, drizzly, misty. 2 
** Dewy. 


d, sind, Showeriness, drizzli- 
ness. 2**Dewiness. 
cer, see cear. 


c'e sam bith, [ for cia e'sam bith]adv. How- 
ever. 2 [for có e’sam bith] Whoever. Ce 
'sam bith cho fearail ’s a tha iad, no matter 
how manly they are. 

cé-sgriobhachail,Tt -e, a. Cosmographieal. 

cé-seriobhadh, s.m. Cosmography. 

eé-svriobhair, s.m. Cosmographer. 
cé-thomhas, -ais, sm. Geometry. 

teeuchd, s.m. Plough. 

ceud, pl. -an, a. Hundred. [Governs its nomm 
in the gen. plur. unaspirated when by itself 
or combined with other numerals, as, ochd 
ceud, eight hundred; it is also used in the 
singular when governed by numerals other- 
wise requiring the plural after them, as, tri 
cheud eun, three hundred birds—Forbes. It 
is aspirated by the four nuinerals aon, da, 
tri, ceithir, as, aon cheud, one hundred; ceith- 
ir cheud fear, four hundred men. 

ceud, a. First. An ceud fhear, (m.) the first 
man; a’ eheud bhean ( f.) the first woman ; 's 
e an ceud thaom de "n taigeis a's teotha, the 
first helping of the haggis 18 the hottest. 

ceudach, a. Centuple, in hundreds. 

ceudamh, a. Hundredth. 

ceudan, n.pl. of ceud. 

cend-bhainne, 8.m. First milk of a cow after 
calving, (bainne-nois,) Sc. beastings. 

ceud-bhann-malairt, $.m. Debenture. 


ceud-bhileach, -ich, s.f. Centaury or red gen- 


tian—erythre centauriuw. 


ceud-blireith 


—À À — 


eeud-bhreitit, s.m. Birthright, 
priority in b.rth. 

ceud-cha'hach, s. m. Haun- 
drel fighter, i.e. the fighter 
oi a hundred men, epitie. 
of Conn, an ancient king o" 
tbe Gaei:s. 

ceud-chuairt, s.f. First-foot- 
ing on New Year's Day. 

ceud-cothroin, s.m. Hundre- 
weight. 

eeud-dhuilleach, a. Hundred- 
lea ved. 

cend-dhuilleagach,**see ceud- 
bhileach. 

ecud-dreagh,t} v.a. Prime. 

ceud-fàlb, see ceud-fath. 

ceud-faithne, see ceud-fàth. 

ecud-fath, -an, 8. f. sense, faculty. 2* First 
principle. 3**Conjecture. guess. 4**Judivi- 
OUSIIess, ? 

—ach,** a. Intellectual. 

eend-fhaire, s.m. Dawn, first dawn. 

ceud-fhàs, -fhais, s.m. First growth, embryo. 2 
Spring. 

cend-rhéille-Muire-earraich, s.f. The Purifica- 
tion (2nd. February.) 

cend-,hin, s.m. Firstborn, firstlings. Ceud- 
ghiu a’ threuda, the firstlinos of the flock. 

ceud-laoigh, -e, -ean, 3.f. Cow that has calved 
once. 

ceud-lomaidh, s.f. Breakfast. [Preceded by 
the article a’ ch—.] 

ceud-luaidh, -e, -ean, s.m. “hout of app'ause. 

qeud-lith, -a, s. m. Beyinuing, first essay, 
first. 2¢f{Shout of applause. 

eeud-mheas, -an, $.m. First fruit. 
Chief respect, chief honour. 

ceudna, a. The same, that formerly mention- 
ed, similar. Airan dòigh ch., in the same 
way; maran c., dien: an duine c., the same 
man; maran c. an duine seo, likewise this 
man. 

ceudnachd, s.f. Identity, sameness. 

feeudoir, for ceud nair. 

eeud-tharruing, -ean, s.m. First draught or 
drawing. 2 Firstrunving of spirits in dis- 
tilling, singlings. 

cend-theagasgach, -aiche, o. Institutionary. 

ceud-thoiseach, Ach, s.m. First principle. 2 
first canse, origin, commencement, 3**Rudi- 
inerts, elements. 4**Archetype. 

ceud-thomhailt,** s. Breakfast. 

ceud-thüs, s.m. see ceud-thoiseach. 

Quudnrin, see Ceitein. 

ceum,[-a & ] céim, pl. ceuman -a, & -annan, s.m. 
nter, as of a stair or ladder. 2 Footstep. 8 
Degree. 4 Path. 5**Ntride, pace. 6**Pedi- 
gree. ‘Tri cheumannan, three paces ; tha e c. 
ui’s fhaide mach, he is a degree farther remo- 
ved in relationship; mullach nan c., on the top 
of the stairs; vabh do ch., go thy way; c. sràid, 
@ short walk: thoir c., make a stride, 

cenm, pr.part. &' cenmadh, v.2. Step, measure 
by steps, pace. 2 Moyestep by step. Cheum 
ay d mu'n cuairt, he walked majestically 
aboot, 

ceumach,tt -aiche, a. see ceumail. 

ceumadh, -aidh, s.m. Stepping, pacing, mea- 
suring. 2 Walking slowly, strutting, striding. 
A’ c—, pr.part. of ceum. 

eeninaid, -¢, a Swift. 

cemmaide,(AC) comp. of ceumaid. 

ceamail, e, a. State'y in gait, stalking, strut- 
ting, majestic, pouiuons. 

cennianna, n.pé. of ceum. 

enuluants, -ainte, a. see ceumail. 














142.Ceud-onileach 


2 Tax. 8 


190 


e c — —— ` e Qo m — 


ch 


ceum-cille, s.m. Bier-balk. 

ceum-inbhe, sm. Degree in rank or dignity. 
2tt Promotion. 

eeninnach, a. Gradatory. 2 Ambling, pacing, 
moving inajestically or stately. 

ceunimachadh, -aidh, s.m. Pacing, striding, 
strutting, marching, stepping. 2**Prancing. 
A' c—, pr.pt. of ceumnaich. 

ceumnachd,** s.f.ind. Graduation. 

ceuinnaich, pr.part. a ceumnachadh, v.a. Step, 
pace, mareh, advance by steps. 2**Prance. 

ceumnaiche,{f an, s.m. Pacer. 
ceumnaidheachd, see ceumnachd. 
ceuin-tuislidn, s.m. False step. 

ceun’, for cendaa. 

ceus, cedis, censau, s. m. The ham or lower 
part of the body. 2 The coarser parts of wool 
on sheeps’ legs. 

pe pr.part. a’ ceusadh, v.a. Crucify. 2 Tor- 

ure. 

ceusach, &. Crucifying. 2 Torturing. 3 Of, 
or connected with crucifying or torturing. 4 
Crucifieatory, like, or belonging to, a cross. 

ceusadair, -ean, s.m. Crucifier. 2 Tormentor. 

-—eachd, s.f. Business of a crucifier or 
tormentor, crucifying. 

ceusadan, -ain, s.m. Crucifix. 

ceusadh, -aidh, s,m. Crucifying, crucifixion. 
A’ c—,pr.pt.of ceus. Crann-ceusaidh, a cross. 

ceus-chrann,(AC) sa Passion-fiower, cruci- 
tixion tree, so called from a resemblance of 
the cross on the flower. 

ceusda, see ceusta. 

ceuslach, -aich, s.m. Wool on &sbeep's legs, 
also the borders and coarser parts of the 
fleece. 

ceusta, a. & past part. of ceus. Crucified. 

teent, (AF) s.f. Sheep. 

ceutabh, s.m. (CR) Admiration. 2(DM) Jey, 
satisfaction. " Bu bheag dheth ‘san ain mo 
cheutabh, Z had precious little satisfaction out 
oy it atthe time. 

tceuta, s.m. Opinion in favour of, approbation, 

satisfaction, pleasure. 
Ciod doch. dheth ? what do you think of him? 
cha’n 'eil c. air an t-saoghal agam dheth, Z do 
not think much of him—lit. have no opinion 
in the world of him. 

ceutach, -aiche a. Handsome, goodly, seeinly; 
comely, pleasant, pleasing. 2 Persunable. 3 
Admirab'e. 4 Elegant, graceful, enpaging. 
5 Beautiful, 6**Conceited. 7{{Honest. 8 Sen- 
sible, intelligent. Luach e, a goodly price ; 
duime c., @ handsome man; A Chonnail chent- 
aich ! O handsome Connal ! tha e c. as fhéin, 
he is concetted. 

ceutachas, -ais, see ceutachd & ceutaichead. 

ceutachd,* sf. Amenity, acceptability. 2** 
Agreeableness. 

ceutadh, -aidh, s.m. Pleasure, 
tion, delight.  2**Elegance, 
comeliness. 38**Pleasantness, seeluliness. 4 
**Kindness. 5** Satisfaction. 6** Opinion, 
Cha’n 'eil c. sam bith aige dheth, he has no 
great affection for him. 

ceutaich, see ceutadh. 

ceutaiche, comp. of ceutach. 

-. —— —-Aad, -hid, s.m. Degree of beauty, come- 
liness, gracefulness, seemliness, decorum or 
elegance. A’ dol ane, improving in elegance, 
beauty, dc. | Like many similar words in 
Gaelic, this is often used as a kind of donble 
comparative, as, is ceutaichid i an culaidh 
sin, that dress renders her more engaging. | 

e'fhada ? adv. for cia fhada ? 

e for words not given below under cA, see 

9 under c. 








———— — 





love, adinira- 
gracefulness, 


cha 


negative particle, Not. [Cha aspirates 
the fut. neg. of a verb, also the initial of 
words beginning with labials and gutturals, 
and, in Argylishire, with dentals also, as— 
cha dhuin an dorus, the door will not shut; 
cha dhaor a phrìs, its price is not high. Cha 
simply negatives the signification of the verb, 
as,(do) bhuail mi, J struck; cha do bhuail mi, 
I did not strike. lt becomes cha’n before in- 
itial vowels or f pure, as chan òl mi, I shail 
not drink; cha’n fhosgail mi, I shall not open. 
Dr. Gillies remarks that the n of cha’n in 
cha’n ’eil, *showsthe abiding influence of a 
lost dental n,—the n doubtless which re-as- 
serts itself before initial vowels—it shows 
that it is wrong to separatethe n of cha’n as 
is usually done in writing, as cha’n, cha-n 
and cha n-."* CN is not a dental, and then 
has as much right to separation as in gu’n 
dean. Cha’nis simply aspirated gu’n or co'n, 
only the aspirating influencs is lost. It was 
no cha’n, and appears again in nach.) 
Cha’n 'eil eadar an t-amadan agus an duine 
glic ach tairgse mhath a ghabhail 'nuair a 
gheibh ei, there is no difference between the 
wise man and the fool, but to accept a good of- 
fer when in his power; cha mhae mar an t- 
athair thu, you are not a son worthy of your 
Sather; cha téid e dhachaidh, he will not go 
home; cha tig fuachd gu h-earrach, cruaidh- 
chàs no droch cheannach, cold, hardships, ana 
bad bargains do not come till spring ; chan 
fhidir an sàthach an seang, 's mairg a bhith- 
eadh ’na thràill do "pn bhroinn, the satiated 
will not sympathise with the starveling, woe to 
him who is a slave to his belly; cha’n fuiach 
duine gun sibht gun seóltacnd, a man with- 
out shift and ingenuity is good Jor nothing; 
cha’n "eil ann ach bó odhar mhaol, agus bó 
mhaol odhar, it is only a dun hornless cow, 
an: a hornless dun cow—Gaelic equivalent of 
«six of oneand half-a-dozen oi the other" ;cha 
mhér nach do mharbh e mi, he alinost killed 
me; cha chuir mi, J will not put; cha dean mi, 
I shail not do; cha d'fhalbh mi, Z did not go; 
cha d'éisd mi, I did not hearken; cha d'ol mi, 
I did not drink; cha leig mi, I shall not allow; 
cha d’rinn mi ach sgur, J have only just stop- 
ped; cha robh sgireachd anns a’ Ghàidheal- 
tachd cha mhór anns nach robh e, (col. cha 
mhór oun robh sgìreachd &c., or ’s ganna 
bha sgireachd &c.,) there was hardly a parish 
in Gaeldom he had not been in; cha dean 
mi, I shall not do ; cha’n fhaod thu, you 
must not; na’m bithinn ag iarraidh cuideach- 
aidh, cha lughaid gu’n rachainn do d’ ionn- 
suidh air son 'fhaotainn, if I were wanting 
assistance, not the less would I go to you for it. 

chab, past aff. of cab. 

cha chreid, v. An expression very often used 
in connection with another negative verb to 
equal the word think, suppose, expect. Am 
bheil thu dol ann? are you going (to it)? cha 
chreid mi gu 'm bheil, I expect not; cha 
chreid mi nach "eil, I think so. 

chagainn, past aff. of cazainn. 

chagnadh, past subj. of cagainn. 

chaidh, past aff. of rach. B’ ann ortsa chaidh, 
it was you that had the worst of it; chaidh e 
as, it went out (as a flame); 2 he escaped; a’ 
bhliadhna seo chaidh, last year; an deach e 
mach ? chaidh, has he gone out ? yes. 

chaill past aff. of caill. 

chain, past af. of cain. - 

thàininn, Ist sing. os subj. of cain, I would 
traduce or miscal 


cha, 


190 


chionn 


chairich, past aff. of cairich. 

chaisg, past aff. of caisg. 

chaith, past aff. of caith. 

chaitheas, fut. subj. of caith. (That) shall or 
will consume. 

cha mhi, see v. is. 

cna mhó, adv. Neither, none the more. Cha 
mhó tha mise read dhìteadh, neither do I 
condemn thee. 

cha mhór naeb, adv. Almost. Cha mhór nach 
do thuit e, he almost fell. 

chan, past of of can. 2 Old form of cha’n, 
see note under cha. 

cha’n el (e), pres.neg. of bi. (It) is not. 

chaob, past aff oi caob. 

chaochail, past aff. of eaochail. 

chaoidh, adv. see & choidhche, 

chaomhain, past aff. of ca mhain, 

chàrnadh, past subj. of carn. 

chas, past af. of cas. 

cheadaich, past aff. of ceadaich. 

cheana, adv. Already, before now. 2 Indeed 
—W. or Ross. Rinn e sin à 2neana, he has 
done that already; tha e fuar cheana, it is cold 
indeed. 

cheana, see chianamh. 

cheangail, past a/f. of ceangail. 

cheangladh, pas: pass. uf. & past subj. act. of 
ceangail. Was bound. 2 Would bind. 

cheannaich, past aff. of ceannaich. 

cheaunsaich, past af. of ceannsaich. 

eheanusaich ada, vast subj. of ceannsaich. 
Would tame, would subdue. 

cheil, past aff. of ceil. 

chéile, odv. Both. Bha iad le iech lomnochd, 
they were both naked; ghabh iad air a ch., they 
fought among themselves; thar a ch., in confu- 
sion; fangibh ri 'ch., uait for one another ; a 
réir a ch., one with another, ai an average, on 
good terms. [Though chéile is always aspi- 
rated, it is due to the effect of the poss. pron. 
a, which is suppressed in Scottish, though not 
in Irish Gaelic. | 

chéile, asp. form of eéile, (spouse.) 

chcilinn, 1 per. sing. fut. sub. of ceil. I would 
coneeal. 

chéin, asp. form of céin, a. 

chéir, pastaff. of céir. 

chi, fut. aff. of faic. Chi mi, I shall see. TO. 
ten used as & simple pres-nt tense, like all 
future affirmatives, as, chi mi triùir, 4 see 
three persons. ] 

chiallaich ! ++ s.f. (voc.) Darling ! 

chianamh, adv. (also a chianamh) A little 
time ago, a little while ago. 
Am fearamharvhadh a iwhathair a chian- 
amh, bheireadh e beò a nis i, the man who 
would have killed his mother a little while ago, 
would bring her alive now—said when a good 
day appears after a storm of in any similar 
circumstances. 

chiar, past aff. of ciar. 

+chim, (for chi mi,) I see. 

chinnte, asp. form of cinnte. 
tainly. 

chinnteaeh, asp. form of cinnteach. 

Tchiom, see tchim. ? 

chion, asp. form of cion, (oftener a chion, for 
want of.) E 

chionn, adv. & conj. (fora chionn) Because, 
forthat reason. A chionn gu'n do bhuin e 
rium gu Bal, because he dealt bountijully with 
Tw; & chionn nach do chreid iad, because 
they did not believe; deas air chionn domh 
tighinn dhachaidh, ready by the time of my 
home-coming; bha e deas agam air chionn da 


Air chinnte, cer- 


ehionn 191 clab | 


dheug ast oidhche, / had it ready by twelve| chualar, see chualas, 
shiotar, see chithear. [o'clock at night. | chualas, past aff. pass. of cluinn. Was heard. 
chìte, see chìteadh. tchualas, ( for chuala mi) I heard. 
shiteadh, past subj. of chi, Might be seen. fchuamar, We went. 
shitear, see chithear. chuca, prep. pron. To them, towards them, 
shitheadh, past subj. act. of faic, Would or] Sgrìobh e litir ch., he wrote a letter tu them. 
could see. chugad, prep.pron. To thee, towards thee. 
shitheamaid, Ist. per. pl. past subj of faic. Wel Chithu chugad e, 's cha'n fheairrd thu agad 
would see. , e, you'll see it coming (towards) you, and when 
shithear, fut. af. pass. of faic. Shall be seen.| you have got it yow'l: be none the better of it. 
2 I3 seen. chugaibh, prep.pron. To you, towards you. 
shithinu, Ist. per. sing. past subj. of faic. I|chugainn, prep.pron. To us, towards us, 2 Ib. 
would see. benoves us. Chugainn a bhi falbh dhachaidh, 
shiadhaich, past af. of cladhaich. it behoves us to go home. 
»nleachd, past ag. of cleachd. chugam, prep.pron. To me, towards me. 
shiisg, past af. of ie Chi mi chugam,chi mi bhuam a’ bhogha-frois, 
shlisge, adv. see a chlisge. I iseeithe rainbow stretching towards me and 
shlisveadh, adv. see a chlisge. from me—i.e. in both directions. 
shluinn, v. irr. past. Was wont to hear. e.g.(chuice, prep.pron. To her, towards her. 
in Mary Mackellar's well known song— |chuige, prep.pron. To him, towards him. 
“Chluiun mi na h-eòin,” J was wont to hear| Thainigi chuige, (as a ship) she came to, (as 
the birds. It has not the same meaning aal anything else) it improved, a’ doi chuige is 
chuala. naidh, going hither and thither; thainig e 
dùluinneamaid, 1st. per. pl. past subj. of cluinn.| chuige fhéin, he came to himself, recovered 
We would hear. his judgment; chuir iad chuige mi, they have 
shluinnear, fut. subj. pass. of cluinn. (Ma)| severely tried me. 
chluinnear mi, (if) 1 be heard.§ ch’uile, ( for gach uile) Generally pronounced 
chluinninn, Ist. per. sing. past subj. of cluinn.] and written *‘a h-uile," which see. 
I would hear. chnilein, (a chuilein ! ) ut. see cuilean. 
chluinnte, asp. form of past part. of cluinn. | chuimhnich, past ind. of cuimhnich. 
Heard. chuir, past af. of cuir. 
chluinuteadh, past pass. sub). cf cluinn. Would | chum, past af. of cum. 
be heard. | chuin, \see a chum) Thainig e dh'am ionnsaidh 
ehluinutinn, Ist. per. sing. past subj. of cluinn. | a chum furtachd a dheanamh orm, he came to 
I would hear. me for the purpose of aiding me; a chum mo 
cho, adv. As, so. Cho dalma, so presumptu-| sgrios, for the purpose of killing me. 
ous; cho cruaidh risan s ation, as hurd as|cnum, prep. (a chum) For. 2 Towards. 3 Till. 
steel; cha robh mi cho ,rónacn agus cno dal, 1 4ftin order to. [Governs the genitive case. ] 
I was not so mournful and so blind; am bucil]chüm, see chum. 
e;cho mór sin ? 1s it as big as all thut? &|chun, adv. To, toward. 2 Thither. 3 Near, al- 
cheart cuo mór, every vit as big. [Cho is al-| most, on the eve. ^ffUntil. Chun an taighe, 
ways aspirated in modern Gaelic. ] towards the house; cnun teireachdainn, near- 
chog, pust aff. of cog. ly exhausted; chun éirigh, on the eve of rising; 
ehoidhehe, see a choidhche. chun cogaidh, for war; chun mo mhic, to 
choimeas, past aff. of coimeas. my sons. [Governs the genitive case—orten 
choimhead, past aff. of coinnhead. pronounced and written thun.**] 
choianien, past «jf. of coinnicu. Choinnich iad | chusna, see ennnnaic. 
a cheana, they met already. chunnacadh, past afr. pass. of faic. 
chòir, prep. see A choir. ` cuunnacas, past aff. pass. of faic. [Used in 
choisinn, past af. of coisinn. preference to the regular forum chunnwacad A. ] 
chon, adv. Until 2 To. prov. Chunnacas e, it was seen. 
¢chonnaire, see chunnaic. chuuna:e, past aff. of faic. Chunnaie mi, 4 saw. 
Ge, ERR. ee a wm ee Cho cruaidh | tchu.naire, see chunnaic. 
ris an darach, as hard as the oat. tehunnam, ( for chunnaie mi.) 
chorrach, (for a charachadh) To move. chuunas, see chunnacas. 
chrath. past aff. of crata. teaunnacabbhair, (for chunnaic sibh) You saw, 
cireach, past aff. of creach. teaunnacadar, (for chunnaic iad) They saw.4 
chreii, past aj. of creid. tchunnacamar, (emphatic chunncamaii-ne) We 
Chreilinn, Jot. per. sin». past subj. of creid. saw. , 
chritn, past aff. of crit. chunnacas, see chunnaeas. 
enroch, pos’ añ. of croch. ci, (AF) s.m. d£ Animal, beast. 2 Hind, roe. 
carom, port af. of crom. 8 Stag, the leader. 4 Noble aniinal. 
enruadiacu, past aff. of cruadhaich. c' iP (for coi? or ciai?) pron. interr. Who 
chruinnich, past aff. of cruianich. is she ? 
Tchuabaair, (for craidh sibh) Ye went. tci, s.t, Lamentation. 
fehuadar, v. They went. fci, v.n. Lament, wail, weep. 
¢enuaidh, see coaidn. cia P pron. interr. Which ? what? who? 2 How? 3 
chuala, past aff. of cluinn. Heard. [Written **Where? Cia an uair? what hour ! cia an 
chual before a word beginning with a vuwel.]| duine P what man? cia aois thu P how old are 
fehualabhair, (for chuala sibh) Ye heard. you? cia an taobn? which side? cia an t-ionad? 
fenualadar, (for chuala iad) They heard. what piace ? cia b’e air bith ded’ sheirbais- 
chualadh, past af. pass. of ciniun, see cnualas. | ici aig ain faighear e, with whomsoever of thy 
ehualaig, parts of Argyl for cnuala. servants it may be found. 
telinalais, (for chuala tu; Thou didst hear. teia, s.m. Man. 2 Husband. 3 Cream. 
fe:ualam, ( for chuala mi) I beard. cia as? adv. Whence ? Cia as air bith, whence. 
4chuulamairn, see chualainar. soever, from whatever place. 
fchualainar, ( for chuala sian) We heard. ciab, am. Lock of hair, ringlet. 2**Side loek. 





















ciaban 


192 


cian 


chiall nach mise bh’ann, Z wish I had been 


ciaban, -ain, -an, see giaban. 

Ciavh, -a, -an, s.f. Side lock of hair. 2 The 
hair. 3 Ringlet. 4 Tress. Thuit i agus 
sgaoil a ciabha air an lar, she fell and her 
tresses <pread on the ground. 

ciabh,* pr.pt. a’ ciabhadh, v. a. Tease, vex, 
gall. Tha e 'gam chiabhadh, he is teasing me. 

ach, aiche, a. Hairy, bushy. 2 Having 
much or long hair. 3 Having riuglets, tressy. 

ciabhag, -aig,-an, 8f. Small lock, small ring- 
let. 2 Whisker. 3* Lock or tress of hair. 4 
pl. only, Mustachios. 

ciabhagach, -aiche, a. Bushy, having curls, 
ringlets, locks or whiskers. 





ciabhag-choille, pl. -an-coille, &.f. Wood-lark, | 


see uiseag-choille. 
fciabharthan, see ceatha. 


ciabh-bhachlach,-aiche, a. Having curled locks. | 


2 Tressy. Mo chaileag ch., my tressy girl. 

ciabh-chasta, -chaiste, pl. -àn-casta, s.f. Curl- 
ed lock of hair. 

ciabh-cheann-dubh, s.f. Deer's hair grass, see 
ciob-cheann-dubh. 

fciach, s.m. see ceathach. 2 Sorrow, concern. 

fciad, see ceud. - à s 

ciad, (CR) s.m. Opinion, impression.—Strath- 
tay. Ghabh mi droch ch. dheth, I formed 
a bad opinion of him. 

cìadach, see ceutach. 

ciadamh,t+ see ceudamh. 

ciadan, s.m. Height, altitude. 2 Moor. 

Ciadaoin, -e, s.f. (Di-ciadaoin) Welnesday, 
(lit. day of the first fastt—di-, +ceud+aoiue, 

—each, a. Falling on a Wednesday. 
Nuair is c. an t-Samhuinn when Hallowmass 
Jfalis?on Wednesday.—NGP. , ^ 

ciad-bhainne, see ceud-bhainne. 

ciad-bhileach, see ceud-bhileach. 

cia dha? e Kë co dba ? 

ciad-dnuilleach, 

ciad-fhàire, } see soid —, 

ciad-fhàs, 

ciad-ghin, see ceud——,. 

ciad-laoigh, 

ciadlus, -uis, s.m. Curiosity. 

ach, ** a. Curious. 

ciad-mheas, see ceud-mheas, 

ciadna, see ceudna. 

ciadnaich, see ciadaoineach. 

cia fhada? adv. How long? 

ciagach, a. Sly-humoured. prov. 

cial, s.m.ind. Side or brim of a vessel. 

ial. 

am lion ? adv. How many ? 

ciall, céille, dat. eéill, s.f. Reason, sense. 2 
Opinion. 3 Meaning. 4 Discretion, pru- 
dence. 65 Darling. 6* Understanding, wisdom. 
7**rarely Death. 8(AC) Inspiration. As a 
ch.. out of his senses, mad; duine gun ch., a 
madman; ceann na céilie, the prudent man, 
(lit. the wise head); a chiall mo chridhe ! 
my heart’s darling | a ch. de na fearaibh ! my 
beloved of all men! glac c., be easy, do not for- 
get yourself ; ciod e isc. dhuit ? what do you 
mean ? ciod e is c. dona daoine ? what do the 
people mean ? ciod e is c. dha sin}? what is the 
meaning of that ? ciod e is c. do o aisling ? 
what 18 the interpretation of my dream? tha e 
'dhith céille, he lacks understanding; air 
bheag céille, possessing little understanding; 
is en c. ceannaichte a’s fearr, wisdom bought 
by experience) is best; air call a chéille, losing 

is senses, doting ; mo chiall ! my darling ! 

coimhead c., regard discretion. 
samt generally used as an expression of 
ondness or term of endearment, also to ex- 








(see 


press desire, as, a chiall, I would, I wish ; a}, 








there; also as an expression of surprise, as, & 
chiall ! goodness !] 
ciallach,** -aici, s.m., Lover. 
ciallach, -aiche, a. Judicious, rational, pru- 
dent, cautious, sensible, discreet. 2*Nedate 
3 Significant. Dean d» ghnothach gu c., do 
your business rationallu; ceilidh quine e. mas 
ladh, a wise man covereth shame; cho c. r 
cnoc, as staid as a hill. 
adh, -aidh, s.m. Meaning, significa 
tiou, interpretation. A’ e—, pr. part. of 
ciallaien. Signifying. Ciod tha thu a’ ciall- 
achadh ? what do yon mean ? l'his is a li- 
teral Gaelic translation of the Enz. idiom, 
the idiomatie Gael. forin is given nder cial. 
ail, a. Emblematical. 2 Rational. 3 
Significant, allusive. 
d,tt s.fiind. Advisedness. 2 Ingenious- 





ness, 

ciallag, s.f. Feminine form of ciallan. 

ciallaich, pr. part. a ciallachaun, v.a. Signify, 
meau, alinde, design, interpret. 


.feiallaideach -eiene. a. see ciallach, 
-ciallaidheach, a. 


Significant. 
ciallail, see ciallach til. 


ciallairt, see cialtradh. 
ciallan, -ain, -aa, s.j». Favourite. A chiallain } 


my dear ! 

ciall-chagair, -air, s.f. Watch-word. 

tciall-chaisg, sf. Exa:nple. z Check, warning. 

ciall-chogair, see crell-shagair, 

tcialldha, a. see ciallach. 

ciall-lhealbh,** gan. Eaublem. 

ciall-ionnsacnaidh, s.f. Acquired knowledge. 

ciall-naduir, sf. Natural sense. 

ciall-hpàdurra, see c— -na uir. 

ciallradh, s.m. Kull or complete sentence. 

ciallsgur, (JGM) s. Upshot, tinal proceeding. 

fteialiughadh, see ciailachadh. 

¢eialluigheach, sev ciallaeh. 

cialtradh, -aidh, aidheau, s.n. Sentence. 2 
** Proposal. 

cia mar ? adv. How? in what way ? in what 
condition ? in wiat state or manuer? Cia 
mar tha thu ? how are you ? air ua h-nile cia 
mar, by all 1neans, (said in answer to cia mar ? 
in what way P) 

cia meud ? adv. How many ? how mech ? Cia 
meud a th’ ann? how many are there? cia 
meud bliadhna tha thu? Fow old are you? 
(lit. how many years are you P) 

fciamh, see ciabh. 

ciamhadh, s.m. Mauling. 2 Pelting—Zs/ay. 

tciamhair, a. Sad, weary, lonely. Gu c., sadly. 

f-—————e, sf. Lamentation, wailing. 

ciamhaireachd, s.f. Saduess. 2 Weariness. $ 
Loneliness. 

Tcelamhchallach, a. Curl-haired. 

¢ciamhoir, see eiamhair. 

cia minic Padv. How often ? 

cian, céine, a. Long, tedions, lasting. 2 Vast. 
3 Far-distant, remote, foreign, 4**Causing 
regret or pain. Is e. an oidnche, dreary is 
the night; bu c». leinn guin ain buillean, ling- 
ering was the pain ef their blows; gu c. nan c., 
Jor ever and ever; is c. mo leannan, my love 
is far away; sgeul cho binn eha chuala sinn o 
ps T so sweet a tale we have not heard this long 
while. 

cian, adv. As long as, while, whilst. An cC., 
long since, long ago; anc. a bhitheas‘mi beo, 
as long as I live. 

cian, dat. céin, s.m. Distance of time or place. 
An céin, ata distance; bho chéin, from afar; 
is iomadh c. o nach robh e an seo, il is a long 
time since he was here; gu c. nan c., to all eter- 


cian 


niy 


cianail, -e [& -ala,) a. Melancholy, mournful, ; ciaradh, see ciarachadn. 


sad, lamentable. 2 Pensive. 8 Solitary, 
lovely, lonesome, dreary. + Mild, gentle. 5 
Loving. 6** Weary, fatigued, fatiguing, te- 
dions, forlorn. 7(LCO) with another a. Ex: 
ceediugiv. S(MMcD) Amusing, Is c. m 
aigne, mw thoughts are sad; dà chraoibh ch., 
two xolitury trees; c. fiathaich, exceedingly 
rtormy—Uist; duine c,, an amusing fellow— 
Lewis. 

cianalach, -aiche.a, Solitary, lonely. 2 Pensive. 
3 Sad, mournful, lamentable. 

-— — ——4.* >f. see ciaaalas. 

cianalas, -ais. 3m. Melancholy, sorrow, sad- 
pess. 2 Mildsess. 3 Dulness, pensiveness. 
4**Wearisomevess. 6 (MMcf) Home-sick- 
ness. 6* Solitariness, loneliness, dreariness. 
A’ cur dhiun ar c., banishing our dreariness ; 
thainig smal oirnn lec., we are darkened with 
sadness; tha c. air, he is homesick. 

cianamh, adv. see a chianamh. 

ci&naran, -ain, -an, s.m. Melancholy person. 

cian-fnuaim, «9n Telephone. 

nea-h, a. "lelephonic. 

c an-fhulang, -ainz, s, m. Patient meek en- 
durance. 2**Perseverance. 3**Longanimity. 

- ——iüwh, -aiche, a. Long-sufering. 2 
** Persevering. 

———--——as, -ais, see cian-fhulang. 

cian-mhaireanuach, a. Lasting, durable, con- 
tioual, perennial. 

ciau-imhothacaaidh,** s.m. Apathy. 

cianog, -oig, -au, 8f. see cionag. 

cian-oran, -ain, pl. -ain,|& -an,] 8$.m. Mourn- 
ful, plaintive song. 

cian-szeul, s.m. Telegram. 

cian-szrioohach, a. Telegraphic. 

cian-sgr obhadn, -aidh, s.m. Telegram. 

cian-szriobaair, a.m. Telegraph. 

ciaa-sgriobhadair, s.m. Telegraphist. 

c.an-stanas:ir, sm. f'elegraph, telephone. 

Ci.i0-shauasacu, a. ** l'elegraphic, telephonic. 

tciap, v.a. Vex, torment. 

t al. at, sf Strife, debate. 2**Quarrelling. 
3**Vexation. 

fciapal, v.a. Encounter. 

eiapalach. -siche, a. tContentious, quarrel- 
some. 2**Militant. 

ij, s.f. Vexatiousness. 

feiapalaiene, s.n. Contentious, troublesome 
feilow, quarrelsome fellow. 

clapan,(DU) s.m, see giaban. 

ciar,* 8. m. Gloominess. 2 Dusk, evening. 3 
Darkness. C. nan carn, the gloom of the rocks. 

ciar, céire, a. Dusky, dark grey. 7 Dark brown, 
swarthy. 3 Dun. 4 Roan. 5 Sable, 6 Gloomy. 
7 stern. Siéibhte nan earba c., the hills of the 
dusky roes; fonn c. a’ bhròin, the gloomy strain 
of grief ; a ghaisgich chiar! thou stern hero ! 
ciar imeachd an aineoil, the dark path of the 
stran rer, 

ciar, pr.part. a’ ciaradh, v.n. Grow dusky. 2 
Become grey or brown. 3 Become dark, 
gloomy orstern. Am feasgar a’ ciaradh, the 
evening growing dusky. 

ciara, pl. of ciar. 

ciarach, -aich, -aichean, 8.m. & f. Swarthy 
.person of either sex. 

ciarachadh, -aidh, s. m. State of becoming 
dusky, dark or grey. 2 Dusk. A’ c—, pr.pt. 
of ciaraich. Darkening, making or becom- 
ing dark or dusky. ’S a’ chiaradh, in the 
dusk of evening. 

claracban,(AC) -ain, s.m. Wool-basket. It is 
open at the top, bulges out in the middle, 

and tapers in again towards the base. (call-| 














193 


cihi1h 


cd muriay (f.) anu muriainn (m.) in Argyll. 

C. nan speur, the 
da: kening o7 the heavens; c. an anmoich, the 
evening dusk. 

ciaray, «vig, -an, s.f. Any little dark*coloured 
creature. 2 Kind of beetle or bug. 3 Chafer. 
4** Dark-brown haired girl. 5**5warthy maid. 
6ttAny dark-coloured thing. "IT Dark grey 
cow. Ex. under bòid. 

ciaraich, pr.pe a’ c1 rachada, v.a. & n, Grow 
dusky. 2 Make browu, dusky or grey. 

teiarail, sf. Quarrel, brawl, tray. 

tejaralaen, -aiche, a. Perverse, 
quarrelsome. 

ciaralachd, s.f.tad. Perverseness, quarrelsome- 
ness, contentiousness. 

ciarauff, "ain, s.m. Dark or swarthy man. 

ciarcaii, œ. see ciocrach. 

ciar-eneó, s.m. Dark mi t, dusky mist. 
h-oidnche, the dusky mist of night. 

ciar-dhubh, -uibhe, a. "Dark grey. 

eiar-üneachd, af, Dark departure. 

tciarog, see ciarag. 

ciarsach,(AF) s.m. Thrush, see smedrach. 

teiarsain, s.f. Kercliuef. 

tarsan, -ain, s.m. Grumbling. 2**see ciarsain. 

ciarsanachd,** s.f. Gruubling. 





froward, 


C. na 


ciar-shuil, -shul, -suilean, 8. f. Dark eye. 9 
Scowling eye. 
- zach, a. Dark-eyed. 2 Having a 


scowling eye. B'fhada spàirn nan ciar-shuil- 
each, long was the struggle of the dark-eyed 
t chiefs. ) 

tciarsuin, see fciarsain. 

feiarsur, see ciarsain. 

tciarta, part. Waxed. 

cias, ceòis, ciasan, s.m. Border, skirt, fringe, 
corner. 2tf see ceós. 

——ach, -aiche, a. Bordered, skirted, fringed, 
cornered. 2tt see ceósach. 3(AH) Tangled 
wisp of wool or hair. 

feiasail, -ean, 8.f. Strife, dispute, contention, 
brawl. 

ciasalach, a. Quarrelsome, brawling. 

ciat,* see ceutadh. 

ciata, see ceuta. 

ciatach, a. see ceutach. 

——as, see ceutachas, 

————d, see ceudachd. 

Catadh, see ceu.cadh. 

ciataich, see ceutaich. 

ciataiche, see ceutaiche. 

ciataichead, see ceutaichead. 

ciataidh, gen.sing. of ceutadh. 

ciatamh, tt -aimn, see ceutadh. 

ciatfach, see ceutach. 

— ———d, see ceutachd. 

ciatfadh, see ceutadh. 

cib, -e, s.f. see ciob. 

cib-cheann-dubh, see ciob-cheann-dubh, 

cibean, -ein, -an, sm. Rump. 

cibein, -ean, 8.m. see cibean. 

cibyir, ean, 8.m. see ciobair. 

———-eachd, see ciobaireachd. 

cibh,* s.m. Skye for cuithe. Wreath of snow. 

cibheall, see giall. 

cibhear,* s.m. Drizzling rain, drizzle. 

cibhearg, -eirg, -an, s.f. Rag. 2 Little ragged 
M. 3 Wisp of wool, grass, o [** gives 
s."n. 

cibheargach, a. Ragged. 2 Tawdry 

cibheargan, -ain, s.m. Little rag. 
ragged wight. 

cibhlean, s.pl. Jaws. 

cibhrinn,* see curainn, 

cibulh, (ciob, bite) Mirun a’ mhillteir ’g iarr- 
aidb fath chum do ch,—Dain lain Ghobha. 


' 9 Little 


cich 


194 


cinneadas 


cich, dat.sing. of cioch. 

tuich, s.m. Greyhound. 

ciche, Gre of cioch. Ceann na ciche, the 
nipple. 

cichean,n.pl.of cìoch. C. liontach, full breasts. 

cideach,(AF) s.m. Petlamb. 

feàdh, v.a. See, behold. 

teidh, sf. Sight, view. 

cidueal, see giall. 

cidhean,(AF) sm. Fat lamb. 

ciduis, -e, -ean, s.f. Mask, disguise. 2 Vizor. 
Luchd cidhis, masqueraders. 

ear, -an, s.m., One wearing a mask, mas- 


querader. ` 
2** Masking. 








earachd, ss. Masquerade. 

cigeall, -gill, s.m. see diogailt. 

ach, see diogailteach. 

- adh, see diogailteadh. 

cigh, see ci. +2 s.f. Hind. 

——each, (AF) sm. Fat lamb. 

civil, v.a. see diogail. 

— —teach, -eiche, a. see diogailteach. 

tcl, s.f. Ruddle, species of clay. 2 Death. 

tcilcheis, s.f. Bad wool. 

ciivacn, a. Piebald, speckled over the body— 
Lewis. 

cileediir,* -ean, Prophet, soothsayer. 

cileag, -eig, 8J. Thin spare female. 2tfFrail 
oli woman. 3(AH) Timid, pli nt, irresolute 
mau. Never usedin Lewis to signify physicat 
frai'ty, but one easily led, as, ciieag dhuine, 
a man easily deceived. 

cilean, -viu, -eanan, s.m. Large cod fish.—Skye* 

cilean, s.pl. see cibhlean. 

teiltinug, s.f. The belly. 

cliig, -e, -ean, s.m. see cilean. d 

ci:l,-e, cilltean [& cillean] s. f. Cell, church. 
2 Chapel. 3 Cuurchyard, barying-ground. 4 
Grave. 5**Ruddle. 6fiDeuth. Thug am 
bas an cuirp do "n chill, death has given their 
bodies to the cemetery. 

Fell, «f. Partiality, prejudice. 

Cille-, A form of cill prefixed to the names of 
builders of churches, as, Cille-Mtiailidh, Cille- 
Bride, Cille-Mhaodain, &c. Before a vowel 
or fh it is written Cill’. 

cillean,(CR) s.m. Scamp.—Blair Athole. Is e 
c. grannda a th’ ann, Ae is a nasty scamp of 
a fellow. 

,'* see cillein. 

cillein, -e, -ean, s.m. Repository. 2 Concealed 
heap. 3 Anything concealed from observa- 
tion. 4 (Fionn) Small quantity—Argyll. C. 
eòrna, a puckle barley ; nach d’ rian riamh 
de 'n t-saoghal cillean (cillein)—Duanaire, p. 











15. 
cilleorn, (AC) s.m. Urn. 2 Sacred vessel. 
cillinn,** at, Chapel. 
cill-inbtiun, s.f. see cleith-inntinn. 
cill-inhanach, s.m. Abbey, monastery. 
cilltean, n.pd. of cill. 
tein, v.a. Captivate, capture, enslave, 
tcim ( for chi mi) I shall see. 
fein, 8.m. Drop. 2 Money. 
tciincheartaich, v.a. Rifle, pillage. 
cimeach, see ciomach. 
as,** -ais, 3. m. 
ment, bundage, slavery. 
cimich, v. see ciomaich. 
tcimidn,-ean. sce ciomach. 
cin? adv. Where? whither ? to what place ? 
Cin a cnaidh e? whither did he go ¢ (ceana ? 
in Argyll.) 
fcine, see cinneadh. 
cineadach, see cinneadach. 
cineadail, see cinneadail, 
fcineadh, sm. Country, ration. 


Captivity, imprison- 


2 Determin- 


ing, decreeing. 
cineal, -eil, -eatan, x. m. Offspring, progeny. 
2 Sori, specics, nature, 3 Extraction, race, 
tribe, clan. 4lfKindness. 
acu,** a. Lu clans or tribes. 2 National 
3 Clannish. 4 Populous. 
cinealta, a. see ceanalta. 





2**Clannish. 


chd, s.f. see evanaltachd. 2**Clan- 
nishness. 
s, -ais, s.m. see ceanaltas.  2**Clan- 
nishness. 
cineainhuinn,** e, Random. 
—————-——-each,** a. Fortuitous. 





Eo eachd,** s.f. Fortuitousness. 
GAMME OR) a. Agreeable. willing— West of 
058. 

feineil, s.f. Sort, kind, sex, gender. 
cineal.) 

tcineil-Scuit, s.pl. The Scots. 

tcineil-Sguit, see cineil-Scuit, 

tcinfideach, s.m. Conception. 

teing, a. Strong. 

Fong, s.m. Gaclic spelling of king. 2 Prince. 

feingeach, -eiche, a. Brave. 2**strong. 3** lin- 
petuous. 

tcingeachd,** s.f. Bravery. 2 Strength. 3 Im- 
petuousness. 

feingeadh, s.m. Courage, bravery. 2 Magnani- 
mity. 

cingean,** s.m. Keg. 

Cingeis, see Caingis. 

te:nid, a. Peculiar to a family. 

cinionnan-crd, s.m. see cionnan-crd, 

tcunnheath, sf. Consumption. 

tcinmhiol, s.m. Colours. 

t „v.a. Paint. 

+————-adh, s.m. Painting, image, picture. 
2 Art of painting. 

t———-—air, sm. Painter. 

cinn, gen. sing. & n. pl. of ceann. 

cinn, pr. part. &' cinntinn, v.n. Grow,increase, 
become grcater or more numerous, mustiply, 
spring from. 2 Vegetate, 3* Result from, 
happen. 4 Grow taller. 5**Agree to. 

tcinn-bheartas, -ais, s.m. Sovereignty, domin- 


(see 


ion. 
tciun-bheirt, sm. Ruler, governor, see ceann- 


bheart 
—————-—eadh, see ceann-bheartas. 
fcinn-bheirteas, s.m.  Doininion. 
ciune, see cinneada. +2 s.f. Megrim. 
anneach, -ich, s.m. Nation. z Heathen. 8 
Gentile. 4 Surname, csguomen. 5* Heathen 
nation. Air feadh nan cinneach sin, among 
those nations. 
cinneachadh, -aidh, s. m. Growing, growth. 
2 Budding. 3 Vegetating. 4 Prospering. 5** 
Augmentation. A'c—, pr.part. of cinnich. 
cinneachdach, -aiche, a. Vegetative. z In- 
creasing in size. 
,** s.m. Accretion. 
cinneachdaiche, comp. of cinveachdach. 
cinneach.tainn,** s.m. see cinueachadh. 
cinneachiuinn, s.m. Same meanings as cinn- 
eachadh. A’c—, pr.part. of cinnien. 
cinneadacn, -aiche, a. see ciuneasach. 
Clannish, in cians. Gu c., clannishly. 
cinneadacad,** &.f. Vegetability. 
ciunead il, -e, [& -dala,tt] a. Attached to 
one's own name and family. 2 Clanuish, par- 
tiai to persons of the saine naime or clan, fond 
of a numesaxe. 5**Accretive. Cinneadail 
coir, clannish and hospitable. 
cinneadalachd, Stau, Clannishness, pare 
tiality for one's own uame, clan, or kindred. 
cinneadas, -ais, s.m. Clan, kindred. 2 Cian- 
ship. Do ch. còir, thine honest kindred. 








9*9 


cinneadh 


cinneadh, -idh, -idhean, s m. Cian. tribe, sur- 
Name, relations, kin. kindred. 2**Pro;eny, 
offspring. 3t Preparing. 4tt Happening. 
Fear-cinnidh, a namw.ak», clansmen; beau- 
chinnidh, a clanswoman ; ceann-cinnidh, a 
chief:3in ; an c. maiseach, treubhach, the 
handsome», powerful clan. 

, v.n. Decree. 

cinneag, -eiz, -an, sf Spindle—Sutherl’d. 2 
Tuft of wool, especially wool on the spindle. 
3 Coward. 

cinnealtas,** -ais, s.m. Fondness, affection. 2 
Clannishness, 

tecinneamhna, a.. Accidental. 

fcinneamhnach, a. Fatal. 2**Accidental. 

fcinneanhuin, s.f. Chance, accident, fortune, 
fate. Àm agus 0., time and chance; clach na 
c., (see Lia tail) the fatal stone. 

cinneas, -eis, s.m. Growth, vegetation, 2 In- 
crease, produce, crop, fruit, production. 3 





Access, Ach. agus 'fhochann, its produce 
and brier. 
ach, a. Fruitful. 2 Vegetative, in- 





clined to grow, germinative, productive. 

achd, s.f. Fruitfuluess. 2 Vegetative- 
ness. 3* Vegetation, growth. 

cinn-fheadhna, pl. of ceann-fheadhna. 

tciunfhionn, a. Bald-headed. 

teinntidh, v.n. fut. (for orduichidh) Will order. 

ciunich, a-n.sing. & n.pl. of cinneach. 

cinnich, pr.part. a’ cinneachdainn [& a’ cinn- 
eachadh] v.a. £ n. Grow. 2 Rear. 3 In- 
crease, abound. 4**Make to vegetate. Cha 
chinnich craobh ni’s àillidh, a fairer tree 
shall never grow; an do ch. na caoraich dhuit 
ain bliadhna? did your sheep do weil this 
year ? (at the lambing season.) 

ciunidh, gen. sing. of cinneadh. 2 fut. aff. of 
ciun. 





cinnire-cartach, s. m. (for ceannaire-cartach) | t 


Carter. 

fcinnlitir, see ceann-litir. 

fceinn-mhire, s.f. Frenzy. 2 Insanity. 

cinn-ruidhe, s.pl. Timbers in a boat, see bata. 

frcinnseach, -sich, sm. Want, need. 

cinnseal, -eil, an. s.m. Commencement, origin, 
begiuning. 2 Want, necessity, hardship. 3 
"Contact.  4'*Desire.  5** Search. 6 (AC) 
Possession. 7 (DC) Pretence.— Argyll. An 
c. dol do 'n chlachan chaidh e dh’ iasgach, 
pretending to go to church he went a-fishing ; 
a’ dol an c. ràbhaidh, getting in contact with 
dan Jer; is coma leam dol 'na ch., I do not like 
to get in contact with it; bitheadh Micheal an 
e. an anama ghaoil, may M. take charge of the 
beloved soul. 

cinnt, -e, 8.7. Certainty. 2 Truth. 3 Confi- 
dence, reliance, assurance. Cha’n 'eil c. 'nam 
beul, there is no certainty in their lips; air 
chiunt, certainly, most assuredly, decidedly so. 

cinnte, gen siny. of cinnt. 

cinute, a. see cinnteach. 2t{Continual. 

ciunteach, ciuntiche, a. Certain, positive, as- 
sured, sure, contident. 2 Unerring, exact. 
3 Plain, evident, obvious. 4 Definite in gram. 
Saighde cho c. ris a’ bhas, arrows as sure as 
death; nach c. a làmh ! how unerring his hand 
is ! am bheil thu c. ? are you quite sure ? tha 
mi làn ch., / am quite certain ; mo ghille c. 
féin, my own confidential servant ;tha mi c. 
as, I am certain of it. 

as, -ais, s.m. Same meanings as cinn- 


teachd. 

, &f.ind. Certainty, actuality. as- 
surance, positiveness, c nfidence. 2 Clear- 
ness, unquestionableness. 3 Evidence. 4** 
Sureness of aim. 6*Demonstration. 


195 


cioch-mhuineil 


viniteadair, -ean, 5.24.  [nsurer, assurer. 

fcinnteagal, see cinnteasan. 

cinuteagan, -ain, s.m Course eloak. 

cinntealas, -ais, s. m. Certainty, assurance. 
E p" cinntealas agad air ? are you sure 
ofi 

tcinntich, v.a. Appoint, determine. 2 Ascer- 
tain. 

cinntinn, 8.m. Growing, vegetating, increas- 
ing. 2 Prospering. 3** Becoming. 4**Growth. 
A’ c—, pr. pt. of cinn. [** gives sr? 

fcinn-treun, a. Headstrong, obstinate. 

ciob, -a, $8. f. Tufted scirpus, deer’s hair, 
heath clubrush. see ciob-cheann-dubh. 2 
‘Low, refuse of flax. Sr Sponge—Islay. 4(AF) 
Sheep. 5 sheep stock. 6ffHand. C. nan 
ciar-bheann, the grass of the dusky hills. 

ciob,* a. Spongy, porous. Mòine ch., spongy or 
porous peats. 

cob, v.a. Bite. 2 Wound, maim. 

ciobach, -aich?, a. Abouuding in tufted scirpus. 

cioba-cloimhe,(A F) s.f. Woolly sheep. 

ciohair, s.m. (ciob) Shepherd. Feadec. an aon- 
arcu, the wiitatle of the mountain shepherd. 

eachd s.r. Herding of sheep. Ris a’ ch., 
herding sheep. 

clob-cheann-dubh,$ s.f. Tufted 
scirpus, deer’s hair, or heath 
club rush—scirpus ceespitosus, 
(Badge of tne MacKenzies.) 
2(AC) Flaky peat. 

cio hal, ail, cibhlean, see giel. 
2ttses ecioohull. 3(DC) Door- 
citch or ‘‘sneck.”’ 

ciobnraig, s.f. Skye for cürainn. 

ciopnull, -uill, pl. [-uill &] cibh- 
lean, s.m. Jaw-bone. 2ttDoor- 
jamb. 

tcioblaid, s.f. Trouble. 

each,-eiche, a. Trouble- 

some, tedious, clumsy. 

tciobrathach,a. Chattering,twit- 
tering. 

clocar, -air, -an, 











143. Ciob- 


s.m. Hungry, cheann-dubh. 
ravenous creature. 


ciocarach, a. see cìocrach. 

ciocaraiche, comp. of ciocarach. 

teiocardha, see cìocrach. 

cìoch, gen. cìche, dat. cìch, pl. cìochan, [& -à] 
s.f. Woinan's breast, pap. 2 Nave of a wheel. 

^ Cioch a mhuineil, or cìoch a’ bhràghaid, the 
uvula; c. au t-sluigein, the sac that propels the 
food into the gullet; leanabh cìche, a babe; 
bainne mo chiocha, the milk of my breasts. 

ciochair,** s.m. Stingy man. 





ZE. Ciochan. 
cìochan, -ain,s.m. Long-tailed tit-mouse—parus 
caudatus. 2 n.pl. of cìoch. 
-fada,1 s.m. Long-tailed tit-mouse, 
see ciochan. 
————- -nan-cailleach-marbha,§ s.m. Foxglove, 
Skye for lus-nam-ban-sith. 
ciocharan, -ain,-an, s.m. Suckling, infant on 
the breast. 
ciocharanachd, s.f. Condition of a babe or 
suckling. 2 Management of a suckling child. 
cioch-bhraghad, ciche-, -an-, s.. The uvula. 
cioch-chinn, ef. The uvula. 
cboch-mhuineil, 8.f. The uvula. 


ciochrach 196 cionradharcach 
ciochrach,(AC) -aich, s.m. Breastling. ming-dish. 
ciochran, see ciocharan. Ciouibal, -ail, -an, San, Bell. 2 Cymbal. 
achd, see ciocharanachd. air, «can, 8.7». One who plays on cym- 


cioch-shlugain, af. The muscular sac which 
propels the food into the gullet, the uvula. 

tcivcht, v.a. Rake, scrape. 

t——-, s.m. Carver. 2 Engraver. 
4 Children. 

1 adh, s.m. Engraved work. 

cìocrach, -aiche, a. Greedy of food, ravenons, 
voracious. 2 Longing, asafemale. 3**Ava- 
ricious. Guc., ravenously; an t-anam c. liou- 
aidn e, he shall jill the hungry soul; Roimh- 
ich ch., avaricious Romans. 

cicorachd,t? at see cìocras. 

cìocras, -ais, s.m. Earnest longing. 2 Hunger. 
3 Ravenousness, greediness, avariciousness. 


3 Weaver. 





4 Excessive desire, 5**False appetite. Air 
eLioeras fola, through thirst for blood. 
ach, -aiche, €. see cìocrach. 
——an, -ain, s.m. Hungry fellow.  2** 
Greedy fellow. 


ciod ? interr. pron.ind. What ? Ciod seo P what 
is this? c. air sou? why ? c. tha thn ag ràdh? 
what do you say ? c. ged a tha, what though 
there be; c. ged a bhitheadh, what thou sh 
there were; e. mu dhéidhiun? what about it? 
c. e an t-astar a tua Caoilte de "pn fniadn? or 
c. e an t-astar anns am bheil C. de 'n fhiadh? 
how fær is C. from the deer? c. gus an tig e, 
what it shal come to ; an cadal dhuit ? ciod 
e 1na’s e? ma’s e, cha bhi, are you asleep ? 
what if Lam ? if you are, yov, wiil not be so 
lunj—Gaelic idiomatic way of saying ‘wake 
np, the enemy is near”— Waifs & Strays. 

1eiodar, adv. Wherefore. i 

tciodn, What. 

teiouhfa P (ciod am fàth?) Wherefore? for 
what cause ? how many ? 

tciodhfar ? (ciod am fàth air ?) see fciodhfa ? 

ciog,(AF) s.m. Beast, animal. 

ciogail, v.a. see diogail. 
ciogailt, -e, s.f. see diogailt. 

————-each, -eiche, a. 

tciogal, see cuigeal. 

ciogladh, -aidh, s.m. & pr.pt.see diogladh. 
cioguilt, -e, see diogailt. 

Tciol, a. Squint. 

tciol, s.m. see cill. 2 Death. 3 Inclination, 
propensity. 

tciolach, s.m. Small fry. 

feiolag, -aig, sf. Hedge-sparrow. 2**Store, 
provision. 

ciolam, -aim, sm. Vessel. 

ciolar,** -air, sm. Linsey-woolsey. 

ciolarn,** s.m. Vase. 

tciolcach, s.f. see cuilc. 

tciollach, a. Superior, master of. 

ciollam,(DU) see ciorram. 

teiolrath,** v.n. Chatter, twitter. 

teiolrathach, a. Chattering. 

ciom, -aichean, s.m. Comb. 2 Wool-card. 

ciom, pr.part. a’ cioinadh, v.a. Comb, card or 
teaze wool. 

ach,** a. Restless. 

-—ach, -aich, s.m. Prisoner, slave, captive. 
2** Restless fellow. Ceud-ghin a’, chiomaich, 
the first-born of the captive. 

ciomachas, -ais, s.m. Captivity, slavery, bond- 
age, imprisonment.  Thng t' aghaidh gach 
aon an c., thy face has brought everyone into 
captirity. 

ciomadh, -aidh, s.m. Fault. 

ciomaich, v.g. Imprison. 

ciomaidh, see ciomach. 


211Terror. 
see diogailteach. 





cioman, -ain, s.m. Comb or card for dressing! ¢ciouraidhare, s.m. Fate. 


bals. 

ciomboll, -oill, -oillean, s.m. Bundle of hay 
or straw. -- Habrides, 

cion, s.1n.ind. Desire, love, esteem, fondness. 2 
** Fault. 3**Cause. 4ffWant,defeei. C. léir- 
sinn, want of sight, d»rect of vision; an c. air A 
leannain, fond of her lovers; mo ch. ort, 4 love 
thee; le c. a bhi’ga chleachdadh, in conse- 
quence of neglecting to practise it; e. faobhair, 
want of edge, bluntness. 

tcion,t see ciont. 

c’ ionadh ? adv. Whither P 

cionag, -aig, An, 3.f. tKernel. 2 Small coin. 
3 Small piece of land (4 of a cléiteag and j of 
a farthing-land.) 

cionail, a. Desirons, fond. 2 Defective. 3 
Guilty. CO air móran fiona, fond of much 
wine. 

eion-aire, s.f. Inattention. 

- acaail, a. Luattentive. 

cionaita, see ceanalta. 

feciouamhuil, -e, a. Desirable. 

eionar, -air, s.m. Music, melody, song. Ric., 
singing. 

tcion-churran, -ain, s.m. Hook. 

cion-cnimhaidh,{} s.m. Indigestion. 

cionda, see ceudna. 

c.on-edlach, a. Ignorant. 

cion-eólais, 8.11. Ignorance, lack of knowledze. 

c.onfa, see cion-fach. 

cion-fabhair,** s.m. Disfavour. 

cion-faiaich, s.m. Secret, ardent love. 

cion-faobhair, s.m. Bluntness, want of edge. 

cion-fàth, sam, Occasion, cause. reason or 
ground of any proceeding or occurreuce. 277 
Quarrel. C. 'n ar n-aghaidh, occasion against 
us; gun ch., without reason. 

cion-fhaobhair,** see cion-faohhair. 

cion-fhoighidinn, 38.m, Jinpatie ce. Da 

@on-léirsinn, s.n. Kiindness, defect of vision 
2**Shortness of sight. 

cion-maoidheim,** s.m. Disfavour. 

cion-meirbhidh, * s.an. Indigestion. 

cion-mhaireann,** a. Continual. 

cion-mhaireannach,** a. Continual. 

cionmhur,** a. Lovely. 

ciou-modh,** s.m. Bluntness, disrespect. — ` 

cion-mothachaidh, s.m. Apathy. 2 lInscnsibi- 
lity. 3 Want of sense or feeling. 4 (DU) 
Thoughtiessness. ! 

cionn, 8.2 ind, Reason, ground, occasion, 
cause, sake, quest, purpose. A chionn eu, 
because that. 

cionn, (os cionn prep.) Old dative case of 
ceann. 

ciounabharr,* s.m. Commode. 2 Hood. 

cionnachd, s.m. (ceann-aghaidh) Face. 

cionnan-cro, 3. m. The “leader” of a school 
of whales. Seachd mucan-mara beaga, satn 
cionnan-crò, seven small whales a Jull imeal 
Jor a bull whale. d 

cionnarra, a. Identical. T2(AC) White-headed. 

cionnas P adv. How? in what way or nian. 
ner P by what means? A dh'fhaicinn c. a 
dh'ainmicheadh e iad, to see how he womd 
name then: c. à thàinig orra claoidh ? dow 
hus trouble come upon them ? c. à tha thu? how 
do you do ? 

cionnfath, see cion-fath. 

eionnsaich, see ceannsaich. 

cion-ombaill,** s. m. Recklessness. 
nmaail) 


^ 
(cion- 


2 Want of sight. 


wool. 2 Kitt. 3**Combing, teazing. 4 Skim-| cionradharcach, -aiche, a. Deficient in vision, 


cionradharcach 


2 Deficient in foresight. 3f{Illiberal, stingy. 
¢cionran, -ain, 8.1. Melanchuly music. 
cion-seirce, s.m, Disaticction. 
€ion-sgeoil, AC) s.m. _ Propensity. ` ; 
ciont, -a, pl. -v[& -an,] s.m. Guilt, crime, siu, 

fault, blame. Dean c., sin, ufeud; na maith 

au c., pardo nol their sin; vun ch., blameless 
—ach -aiche, a. Guilty, at fault, sinful, 
cruninal. 
—ach. -aich, s.m. Culprit,criminal,defaulter. 
——iwnadh, -aidh, 8.m. 'I'res passing, tra nsgi ess- 
ing, siumng, blaming. 2 Act of contractiag 
guilt. A c—,pr.part. of ciontaich. Le c. 
ainazhaidh, with trespassing ugainst me. 
—acid,* s.f. Degree of guilt, 2 Sinfulness.- 
——aich, pr.pt. A ciontachadh, v.a. & n. Tres- 
pass, transgress,sin. blaine, be gnilty. Chiont- 
aich iad ain aghaidh, they sinned ayainst me; 
cha ch. sibh, ye shall not sin. 

ceiontaiche,** sm. Aggressor. 

cion-teas,** s.m. Chiiliness, 

cion'tbar, -air, see cionar. 

tc.ou-tire, sf. Tax, tribute. 

Ciou-tüir,ff -e, 8m. Foolishness, 

ciopair,** see ciobair. 

fviopallaicn, sf. Galling. 

ciopan, -ain, 8. m. see cipean L 

tor, -a, -an, s.f. Comb. 2 Jaw. 8 The cud 
of ruminating animals. 4 Hand. 5 Agent. 

tcior, v.a. see cir. 

ciora, -an, Tal, ciorachan— Lewis]s.f. Pet lamb. 


2 Sheep that feeds with cows. 3 Cud chew- 
er. 4 Ewe-teg. 
ci rag, see cipra. 


:oralta, a. Cheerful. 
tciorb, v.a. £ n. Mangle. 
come black. 
ciorhail, -e, a. Snug, close-wranped. 
tciorbh, v.a. Take away, mutilate. 
t adh, 8.m. Mutilating, mangling. 
t tha, a. & past pt. of ciorbh, Hurt, la- 
cerated. 
ciorcail, -e, a. see ciocrach. 
4ciorcal, -ail, -àn, s.m. see cearcall, 
teiorghal, s.m. Bravery. 
———.,** a. Brave, fearless. 2 Strong. Bi 
c. treubhanta, be fearless and strong. 
ciorra, ( for céarra) comp. of céarr. 
ciorraidh ! sce ciridh. 
ciorram, -aim, -an, s.m. Mischief, disaster, 
accident, mishap. 2 Maim, hurt, d-fect ina 
person's body. 3 Damage, wounding. 
ach, -aiche, a. Mutilated, maimed, de- 
formed by accident. 2 Pernicious, daugerous, 
destructive, hurtful. 3 Accidental, unto- 
ward. A Paiuinl. 5**Mean. o**Blemished. 
7**Causing a flaw or blemish. 
achd,** s.f. Lameness. 2 State of being 
maimed. 
tciorrbhuch, -aidh, s. m. 
consuming. 2 Mangling. 
ciorrtham, -aim, -an, see ciorram. 
ciorrnach, a. see ciorramach. 
clorusgrach,** -aiche, a. Clearing, 
away with the hands. 
teiorusgraich, s.f.ind. Clearing, driving away 
with the hands. 
cios, -a, s.f. Wages of a nurse. 
tclos, s.f. Petition. 2(AC) see cis. 3[ÍSin. 
fciosach, -aiche, a. linportunate. 2 Sluggish, 
slovenly. Gu c., importunately. 
civsachadh, -aidh, $.m. Restraining, act of re- 
straining. 2 Subduing, quieting, calming, 
appeasing. A’ c—, pr.pt. of ciosaich. 
eiosachdach,** a. Importunate. 2 sSluggish.! 
5 slovenly. 
Ciosaich, v.d. 


2 Mortify. 38 Be- 











Wearing, spending, 


driving 


Bee cìosnaich, 


my 


er 
e, -ean, see closnaiche. 
te, a. & past pt. of closaich, see cìos- 
naichte. 
ciosal,** -ail, 8.m. 
ciosan, -ain, -an, 
3t¢t Box. 


Wages of a nurse. 
$.m. Basket. 2 Corn-skep, 





145. Ciosan. (ill. by MMcD) 
earain, s.m. Bread-basket. 
-bafair, s.m. Vessel made of sea-bent, 
see bra 15, p. 112. 
-lóimhe, s.m. Large spherical baske 
with an opening in the side. 
-mine, 8.0». Basket circular like a bee- 
hive, for holding meal. 
amüvain, s.m. Another name for ciosan- 
mine.— Lewis. 2(DM) Another name for tios- 
an bafair, (see bra 15, p. 112.) 
cios-chain, 3.f. Tribute, tax, assessment. 
cioslaich, see ciosnaich. O chioslaich ain bas 
thu, since death subdued you—ho, Donn. 
cios-mhér, -oire, a. Exacting tribute. 
ciosnaeh,ft -aiche, a. Tiresome, 
cìosnachadh, -iidh, sm. Act of conquering, 
subduing, appeasing, quieting, cauming. 2t 
Wearing out, oppressing. A’c—, pr. pt. of 
cìosnaich. Tha’n tir air a e, the land (e 
subdued. 
ciosnachail, a. Placable, tranquillizing. 2* 
Overpowering. 3 Made to pay tribute. 4ttsea 
ciosnaichte. 
ciosnaich, pr. pt. a’ ciosnachadh, 
power, conquer, subdue. 2 Appease, quiet, 
calm, restrain. 
ciosnaiche, s.m. 2 Ap- 
peaser. 
ciosnaichte, a. & past pt. of cìosnaich., Con- 
quered, subdued, appeased. 
ciosnuich, see cìosuuch. 
ciotach, -aich, s.m. Left hand. 
ciotach, -aiche, a. Left-handed. 2 Awkward. 
3 Cunning, craity, designing. 4 Sinister, de- 
fective. Duine c.,a lejt-handed man; Colla 
c., Colkitto. 
d, s f. see ciotaiche. 
ciotadh,** s.m. Pail. 
ciotag,-aig,-an, 8. f. Left hand. ? Cunning 
unlooked-for trick. 3 Little plaid er scarf. 4 
Rag. Ghibhainn ort lei’ chiteaig .chiot- 
aig), 1 would take you, fight you, with my left 
nana, 
ciotaiche, 8.f. Left-handedness, habit of using 
the left hand more than the right. 2 Awk- 
wardness. 
ciotaiche, comp. of ciotach. 
Tciotan, s.m. see ciotag. 
cioth, -a, 8.m. see cith. 
-——ach, see citheach. 
tciothramach, -aiche, a. 
Mean. 
tciothruimich, 8.pl. 
ciotog, see ciotag. 
cip, gen.sing. & nom. pl. of ceap. 2 Ranks, filea. 
cipean, -ein, -an, s.m. Stumn, stake, peg, 
tether-stake. 2 Stick or dibble for plant- 
ing. Cuir nir C., tether. 
cir, gen.sing. of ciar 
cir, ». Eo a rreadb V. a. Teazeor comb, a4 
wool. 2 Curry-comy. 3 Hackle, as wool 
Cir t’fhalt, comb your hair. 
cir -e, an, s. f Comb. 2 Honey-comb. 8 
Crest oa cuch. 4 Cuu. b Jaw. Gë Part of 

















va. Over- 


Conqueror, subduer. 





see ciorramach. ?1f 


Abject persons. 


cir 





103 


DEE ` 


eithris-chaithris 


a key coacainiug the oke, 7(AC)Sheep. 8,tciseal, (co-iosal, a. Low, as if betweeu two 


«(AC;Cud-cb»wing animal. Tha a’ bhó ai 
enàuiü na cire, the cow is chewing the cud ; eun 
cir-daearg an aonaich, the reu-crested fowl 
of the heath. 

tcirb,** a. Swift, fleet. 

cirb,(AH) s. f. Skirt, tail, pendant, appendix, 
edge. Ghlac mi c. a’ chota aige, I seized the 
taut of his coat. 

cirb, dat. of cearb. 

circean-caorainn,(AF) s.m. Mountain finch, see 
briceiu-caoruinn. 

circe-ball, s.m. Shutt:ecock. 

circ-fheodil, st, Flesh of a hen or chicken. 

¢cird ,céaird) s.f. Employment. 

cir-dhearg,1f a. Red-crested. 

eire, see cir 7. 

Greach,}t -cich, -eichean, s.m. Comb-case. 

, -eicne, a. Crested. 2 Having a comb. 
3 Of, or belonging to, a comb, or crest. 4** 
Combing, inclined to coimb. Cha mhinnean 
gorm no coileach c. e, it is neither a grey kid 
nor a crested cock. 

cireachan, -ain, s.m. Comb-case. 

cìreadh, -idh, s.m. Combing, act of combing. 2 
Teazing, as of wool. A’ c—, pr.pt. of cir. 
Tha a cuaileanan géarrte gun chìreadh, her 
shorn locks are without combing—Duanaire, 14. 

cireag, -eig, -an, s.f. see ciora. 2ttLittle comb. 

ach,ff -aiche, a. Abounding in little 
coinbs. x 

cìrean, -ein, pl. -an Lë -einean,] 8m. Crest. 
2 Metal badge or family crest, as worn on 
belts, bonnets, &c. 3 Cock's comb. 4 Coam- 
ing of a boat, see bata, F4 p. 78. 

ach, -aiche, a. Crested. 2 Of, or be- 
longing to, a comb or crest. 3 Like a crest. 

cireanach,(MMcD) -aich, s.f. Short seaweed 
that grows nearest hish-water mark on a 
beach or shore— Lewis. 

cirean-choilich,3 s. m. Red zm 
campiou,—lychnis diurna. 5 Ge, 

cirean-tarsuing, s.m. Coam- e } 
ing of a boat, see bàta, F4 ; Z : 

3 











E 49. 

abut, s.f. Currycomb. 

cireineach, see cireanach. 

cire-mheal, see cir-mheala. 

ciridh ! int. Call addressed 
to a goat or sheep—NortA 
Highlands. 

ciridh, s.f. see ciora. 2 see 
ceairidh. 3(AC) see cir 7. 

cir-mheala, 8.f. Honeycomb. 
March.,as a honeycomb. 

cis, -e, -ean, &f. Tax, tribute, — 146. Cirean- 
impost, rent, obiation. 2 choilich. 
Homage, submission, 3 Reverence. 4** Aid. 
Thoireadh Cuchulainu dhomh c., let €. yield 
me tribute ; fo ch., under su'jection ; tha ’n 
dàmh fo ch. aige, he bas brounkt the stag (ow ; 
thug am bàs fo chìs iad, dealh has brought 
them low ; seirbhiseach do ch., a servant to 
tribute. 

cis-badhar,lf s.f. Excise. 

Cis-bhuailteach, a. Taxable, liable to tax. 

cis-chacaaileith, gp, Turnpike charge. 

cis-chain,** s.f. Tribute, tax. 2 Poil-tax. 

cisd, see ciste. 

eisde, T 

cisdeag, -eig, s.f. (cisteag) dim. of ciste. 

teisdeamhuil, a. Capsular. 2 Hollow. 3 Like 
a chest. 

cis-dhiolach,* a. Assessable. 

ciseach,tt a. Of, or pertaining to, tax or tri- 


bute. À 
tciseal, s.m. Nurse’s wages. 2 The Devil. 





TM 
. 
a 


waters. 

tcisean, -ein, s.m. Little chest, coffer. 2*Ham- 
per—Jslay. 

cisean-bafair, see ciosan-ba fair. 

cisean-mürain, see ciosan-mürain. 

cisear, -vir, -an, s.m. Kxciseman, tax-gatherer. 

cisearachd, s.f. Business of an exciseman or 
tax-gatherer. 

cise-bhuailteach, see cìs-bhuailteach. 

cis-fheart, s.f. Mixed clota. Ri fuachd Féill- 
Bride foghnaidh c., for Candlemas cold, miz- 
ed stuff will do—N.G.P. 

cisire, see cisear. 

cis-leagadair, see cis-leagair. 

cis-leagadh,*-aidh, s.m. Assessment, assessing. 

cixleagair, ssm. Assessor. 

cis-mhaor, -mhaoir, 8,m. 
lican. 
licans."? 

cis-righ,* s.f. Allegiance. 2 Excise. 

ciste, pl. cisteachan, s.f. Chest, box, coffer. 2 
Coffin. 3**Treasure. 4**rarely Cake. 

——ach,ft-eiche, a. Chested. 

——achan, a.pl. of ciste. 

cisteag, -eig, -an, s.f. Small chest or box. 

-tha:rneach,* s.f. Drawer. 

cis-teallaich,* s.f. Fumage. 

cistean, -ein, s.m. dim. of ciste. 
little trunk. 

tcisteanach, -aich, -aichean, s.f. Kitchen. 

tcisteanadh, -aidh, s.m. Rioting. 

cistear, s.m. Cashier. 

ciste-chaol,, MMcD) st, Wooden settee, with 
bottom and sides closed in, and lid on top, 
about 7ft. long, placed towards the wall 
and near the firein a black house— Lewis. 
also ‘‘beinge.”? 2 poetically Coflin. 

cisteil,** a. Capsular. 

ciste-mhairbhe,**s.f. Coffin. Chuireadh ann 
an c. e, he was put into a cofin. 

ciste-mhine, s.f. Meal-chest. 

cistin, -e, -ean, Gaelic spelling of kitchen. 

each, -eiche, a. 


Deriv. of kitchen. 
inary. 2 Low bred. 
eadh,** -nidh, s.m. 
citeag, see ciotag. 
cicean,(AF) s.m. Lamb. 
fcitear, see chìthear. 
cith,-e,-ean,s.m. Shower,heavy rain,mist. 2 Ar- 
dour. 8**Havoc. 4**Peal. 5fIParticle.—Sut'd 
6 (AO)Lake. 7 Snow-drift—skye. t8 Rage, 
fury, ire. This meaning is preserved in **citu- 
chath,” as, chuir e 'na chith-chath e, he tore 
it in shreds (lit. the urdour of battle)—suth'd 
said of anyone impatient to do anything 
(AG.): tha e an citt falbh, he is eager to be 
off ; cith na fola, the shower of blood; an cith, 
in the mood, attuned ` KE? to do anythiny ; 
cathadh na fuar c :ithibh, drift in coid show- 
ers. 
cith-chaolan, -ain, sm. Vomiting. 
cith-chath, &.f. Ardour or impatience to begin 
a battle. 2(DMy Hurry scurry— Lewis. 
cithe, see cuithe. 
citheach, -e:che, a. NShowery. 
wasteful. 3 Furious, keen. 
citheal, see ciall. 2 see iall. : 
cithean, ein, s.m. Complaining, lamenting, 
grumbling. 
——ach, -aiche, a. 
bling. 
cithein,tt s.m. 
each,tt a. 
cithiuracüu, che, a. 
cituris-chaithris, 8.f.ind. 
commotion, hurly-burly. 


f Tax-gatherer, tpub- 
Caraid chis-mhaor, a friend of ‘“pub- 








Little chest, 


Cul- 








Rioting. 


2 Destructive, 


Complaining, grum- 


see cithean. 
see citheanach. 
*howery. 
Confusion, tnmult, 
2 ttLoquacity. 





citsin 179 clabarach 
citsin, see cistin. — danach,** o Murmuring. 
———each, see cistineach. ———danachd, see ciürach 2. 
ciubhrach, -aiche, see c(übhran. Frasan a/ciurair, s.m. Gaelic spelling of curer. 


thig 'nan c., showers that c me in drizcle. 
ciübhragaich, s.f. see ciüblran. 

ciàbhran, sn. Small drizzling rain. 

cluch, s.m. Pass. 

ciuchach,(AC) a. Plaintive. 

ciuchair, a. Beautiful. 2 M — 3 

ciücharan, -ain, $. m. Low-voiced, plaintive 
lamentation. 

tciuchlaith, v.a. Hear. 

citicrun,t{ see ciücharan. 

ciud-siorraig.(DC) s.f. The modern wool-wind- 
er with an arrangement of toothed wheels, 
worked by the revolving winder aud with a 
spring wnicü makes a sound when the num- 
ber of threads forming a ''cut" is wound on 
the rim of the winder-wheel— Uist. 

ciùil. gen.sing. of ceòl. 

teiüileabhar, s.m. Greyhound. 

c.üiu, -e, a. Calm, gentle, meek, mild, ami- 
able. 2 Smooth, agreeable to the touch. 3 
Unruffled, placid, peaceful, quiet, composed. 
Agus bna 'n duine Maois ro ch., and the man 
Moses was very meek; feasgar c., a still evening; 
aodach c., smooth cloth, [McA says North 
after this, but “aodach mia” is the correct 
expression]; cha ch. e, heis not mild. 

ciùin, pr.pt. a’ cidineadh, v.a. see ciùinich. 

ciùme, s.f.ind. Mildness, gentleness, meek- 
ness. 2 Calinness, peacefulness, tranquillity. 
3 Quietness, repose. 4**Smoothuess. 5** 
Gentle gale. C. mhór, a great oalm. 

, com» of ciùin. More or most calm. 

ach,** a. Assuasive. 

achadh, -aidh, s.m. Appeasing, quieting, 

calming, pacifying, assuagement. A’ ce, 

pr pt. of ciùinich. 

achail,** a. Appeasable. 

———achair,** s.m. Appeaser. 

achd, see citineas. 

——ad, -eid, s.f. Degree of calmness. 2 In- 
crease of calmness or smoothness. A’ dol 
an C., increasing in calmness. 

adair,** a.m. Caimer. 

83, -eis, 8.m. Calinuess, quietness, mild- 

ness, meekuess. 2 Gentleness. 8 Smooth- 























ness. 4 Coinposure. 
ciùinich, pr.p.. a’ ciùin eachadh, v.a. Appease, 


calm, still. pacify, assuave. Ch. e iad, he still- 
Eg ciüiniehidn tìodhlac, a ott will pa- 
ey. 
ciuinichte, past 
eased, calme 
Top), prov. for céaird. 2 gen. sing. & n. pl. of 
ceaird 3 Covering. 
fcrüirinich, v.a. Cover. 
fciüirt, s.f. Rag. 
t- ——,** v.a. Tatter. 
ciüirteach, -eiche, a. 
ciulan,** s.m. Murmur. 
——ach,** a. Murmuring. 
ciulcharan,(CR) s. m. Warbling, singing of 
birds.— West of Ross-shire. 
¢ciumhas, -an, s.m. Border, selvidge, “list” of 
cloth. 
+————-ach, a. Having a border or selvidge. 
ciünachair,** see citineachair. 
ciünadair, see ciüineadair. 
feiànas, see ciùineas. 
ciür, see ciürr. 
four, sm. Merchant. 
¢ciura, a. Marketable, merchantable. 
ciùrach, -aich, s.f. see cidbhran. 2**Querimo- 
niousness. 
n,** 


pt. of ciùinich. Pacified, ap- 


see ciürrail. 


8ee ciülan. 


ciüran,tft -ain, s.m. 
ran. 


Drizzling rain. also cidbh- 
(sgiürau—4A rgyll.) 

ach,tt a. Rainy. 

ciürlan, see ciülan. 

ach,** see ciülanach. 

achd, see ciülan. 

ciùrr, pr. pt. a’ ciùrradh, v.a. Hurt, torture, 
agonize. 2ttHarm, injure, blemish. 3 Put to 
pain, smart. 4 Cause loss or damage. 

-——ach,** see ciürrail. 

ciürradair, -e, -ean, s.m. Tormentor, one who 
hurts or pains. 

citrradh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Hurt, injury, 
wound. 2 Act of h rtivg or wounding. 3 
Aggrieving. 4**Blemish. <A’ c—, pr. pt. of 
ciùrr. Chum mo ch., to my harm; fi:uair e 
'ch., he got himself hurt. 

citrraidh,** g. Hurtful, destructive. A’ ghaill- 
ioun ch., the destructive sorm., 

ciùrrail, a. Hurtful, destructive, injurions, 
causing damage or grief, torturing. 2 Lad. 
3ttWounding. 4{tKagged. Ana-mhiaua c., 
a hurtful (ust. 

ciürram,** s.m. see ciùrr. 

— ach, -aiche, a. Hurtful. 
lamed. 3 Lame. 4 Manning. 
ch., the destructive spear. 

ach, -aich, s.m. Maimed or laze per- 











2 Maimed, 
An t-sleagh 


son. 

ciürramaich,** v.a. Damage. 

ciürrta, a. & past pt. of ciürr. Hurt, wounded, 
injured. 2 Blemished. 3 **OGfiended. Isc. 
tha mo chridhe, wounded is my heart. 

ciürrteach,ftt see ciürrail. 

fciürrtha, a. Bought, purchased. 

—— ———mach, see ciorramach, 

ciürtach, a. see ciürrail. 

-——_——-d, tt sf. Ottensiveness. 

ciuthrach,(AF) s.m.  Red-head (bird.) 

Teciüthramach, a. see ciorramach. 

foüthramaich, v.a. Maim. 2 Mutilate. 

¢clab, a. Thick. e 

clab, -aib, -an, s.m. Open mouth, gaping gar- 
rulous mouth. 2 Thick-lipped mouth (a ludi- 
crous familiar term.) 3**Lip. 4**Gouorrl oa 
or any venereal affection. 5(AF, Frog-t:h, 
angler. 'S ann ort a tha’n clab, how taik- 
ative you are—said to a chatterer ; an dorus 
air clab a’ chraois, the door wide open. 

—-ach, -aiche. a. Thick-lipped. 2 Open- 
mouthed. 3 Wide-mouthed. 4 Garrulous. 

—ach, sf. see clabag. 

clabadair,* see clàbaraiche. 

claba-dubaidh, (AF) Cockles, clams. 

clabag, -aig, -an, s. f. Garrulous female, 2 
Thick-lipped female. 8 Large-mouthed fe- 


male. (cliob—<Argyll.)  4**scoft. 
ciabair, -ean, 8.1m. Babbler, loud disagreeable 
talker, prater. 





, gen. sing. of clabar. e : 

eachd, s&J.ind. Eabbling, tattling, vice 
of tattling. 

claban, -ain, -ainean, s. m.  Mill-clapper. 2 
clack. 3ttPaddle. 4ffRattle. a 

e'aban,f -ain, em. Top of the head, brain-pan. 
2 Balance— MacL. 

clabau-uaireadair,* s.m. Balance of a clock. 

clabar,ft -air, -an, 8.2m, Mill-claprer. z**Clack. 

clàbar, -air, s.m. Filth, dirt, nastiness. 2 
Mire, mud, clay. 3 Puddle. 4**Kennel. C. 
cré, miry clay; c. an t-sràid, the mire of the 
street. 

ach, -aiche, 

Miry. 





a. Dirty, filthy, nasty. 2 





clabarachd 
clabarachd, s. f. Dirtiness, filuliivess, uasti- 


ness. 2 Miriness. 

elabaraich,tfv.a. Bedraggle, 

clabaraiche, ëm. Scavenger. 

ciabaran,** s.m. Patten. 

ciavarsach.(DC) a. Hashing—applied to work 
requiring excrtion and strength— Uist. 

clabastair, -e, ean, 8.m. Brawler, babbler. 

—— ————— -ciocharain, see clab-ciocharain. 

clab-ciocharaiu, pl -an-ciocharain,s.m.Frog-fish. 
— Uist. [griasaiche—Skye ; mac-làmnaich 
—A rgyll.] 

clab-dubh,* pl, claba-dubha, s.m. Mussel (fish.) 
2 Phola (shell-fish), the **chubby doo" of the 
Firth of Clyde. 

fclabh, see claimh. 

fclabhair, s.m. Mead. 

olabhais-feach,"i s.m. Red-shank (bird) 
caim-ghlas. : ' 

clàbndaiu, s.pl. see clàdain. 2**Stilts. 

clabhdan, -ain, 8.94. Ciamp. 2 see cladan. 

clabhrachan,** -aiu, s.m. Babbler. " 

tciabhsail, a. Systematic, quiet, tranquil. 

¢ciabnuin, sm. see clàinhuinn. 

Qi&bog, -oig, -an, SP. Good bargain, great bar- 
.alu. 2 see clavag 

*$c.absal, -ail, s.m. Column of a page. - 

Glab-sgain, -e, -tean, s.m. Open-mouthed noisy 
fellow. 

4c.ab-sholus,** -uis, s.m. Twilight. 

elabstair, s.m. Clatterer. 

felabstur, s.m. Cloister. 

clach, cloiche, dat. cioich, pl. clachan, s.f. 
Stone. 2 **Pebble. 5**Rock. 4 Stone weight 
(14 1b.) 5** Monument. 6* *Testicle.  7* 
Goggle-eye —Isiay. C. olainn, a stone-weight 
of wool ; clachan an clit, the memorials of 
their fame ; c. na sùla, the apple of the eye ; is 
fhearr a’ chlach na 'bhi gun mhathachadh, 
better stones than no manure. 

; pr. pt. a’ clacuaih, v. a. Stone, strike 
with stones. 2 K.ll by stoning. 

clach-a’tbhoisgein, s f. Putting-stone—Cowal. 

clachach, -aiche, a. Set, rocky, pebbly. 

clachaidh. fut. af. a. of clach. Shall stone. 

clach-ailn, sf. Alum stone. 

ciachair, pl. -ean, 8.a. Mason, stone-builder. 
A’ chlach a dhiùlt na clachairean, the stone 
which the builders rejected; c. Sainhraidh, diol 
ueirc Geainhraidh, mason in summer, beggar 
in winter. 

clachaireach,ff -eiche, a. Masonic. 

——————d,1t sJf.ind. Masonry, occupation 
of a mason, stone-buildiug. 2*Architecture. 
Ris a’ ch.. at the masonry business. 

clachairich,[f v.a. Build. 

clachan, n.pl. of clach. 

, ain, -an, s.m. Village or hamlet in 
which chere is a parish church, inn, and 
smithy. 2**Churea. 3**Churehyard, burying- 
place. 4**Druidical circle composed of stones 
raised on end. o* Stepping-stones. Di- 
dóinhnuich ‘dol do 'n ch., on Sunday going to 
church ; baile chlachain, a nam? given to a 
parish vage because it contains the parish 
church, «c. 

clachau-ghadhair, sm, Early orchis, see moth- 
uraci. 

clachar, fut. pass. of clach. 

clacharan, -ain, -an, s.m. Pavement. 2 Step- 

ping stones across a river, or in boggv ground. 

— — ——,"l 3.m. Wheatear, 2 Stonechat, see 

cloichirean 


see 





200 


c'ach-ghorm 


tion of rattle, such as those formerly used by 
the police. 

clach-bhannag,(AC) s.f. Bannock-stone, the 
Stone against which the cake is supported 
before the fire. 

clach-bhleath, see e— -bhleith. 

clach-bhleith, pł. -an-bleith, s.f. Grindstone, 
whetstone. 2 Dram before meals particular- 
ly breakfast. 

clach-bhlionain, (DC) A rgyll for clach-bhleith. 

clach-bhogha, s.m. Catapult. 

clach-bhoig, see claci-bualg. 

clach-bhriseach,}s.m. (lit. stone breaker) Saxi- 
fraza,—saxirraya. 

clach-bhuadlach, -aich, pl. clacha-hua:lhach, 
8.f. Precious stone, gem, amivlet, charn. 

clach-bhuaidh, see clach-bhinadhach. 

clac bhuinu, sy. Nether stone of null. 

clach-brath, s.f. Judgment stone. 2 Rocking- 
stone, an immense spherical mass of r: ek, so 
situated that the least touch can rock fp 
one certain direction, but which caunct be 
wade to move in any other by allthe force 
that can be applied to it. Such stones were 
once frequentin Britain. There are stones 
in Iona called na clachan-brath. They are 
within the preciucis of the bnrial-ground, 
andjare placed on the pedestals of a cross, 
and rave been, according to Pennant, the 
supports of a tomb. It is believed by some 
that the world's erd will not come till the 
stone on which they stand is worn through. 

clach-buaidh, see clach-bhuadhach. 

clach-cheagail, s.f. Key-stone. 

clach-chinn, pl. clachan-cinn, s.f. Head-stone. 
2 Copestone. 3 Upright grave-stone. 

clacb-chnotaidh, (DC) Argyll for clach-chno- 
tainn. 

clach-chnotainn, gt Hollowed stone into which 
buriey is put and beaten with a maiiet, until 
freed from the husks. [Generally calied 
cnotag, mortar. ' 

clach-eDreadha, pl. -an-creadha, 8. J. Brick. 
ae clachan-creadha, let us make 
ricks. 

clach-chriche, pl. -an-criche, s.f. March-stone, 
landmark. 

clavh-chrocaidh, 

ciach-curotaidh, ` see clach-chnotainn. 

clach-chrotainn, 

clach-chribain, pl. -an-cribain, s. f. Amulet 
supposed to cure rheumatic complaints; spe- 
cies of gryphites. 

clach-chuarsgaidh, pl. -an-cuarsgaidh, s.f.Stone 
roller. 

clach-chuimhneachan, -an-cuimhneachan, ZS, 
Monument. 

clach-dhealbh,ff s. Stone statue. . 

clach-dheanadach,ff -aiche, a. Lapidific, 

ciacn-dhearg, 8.7. Keel, ruddle. 

clach-dhualadair.[f s.m. Stone-cutter. 

ciach-dnünaidh,ff s.f. Keystone of an arch. 

clach-éiteig, &./. Alabaster. 2(DC) Quartz. 

clach-fhaisneachi,ff{ s.f.in . Litnomancy. 

clach-ftiaobhair, sj. Hone, whetstone, 

clach-fhaobhrach, see clach-fhaobhair. 

clach-fhuail,| pl. -an-fuail, 3.7. Gravel-stone, 
stonesejected with urine. 

clach-ghaireil, s,f Freestone. s 

clach-gnueurachaidh, pl. -an-geurachaidh, s.f. 
Hone, whetstone. P 

clac'i-ghinea:lach, -aiche, a. Lapidific. 

clach-ghtueaimhuion, tf s.f. Lapiditication, 


elacharra, a. Set with stones. 2 Goggle-eyed. clacn-ghlaisidh tt s./. Keystone of an arch. 
clach-baalg, -bhuilg, am, s.m. Originally a bag clach-ghleusaidn, (MMeD) sf. Grindstone, hono, 


witb stones in it to scare oT birds or horses! 


whetstoae— Lewis. 


by rattling. 2 Now applied to any descrip-! clach-ghorm,(AH) s. f. Lunar caustic, fuse” 


clach-ghorm 


ervstals of nitrate of silver. 
clach-gho'reil, see clach-zuaireil. 
clach-ghràb.adh, -aidu, s.. Lithography. 
clacii-ghrain, s./. Granite. 
clacs-;hraineil, see clach-gliriin. 
clach-vhuail, s.f. Sea-cral. 2 Shale. 
clach-;huiteir, pei sf. Gntter-stone, 
elach-giuin-a’-c 

cure snudry distempers. — (Ut. the eovk-Knee 

stone, so called fro the notion that it is ob- 

tained from the knee of a cock. Itis only a 

common pebble. } 
clach-inue, s f. Gntter-stone. 


elach-iochdarach, s.f. Nether mill-stone, see 


bra, p. 112. à 
clach-iolaire,* ert Aetites. 
clach-iüil, pl. -an-iüil, et Loadstone, magnet. 
-— ——— -dhealanach, st Electro-magnet. 
ebe, s.J. Perthshire for clach-liobh- 
aidh. 
clach-léig, pl. -an-léig, s.f. Precious stone, gem. 
clach-liobhaidh, pl. -an-liobhaidh, e € Grind- 
stone. 2 Smoothing-stone, polishiug-stone. 
ciach-lioLhair, see clach-liobhaidh. 
elach-liobharain, see clach-liobhaidh. 


elach-lionraith, pl. -an-lionraith, sf. Rolling 


whet-stone. 
clach-!oiseeach, s.f. Caustic. 
clach-luachmhor, s.f. Precious stone, gem. 
clach-mhara, 8.f. Aqua marina (stone.) 
clach-mheallain, pl. -an-ineallain, 8.7. Hail- 

stoue. 2 singular used collectively, Hail. 
clach-mhìle, et Mile-stone. 
elach-inhineachadh, -aidh, s.m. Smoothing or 

poli-hing of stones. 


elacii-mhineachair, s. m. Lapidary, stone po-` 


lisher. 

claehmhor, -oire, e. Stony. 

clach-inhuilinn, pl. -an-muilinn, s.f. Mill-stone. 

clach-mhullaich, pl. -an-mullaich, e f. Top- 
stone, abacus, copestone. 

clach mu'n cuairt, (DC) Uist for clach-bhleith. 

elach-na-cincamhuinn, s.f. The fatal stone, the 
stone on which the ancient Caled: nian kings 
were inaugurated. So called from au old be- 
lief that wherever the stone remained one of 
the Scottish race shonld reign. 


clach-nam-buadh, * s.7. ‘The p:nlosopher’s stone.. 


clach-na-süla, 8. f. The apple or pupil of the 


eye. 

clach-nearaidh,** -an-nearaidh, ar. Grinding- 
stone. 

clach-neirt, pl. -an-neirt, e. f. Putting-stone, 
(dt. stone of strength.) 

clach-^isinn, -an-o'siun, 8.f. Corner-stone. 

clachi-raineach,{ s. m. Polypody—polypodium 
vulvare. 

clacnran,** s.m. Pier, land- 
inz-place. 2 Stepping- 
Stones in water, or on wa- 
tery ground. 

cluch-sgrioban,-an-serioban, 
(DJM? s. f. Weight for 
hand fishing-line. 

elach-sgriobhadh.tf -aidh, 
èm. Lithography. 

elach-shloc. -shluic, -shloc- 
ab. 2.m. Stone quarry. 
O nn clach-shlocaibh.from 
the stone quarries. 

clach-shnaiutheadair, -ean, 
Säi, Heweror dresser of 
stone. 2 Engraver (stone) gg 
3 Sculptor. 

clach-shneachd, cloiche-, clachan- s f. Hail 
stone, hail. Le c. chruaidh. with hurd hail 

9acb-shueachd^ilh, see clach-shneachd. 





201 












oilieh. s.f. Amulet supposed to 


\elach-thomha:s, pl. -an-tomhais, s./. 


| 
14?. Clach-rainene] | 


cladhaireach 


clach-sbreathail, s.f. Freestone. ashlar. 

clach-shail, -shüla, -ean, e am. Pearl eye. 2 Eye 
of d infant gazing with pleasure at any ob 
ect. 

-—— each, -eiche, a. Having pearl eyes. 

clach-smior, pl. -an-siniora, s.f. Emery. 

elach-spor,,AH)}s.7. Flint 

clach-tabhuill,** s.f. ling-stone. 

clach-thairnue, s.f. Loadstone. 

clach-theine, pl. -an-teine, s.f. Flint (stone.) 

ciaeh-thochailt, pl. -thochailtean, s.f. Stone 
quarry. 





ee iche, -an, s.m. Quarrier. 
clach-thogala‘ch, (AH) s. 7. Stone used in 
weicht-lifting contests. 

Weight 


Clachau-toml ais cearta, just weights. 

clach-thuislidh, ni. -an-tuislidh, &J. Stumbling 
block, rock cf offence. 

cla h-uachdarach, s.f. pne: stone of mill. 

clach-uasal. pl. -an-naxal, s.f. Precious stone. 

clach-ultaich,(Fionn) s f. Lift-stone, Ze what 
aiman could lift. “Ciach ultaich Iain Ghairbh 
MhicllleChalnim Raasaidh” is at Duntuilm, 
Skye, and is said to weigh abont a ton. 

clach-ürlair, (AH ) pl. -an-u—, s.f. Paying-stone. 

clad, -a, -an, s.f. Wool-comb. ?ttMud scraper. 
8 Wool hackle. 

clàd,tt pr. pt. a’ clàdadh, v.a. Card wool. 

cladach, -aich, -ean, s.m. Shore, beach, coast, 
stony beach. 2* Anything scattered. 3** 
Sandy plain. 4tt Channel of a river. tł 
Death. destruction. Cha suaicheantas corr 
air cladach. a heron on the shore is no odd 
thiny ; "sx chladach fhcamainn, ta the sec- 
weed shore, i. e. that part of the shore where 
SeAweed can be gathered. 

fclàlach, -aich, s,m. Clay, mire. 

cladachail.tf -e, a. Beachy. 

cladach leis, (AH) sm. Lee shore. 

cladadh, -aidh, s.m.  Conibing of wool. 
Hackling of wool. A’ c—, pr.pt. of clad. 

clàdain, (AH) s.pl. Oar-cleets, see bata, p. 76. 

clàlaire, an, s.m. Wool-comber. 

cladan, -ain, -an, s.m. Burr. 2 Flake of 
snow. 3tt Prickly seed-case of burdock. 4f 
Thing that sticks. 

ach,* a. Like Lurrs. 2 Flaky. 

clad-chasach,** a. Duch-Jegged. 

cladh,* pr.pt. a’ cladh, v.a. & n. Spawn,as & 
fish. ‘tha na bradain a’ ciadh, the salmon 
are spawni ag 

cladh, -a [& claidh**], s.m. Spawn. 2 Act of 
spawning. 3 Burying-place. 4 Monni, dyke. 
5 Trench. 6 Holiow between two wares. 
7** rarely Wool-comb. C. a’ chalihninn, the 
back wave hollow, 

cladh-abhainn,** sg, Canal. 

ach, -aich, s. m. Digging, delving. $ 

Poking. A’ c—, pr.pt. oí cia .baich. A’ c. 

fo 'n bhruaich, (ihe river) undermining the 

bank. 

achadh,** -aidh, s.m. Digging. 2 Bury- 
ing. A’ c—,pr.pt. of cladhaich. An tulach 
uaine a’ c., in the green mound a-dicging. 

cladnaich, pr.pt. a’ cladhach & a’ cladhachadh, 
v.a. Dig, delve. 2* Poke. 

cladhaire, -an, s. m. Coward, poltroon. 12 
Hero. 130ne superintending the burying of 
soldiersin an army. 4 Grave-dips;er.  5** 
Rogue. Ni robh cota dubh air cealgair no 
co'a dearg air cladhair, may black coat «of 
ministr) never cover hypocrite, nur red cout 
Cor soldier) coward ; cha teich ach e, none 
but a coward will flee. : 

icladhaireach, a. Cowardly, timorous. 


p 





2 











gre 


cladhaireach 


20 


É claidreadh 


La 





Roguish. 

eladhaireachd, 8.f. Cowardice, cowardlimess. 
2 Roguery. 

cladhan,(AH) -ain, s.m. Channel, very shallow 
stream. 

eladharra, a. see cladhaireach. 

cladh-düdaidh, pl. -an-didaidh, 8.m. 
billow. 

tcladhe, s.f. Genealogy. 

cladh-nàire, s.m. Modesty, bashfulness. 

cladh-shruth,** s.m. Canal. 

cladh-uisge, see cladh-shruth. 

cladrach,* s.m. Anything scattered. 

cladraich,* v.a. Scatter. 

clàduinn, see clad. 

clag, cluig, s.m. Bell. 2* Crash. 8 Clock. 4 
**Loud talk. 5**Mill-clapper. Cluig nan 
each, the bells of the horses ; freasdail an c., 
answer the bell. 

——, pr.pt. &' clagadh, v.a. Sound, as a bell. 
2 Make a noise. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Like a bell. 2 Abounding 
in bells. 

— -adair,** s.m. Bell-founder. 

clagadh, -eidh, s.m. Ringing, chiming as of a 
bell. A’ c—, pr.pt. of clag. 

clag-aite, sm. Belfry. 2 Steeple. 

clagan, -ain, s.m. Little bell. 2 Hand-bell. 

ach,tt -aiche, a. Pertaining to small 
bells or hand-bells. 

clagarnach, -aich, s m. Loud noise. 

clagarsaich, s.f. Clashing noise. 2 Dangling, 
waving. 

fclagartas, -ais, see clagharthas. 

clagas,** s.m. Belfry. 

clag-chumach, a. Bell-shaped. : 

clag-citil, pl. cluig-chiüil, s.m. Music bell. 

clagh, see cladh. 

claghann, see 2laon, 

clagharra, a. Siuggish. 2 Slovenly. 
c., sluggishly. 

fclagharthas, 
ness. 

clag-ionad, see clag-lann. 

clag-laimh, eluig-làinih, s.m. Hand-bell. 

clag-lann, clag-lainn, st, Belfry. 2 Steeple. 

claz-mheur, pl. cluig-mhedir, s.f. Finger of a 
clock, (not a watch) also :amh-uaireadair. 

clag-smalaidh,* st Curfew. 

clag-thaigh, -ean, s.m. see claig-theach. 

tclagun, -uin, s.m. Flagon. 2 Lid. 

clagunn, prov. for claigeann. 

tclaibin, s.m. Tap, spigot. 

¢claicheach, sr, Church steeple. : 

claideag, -eig, -an, s.f. Lock, wreath, ringlet. 
2 Erroneously used for clàidheag. 

ach,ff -aiche, a. Pertaining to locks 

or ringlets. 

claidean,* s.m. Absurd hammering at any- 
thing. 2 Dangling, — . à 

claideart, AH) s. J. Toil, strain, drudgery, 
fatigue. 

tclaidh, v.a. Dig. see cladhaich. 

+claidhe, s.n. Burial. 

elaidheach, see claidheamhach. 

clàidheag, -eig, -an, s.f. Last handful of corn 
cut on the ground,better maighdeann-bhuana. 

claidheamh, -eimh, pl. claidhean [celaidhmh- 
neau *claidhmhichean & **cloidhean] 8. m. 
Sword. 2 That part of a spinuing-wheel 
which connects the footboard and crank. 
C. caol, a small sword, rapier; c. Crom, a sa- 
bre, a scimitar; c. mór, a broad-sword, clay- 
more; c. cùil, a back-sword; c. leathann, o 
broadsword; c. dà-làimh, a two-handed sword, 
properly c. mór. Chan el fios ciod an c. a 
bhitheas "san truaill gus an tàirnear e, $t is 


Roaring 





Gu 
8.m. Sluggishness 2 Slovenli- 


not known wha: (kind of) a sword is in the 
sheath till it is drawn ; seasamh claidheimh, 
standing on one’s head—children in school see 
who can stand longest on their heads—co a’s 
fearr a sheasas air an ceann.— Fionn. 

PARTS OF A SWORD; 

1 Lann. blade. 

2 Truaill, sheath. 

3 Bàrr, rann, point. 

4 Dorn-chuir, dorn-bheirt, ceann, Att. 
Ceann-aisneach, a basket-hilt; ceann-lleach, 
an ‘‘Islay’’-hilt. 

Crambaid, ferrule on sheath. 





148.Clac.dheamh-mór. 149. ns ^ tin: d 
àimh. 
claidheamhach, -eiche. a. Fullofswords. 2 

Of, or belonging to, @ sword. 
claidheamhail, -e, a. Ensiform, having the 
shape or appearance of a sword. 
claidheamhair, -e, -ean, s.m. Swordsman. 2 
J'encer. 





—— eachd, s.f.ind. Swordsmanship 
2 Fencing. 

claidhcan, n.pl. of claidheamh. rov. 

——— — ,diin.of claidheamh.s.m.Little sword, 

seymitar, bilboe. 

claidhean,t s.m. Bolt or latch of a door. 

———-— -doruis, 8.m, Bolt or bar of a door. 

claidheil,** see claidheamhail. 

claidreach, a. Harassing, fatiguing. 2 Dam- 
aging, shattering. 3ttDeafening. 

claidreadh, -ridh, s.m. Shattering. 2 Dam- 

aging through toil or fatigue. A’c— pr.pt 

of elaidrich 


elaidrich 


claidrich, pe oi. a’ claidrvadh, v. a. Shatter. 
2 Damave. 3 Harass, fatigue. 4tł Deafen. 

claig, e, -ean, s.f. Indentation. 2 Dimple. 

— each. -ielt, sm. see claig-theach. 

telai: eag. -eig, sf. Deceit. 

claigeann. see claigionn. 2 Head of a rudder, 
see under ridder, p. 78 

—— ach, see elaigionnach. 

claigionn, -inn, pl. claignean, se m. Skull. 9* 

Scalp, 3 Best field of arable land on a farm. 

Brrist e 'ch., he broke his skull ; ard mo ch., 

at the top of my voice. 

=) Stem of a boat, see bata El, 
Ke 

claigiounach -aiche, o Of, or belonging to, a 
skull, abunnd‘ig in skulls, 





Se 








; ich, sm Head-stall of a halter. 
2 “Best arable land of a district. C. sréine, 
headstall o, a bridle. 

clrigionn:.chd, 3.f. Craniology. 

elaizionna chc, s.m. Craniologist. [** says er? 

cl^igionn-deiridh, Stern-post, see O 1, p. 73. 

-athrach,t] s. m. Timbers of girth- 
saddle. 


— — + tidrach, s.m. Helm-top. 

= -toisich, Stem-post of boat, G 1. p 74. 

claig-theach, -an, $m. steeple, belfry. 

felaime,] sf Svabies, leprosy. 

claimh, -e, see cloimh. 

cliimheach, eiche, a. 

e'aimh-eac.i, eich, sm. Farcy. 

ciaimhean, s.m. {see clàidhaan 24tLatel. 

Be ees -eivhe, o Antiscurbu- 
ica 

claimhseach ,}t -eiche, e. Mangy, scorhutic. 

-— ————,ich,-icheau, &/. Scorbutic female. 

te’ain, 8.7. Kngendering. 2 Children. 

c'anu, } (for cloinne) gen. of e'ann. 2 Used 

Canne, ) prov. as nominative. 

clàir, gen. St. & n. pl. of clàr. Boards, 
tables. 2* Lids. 

teiair, pr.pt. a’ clair adh, v.a. Divide, partition. 

telair-bheul, (clar-bed‘l) s.m. Lid, cover. 

telaireach, a. see clàrach. 

tcLiireadh,-idh, s.n. Division, disjunction, re- 
lasing, separating. A’e—, pr.pt. of clair. 

te'a‘rein, s.m. Cripole. 








see cloimheach. 


staves, 


claireineach, -neich, -neichean, s.m. i i 
— e s.m. Cripple 

——— — ——-, -neiche, a. Broad-bott " 
Flat-nosed. sco 


clàir-endanr ach, -aiche, æ. see elàr-aodannach. 

clàir-fhiaeaiii, -fhiaclan, see clàr-fhiacaill. 

elàir-fhiaclach, -aiche, a. see clar-fhiaclach. 

clairidn, -e, -ean, see c àraidh. 

teidirin, see tcelàirein. 

c à rinn,(DU see c:àirinneach 2. 

cia rinneach,** -eiche, o, Decrepit. 2 Marbled, 
mottled, marked with spots of various colours 
or shades.—-D.C. 

ciair-.ongach, -aiche, a. Broad-nailed. 

¢clairneach, a. Crippled. 

cià rseach, -ich, -ean, see clàrsach. 

clairseir, -ean, see clàrsair. 

telàirthe, past part. of ciair. 

elais, e, -ean, s.f. Furrow. 2 Gutter. 3 
Streak, stripe, mark. 4 Pit. Ditch. 6 
Hollow, groove. 7 (AH) “Finish,” in a 
ploushed rigg Gach c. ’na ghnüis, every 
furrow in hix face ` anns na c!aisibh, in the 
"ONE c.-bhlair, a trench; sruth-ch., a chan- 

clais, pr.pa:t. a’ claiseadh, v.a. see claisich. 

fclais, -e, 8./. Class. 

clais alpaidh, ar Mortice. 

Clais-bhlàir, ar. Trench. 


clamhan-fionn 


tclaischeadal, s.in. Vsalni-singing. 

claisdcachd, er id Hearing, senseof hearing. 
2 Listening, hearkeuing. Annam ch., énmy 
hearing; chaill e a ch., he lost hig sense of 
hearing. 

clais-dhionaidh, s.f. Fortifying trench. 

clàisdinu, see claistinn. 

claise,** et, Avoidance. 

clai-cach, a. Furrowed, trenched, full of ditech- 
es or hollows. 2 Grooved, fluted. 3 Striped, 
streaked. 


teligeagh. -ich, -ichean, s.m. Sword.  ?1f 
vile. 

el:irseadh, vr.pt. of clais. 

c aiseag, s /. Rindle. 

claisich, pr.part. a’ claiseadh, v.a. Furrow, 


flute. 2 Dig, trench. 

te, pas: part. of claisich. 

c'aisire,* s.m. Trencher. 

clais-locair, 8&./. Mortice-plane. 

cl:isneach,** a. Auditory. 

——— ——--d, see claisdeachd. 

claisniche,** s.m. Auditor. 

claist, p..part. a’ claistinn, [& claisteackd] 
v.a. Hearken. 

elaisterch:, s.f. see claisdeachd. 

elaist-eólus, see claist-iuil. 

cliistine, sf. see claistiun, 

claistinn, $J. Hearing, listening, hearkening. 
A’c—,pr.pt. of claist. 

claistinneach,** a. Auditory. 

claist-:iüil, sm. Diacoustics. 

clàiteacn, s.m. see clàiteaend. 

O—— —Q,thf s. Gentle rain—A rran. 

clàiteag, (AH) s.f. Snowilake. 

fclaithe, s.7. Jest, game, ridicule, sport. 2Ge- 
nealog cal table. 

clambar, -air, s.m. Wrangling, clamour. 2 
Scranible, scuffle. 3 Evil report, private 
slander. 4 *Litigiousness. 5** Wrestling, 
struggling. Ri c , struggling or wres'ling. 

———ach, -aiche, a. Litigious, wrangling, 
slandering. 

clambrach, see clambarach. 

+clainh, s.m. Leper. 2 see cloimh. 

t ach, -aiche, a. see cloimheach. 

clamhainn, see clàmhuinn. 

-—each, see clàmhuinneach. 

clamhair, v.a. seeclamhar, 

clamhaire MMcD) s. m. Greedy, rapacious, 
grasping person— Lewis. 














150 Clamhan. 


clamhan, -ain. -an, &.m. Buzzard,—buteo vul- 
garis. 2**Kite. Am fang agus an c., the 
vullure and the kite ; chad’ thàinig eun glan 
riamh 4 nead a’ chlamhin, a clean bird 
never came from a kite’s nest. i 
clamban-fionu.« s.m. Hen-harrier, see bréid- 
p2 


clamnan-fionn 
air-toin. 
clamhan gèarr, (AF) s.m. Broad buzzard. 
slamhan-gobhlach,% n.pl. -ain-gh—,s.m. Kite, or 
saluon-tailed gled—milvus vulgaris. 
slamhan-loin,{ 8.41. Marsh harrier—círcus ru- 
a 43. 
clamhan-luch,f em. Montague's harrier—cir- 
cus Montagui. 2 Hen-harrier, see breid air- 
tóin. 
clamhan-nan-cearc, (MMcD) s.m. Hen-harrier, 
-— Lewis. 
slauthan-nan-luch, see clamhan-luch. 
slamhan-riabbach,f s.m. Honey-buzzard—per- 
uis apivorus. 





151. Clamhan-riabhach, 


clambhan-ruadh,4 s. m. Kestrel—‘alco tinnun- 
culus. 


clamhar, v.a. Scratch by 
shrugging. 

—————-ach, a. Shrugging. 
2 Drone to shrug. 3 Li- 
tigious. 4 Wrangling. 

clamhas, ais, see clamh- 
Tas. 





—ail,* a. Brawling, 
clattering. 
clamhrach, a. see cloimh- 

. each. 

'elamhradh, -aidh, s. m. 
Shrugging, act of shrug- 
ging. 2 Scratching by 
shrugging. 

clamhras, -ais,s.m. Brawl- 
ing, chiding, clamour, 
scolding, altercation. ? 

152. Ciamhan-ruadh. *Unfounded report. 8** 
Brawl. scold. 4* Clatter. 

clawhsa, pl.-chan[& -aichean] s.m., Alley, 
narrow lane, little court, entry, close, pass- 
ace [** gives clamhsadh.] 

¢clamhuin, er, Sleet. p 

clàmhuinn, s m. Sleet. Sneachd is 2. air gach 
ton, snow and sleet on every hillock; ris a 
ch,, showering sleet. 

——————.üach, a. Sleety. ; 

clampar, -air, m. see clambar. 2łłInjury. 

ach -aiche, see clambarach. 

clamras ais, see clamhras. 

tilan: ch. ar, Virtue. 2 Frnitful persons. 

clann, gen. cloinne [clainn clanna & clainne]col- 
lecrive 8.f. Offspring, children, 2 Descendants. 
8**Clan, tribe. C. bheaga, little children ; 
cleas na cloinne bige, the manner of little 
children ; Clann Mhuirich, the MacPhersons. 
Clann Dòmhnuill, the MacDonalds; Clann-an- 
toisich, the Maclntoshes; c. dìolain, bastard 
children; c. an eloinne, their children’s chil- 
dren; à ch. nau sonn, ye descendants of heroes «| 






4. 


Zua% 


C'aoidheadh 


thoir seo do 'n chloinn, give this to the chil- 
dren. [C. is followed by the adjective iu 
the plural when in nominative case, but in the 
singular «hen in other cases, It aspirates a 
proper naine followi^g except one beginning 
with D. It is preceded by the article in the 
singular. ‘Donald's children” may be either 
“clann Domhuuill’, with the emphasis cn 
clann, or “elann Dhomhnuill” wiih the em- 
phasis on Dhòmhnuill. Clan Donald has the 
emphasis on “Dòmhnuill.” “Dorald’s chil. 
dren” is generally “clann Domhmuill” in che 
Gairloch district, and ‘eanu Dhomhnuill” 
in Lorn. 

clann, -a, -an, s.f. Lock of hair. 
aibh, in curls, in ringlets. 

clannach, -aiche, a. Fruitful, protific. 
Hanging in locks, curled. 
ing, crowding. 4 Luxuriant. 
wrth the many ringlets. 

clannadh, -aidh, s.m. Thrusting. 2 Blast, puff. 
T3* Interment, 4**Child's portion. 

clannaich,* v.n. Beget children, 

clannail, -e,@. see clannach. 

Clann-an-oistir,** s. p Ostuarii, doorkeepers 
to the monastery of Iona. The first of the 
family caine over from Ireland with “Colum 
Cille," but causing the displeasure of that 
saint, he invoked a curse on him, by which. 
it was decreed that never more than flve of 
his clan should exist at the same time. Ac- 
cordingly, when a sixth was born one of the 
five was to look for death, which always 
happened until the race was extinguished. 
A female who died about the middle of the 
18th. century, in Ilona, was the last person 
who could trace a lineage to the doorkeep- 
ers of this monastery. 

felannar, a. Shining, sleek. 2 Hanging in 
locks or clusters, 3 see clannmhor, 

clannmhor, -oire, d, Having issue, prolific, 
fruitful. 

telaochladh, see caochladh. 

fclaochloid, v. a. Exchange. 

ciaodhaire, see cladhaire. 

———-—achd, see cladhaireachd. 

telaoi, see claoidh. 

tclaoicheadh, see cladhach. 

claoidh, s.f. Pain, aftiction. [does not mean 
Sorrow, as given by McL & D—-CR] 2 Vex- 
ation. 8 Anguish, torment. 4 Defeat. 5* 
Fatigue, excessive fatigue.  611Desolation, 
destruction, consumption. 7* Tagging, fuint- 
ing. A'c-—, pr. pt. of claoidh. Gu bràth 
cha'n fhaicear e, sorrow shall never Le sern. 

claoidh, pr.part. a’ claoidh & a’ claoidheadh, 
v.a. Vex, annoy, harass, trouble. 2 Affict, 
torment. 3 Defeat, overthrow. 4 Mortify. 5 
Oppress. 6 Exhaust, fag, fnti:ue. %*3 
Wound. 8**Consume, overcome. 9**Dazzle. 
Mar a chlaoidheas teine coillteach, as fire. 
overcomes wood ; claoidhibh ur buill, mett 
ycur members; a' claoidh fradhairc, dazzling 
the sight: na c. w fhaeal, wo not contradict me. 

claoidl.each, -eiche, o Vexing, annoying. 2 
Tormenting, afflictive, painful, troublesome. 
8 Harassing, tiresome, overcoming, exhaust. 
ing. 4**Defeativg, overthrowing. 5*Spend- 
ing. 


‘Na clann- 


2 
3 Bushy, cluster- 
Anna ch., Ann 


— d,** s.f.ind. Distress, vexation, an. 
noyance, mortification. 2 Continued cr tre- 
quent distress, continued vexation or annoy- 
ance. 3 Fagging, exhaustion. 

clacidheadair,* s.m. Tormentor. 

claoidh ach, -idh, s.m. Wearyiug out, act of 
frequently oppressing, tormenting, harass. 
ing, afflicting, mortifving. arnainine 91! 


claoidheadh 
3** Overthrow. 





comforting, conquering. A’ 
c—, pr. part of ciuo:dh, 

telaci:theamh, see claiiheamh. 

slavidhear,** s.m. Afftiicter. 

telaoidheir, sn. see cladhair. 

*laoidhte, past part of clavidh. Defeated,over- 
powered, overwhelmsd, conquered. 2 Har- 
axsed, wearied out, exhausted. 8 Afflicted, 
distressed, tormentel. 

Aen, e. see claoidheach. 

— ——uUchd,* sf. sea claoidh, s. 

slaoine, s.f. Obliquity, squintuess. 2(DU) Ob- 
tuseness, stupidity. 

ad, see claoine. : 

olaoin-.eathad, s.m. Sloping hill 

*aoiu-leil, s. s3e claoin-lexthad. 

claoin-leud, see claoin-leathad. 

Sainte, a. d past part. of claon. Bent. 2 
Slopinz. : 

Haon, -aoine, a. Squint, squint-eyed. 2 Inclin- 
ing, oblique. 3 Winding, meandering. 4 
Perverse. 5 Partial, prone to. 6 Uneven, 
unequal. 7**Moving obliquely or aslant. 8 
(DU) Stupid. dense. Fear c., à man that 
squints ; uithean e, perverse things. _ 

,pr.part.a' claonadh, v.a. Incline. 2 
Go aside, depart, pervert, move aslant or 
obliqnely, make awry. 3 Squint. 4 Decline. 
5 Go wrong, r2b°1. Linne a tha claon ’sa 
ghleann. a poo! that is transverse in the glen; 
ch. iad uile, they all went aside; mar a’ ghrian 
a thv claonadh 'sa ghleann, as the sun that 
moves aslant in the oi n ; sùil ch., a squint eye. 

telaon, s.m. Partiality. 

ad,** -aid, sm. Proclivity. 

adh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Inclination, 

bending, bend. 2 squinting. 3 Turning 

asides. 4 Moving aslant or obliquely. 5** 

Declining, squinting. 6**Oblique motion, as 

of the de<cending sun. Mar szailea’ c. sios, 

like a shadow declining. A’ e—, pr. pt.of claon. 
ag,-aig,-an, sf. Cunning deceitful wo- 
man. 

aire,(DU) s.m. Stupid fellow, used of a 

person whose wits are considered to be less 

sharp than the normal. 
—aireachd, s.f.ind. Partiality. 2tfInclin- 


ation. 
claon-aontachd, tt s.f.ind. *Assentation. 
eiaon-àrd, -àirde, an, s.m. Inclining steep. 
elaun-bhàighn, sf. Partiality, bias, prejudice. 
-—— ——-———6il, a. Partial. 
claon-bhord, -bhüird, s. m. Sloping table. 9 
Desk. 3 Inclined plane. 
claon-bhreith, -e, -ean,s.f. Prejudice, partial- 
ity. 2 Unjust judgment, uníair decision. 
-~——each, -ciche, a. Partial, unjust in 
judging or dec‘iling, 
eacad,tt sf. Partiality. 
claon-bhreitheamh, s.m. Partial jud ze. 
clavn-chomhnard, -aird, s.m. Inclined plane. 
elaon-intarbh, pr.pt. a’ claon-mharbhadh, v.a. 
Mortify. 


























— 








adh, -aidh, s.m. Mortification, 
A’ c—, pr.pt of claov-mharth. 

claon-shuil, -siiula, -sliuilean, sf. 

——— -— eat, 11 5quint-eyed. 

claor,** s.m. shout. 

ad sm., Gonorrhcea [preceded by the art. 
an. 

——, v. English word clap. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Clapping. 

—aizg, (DU) v.a. Gaelic form of clap. 2 Em- 
brace. 

— ail, see clapartaich. 








Squint eye. 


205 


clar-dhealbh 


clap-ciochrain, (DC) s.m. Fishing frog or sea 
angler —Uist. 

fclap-sholus, s.m. Twilight. 

fciàr, v.a. Dec»ive, fable. 

clàr," pr.pt. a’ clàradh, v.n. Maintain, contra- 
dict, oppose. 2 (Fionn) Make believe, in- 
duce oae to believe more than is true. Am 
bheil thu math air c:aradh ? are you good at 
persuadiug or make believe ? ai c. orm, contra- 
dicting m» ;'sanna tha e a’ c. orm, he stout- 
ly contradicts me. 

clàr, -àir, pl. clair and clàran, s.m. Any smooth 
surface or plane. 2 Stave, in music. 3 Stave 
ofa cask. 4 Lid. 5 Trough. 6 Wooden tray 
or plate. 7 Table, desk. 8 Spoke. 9 Sheet, 
as of paper. 10 Board, deal, plank. 11(AH) 
Deck of a ship. 12 Catalogue. 18 see clar- 
sach. lítfTablet. Cha togadh e salann baàrr 
a’ chlàir, he would not lift salt from the tahle 
—said of avery shy person ; clair cloicne, 
tables of stone ; le clàraibh giubhais, with 

lanks of fir ; clair umha, plates of brass. 

clarach, -aiche, a. Bare, bald. 2 Of, or belong- 
ing to, staves, boards.or planks. 3**Full of 
tales or plates. 4**Iu staves. 5ftFloored. 

clàrach, -aich, -aichean, s.f. Woman of clumsy 
figura, ‘broad-builo. 2 Floor. 3(AC) Small 


boat. 

telaradh, -aidh, s.m. Familiarity. 2 Dividing. 
A’ c—. pr.pt. of clèr. 

telàr-aenach, l a. see clar-aodannach. 

clarag, -aig, -an, s.f. Fore-tooth. 2 Frame of 
hant fishing-line. 3** Wattle-work, as in a 
sledze. 4 (AH) Syuare-sterned boas. 5t+ 
Broad woman. 7(JM) Crutch—Tiree. 

clàr-agaaidh,* s.m. Frontisviece. 

claraich,*-e, -ean, see clàraidh. 

. „tt v.a. Planch. 

clìraichean, (DC) s.pl. The incisor teeth— Uist. 

clàraida,** a. Dividing. 2 Of deal or plank. 3 
Floating. 4 Row of layers. Urlar ch., @ 
deal floor; leabaidh ch., a deal bed. 

clà'aidh, -ean, s.f. Partition. 2 Flooring. 

clà:aineach, a. Flat-nosed. 

cla‘-1inm, -ean, 8.51. Catalogue. 

Ciaretinine, see clàr-aiumeachaidh. 

clàr-ainmeachaidh, s.m.  Title-paze. 2**Index. 

clar-ainmiche, see clàr-ainmeachaidh. 

clàr-amiis, s.m. Index. 

clàran, n.pl. of clàr. 

clàran,**-ain, s.m Little table, 2 Little plate. 
8 Little stave. 4 Littletrough. 5 Little deal 
or plank. 

ach, -aich, (AC) s.m. Boatman. 

clar-an-aodainn, see clàr-aodainn. 

clar-aodainn,s.m. Front, visage, brow,forehead. 

clàr-àodannach, -aiche, a. Broad-fared, flat- 
faced, broad-browed, broad-visaged. Leg 
gives clàr-aodaiuneach.] 

clàr-beoil, sm. Lid, 2tti»repiece. 

clàr-bhuideal,** s.m. Burtle-rack. 

elar-buvkvidh, s.m. Printing-presy. 

clar-buideal, $.m. Staveof acask. 2**Bottle- 
rack. Cho tioram ri c.. as dry as a bottle-rack. 

elarc,.s.m. Ga-lic selling of cierk. 

clár-chairtean,1t s.m. Card-table. 

clar-chas, -chois, -chasan, 8.f. Splay-foot. 

-————ach, -aiche, a. Splay-footed. 2 Duck 
legged. 3 Crump-footed. 

clàr-caos, see ciáàr-chas. 

clar-ciocharain, see clab. 

telar-cisteanach, s.m. Dresser, kitchen table. 

clàr-enibnle, s.m. Spoke of a wheel. 

elar-cuil, s.m. Back piece. 








| car-cuuntais, -an-, sf Abaons. 


slapartaich, -e, sf. Act of clapping or flap- , teiartha, past af. of clàr, Divided. parted. 


ping with the wings. 2 Fondling, caressing. | clar-dhealuh, a. -an, 8. m. 


Painting, sketch 


clàr-dhealbh. 206 


draught, map. 

clar-cndannach, -aiche, see clar-aodannach. 

clàr-;adhairt, s.m. Smith's trough. 

ciàr-teoirue, s m. Chess-board, draught-board. 

clàr-fhiacaill, -cian, s.m. Fore-tooth, butter- 
tooth. 

clàr-friaclach, a. Having large fore-teeth, 

clàr-fhuioe, see clàr-fuine. 

clàr-fodhairt, see ciar-fadhairt. 

clàr-fuine, ëm. Kneading-trough. 2ttBaking- 
board. 

clàr-fuinidh,** see clár-fuine. 

ciar-innse see clàr-innsidh. 

clàrànnsidh, s. m. Index, contents of à book. 
2*'*'l'itle-page. 

clar-iomairt, s.m, Chess-board, draught-board. 

clar-iongach, see clair-i—. 

ciàr-Lochluinneach,(M McD) s.m. Plank hollow- 
ed out iu centre in form ofa trough. Small 
shallow holes were cut at intervals in the top 
edges which were for holding salt. The meal 
of potatoes was poured into the hollow in the 
centre, round which the famiy sat at dinner 


— Lewis. h 
clàr-maide, (DC) s.m. Stick laid across a door- 
way to close up the space between duor and 
floor, and exclude wind, rain, &c— Barra. 
clàr-maiairt,*.5.m. Counter of a shop. 
celàir-niucacnaidh, ciair-, s.m. Glossary. 
clàr-na-dearna, 2.4%. Palm of the hand. 





153. Clariach. 
clàrsach,f -aich, -aichean, s.m. Harp. 
cavin ric., as soft as a harp. 
PARTS OF A HARP :— 
1 Amhach, neck, 
2 Cnagan, pins, 
8 Com, chest, 
4 Làmnh-chrann, tree, 
5 Teudan, strings. 
clarsach-urlar,* s.j. Old woman in gentle- 
men's iamilies, kept for telling stories. 2 
" Witch. 
clàrsaich, gen. sing. of clàrsach. 
clàrsair, -e, ean, s.m. Harper, minstrel. 
———-eachd, s.f. Harp-music, harping, em- 
loyment of a harper. 
clar-scolaidh, s.m. Guide-post. 
clàr-sgéithe, sm. Field n heraldry. 
cla. -shoithichean, s.m. Cupboard, “press.” 
clar-tailisg, s.m. Backgammon table. 
clàr-thomhais, see clàr-tomhais. 
clàr-ton:hais, s.m. Balance, scale, measure. 
clar-uaclidair,$.0. Lid of a chest or trunk. 2 
(AH) Deck of a ship. 
clas, s.m. see gleus. 2 8.f. see glas. 
telas, clais, s.a. Melody. 2 Furrow, pit. 8 
see Cleas. 
clasach.{t s.f. see closach. 
tel.sach, a. Crafty. 2 Playful. 
4**Me odious, 


Cho 


3 Fat, fatted. 


+————d, s.f. Craftiness, subtlety. 

tclasaiche, s. m. Singer. 

claspa,1f-an, s.m. & v.a. 

clatar, -air, see c!abar 2. 

clath-naire, s.f.ind. Bashfulness, shamefaced- 
ness, modesty. 

fee, sJ.ind. (à The left hand. 2 Evil, in- 
jary. 3 Disposii.on. 


Gaelic form of clasp. 


cleas 


T-—, a. Left-handed. 
cleabhaid,** er, Slap. 
cleabhar, (AF) see gieithir. 

"est ec (AF) Ccrn-craik, see tréun-ri- 

réun. 

cleachd, -an, s.f. Ringlet of hair, waving lock, 
tess. 2 Fillet of ceml ed wool. 8 Habit, 
custcm, practice. 4** Exercise. 5** Plait. 
6 Ray of the sun, [** says s.m.) Cleachdan 
na gréine, the rays of the sun ; Lilidh nan òr- 
chleachda, Helen with the cold.n locks. 

— —— , pr.part, a’ cicaclidadh, v.a. d u. Ac- 
custom, habituate, inure. 2 Practise, use. 
3**Acquaint. 4**Plait. C. thu flé:n ris, in- 
ure yourself to it ; ch. mi a bhi, J uas ac- 
custumed to be ; eh. mi moran dheth 'fhaot- 
ainn, J was accustomed to get much of it. 

ach, -aiche, a. Usual, customary, Lab- 
itual. 2 Havivg ciusterir.g ringlets or tress- 
es. 8 Waving. fowing, as hair 4**Filletcd. 
5**Plaited. 6** Accustomed. — 71i Thick, 
clustering. 

cleachdidh,-aidh, pl. -aidhean, [clcaehdannan, 
& cieachdainpess.] 8. m. Custom, practice, 
use, exercise, hitit. 2 Accustuming, inuriug. 
A’ c—, pr. pt. of cieachd. Is e an clcacnd- 
adh anitcoma, practice makes perfect. 

cleachdag, -aig, -an, s.f. Ringlet, tress. 

—ach, a. Full of curis, rit glets or 
tresses. 2**Curled. T’ or-chul cleachuagach, 
thy curleu golden locks. 

cleachdaidh, see cleachdach. 

————-—— eachd, se’ clenchdalachd. 

cleachdail, -e, see cleachdach. 

cleachdainn, a. see cleachdach. 

cleachdainn, -ean, s.m. Custom habit, prac- 
tice, use and wont. |** gives s.f.] Is dou’ an 
c. sin, that is a bad custom; deagh ch., a good 
custom. 

cleachdalachd, s.f. Customableness. 

cleachdan, n. pl. of cleachd. Do ch., thy locks. 

cleachdar,** o see cleaciidimhor. 
cleacbdmhor, -oire, a. Accustomable. 
cleadhdna, see cleachdan. 

cleachdta, a. & past pt. of cleachd. Accus- 
toned, wont, babituated, tured, trainet, 2 
**Expert. 3**)laited. 4**Sccondhaud. C. 
ris an ole, accustomed to do evil ; c. an cogadh, 
expert in war. 

cleachdte, see cleachdta. 

cleachduinn, see cleachdainn, 

cleachta, see cleachta. 

cleachte, see cleachdta. 

cleadhag, st see c.oitheag. 

cleamhna, gen. of cliamhuinn. 

cleamhnas, -ais, s.m. Affinity, bethrothal. 2 
Friendship, consanguinity, relationship by 
marriage. 3* Sexual intercourse, carnal 
connection, copulation. Dean c., brcome con- 
nected by marriage; c. am fagus is goisdeackd 
am fad, marriage near and gossiping afar. 

+clearadh, -aidh, s.m. Familiarity. 

cleare, -an, s.m. Curl, lock of hair. 

—,a. Curled. 2 Bright, radiant, shining. 
8**Of a bright yellow. 

„v.a. Spread, curl, arrange. 2 Make into 

ringlets. 

ach,* a. Curled, in ringlets. 

t¢clear-na-caine, s.m. sce under cliar. 

cleas, -a, -an, s m. Play, trick, craft, feat. 2 
Gambol. 3 Featin legeruemain. 4 Strata- 
gem. 5**Warl ke exercise. 6**Deeds, reye- 
ments. Cuchulaiun nan c., C. full of cap.oits; 
gun ch., (adv.) above-board ; c. lucha-tozail 
nacanneimb, a! faicinn cach a ché le dnack- 
aich gu latha, the way o) sauc-carriei s. see- 
ing cach other home (il daylight ; air chleas 


2 Prejudiced, partial. 











cleas 


207 


cleith-inntinn 


(AC) like ; chithear an t-anam ar ch. meall | teléirceach, Old misprint for cléireach. 


soluis ; the soul is seen like a bright ball of 
ight. 4 

"e am -aiche, a. Playful, sportive. 2 
Crafty, full of schemes or tricks. 3 J uggling. 
4 Performing feats of valour. 6 Frisky, ac- 
tive, bri:k. 

cloasac :a/l ff -e, e. Pantomime. ' 

cleasachd, s.f.ind. Play, diversion, pastime, 
spore, relaxvion, 2 Leyerdemain, sleight 
oihand. 8**strife. 4tfviayfulnmess. sft 
Performing of hervie deeds. 6 Frolicso.ne- 
ness, frisxiness. Ric., playing, sporting ; dh’ 
éiricn iad gu e., they rox un to play; c. 
dhaoine, the sleights of mun ; droch ch., Soul 
pay. A' e—, pr pt. of cleisaich. 

clersachdach, -aiche, a. Playful, sportive. 

c oasachdaich, -e, see cleas:.chd. . 

cleasath, -aidh, s.m. Bounding, leaping, sport- 
ing, gainbolling. Miolenoin a’ e. ard, grey- 
hounds bounding high. 

eleasaich, pr.pt. a’ cleasachd, v.n. Play, sport, 
gambol, perform feats ef activity, vault, 
tumble as a rope-dancer. 

elexsaiche, -an, s. m. Juggler, eonjurer. 2 
Buffoon. 3 Mountebank. 4 Stage-player, 
actor. 5* Cunning fellow. 

——— ——, comp. of cleasach. 

cleasaidheachd, s.f.ind. see cleasachd. 

eleasanaeh,t:l-aiche, a. Apish. 2 Wanton. 

cleasanta, see cleasach. (Gu c., playfully. 

—— ———chd, see cleasachd. 

cleasan-teine, s.pl Fireworks. 

ciasmhor,** -oire, a. Agile. 

cleath, s.m. see cleith. T2 Prince chieftain. 

, (for cleith) pr. pf. of ceil. 

eleatha, s.f. Goad. 2 Rib 3 Stake. 4 Club 

or clumsy stick. — [tt & * gives.m.] 

+ —ch, -aiche, a. Ribbe:l. 

¢cleatha‘reachd,  8J.ind. Rusticity. 2 Bold- 
ness. 

clua.nar, s.m. Milch-cow. 

+cleathard, a. Steep, inaccessible. 

t --—, sm. Fame, eminence. 

` — ig see cleathar. 

teleath-chur, &.f. Relation by blood. 2 Genea- 
logical line. 

fcle:thranih, -aimh, s.m. Partiality, 

cleibe, -achan, gan. Instrument use 
fish and sea-fowl. 

cleibaach,(DU) a. Clumsy. 

cleibean,(DU) s.m. Slow, clumsy, awkwar.1 

cleibeire, see cleibean. [fe.low. 

clé bert, see eleibean. 

clé Lh, gen. sing. of cliabh. 

fc é buin, seo cliabhan. 

cleib deach, sf. Clum:iness, untidiness. 2 
(DU) Tossing. Thàinig e anns a’ ch eibidich, 
he came clumsily—said of one deformed. of an 
oll person, or cripple: bha biodag anns a’ 
chleibidich air mac a’ bao :aich lei: idich, the 
arvecward fellow's son had his dirk dangling. 

clert, -e, -ean, s.f. see cleit. 2 (AC) Quip, 
prauk, trick, fillip, sharp stroke. 

eleide,** s.f. Fair. 











rejuiic:. 
to catch 


eléir-chuilbheart, -eirt, -an, s.f. Priestcraft. 
eléireach, a. Clerical. 2 Presbyierian. 
cléireach, Ach, s.m. Clerk. 2 Clergyman. 3 
Writer. 4 Proclaimer of banns. 5 Beadle, 
church-officer. 6**Precentor. Cha’n "el o. 
no vears’-eazlais ann, there i$ neither clerk nor 
Gier mmm. 
ail,** a. 





Clerical. 

cléireach-cuirte, s.m. Actuary. 

cléireachd, sf. Scholarship. 2 Clerkship. 3 
Condition of a churchmaa. 4 Body oi caurch- 
men. 

cleireanach, -aich, s.» prov. for cliaranach. 

cléireil, o Presbyterian. An Earlais shaor 
en, the Free Presbuterian Church. 

cléirich, gen. & pl. of cléireach. 

cléir-lagh, s. Canon. 

eléir-shoónruchadh.fft -aidh, s.» Ordination. 

eléirsinneacnd, s.f. Clerkship, writing,account- 
antship. Ris a’ ch., clerkinj. 

cléir-smachduichte, a. Priest-ridden. 

cléirsneachd. see cléirsinneaend. 

eléir-uachdaranachd,tf s.f.cnd. Churchdom. 

cleit, -e, -ean, s.f. Quill 2 Feather. 3 Down. 
4 Covering of feathers. 5 Rocky eminence. 
6 Ridge or reef of sunken rocks —1s/ay. 
Eaves. 8 Flake, as of snow. 9(AC)Land sur- 
rounded by the sea at high-water. 10*Clot. 
11(AC) Door-bar.—Uist. 12 (AC) Backbone. 
13**Penthouse. 14 J M)C'iff on the sea-snore. 
15(DU) Gaelic spelling of cleat, see bata, Nos. 
6 to 8 p. 75. 
[Often appears as a prefix or suffix in names 
of plac +s, as. Ormacleit, Orme's ridge zj c. na 
dabhcha, the ridge of the district; c. na 
comhla, the bar of the door. 
[AlcL & D. and ** give ‘‘cléit,” ‘‘cléiteag,” 
&c., butthe e is short, and *'cleit," &c. as 
given here and by f & ff is correct. —R. tt 
gives ‘‘cleit’’? for Nos. 5 & 6, and *clé.t" for 
es nes 8, but the accent is omitted by f in 
both. 

cleite,** s.f. Calamus. 2 see cleit. 

-— ach, -eiche, a. Rocky, craggy. 2 Feathery. 
8 Flaky. 4 Clotty. 5 Sha gy. 

cleiteadh, -idh, -ean, s.m. Ridge of rocks in the 
sea. 

cleiteag, -eig, -an, sf. Small flake, quill, or 
feather. 2 Small clot. 3**Down. 4**iload 
of the burdock. 5(DC) Flake of snow— 
Perth & Argyll. Cho pailt ri cleiteagan 
sueachd, as plentiful as flakes of 84ow. 

—————ach, -aiche, a. Flaky. += Downy. 8 
Feathery. 4 Craggy, rocky. 5 Shaggy. 

elo! ep, -ein, an, s.m. see cleiteag. 1fPent- 
house. 3 Eaves of a roof. 

cleith, -e, -ean, s.f. & m. Stake 2 Goad. 3 
Oar. 4 Roof. 5 Post. 6**Residence. 7** 
Coucealment. 8 Skulking, lurking. 9 So- 
crecy. 1011Hill, env nence. 11(AC) Waulk- 
ing board. 12] Wattle. 13 Body of any bin, 
A’c—. pr.pt. of ccil. An c., in cone a m»; 
cha'n 'eil c. air an ole ach guna dn: ana ah, 
the only way to conceal evil is not to commi. it; 
clcithean righinn. tough oars. 


cie'deach, -eiche, see cle‘teach. 

cieideag, eig, -an, see cle teag. 

—————aách,-a' che, see cieiteach. 

cleilh,(AC) s. Cot. (cleith) 

fclo«lhe, er, Chalice, cu». 

eséthscam.(CR) sam, Wrath, Tore, West of | 
Ross. Chuir thu an c. dearg air, you made! 
him perfectiy ruriets. 

Së, v.a. )i-h-vel, as hair. j 

cléir, -e, ¢.f. Clergy. Z Presbytery, A’ch. 
the clergy (colleciively.) — i 


‘With, dat. of cliath. 

civith, v.a. see cel 

cleithe, pr. pt. of cei h. 

clé the, gen.sing. of cliath, 

cleitheach, -eiche, a. Private, concealing, 
clandestine. Gn c., clandes inely. ` 

cléitheach,** a. Fcathery. 

——————4, s&J.inl. ..urking, - d 
Cone. aliment, secrecy. 

cleith-inntinn, 8.f. Mental reservation, dis- 
siw ulation. 


skulking. 


cleithir 





eleithir,, AF) see gleithir, | 

Qleith-In«idh, seecleith-luathaidh. | 

oleith-luathaidh,(AC) dat. sing. of cliath-luath- | 
aidh. 

eleith-mhi sguis, 8.7, Private grudge. 

ole tig, e -ean. s.f. One cow's giass. 2 Croft. 
3 Measure of land, containing 4 pennyland. 

cleitinn, s ecleitig. 

cléit-sgriobhaidh,** st Pen. 

tclé-lamhach, see cli-làmhach. 

fcleanhana, 8f. Mischief. 

cleóbag,(AF) see cliobag. 

—————ach, see cledbag. 

cleòc, -a, -an [& -annan,] s.m. Cloak, mantle. 
C. nam meanbh bhall ruadh, «€ cloak with, 
small red s »ots. 

cleòc, v.a. Cloak, cover with a cloak or mantle, 
conceal. 

ach,¢#ta@. Mantled, cloaked. 

an, -ain, -an, s.m. Little cloak or mantle. 

2**vcarf. 

anach,t# -aiche, a. Of, or pertaining to, a 
litt e cloak. 

elcóchd, s. & v. see cleòc, s. & v. 

cleod.(AF) s.m. Horse-fly. 

ci ubacn,** a. Dilatory. 

cil, clithe, s. . Vigour, strength, force. 2 Pow- 
erof moti n. 3 Ability. 4 Energy, pith. 5; 
**rarely t e body, ribs. Gun ch., withont 
power of motion; duine gun ch., a man with- 
out energy; chunnaic e a’ ghaoth gun ch., he 
saw the wind was without force. 

Left-handed, left. 2 Awkward. 

8 Slow, feeble. 4 Humble. 5**Strong. GI 

Kind. 7łłClever. 81 Wrong. A dh! ionn-| 

suidb na làimhe clithe, to the left hanl; air a| 

thaobh cli, on his left side; c. ’s a’ chòmhraig, | 

lame or feeble in the strive; labhair gu c., 

speak wrongly; dh’ éirich thu bhàrr do thaobh 

clì, you have risen off your left, or wrong 

side—-generally applied when one is not get- 

ting on well, or has a reference to the idea of 

bei g lucky or unlueky; ma théid mi e, if 7 

go wrong. 











cli, clithe, a. 


Tei s.m. Successor to an episcopal see. 2 
oet of the third order. 
lia, s.m. see crün-luath. 

cliabh, -éibh, s.m. The chest, the breast. 2 


Kind of basket or hamper used in the High- 
lands for carrying burdens, and generally 
slung on each side of a horse, creel. 3 Stay. 
4 Strait-jacket, strait-vest of wicker-work 
for a madinsn. 5t+Cheese-chest. 'Sann a 
tha 'v t-olach ann an cliabh, the fellow is mad; 
a’ taomadh m’ a ch., pouring it on his chest ; 
e. gùin, Lodice of a gown; eliabhan mnà, 
stays; glacadh-celéibh, rickets. 


PARTS OF a CREEL :— 

i Briagan a’ chléibh, taobhaisdean, holes 
round the centre. Mu bhriagan a’ chléibh, 
about half-full. 

2 Iris, iris-mhuineil, (AH) shoulder-band of 

creel (made of rope of woven grass.) Called 

Uchdach, breast-band, in Lewis. 

Dula na h-iris, loop of shoulder-band. 
Staingean, ribs. 

An curra, an t-inneach, the woof or weft. 
An dlüth, the warp. 

Mas, bottom. 


IAA VW Co 


cliabhach, aiche, a. Chested, haying a large 
chest, + Of, or belorging to, the chest. 3 
Like a hamper or basket. 4 Of, or abounding | 


208 


cl iath 


in, hampers or baskets. 

tclia! hich, -aich, s.m. Wolf. 2(AF)Fox. 

cliabhadair,** see cliabhair. 

cliabhair,** sm. Basket-maker, 

cliabhairt, v.a. Fish tboroughly. 

cliabhan, -ain, -an, s.m. Small creel, hamper. 
or chest. 2**Cage. 

ach,tt -aiche, a. Full of small ereels os 
chests. 

cliabhan-ceangail,* s.m. Rodice. 

cliabh-caol s m. Creel made of wands. 

cliabh-chuiseag, aan, Creel ma:le of stalks. 

cliabh-fharsuing, -e, a. Broad-chested, broad- 
breasted, 

eiabh-tiodha, s.m. Creel made of slips of wood. 

eliabh-f'ao:ch, ssm Creel made of heather. 

eii.bh-giomach, AH) s,m. Lubster-creel, lob- 
ster-}.ot. 

teliabarach, -aich, -aichean, gf see eliathach. 

clia: h-sgeathrach, -aich, -aichean sf. Vomit. 

eliabh-spidrich, s.m. Creel for carrying bnr- 
dens ou hor: eback, having a false bottom fix- 
ed with moveable pins. 2 ( reel with closed 
pointed end for catching fish— Livingstone's 
Poems. 

cliadan, -ain, -an, s.m. Burr, burdock. 

ach, a. Abounding in burrs, like a 

burr, 

feliadh, s.m. Antiquaries. 

cla lùth, s.f.ind. see crün-luath. 92 Musica? 
term íor a certain class of fingering, not the 
A as crùn-luath, nor in pipe-music only— 

MM.) 

cliamach, **-aich. s.m. Lobster. 2 Ragged 
child. 3 Surly fellow. 

feliumhach, -aich, s.m. Fox. 

eiitnhnas,-ais, see cleamhnas. 

eiinnuin: , gen. cleamhna, pl. cleamhnan, [& 
c'eimhn-an,]s.^. Son-in-law. z**Ally. 3 
*Brother-iu-iaw—ZJslay. [In the plural it 
g: nerally signifies any near relations by mar- 
riage.] 

-—ens, -eis, s.m. see cleamhnas. 

cliar, -eir, | **gen. £ pl. cliair] s. m. Poet. 2 
Brave m: n. 8 see clér. Fuil nau c., blood 
of the brave mn. The Cliar Sheanachain, 
(Senchau's lot) was the mythic bardic com- 
pauy, especially on its rounds—Gaelic Folk 
Tales—t. 

-——acl,** a, Like a poet. 2 Like a brave man. 
3 Brave. 4 see cléireach. 

-———achas, -ais, sm. Singing. 2 Bardism. 8 
Versifieation, 4 Heroism. 5 Fighting, 6 
Feats of strength or valour. 7*Chorus—4siay. 
Ri c. ré fad an la, fighting all day. 

cliar,tt a. Brave, gallant. 2 Renowned. 

— achd, s.f. see cliarachas, 

eliaradh, -aidh, s.m. Siuging. 

cliara che, an. see cliaranach. 
cliaraidheachd, s.f. see cliarachas. 
cliaranach, -aich, 8. m. Songster, bard, min- 
strel. 2 Harper. 3 Sword. 4 Swordsman, 
łcliar-ealain, s.m. Band of bards. 

cliata, see cliathta. 

cliata,* s.m. Meadow. 2 Burr— Lewis. 

cliatan, -ain,-an, s.m. Level plain of ground, 2 
**Trellis. 3t+Hand. 

cliataran,(DU‘ sm. Crawling. 

cliath, ven. cléithe, dat. cléith, n. pl. cliathan 
[& cléith,]aat. pl. cliathaibh s f. Harrow. 
9 Grate. 3 Lattice. 4 Casement. 5 Batta- 
lion. 6Shoal, as of fishes. 7 Darning of a 
stocking. St Worm ofa still. 9 Body, mul- 
titude. 10 Hurdle, as for fulling cloth. 11 
Hurdle, as used iu fencing. 12 Weir for sal- 
mon.— ewis. 18 strong stockade constructed 
of wood or wattle, aud erected in olden times 





2 Musie. 


c'iath M 
to protect **mennbh-chrodh" (small cattle,as 
sheep, goats, &c.,, from the ravages of wild 
animals. 1ittset of oars. l5łtrreadies of a 
loom, 16 Certain use of the fingers in playing 
bagpipe and other music, 17 Sometimes nsed 
for cliabh. Stann-cléithe, a worm-vat; c. éisg, 
a creel or school of fish; c. chl:ata, a arrow; 
iroimh mo chléith, through my casemeut; cuid 
an t-searraich de 'n chliath, the /oai's share of 
the harrow—i.e. idleness, as the foal o ly fol- 
lows its mother when at work; thuge leis a’ 
ch. agus na h-nrsainnean, he took the door 
and lintels with him. 

eliatu, pr.pt. a’ chathadh, v.a. Harrow. 2 Co- 
pulate, a. fowls. 3 Run or darn a stocking. 
A’ cliathadn nan cearc, treading the hens ; 
tha ’n stoirm air a mhuir a’ cl.athadh, the 
Ac has smoothed (lit. harrowed) the sea— 

swis. 

cliarhaen, -aich, -aichean, s.f. Side of the hu- 
man body. 2 Sideof a quadruped. 3 Slope 
or side of a bill. 4 Battle, confiict, 5 Bilge 
of a boat. Ri cliathaich na luinge, to the 
si:te of the ship; ri d’ chliathaich, at your side: 
c. a' mhonaidh, the sideof the hill; leig leis a’ 
ch, e, let «t go overboard. 





154. An dóigh air Eise muc-fhedil a ghearr- 
a 


PARTS OF A SIDE OF BACON :— 
1 Spoy thoisich, slinnean, fore hock. 
Gearradh meadhonach, an stiallach 
tiugh, thick streaky or middle cut. 
An stiallach tana, thin*streaky cut. 
Loch-bhléin, flank. 
Spòg dheiridh, gammon. 
Oisiun na spoige deiridh, corner of gam- 
mon. 
Leasradh, loin. 
Pruim agus aisnean, back and ribs. 
Amhach, collar. 
cliathadh, -aidh, s.m. Harrowing. 2 Treading, 
as the males in poultry. A’ c—, pr. pt. of 
cliath. 
cliathag, -aig, -an, s.f. Little hurdle or harrow. 
2 The chine. 
eliathaich, gen. sing. of cliathach. 
eliathaidh, fut. aff. a. of cliath. 
cliathair, -ean, s.m. Harrower. 
cliathan, -ain, -an, s.m. Breast. 9**Dreast- 
bone. 3 (JM) Broken side of a ship or boat. 
4(MMocD) Tın erg placed under the thatch 
of a house— Lewis. 
cliath-bharraich, pl. -an-barraich, s.f. flurdle 
or frame of basket-work. chiefly made from 
branches of the birch-tree, and used as doors 
for cottages. 
cliath-chiliata, -an-cliata, 8.f. Harrow. 
eliath-chóinhraig, pl. -an-cómhraig, s.f. Batta- 
lien. 2 Hero. 
eliathdan, -ain, -an, see cliadan. 
cliath-éisg, s.f. Shoal of fish. 
elisth-iaruinn, pl. -an-iaruiun, s.f. Pot-trivet. 
2** Hand-harrow. 
cl'ath-làiinbe, D -an-làimhe, s.f. IIand-barrow. 
cliath-luathaidh,pl, -an-luathaidh, er Fuller's 
frame or hurdle, waulking-board. 
ebath-lüth, see cli»-lüth. 
feliathog, ig, -ean, s.m. The spine ow back. 


OoN How 9 


em 


cliob 

chath-poite-duibhe,tt s./. 

cliathrach,** sm. Trellis. 

teliathrach, a. Breast-high. 

cHathraich,** v.a. Grate, lattice. 

ci;ath-1ànih, I -an-ramnh, s.f. Sct of cars, 

cliath-shearchaidh, pl. -an-seanchaidu, s.m. 
Genealogical table. 

cliath-sheanchais, pl. -an-seanchais, s.m. 
cliath-sheanchaidh. 

cliath-shlat,** e. Hurdle. 

cliathta, past pt. of ciiath. 

cliath-theine,* s.f. Grate, fireplace. 

cliath-uinneig, pl. -an-uinneig, s.f Lattice. 2 
Baleony. Troimh ch.-u., through a lattice. 

clib, -e,-eachan, 8. see cliob. 

clib, v. see cliob. 

—each. a. see cliobach, 

—eadh, -eidh, see cliubadh. 

clibeaz, -eig, -łan sf. Trick, wile, imposition. 
2 Accident. 3 Flap. 4 Sometimes used for 
elicbag. 

clibealachd, st, see cliobaireachd. 

clibean, -ein, s.m. Dewlap. 2 Exercacence. 
3 Any flabby thing. 4 Dupe. 5 Append^e. 
— Lewis. C. na cluaise, the ear-iobe; c. adha, 
a piece of liver. 

clibeil, -e, see cliobail. 

clibein, -e, -ean, see clibean. 

tclibheadh, s.f. Stumbling, 2 Stepping. 

tclibhiseach, -eiche, a. Peevish. 2 Petulant. 
3 Waspish. 

-——d, s.f.ind.Peevishness. 2 Petulance. 
8 Waspishness. 

clibidich, see cliobaidich. 

tclibin, s.m. Piece, segment. 

telibis, s.f. Tumult, stir, wild commotion. 

clibist, e, -ean, s,f. Misadventure. 2 Gudgeon, 
(not a fish, but in the sense of a simpleton.) 
3(JGM) Slut. 

clibiste, see cliobair. 

ach, -eiche, @ Unfit, awkward, un- 
handy. 

clic, -e, -ean, 58. f. Iron hook or crook. 2 
(AH) Gaff for landing tish. 3 Hinge. 4 Trick. 
5**Clasp. 6**Bad trick. 

, v.'. Shut up by means of a hook or hooks. 

2 Draw towards one with a hook or crook. 3 

**Catch with a hook. 

each, -eiche, @ Cunning, artful, fraudu- 
lent, deceitful. 

——each,1l-eiche, a. Knavish, wicked, 

—eadh,{t -idh, s.m. Accroachinent. 

tclich, v.a. Assemble, bring together. 

clichd, see clic. 

each, see cliceach. 

eadh, see cliceadh. 

felicheadh, s.m. Assemblage, collection, 


Worin of & still, 


see 




















clil,(CR) s. Strength. (cli, vigour.) 

clifeagaich, (AH) s. f. School-boy game +a 
whicli each tries to knock the bonnet off ne 
otuer. 

elifeid, (CR) s. f. Sleet, soft snow that raelts 
when,it touches the ground—W. of Roes-sh. 

cli, see clic. 

cliàmhach, a. Left-handed, 2 Awkward. 
Duine c., @ lef:-handed man. 

————-——d, s.f. Left-handedness. 3 Awk- 
wardness. 

telinnceadh, -idh, -ean, s. m. Gaelic form of 
clinkin«. 

clio», pr. pt. a’ cliobadh[& a’ cliobuidich,] v.a. 
dn. Stumble, slip. 2t{ Tear in pieces, 3 
Nibble, pick with the mouth. 4** Dangle, 
swing— Lewis. Tha earball na bà a’ cliob- 
aidich, the cow’s tail is swinging ; leig leam 
gusan c. mi an cnàimh, let me alone till I 
pick the bone (with my teeth.) 


cliob 


liob, sm. Anything dangling loosely. 2 Ex- 
cresceunce. 3 see cliobadh. 

-—ach, -aiche, a. Curled. 2 Rough, 3** 
Hairy. 4 Clumsy, awkward—Lewrs, 51 
Scumbling. 

tliobad,tt -aid, s.f. Lisping, stammerinug. 

sliobadh, -aidh, s.m. slipping, stumbling. 2 
sStniubie, slip. 8** Tearing in picces. à 
N:boüing. A'c—,pr pt. ofcliob. ‘hua iasg 
"yal ch , a fish is nibbling my hook. 

sliobag, -aig, -an, s.f. Filty, young mare. 

——— — -eien, s.f. Shagey colt. 

Z2ziobaidich, pr. pt. of cliob. 

Jliobail,-e, a. Clumsy, awkward, silly, help- 
eps, 9 imbecile. 3 Liable to accidents. 

tlivbain, -ean, see clibean. 

cliobair, -eau, 9.22%. Clumsy, awkward silly per- 
son. 2 Simpleton. 

eacnd, Sid. Clumsiness, silliness, 
awkwardness, helples»ness. 

aliobainend, see «liobaireachd. 

«liobar, -air, &.m see glib. 

cLoubuach, -aiche, a. turiet, rough. 

sliubliag, sf. sla» vith the open hand. 

shobhaid,(DU) e... sleet. 

tetiobhnna, sin. Rug. 

Fcliobsa, 3.f, D«cjeciion of countenance. 

sliof,tt A, -annau, sf. Clit. 

cliogair, v.a. Croak, make a noise. 

clìvgar, -air, s.m. Croaking. 

-——-—ach,** à. Uroaking. 

feodo men a. That croaxs. 

teliolunta, a. Strong, stont, potent, hearty. 

ciiopach, -aiche, a. Stamunering, halung in 
speech. 


cliopach,fts.m. Halt in speech. 

eliupad, see cliobad. 

cliospach, -aiche, a. Lame. 2 Handless. 3 
Inactive. 


cliostar, -air, -an, s.m. Clyster. 

cliotach,** a. see ciotach. 

clip, pr.pt. à clipeadh, v.a. Hook, catch with 
a hook. 2* Pilfer, snatch, steal, 

clip,-e, -an,s,f. Fraud, deceit,cunning. 2 Hook 
$*Haud-hook, for taking fish into the boat 
whicn are too heavy for the line, fish-;:ff. 4 
ttPiece uf fish or white leather used as a bait. 
a* Stratagem, deceit, cunning. 

each, -eiche, @ Deccitfnl. 2 Unhaudy. 3 

Having weak hands. 4tfslack. +5**Liooked. 

6trStummering. 71f De.ective. 

eil, see clipcaen. 

clipiche, s.f.ind. Defectiveness. 

clip-latuhach,-aiche, a Unhandy. 

-———-—-——-838, -als, sm. Unbhban«diness. 

clip-iauhaiche, see clip-lamhachas. 

elipse,** sJ. Gaelic form of “cots clipps (an 
eclipse.) 

clis, v. a. & n. Leap, skip. Zitkrustrate, 81] 
Dec: ive. 

clis, -e,a Active, agile, quick, nimble, speedy. 
Na fir-ci.lis, the mer ry dancers or aurora borea- 
lis; £u c. na chéileshàs iud, they seiccu euch 
other keenly ` bradau grad-chlis, a nimble 

t salmon. ts says t.| 

——beach, a. Unsteady on the feet, apt to 
stumble 2**Cripple, laine. 

—leac. d, sj. Lameness, unsteadiness. 

—veach,(URis.m. Side of the human body— 
H. of tioss-shire. 

vach,* san, Wicket. 

——eacid, s./, Presentuess, quickness, agility. 

—eai, -eid, s.. sce cliseachd. 

— eadh, -sidli, -idhean, s m. Leap, skip, jump. 
A' c—, pr. pt. of chs. Leaping, skipping, 
juinping. 

—-eil, a. Nimble. Gu cliseil fearr-ghleusach, 











216 


eliüiteoch 


brisg fo 'armachd, nànól^, (rained, anad orisk 
under ai ms— Duanaire, 155. 
clisg, pr.pt. a’ clisgeadh, v.a. d: n. Start, star- 
tie, leap throngh fear. Ch. e, he started. 
clisg-bhuail ff v.a. Cause to stand agaze. 
elisge, 5./. Siart. 2 Brisk movement. A ch., 
(adv.) suddenly. 
—ach, -eiche, a. Apt to start, starting, ti- 
mid, fearful. 2 Skittish. 3**sSkipping 
achd,t} sf. Quickness, activity, aimble- 











ness. 





adh, -idh, -idhean, s.m. Startling, alarm. 
2 Ina start, instanily. 3 skipping. Bian 
sco an clisgeadh, be were instuntiy, ch. féidh 
is earba 'san fhracch, startling of deer and roe 
in the heather ` bha iad air an e. romhad, 
they were ajraid of you; e. ort! the greeting 
accorded to one who has startled another. A? 
c—, pr.pt. of cli-g. 

clisgean, Al’) Swift \bird,) see goblilan mor. 

clisgear, s.m. Lnterjec:ivon in grammar, 

clisneach, -nich, san, Human body. 2 Carcase. 
3 The outward appeajance. 4* Wicket, bar- 
gate. 5 Month never at rest. 6 (CR) One 
side or siope of a roof —/'eiihshire. 

clisneach, see cii-beach. 

cliste, a. Active, nimbe, supple, swift, dexter- 
ous. Gu c., mimuly. 

clisteachu, sj.ind. Activity, swiftaess, dexter- 
ity, agil:ty, niumbleness. 

chtb,** san, Desire of copulation in cattle. 

-——, @. ES, see cli 

—— —,1i-e,a. Close, true. 

telitieag, s.f. Gap. 

cütu-làuiach, see ¢!}-lamhach. 

— — d, see clilànhachd. 

tcilthre, s.f. Guard. 

elitiz, -e, -ean, see cleitig. 

cutinn,tt see cleitiz. 

cliù, gen. cliù [& cliütha,] sm. Fame, renown. 
2 Praise. 3 Character, reputation. lo 
dheagh ch., under a good character ` chan 
éireadh mo ch. 'na bhàs, my reputation would 
mot increase by his death ; is e do ch. do 
cheud alladh, the estimate of you gocs according 
to the first report of you. 

eliüar, see cliumhor. 

chic, pr. pt. a’ cliücadh, v.a. Mend or repair 
nets or shoes. 


2 Vile. 








cliùc,* s.f. Stratagem, hellish trick. 2 De- 
ceit, fraud. . 
ach, -aiche, o  Hooked. 2 Cunning, 


deceitful, deceiving, artful. 
ach,* sf. Deceitíul female. 
auh, -aidh, s.m. Mending of nets. A’ 
c—, pr.pt. of cliüc. 
air, -ean, s.m. Mender of shoes or nets. 
2 Netanaker. 3 Cunning fellow, strategist. 
4(DU) Double hook or S for keeping net in 
position while undergoing repairs. 
aireachd, s.f.izd. Art of mending nets 
or shoes. 2 Artifice, cunning, deceit, fraud. 
cliuchd, &c., see cliüc, &c. 
chùd, -a,-an,s.m. Slap onthe face. 2 Slight 
stroke with the tingers, fillip. 3 Childre..’s 
lay. 4 Disabled hand. 6* Small tritling 
and. 
1cliüd, a. 














Squint-eyed. 

cliüdan, -ain, s.m. seecliüd. 2 Little person 
disabled in the hands, 3ttLittle band. — 4* 
Tritiiung stroke or blow, ó6**slapon tine face. 
6**Fillip. C. cliadan, children’s play. 

achd, «find. Continued or ireqnent 

slapping on the face. 2 Filliping. 

cliùich, see cliùthaich. 

cliuin, AF) s. Wolf. 


cliùiteach, -eiche, a. Famous, renowned, no- 


1 


cliùiteach | 
ted, celebrated. 2 Laudable, commendable. 
Fionn c., celebrated Fingal ; is clititeten’ an 


211 


closaideach 


ció-ehlàr, see clòdr-chiar. 
ce:ó-ehodal, see cld-chadal. 


onair na 'n t-òr, honour is more commend- cioch:au, -ain, -an, see clacharan. 


able than gold. 


Í 
—ach, -aidh, s.m. Celebrating, praising, | 


lauding, re:owning. 
-—4,**5./. Admirableness, celebrity. 
cliùitich, see cliütbaich. 
clidmhor, -oire, aq. Renowned, famous, noted, 
c»lcbrat. d, praiseworthy. 
clidmhoireachd,fft s.f. Renown, celebrity. 
cliü-oirdne:re, -e, | a. Illustrious, noble. 2 
Cous,):cuous, 
cliüthaen, -aiche, see cliùiteach. 
clù achadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of praising, extol- 
ling, cel-brating or exalting. | A’ c—, pr.zt. 
of cuit hàich. 
clittha.ca, ppt. a’ clidthachadh, v.a. Praise, 
extol, exalt, celebrate, make famous. 
te, past pt. of cliùthaich. Celebrated, 
raised, extolled. 
chithar, -aire, a. 
cliuthmhor, 





see cliàümhor. 

see clit.) hor. 

—-—achd, see c::imhoireachd. 

elià-thoilltinneach, -aicne, a. Praiseworthy, 
commendable, deserving praise. 

clo, gen. clotha, pl. cloithean, s.m. Homespun, 
coarse home-made cloth. 2 Nail 3 Pin, peg. 
4 Gloom, vapour. 5 Sometimes used for 
clodh; also 6 clo-chadal. Clo do ’n t-sùil, 
slumber to the eye ; bron gun ch., sorrow with- 
out rest. 

clo, v.a. see clódh. 

tclo, s.m. Defeat. 


change. 

clobha, pl. chan, uw cloihan,] 8. m. Tongs. 
Saighdearan a’ chlobha, volunteers (lit. stay- 
at-home soldiers. ` 

elobhar-na-maighiche,} s.m. Wood-sorrel, see 
seamrag. 

elobhdach, (CR) a. Clumsy— W. of Ross-shire. 

clobhdair,. CR) s.m. Bungler, botcher— West. of 
Ross-shire. 

clobh-arbnair,** s.m. Weed-hork. 

clobhsa, chan, 8.3n. see clainhsa. 

eló-bhuail,v.a. see clodh-bhuail. 

—— ————te, see clódh-bhuailte. 


2 The sea. 8 Variety, 


_ see clodh-bhualadair. 

clo-bhualadh, see clódh-bhualadh. 

cidca,-chan, s.m,. see cleòc. 

clocach, -aiche, a. Slonched. 

elocaire,* an, s. s^. Rogue, deceitful fellow. 
2 Dissembler, fpretender. 

clocaireachd,* &.f. Dissimulation. 

cloch, cloiche, -an, 8.f. see clach. 2§Henbane 
—hyorymus niger. 

clochach, see clachach. 

clò-chadal, -ai!, s.m. Dozing, slumber, lethargy. 
C. na h-aoise, the ethargy of ave. 

clocuan, -ain, -an, see clacharan. 2 see clachan. 

, v.n, Respire. 

clochar, -air, 8. 1n. Wheezing in the throat 
of a dying person. 2 Assembly, congregation. 
8 Convent. 

nach, -aich, see clochranaich. 

clucharra, a. see clacharra. 2 Lively, active, 
clever.  3** Pertaining to wheezing in the 
throat. 

cloch-bheumnaich, -e, a. Stamping. prancing. 

cloch-bhrath, see clach-bhrath. 

eloch-bhuadha, -an-buadha, see clach-bhuadh- 


ach. 
cloch-bhuaidh, see clach-bhuadhach. 
cloch-chinn, see clach-chinn. 
cloch-chuotaidh, see clach-chnotainn, 
cloch-chro^aidh,ff see clach-c. nutainn, 
elochlain, sf. Wheat-car, see cloichearan. 


—tear, 








—aicn, 3.f. Wheezing in the throat. 

cloch-reathnach, ( /or clach-raineach, see ceig 
cnrant. 

cloch-shnaidheadair, see clach-shnaidheadair. 

eloch-shreatnail, see clich-shreathail. 

cloch.shüil, see clach-shü i. 

——— ——.—eüch, -aicie, see clach-shüileach, 

cloch-thàirnge, see clach-tinairnge. 

clod, gen. cluid [& cloda,] v; cluid Lë clodan,] 
s.m. Clod, turf, sod. «** in derision, Slug- 
gish person. 

clod, pr. pt. a’ clodadh, v.a. Clod, pelt or cover 
with clods. 2(DU) Lift or remove clods and 
weeds from ploughed land which is to grow 
& green crop. 

—ach, -aich, 8f. Dirt, filth, slime. 
cladach. 

—ach, -aiche, a.  Fullofclods or turf. 2 
Like a clod or turf, cloddy. 

clodair, -ean, s.m. Pelter with clods. 2 Heavy 
dull man or beast. C. duine, dvil heavy man; 
c. deeach, a dull heavy hors»— Lew:s. 

eachd, s.f.ind. Clodding, throwing of, 
or pelting wit^, clods, 

clodan, n. pl. of clod. 

, ain, A1, s.m. Little clod. 

ach, -aicne, Gà. Cloddy, full of small 
clods. 

clod-cheann, -chinn, s.m. Dull heavy head. 

— ——— , -aiche, a. Dull, stupid, heavy- 


2 see 











—a 
headed. 

—————-achd, ff s.f. Obtuseness. 

clodh, -a, -an, s. m. Print, impression. 2 
Priuting-press. 3 Variety. 4** see cló. 

e ódh, v.a. See clódh-bhuail. 2 Conquer. 

clodna, see clobha. 

clodhadh, see clòthadh. ` ` 

ciodhachadh,** -aidh, s.m. Drawing close to- 
gether. A’ c—, pr.pt. of ciodhaich. 

clodhaich,** pr.pt. a’ clodhachadn, v.e. Draw 
close together, approach. 

clodhadair, -ean, s.m. Compositor, printer. 

clodhair,** see clodhadair. 

eachd, s.f.ind. Business of a printer, 
printing, typography. ° 

em E WR, Print, exercise the art of 
typography. 2 Stamp, impress. , 

— rU past part. of clodh-bhuail, 
Printed. 

cloódi-bhuailtear, see clódh-bhualadair. 

clo. |h-bhualadair, -ean, s.m. Printer. 

clodh-bhualadh, -aidh, s.m. Print, impressiou. 
2 Edition of a book. 3 Printing, stamping, 
typovraphy. A’ c—, pr.pt. of ciódh-bhinail. 

clo:lh-chlar, -air, s.m. Copper-plate. 2 Print- 
inz-press, 8 Printing-establishment. ` 

telodh-fhasgadh, s.m. Impression or edition 
of a book. 

cloith-ihear, see clodh-bhualadair. ` . 

clodh-ghalar, -air, s.m. Dizziness, giddiness, 
vertigo. 

clodh-mhearachd,** s.f. Misprint. ` ` 

clódh-sgriobhadair, -ean, s.m. Type-writer. 

ielódhnuieh, v.a. Approach, contract. 

clog, cluig, s.m. see clag. 12Head. 

felog, v.a. Sound, as a bell. 

+——achd, sj.ind. Belfry. f 

clogad, -aid, -aidean, s. m. see clogaid, 

clogaid, -e, -ean, 8. f. Helmet, headpiece. 2 
Cone, pyramid. 3 s.m. (DU) Headpiece ofa 
tm of corn, To 

clogaide, gen.sing. of clogaid. 

olo midesi: cnm a. Wearing helmets, arm- 
ed with a helmet. 2 Belonging to a helmet. 





clogais 


elozais,t sr Wooden clog. 

clogan, see clagan. 

clogarnach, 8.7. see clagarnach. 

clogarnaich, see clagarnach. 

clogas, see clagas. 

clog-inheur, } s.m.Hour-hand of 

clog-shnatnad, -aid, -an, $ s.f. adial-plate 
or clock (not of a watch.) better làmh-uair- 
eadair. 

tcloguide. -an, see clogaid, 

cloich, dat. of clach. 

cloich-bheumnaich, -e, see cloch-bheumnaich. 

cluiche, gen.sing. of clach. 

telvichead, -eid, s.f. Passvort. 

cloichear, -eire, s.m. see clochar. 

cloichearan, Ţ s.m. Stone-chat,—sazicola ruhi- 
cola. Facetiously called Fear na Fé.!l-Pad- 
ruig, the one of St. Patrick's day—becauss he 
appears about then.—AC. 2 Wheat-ear, 
see brü-gheal. 


" aah, h 
Am "ome 


+ 
= ais Zei 


SS e 
"rut ; 
i fi ' 






SEN tte (1) 

cloichirein, see cloichearan. 

cloich-mheallain, see clach-mheallain, 

fcloichreach, sf. Stony place. - 

tcloichrean, sm. see clo'chreach. 

cloich-shueachd, see clach-shneachd. 

cloidh, sm. see cloimh. 

tclòidh, s.f. Paddocs, small enclosure of grass- 
land. 

cloidhe, see cloitheag. v 

cloidheag, -eig, see cloitheag 8, & cloimhneag. 

ach, see cloitheagach & clòimh- 
neagach. . . 

cloidheamh, -imh, -an [& cloidhean] see claidh- 
eamh. 





cloidhean, -ein, s.m. Pith of the box-tree. 2 


Pith of any shrub tree. 3 see clàidhean. 

, n.pl. of cloidheamh. 

«doruis, see claidhean-doruis. 
cloidhibh, (forclaidhibh.) Lee, with knives. 
fcloigean, see claigionn. 

teloigineach, see cluigeanach, 

tcloigionn, -inn, see claigionn. `. 

cloilein, -e, s.m. dim. of clo, Little web of 








cloth. 
clòimh, gen. -e [& clomhach,] dat. cloimhidh, 
s.f. Wool. 2 Down of feathers. 3 Plumage. 


4AF) Woolly sheep. 
Leabaidh chloimh, a feather-bed : ge math c. 
eba’n ithear c., wool is good, but one doesn't 
eat wool—said by a halt-stav.eu woman to a 
Skye minister who, in respouseto an appeal 
for help, had offered her some wool. ‘the 
saying is a good equivalent for the English 
proverb, who gives thoughtfully gives twice ; air 
thughadh le e, thatched with down; tha c. 1,0 
chaorach féin ort, Z like you, (you cut your jib 
just like my own friends.) 

cloimh, sr, The itch, scab, mange. 
ded by the art. a’ ch—.] 

clòimh, 8.m. Iustrument to dress flax. 

elóimhi-chat, (AC) s.m. Catkin, cat-wool, inflor- 
escence of the birch, beech, willow, &c. The 
catkin wool was twined invo a 3-ply cord and 
that into a circle to safeguard against unseen 
powers, 


[Prece- 


212 


closadh 


cloimhdeachadh, -aidh, s.m.  Shrugging. 2 
Rubbing or tue skin against one's civuiva, 
A C—, r.pt. of cloimhdich. 

cloimhdien, pr. pt. a’ clounhdeachadh, v. a. 
Shrug the shouliers. 2 Rub the members 
agaiust one anotuer. 

cloinueach, -ich, 8.7. see clòimh. 2(AF) Wool- 
ly sheep. 

~, -eiche, a. Woolly, feathery. 

cloimheach, -eivhe, a. Mangy, scabby, scorbu- 


tic. 

= d,ii s.f.ind. Manginess, 
cloimheag, -eig, 8.7. see clónuhnmeag. 

cloitheag. 

————ach,ff a. see cloitheagach. 

cloimhein, -ean, s.m. Icicle. 2 Snot, slaver. 
3ttsort of small eel. 4 see clàidhean. 

——each, -eicne, a Hanging in snots, 

bubbles or slavers. 

cloimbeinich,tt ‘sai a’ cloimheineachadh,v.n, 

l'iuvwter, falı slowly, as down or featners. 
cloimn-ghargach, -aich, sf. Down. 
ciónuu-,uüarrain,tf see c— -ghargach. 
clounitivh, dat. of clòimh. 

cloiiih-itean, 8.f. see cloimhteach. 

ciounn-liach, 8.f. Mildew, mould—mucedo, 

cloimhneag, ** .eip,-an, £f. Small feather. 9 
Down. 3 Flakeof snow. 

———- —ach, a. Feathery, downy, flaky. 

cloimhteach, -ich, sy. Down of feathers, 

civiinhteachadh, s.m, see cloimhueachadh. 
cloinu, dat. of ciann. 

cioinne, gen. sing. of clann. 

clois, -e, 8. f. Piants of the order equisetacee. 
growing in watery places, 2{¢ Marsh-weed, 
t horse-tail." 

telois, v.n. Hear. 

t——dean, see claistinn. 

cloitheag,f-eig, s. f. Shrimp, prawn. 2(JM) 
Small tish of a yellowisn colour, found under 
stones on the seashore 1t has a iew black 
spots on each side of the dorsal fin; spotted 
benny. 3(AI) Gadfly, cleg. 4 Sman same 
prey. Cuiridh a’ ch, an lon troimh a ché.e 
(i.e. a Very trifling person may create a als. 
turbance. ("This fish is used as a bait while 
traiiiug for lythe.] 

feloitneagach, a. buli of shrimps or prawns, 

fceloithear, ir, 8.m. (c.aidheamh-fear) Cham- 

ion. 

cloithlein, s.m. see cloilein. 

iclómh, v.a. Dress tlax, 

clomh,(AC) v.a. see cloth, 

ach, -aiche, see cloimheach, 

adh, see cloth. 

ais, &.f. Cloves, 

clòmhar, see clamhar, 

t¢clomhas, -ais, s.m. Trap. 

clo-uiheas,** s.m. Cloves. 

clowhr,tt pr.pt. a’ clomhradh, v.a. Scratch by 
shrug: iung. 

clomhrachan,fft -ain, s.m. Fledgling. 

cloinhsadbh,** see ciamhsa. 

telonn, -a,s.m. Piilar. 2 chimney-piece, 

iclos, s.m. Hearing, 2 Report. 

clos, $. m. ind. Rest, repose, stillness, sleep. 
2 Quietness, silence, 38**Report. 4**Hear- 
ing. 5 see clamhsa. Gabh guc., be silent; 
a’ plosgail gun ch., panting incessantly. 

——, pr.pt. & closadh, v.a. dn. Be calm, be 
quiet, be still, 2 Hush, quiet. 3 Rest, re- 

ose. 

EN -aich, -aichean, s.f. Carcase. 2 Dead 
body, corpse. C. fladh-bheathaich, a wild 
beast' 8 carcase. [Illustrations on p. 213.] 

——Aaüh, -aidh, s.m. Hushing, quieting, being 
still. A’ c—, pr.pt. of clos. 








2 see 














ciosacn ` - 





156. An dòigh air an gearrar sìos closach mairt 
an Albainn., 
PARTS OF A CARCASE OF BEEF As DIVI- 
DED IN SCOTLAND :— 
1 Leasradh uachdar ; Losaid—Lew/s, MMcD 
sirloin or back sey. 
2 Dubh chléith ; Cruachann— Lewis, MMcD, 
hook bone. 
8 Mas buttock, 
4 Bunawhas, sHasaid, 
large round, 
5 Loch-bhléiu thiugh, thick Zonk, 
6 Loch-bhiéinthana, thin flank, 
7 Leas; Leis— Lewis, MMcD, small round. 
8 losgaid, hough. 
9 Eartall, tail. 
10 slinnean, re rib or fore sey. 
Staoig mhór, large runner, 
12 Stavig bheag, small runner. 
13 Na h-aisnean, nineholeg. 
14 Broilleach, brisket. 
15 Spòg thoisich, shoulder «yar. 


Rumball, rump. 


nme 
um 


16 Lurgainn, nap or shin. 

17 Amhach, neck. 

18 slugan, sticking piece. (up towards the 
neck) Sprogan— Lewis, MMcD. 





157. An dóigh air an gearrar sios closach mairt 
an Sasunn. 

PARTS OF A CARCASE OF BEEF AS DIVI- 

DED IN ENGLAND :— 
1 Leasradh; Losaid— Lewis, MMcD loin, 
2 Cruachann, aitch bone. 
3 Mas, rump. 
4 BER Sliasaid— Lewis, MMcD but, 
tock. 
5 Leas; Leis, — Lewis, hock. 
6 Loch-bhiéin thiugh, thick flank, 
7 Loch-bhiéiu thana, thin flank. 
8 Lurgainu, shin. 
9 Earball, tail. 
10 Aisean dheiridh, chuck rib. 
11 Aisean mheadhonacn, middle rib. 
12 Aisean thoisich, fore rib. 

(In Lewis the joint between 10 & 11 is cut 
asacontinuation of that between 14 & 15, 
and the piece then representing 11 & 12 is 
called ** aisean thoisich,” and the remainder 
of 10 ** aisean mheadhonach,” 


clothadh 


about one-third, and what is left of 1 ix call- 
ed ** leasradh” or ** losaid.” With these ex- 
ceptions a carcase of beef is divided iu Lewis 
after the Kuglish fashion.—MMcD} 

13 Amhack & broilleiu, clod, sticking-piece d 


neck 
14 Broilleach, brisket. - 
15 Spòg thoisica, leg-of-mutton piece. 
16 Lurgaiun, shin. 
17 Slugan,— Lewis. 


4) 


| 





E 


159 


2 . 
: 158. An dòigh Albannach air caora a ghearradh 
$208. 
159. An dòigh Shasunnach air caora a ghearradh 
sìos. 


SCOTS METHOD OF DIVIDING A CARCASS 
OF MUTTON (153)— 
1 Spòg dheiridh, Ceathramh deiridh— Lewis, 


170t. 
2 Leasradh ; Aisnean cul or droma—Lewis, 
an, 
3 Aisnean droma, back ribs. 
4 Broilleach, breast. 
ENGLISH METHOD ;— 
1 Gualainn ; Slinnean—Lewis, shoulder. 
2, 2, Amhach, neck, 
3 Proilleach, breast. 
4 Ceathramh,hind quarter. Leasradh— Lewis. 
5 Spòg, leg. Ceathramh deiridh— Lewis. 
[The carcase of a sheep is cut in Lewis 
more after the English than the Scots style. ] 
closaich,* v.n. Get lean or gaunt, as a half- 
starved brute. 
clòsaid, -e, -ean, s.f. Closet, study. 
cld-suaine, sf. Slumber, Ag aomadh gu o., 
drooping in slumber, 
¢eloth, a. Noble, generous. 
cléth, -a, pl. clòithean Lë cldithntean] s.m. 
see clò. 2 Silly man. 
+clòth, s.m. Victory. 2 Fame, praise. 3 Wind. 
cloth, pr.pt. a’ olothadh, v.a. Mitigate, still, 
restrain, calm. 2 Counteract, subdue, sur- 
inount, overcome. 
fclotha, Was heard. 
¢clothach, -aiche, a. Famous, illustrious, re- 
nowned, celebrated. 
clothadair,** s.m. Clothier. 
achd,** s.f. Clothiery. 


* D . . — E 
1 The division | clòthadh, -aidh,s.m. Mitigating, restraining, 
between 1 & 2is also moved farther forward | 


calming. 2(CR) Gadding, roving. A’ e nan 





elothadh 214 
taighean, rangin the houses. A’ c—, pr. 


t. of clocl. 

clo:.u-suaine, see cló-suaine, 

fc à, a. Chosen. 

feiu,S.m. see clit. 

+cluach, a. see cinchach. 

fceiü1eb, s.m. (ci ithach) Hero, 

clua'n, -e, -ean{&-tean] 8f. Pasture, green 
field, meadow, lawn. 2 Bower. 3 Retire- 
ment. 4 Ambush. 5 Pacification, quietness. 
6** Burying ground. 7**Intrigue, deceit, di:- 
simulation. 8**Flattery. 9(CR) Appreh:n- 
sion, a'plicrtion, attention—West of Rosa. 
Cha’n’e ic ann, he lacks unterstanding—sail 
of one who fails to grasp what he is told ; 
gun ch., careless about work or business ; cuir 
c. air an ieanabh. pacify the child ; le "ne, 
with their diss:mulation ; air cluvinibh an 
fhasaich, on the pastures of the desert. 

each, eich: a. Meadowy, abounding in 
pastures, grassy. 2**Deceitful, dissembling. 
38** Flattering. 

cluaineag, -eig, -an, 8.f. Retired field, little pa-- 
ture, little lawn. 2 Neat li tle woman. 3 
Islet ina river. 4ftDecei ful woman. 

cluaineazach, a. Aboundiag in little lawns or 
pastures. 

eluainean,** -ein, s.m. Little pasture, little 
meadow, little lawn, pleasure ground. Fo 
ch. an fhéidh, beneath ihe deer's pasture- 
ground. 

cluainear, -eir, se» cluainire. 

?-——— ——-4À8, See cluaineas. 

cluaineas, -eis, s.f. Intrigue, artifice, design, 
hypocrisy, treaciery, 2**G:nab oiling, frisk- 
ing, Ri c. mhear, frisking merrily ; mar 
bhradan air an aigeal a’ cluaineis ; like a 
salmon frisking in the poul—Duunaire, p. 84. 

elnaineireach, a. Deceittul, alluring, hypocri- 
tical. 

cluaineireachd, 
of deceit. 

cluaineiseach, -eiche, a. Private, remote, re- 
tired, fond of being alone. 2 Intriguing. 

cluaiuire, -an, s.m. Flatterer, sedueer. 2 Hy- 
pocrite, fawner, cunning feliow. 

e!nain-lin,$ -e, Cora spurrey —sp»rgula arvensis 

c'uainteach, -eiche, a. Cunning. 

cluaintean, n.pl. of cluain. 

cluainteir, see cluaiuire. 

————eaeh, see cluaineireach. 

—euchd, see cluaineireachd, 

clnais, dat. sing. of cluas. 

cluaise, gen. sing of cluas. 

ean, -ein, s.m. Blow, box on theear. 2 
Porringer. 3 Shoe-latchet. 4**Ansated dish. 
5** Pillow. Piune cluaisein, tram-pin of a 
cart. [tt gives cluaisein as nom.] 

eluaiseineach,tt -eiche, a. Pertaining to a shoe- 
latchet. 

cluan, -ain pl. -an [& Fan, let see cluain. 

ag,see cluaineag & claonag. 2**rarely Joy. 

agach, see cluaineagach. 

cluanaire, -an, 8.m. see cluainire. 

eluanaiseach,** a. Sauntering, lounging alone. 

eluanas,(AC) s.m. Friendship. 

cluantaireachd, s.f. see cluaineireachd. 

tcluara, a. Steep, inaccessivle. 

cluaran, -ain, -an, 8 m. Thistle. Used as 
a general name for all thistles, but especially 





s.f. Deceit, flattery, practice 














chrysanthemum segetum. 2 Corn-marigold.|-——ach.-aiche, a. Ansated, having ears or 
8 Sponge. handles. 2 Having large ears. 8 Deaf. 
ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in thistles,| 4 (DU) Careless, slow, Meadar c., an ansated 
thistly. 2 Fungous. wooden dish; an t-sobhrag c., the roun:l-leaved 





ach,** -aich,s.m. Thistle. 
cluaran-cruaidh,§ 8.m. Sow-thistle, 
ghiogan, 


cluaran-deilgneach,} 58. m. 


cluaran-leana,} 8.m.Marsh-thistle—carduus pe 


161. C. deilgneach. 
cluaran-óir,i 8.m. 


teluas, -uais, s.m. 
cluas, -aise, -an, s.f. Ear. 


sge bog-| cluasachan, -ain, -an, 
cluasag, -aig, -an, sf. 


^^ ft 







1¢0. Cluaran (1) 


Spear - thistle— 
carduus lanc»olatus. 


lustris. 


^ AS ve 


WEEE E 
Es 
e 4 Po 


SUM 





VN ja 
$4 


162. C. leana. 
Carlinesthistle—carlina vul 
garis. 


: à 


— E Ze 
e gg 
KH 
EEN A 

Wë Vix A he 


163. Cluaran-óir- 





164. Cluas-an-fhévdh. 
Joy, gladness. 
2 Handle of a dish, 
cycle, and most things that may have two 
handles. 3 Tack of à sail, see p. 76. 4 pl. 
Ears of a creel, where ends of suspender are 
inserted. 5(MMcD) Top corners of a her- 
ring net.—Lewis. C. a’ chridhe, auricle 
the heart; chailleadh tu do chluasan mur 
bitheadh iad 'an ceangal riut (or ceanzailte 
riut,) you would lose your ears if they were 
not fixe.l to you. [For Gaelic names of vari- 
ous marks on sheeps’ ears, see under ‘‘ comh- 
arradh.” 


primrose. 
see cluasag 
Pillow. 2 Pin-cushion. 


cinasag 


3 Bolster of a cart. C. de fhionnadh ghabh- 

air, a rillow of goat's hair. e 

ach a. Abounding in pillows. 2 Of, 

or belonging to, a pillow. 

aich,** va. Bolster. 

-ghiüin, **s. f. Hassock, cushion. 

€enasaire tt sfiind. Audience. 

claisan-fhé.«dh, sf. Melancholy thistle—car 
duus hetorophillus. Said to have been the 
badge of King James I. ‘of S otland.) The 
plant *enerally used to represent the Scot- 
tish heraldic thistle is onopordon acanthium, 
—the cotton-thistle. 

eluas-an-luch,§ st 
cerasiium alpinum. 

cluas-bhiorach, @. Sharp-eared. 
eared. 











Mouse-ear- chick-weed— 


2 Pointed- 


Si 





165. Cluas-an-luch. 166. Cluas-chaoin. 

tluas-chaoin, s.f. Wake-robin, lords and lauies, 
cuckoo-pint—arum maculatum. 

sluas-chiuil, s.f. Musical ear. 

sluas-chrochag,** -aig, -an,s.f. Ear-ring, ear- 
ae E 

feluas-doille, s.f. Deafness, dullness of hearing. 

sluas-fhail, -e, -ean, 8.f. (& m.) Ear-ring. 

sluas-fhainne, pl. -fhainntean, 8.f. & m. Ear- 


ring, 

sluasgaich,ff v.a. Pillow. 

3 uas-:ce,** s. Acoustics. 

jiuas-liath, s.f. 1Colt's foot—tussilajo farfara. 
2 Mouse-ear, hawkweed, see cluas-luch. 

sluas-luch.? st, Mouse-ear, hawkweed—Riera- 
ciun pilosella. 





167. Cluas-liath. 168. Cluas-luch. 
eluas-mhaothan, -ain, -an, 8.m. Top of the ear. 
teluasoil, a. Loud. 
eluas-ri-claisdeachd, st Hearkener, charac- 

ter ina romance, one anxious to overhear a 

conversation. 
elnas-<heud, -a, -an, «.m. Ear-jewel. 
felub, v.a. Bend, incline. 
fclubadh, -aidh, s.m. Winding bay. 
clüd, -ùid (&-a,] pl. an [& tid,] s.m. Patch, 

rag. Clout. 
cliùl, pr.part. a’ clüdadh. v.a, 


Clout, patch, 
wend, 2**Cover up warm. 


8**Ci erish. 


sc, -aiche, @ Abounding in rags. 2 Patch- 


715 


| cludan, -ain, -an, s.m. 





cluinn 


ed. c'outed, ragged. 

ceiüdadh, -aidh, s.m. Clouting. pitching, mend- 
me, coboling. A’ c—, pr.pt. of c ul. 

clàdag, -aig,-an, s.f. Little clout or rag. 2 
Concealment., 8**Store. 

ach,-aiche, a. Abounding in little rags 
or eiouts. 

cladaich, pr.part. a’ elàüdachadh, v.a. see clad. 

— ————.e. past pt. of cluilaich. Clouted, meud- 
ed, patched 

clüdair, -ean. s.m Patcher, botcher, cobbler, 

eachd,** s. f. Patchiug,ciouting,cobbling. 

see clüdag. 








clùdan, n. pi. of clud, 

ach, -aiche, see clüdagach. 

clugan, a ~ain, s.m. Kigwort. see lus 

ach, nan-cvapan. 

cluich, -e, pl. -ean [-eacuan & -eannan,] s. m. 
Play, pastime, sport, gaine. 2 Funeral games 
or solewnities. 3 Battle. 4 Sciool vacation. 
5**ilirting. 6**Gamiug. 7** ihea-rical per- 
formance. A’ c—, pr. pt. of cluich. 











, pr. pt. a cluich, a’ cluicheachd, & a’ 
cluicheadh, v.a. Play, sport, game. 2 Finger 


& musical instrument. 3**Represent a char- 
acter. 4ttGamble. 

-abhachd,* s.m. Comedy. 

-cneutaig, 8.m. Teunis. 

-enagaire, 8.m. Cricket match. 

each, -eiche, a. Sportive, playful, frolic- 














som 





e. 

eachd, s.f. Playing, sporting,zambolling. 

2 Gambling. A’ c—. pr.»t. of cluich. 

eadair, -ean, 8.m. Player. 

eadh, -hidh, s.m. Playing, sporting. 2 
Fiugering a musical instrument. 3 Repre- 
senting a character on the stage. A’ c—,pr. 
pt. of cluich. 

cluicheag, -eig, -an, s.f. Children’s play. 2 
Pastime. 3 Flirtation. 4 Trick. Ric., play- 


ing. 

cluichealachd, s.f.ind. Playfulness. 

cluicheil, -e, a. Playful, sportive. 

clüid, gen.sing. of clàd, sometimes used for the 
nominative, 2**Nook. 

cluidhein, -ean, see claidhean. 

cluig, gen. sing. & n. pl. of clag. 2 Bubble. 

-—— ean, -ein, s.m. Icicle. 2 Cluster. 3 Any- 
thing hanging or dangling, appendage, pen- 
dant. 4 Catkin. 5 Wattle, asofahen. 6 
** Far-pendant. 7** Little bell. 8**iubdle. 
9(DU)?lassel. C. cluaise, an ear-pendant ; 
c. na mnàtha sìthe, foxglove. 

-——eineach, -eiche, a. Abounding in clusters, 
bells or hanging ornaments. 2 Sonorous, 
jingling, sounding, as bells. Boc c., a bell- 
wether ` barr c., beli-topped. 

eineichte,** a. & past part. Belled. 

cluimh,(AC) a. Softly. 

clüimh, see cióimh. 

each, see cloimheach. 

ho x s.f. Royston-crow. 2 Flock of 
birds. 

clüin,** s. f. Fraud. 2 Enclosure. 

feluin, see cluain. 

cluinn, irreg. v. Hear, hearken, listen, attend 














o. 
Active Voice— 
IND. past, Chuala mi, &c. 1 &c. heard. 
„ fut.Cluinnidh mi. Ee, Te gio/ hear. 
INTERR. past (cha ch—, an? nach P) cnala 
mi, &e, (did) I Ze, (not) hear ? (mur) 
cuala mi, (if) I did not hear. 
» Jut. (cha ch—, an? nach?) cluinn mi, 
&c., shall I e (not) hear ? 
(nur) cluinn mi, (if) I do not hear. 
SUBJ. past, (g»d) chluinninn, (though) 4 


cluinn 


would hear. 
( ged ) chluinneamaid, ( though) we 


woul! hour. 
(ged) chlu'rneadh tn, Ge, (though) 
thou de. wovulest hear. 

» fut ana) chluinneas mi, &c., (if) I &c. 

shall hear. 

IMPE ~. 1st per. sing. cluinneam, let me hear. 

INFIN. A chluinntinn, to hear. 

PRES. Parr. A’ cluinntinn, hearing. 

l'ussive Vcice— 

IND. past, chualadh mi, ée, J &e. was heard. 

(‘ihe form *chualas" is also used, but only 

m ex person, and then not followed 
y mi. 

»» Jt. cluinnear mi, &c., I &c. shall be 

heard. 

INTERR. paxt, (cha ch—, an? nach? ? 
eunaladh mi, &c., was I &c. (not? heard? 
(mur? cualadh mi, 7f ) were not hecad. 

» fut. cha ch—. an? nach P) cluinnear 

wi, &c.. shall £ Xe. not) be heard ? 
(mur) cluinnear mi, (if) 4 shall not be 
heard. 
past, (ged) ch'uinnteadh mi, &c. 
(tough 4 dc. would be heard. 
» Jut (ma) ctiuinnear mi, dée, (if) I e, 
Shall be heard. 

An ti a shnidhich a’ cluas nach c. e? he 

t] at planted the ear shatl he not hear ? an sin 

clui nidh mise, then shall I hear ; nach 

eluirn thu f do you noth«ar ? on ni a chluinn- 
eas na big se a chanas na big, what the 
young hear they rep-at. 

(Lhe following remarks by J.G.M. concern- 
ing the form of the verb in -eas (e.g. cluinn- 
eas) should be borneinmind, ‘In thejGaclic 
sense iv is not subjnnetive. The proof is 
that cluinnear woes duty for cluinn, cluinn- 
idh and cluinneas in the so-called Passive. 
Thus ma, which in active tukes -eas, in pass- 
ive takes ciuinnear ; an and nach, which in 
active take cluinn, in passive take cluinnear, 
and the absolute cluinnidh is represented in 
passive hy cluinnear. The so-calied passive 
is r.aliy an impersonal form e.g. tillear air 
"ais, he returns home. How can an intransi- 
tive verb have a passive voice ? for instance, 
come, one cavunot say 1 was comed, yet in 
Gaclic we have, cha tinear as eu,mhais na 
220.0 moire, ** cannot be comed without the 
pipes." The Gaelic min s conception of the 
Sub'unctive mood certainly does not cover 
the same ground as in Exrglish. Again, 
bhatar, people were(not p-07«e were d or was'd ) 
If cluinwwar is passive, +0 is bAatar,"] 
feluinneach, Ach, sm. Miner. 
cluinneadh, past.sulj.(except 1st. per.) of cluinn. 
cluinneani, ist. per. sing.imp. oi cluinn. Let 

me hear. 

clniuneam ( for cluinnidh mi)I will hear. 

cluinuezr, Jut. pass. of clninn. Shall be beard. 

cluinnte. a. & gast pt. oi cluinn. Heard. 2 

Actcuded to. 
cluinniteadh, past. subj. rass. of cluinn. 
cluinitcar, (Jor cluinnear) fut. ind. pass. of 

cluinn. 

cluinntear, -an, s.m. Hearer, listener. 

achd, s.f.tad. Listening. 2 Crafti- 
ness 


cluinntinn, s.f. Hearing, listening. 2 Hearsay. 
A’ e—, pr.vt. of cluinn. 
cluip, pr.pt. a’ cluipeadh, v.a. Cheat, deceive, 
e«—, 8.7. Deceit. 
-——eadair, -eir,-ean, see cluipear. 
cluinear, -an, 3.22. One who cheats, deceiver. 
achd, s.7.ind. Deception, villany. 2 


SUBJ. 


— 





216 


cnagadh 


Baseness, depravity. C. agus cha bu cheart- 
as, deception and not justice. 

cluith, see cluich. 

each, see cluicheach. 

eadair, see cluicheadair 

eag, see cluichcag. 

cluitheil. -e, a. sve cluicheach. 

cluítneir,£f see cluicheadair. 

Tclüinh, s.f. Cloak. 

ach, see clòimheach, a., & clòimh, s, 

clumhaidh,(AC) a. Cosy. Gu’ pu c, dhuibb 
gach nochd, cosy Le every exposure to you. 

clunhar,-aire,G. see clu-mbor. 

clümhor, -oire,a. Warm, sheltered, suug. 

Tclumhthach, -aiche, a. Hairy, rough. 

clü-nead, -nid, s.m. Warm, sneitered nest. 

clupaid, -e, s.f. Swollen throat in cattle. 

clüt, see clüd. 

——ach, see clùdach. 

clutaireachd, see clidaireachd. 

Guth, see cliuthaich. 

clutiachadh, -aidh, s m. Clothing. ?ffChasing 
A’ c—, pr.pt. of cluthaich. <A’ c. nan nochd, 
clothing the naked. 

eluthaich, pr.pt. a’ cluthachadh, v. a. Clothe, 
make warm. 2 Chase. 

cluth-acdaicn,** v.a. Clothe, clothe warmly. 
Is éiginn duinn bhi air ar cluth-aodachadh, 
we must be clothed. 

clüth.r,-aire, see c'ümhor. 

ciütb- h'üineach, -eiche, a. 
ber, h-gnidineach. 

clüthoihor, -vire, see clumhor. 

clithimhorachd, s.f.ind. Warmness, snugness. 
Zttsiuelter. 

tena, a. Good, bountiful, gracious, merciful. 

enab, v.a. Pull, haul. Batter. 

enabadh, -aidh, s.m. Pulling, hauling, batter- 
ing. A'c—, pr.pt. of cnab. 

cnabaire, -an, s.m. Scolfer, jester. 
ment for dressing flax. 

Tenabar, s.m. Drowsiness, heaviness. 

enac, s.f. Crack, fissure, crevice, breach. 2 
Crack of à whip. 3 Avy loud report. Bheir- 
inn c. anns na h-aitheantaibh, J would make 
a breach in the commandments ; ann an c., in 
an instant ; leige c. as, it gave a crack. 

-—-,v.a.dn. Crack. 2 Break. 8 Crash. 4 
Split. 5 Splinter. 61fSnap, as the fingers. 
7+tiXnock. 

-——adh, s.m. Cracking, act of cracking. A’ 
c—, pr.pt. of cnac. 

cnacail, -e, s.f. Crackling noise, continued 
crackling or splitting. 

enacair, s.m. Talker, (Scot. cracker.) 2 Crack- 
er. 3 Cracker of a whip. 4 Knocker. 

eachd, s.f.ind. Conversation, chat. 2 
** Cracking. 

cnacan, -ain, see cnacail, 

cnachuair, see ena«air. 

fcandair, -ean, s.m. Prating jester, scoffer. 

eachd,** sJ. Derision. 

Tcnàdan,-ain, s.m. Frog. 

¢cuadar-bharea, pl. Ships. 

t¢enadhoil, -e, s.f. Whining, complaining. 

cnag.-aig,-an, sf. Pin. 2Pex. 3Kuob. 4 
Knock. 5 'lhole-pinof a rowing-boat.  6** 
Wriukle. 7 see cenac. 8 Plug. 9'I Piue-gros: 
beak— pyrrhula enucleator. 10** Woodpecker, 
little wood-rapper. 

cnag, see cnac & enap. 

-——ach, -aicie, a. Knobby. 2 Fullof pegs or 
pins. 3 Like a peg or pin. 4* Knott. 

-—achd, sf. Knottiness. 2 Knobbiness. 3 
rarely steruness. d 

cnagadh, -aidh, s. m. Knocking down, driving 
down. 2 Making knobby. A’ c—, pr.pt. o 














In-kneed. see 


2 Instru- 








cnagadh 2 


enag. 

cpaza--choille,(AF) s.f. Pine grosbeak, see 
elu. 

leoi. -ean, s.f Rap, knock. 2*Old maid. 3 
*Old cow with stu'ups of horns. 

fenagaidh, a. Bunchy. : 

enazair, -ean,s.m. Gill, noggin. 2 Quart mea- 
sure. 3 see cnacair. 

enagiu, ain, an, s.m. Little knob. 2 Peg, 
pm. 3 Earthen pipkin. 4 Thole-pin, see 
under bata, No. 39B, p. 76. 54MMcb) small 
earthen drinking enp— Levis. 

enagan-faoluiz,, Al McD s... Sea-urchin— Levis. 

Cnasan-trashad, (MMocD) se Sea-urchin— 
— Lewis. 

enag-hhuilleach, a. Knocking. Gn cnag-bhuil- 
leach, ordail, knocking precisely—Duanaire, 

. 80. 

B aidh, &.f. Sny, toggle, see bèta, 1,p.76. 

fenaysa, v.a. Push. 

enaib-nisze, sf. Water-necked weed. 

enaid, v.a. Deride, jeer, scoff. 

-——, -e, -ean, &.f. Derision, jeer, scoff. Na 
dean c. air an duine bhochd, do not deride a 
poor man. 

Cia dleach, -eiche, s. /. Vexation. 
ness. 3 Sorrow, trouble. 

fenaidhteach, -eiche, a. Fretted, peevish. 2 
Angry. : 

cnàimh, gen. cnàmha, pl. cnàmhan [& cnàimh- 
ean,] sm. Bone. C. an droma, the spine ; 
«. na lurga, the shin-bone ` c. mér do dhuine 
ghionach, the big bone to the nreedy man. 

evaimli-blristeach, s.m. Ossifrage, osprey. 

cvàimh-built, -ean, see eneaball. 

cnahnuli-coileir,** sm. Clavicle. 

cnainh-crìiche,* saan. Balk, landmark. 2 Mat- 
ter of dispute (about boundaries only—MM) 
—Islay. 

cnaimh-deud, s.m. 

ecnaimheach, -eiche, 
bones. 

e— ———-———,-eich. s. m. seefitheach. 2 see 
cnàimhneach 3 Rook. 4 Crow. 5 Jackdaw. 

—— — adh ft -ailh, s.m. Ossification. 

enadimhean,ft -ein, -ean, s.m. Ossicle. 

enaiuhean-glas, DJM) se Mode of planting 
potatoes, by which the ground between the 
drills is left undisturbed. [Cnàimh, baile, 
d ai T fallow + glas, locked up or unused.— 

enàimh-fhitheach, s.m. see fitheach. 

cnàimh-gheadh, -gheoidh, ssm. Kind of fowl 
between a goose anda duck. 

enáimnh-gheal, Ale, a. White-boned. 

cnaimh-ghobhail, aan. The share-bone. 

cnaimbhich,{; v.a. Bone. 

tcnaimhigheach, s.m. see fitheach. 

enaimbneach, s.m. Skeleton. 

enaimh-nighidh, s.m. Beetle, instrument for 
beating clothes in the wa<hing. 

<< eer s.n. Part of a pipe-tune, see 
ùrlar. 

enaimh-reamhar, -a, a. Thick-, or clumsy-boned. 

cnáimh-rionnach, see cnàinh-rionnach. 

cnaimbieag, -eig, -an, sf. Pimple in the face. 
2 | The bearberry, , ' , acne vulgaris, "black, 
heads.” 3 Particles or dregs (crackling) of 
dissolved fat or tallow. 

-——hch, -aiche, e. Full of pimples or 

reasy particles. 2 Aboundinzin bearberries. 

enáinilite, a. & past pt. of cenàmh. | Corroded. 2 
Consumed. 

ach, -eiche, a. Consmning without 

flame. 2 Corrosive. 3 Having a strong di- 

gestion. 4**Gnawing, chewing. 

-—achd, 1? sf. Causticity. 


2 Uneasi- 


Ivory. 
a. Bony, having large 











17 


cnan^adh 


enaip, gen. & pl. of enap. 

chaipileis, -e, s.m. Lumps, masses. 

cnaire,** s. Buckle. 

cnàmh, gen. pl. of cnàimh. 

cvanin, s.n. || The digestion. [Preceded by the 
art. an.] 2 see cuamhadch, 

cnàmh, pr. pt. a’ cnainhath, [& a’ enàmh] v.a. 
Chew, ruminate. 2 Digest. 3 Consume. 4 
Corrode. 5 Moulder, p nirery, decay. c**Con- 
coct. A'cnàmh nu cir, chewing the cud; ch. e 
a bhiwih, he digested his food ; ch. an t- 
iatrnun, the iron correded; en. an pealbhan, 
the fire wat d 


ena tach, -aiche, æ. Wasting slowly. 2ttDi- 


gestive. 3 Deleterious. 4 Corroding, corro- 
sive. 5* Consuming. 6 see cnaiimheacn. 


—d s. Deleterivasness. 2 Corrosive- 
ness. 3 Wasting, consuming. 
cnàmhadh,-aidh, s. m. Wearing, 
consuming, mouldering. 
Chewiug, masticating. 
cnainh. 
ion. 
cnamhag, -aig,-an, s.f. Substance. 2 Any- 
thing from which juice has been extracted 
by boiling, maceraiion or chewing. 3 Re- 
mains of corn destroyed by cattle. 4 Refuse 
of anything. 5 Dying embers or cinders. ^6 
Pimple. 7 Cracklings of melted tallow. 8 

see cruimheag. 

enambhairneaci,* s.f. Small transparent’ fish, 
fonnd on the coasts of all the islands, young 
mackerel. 2 see cramharlach. 

cnàinuan,-ain, s.m. Corrosive substance. 2 

Gnawing pain. 3 Unceasinz, vexations talk, 

4**seo.ding, rebukiug. 5 n. pl. of cnàimh. 

————-àch. -aiche, &. Vexatious, tronble- 

some. 2 Fretting, ang sore. 3 Corroding. 

eonsummiue. Lnibhre e, a fretting leprosy. 

cnamharlach, -aich s.a. Raw-honed, cadaye 
eruus person. xuftsKeleton. 3 Halm, succus 
lent stalk, as of peas, potatoes or beans. 

enành-clagainn, v.a. Arrode. 

Cüàalus ha nach. tf -aidh, s.m. Arrosion, 

enàima-cenrumuh.** s.m. Cankerworm. 

cnainhlach, see er ài harlach. 

cnamh-ins, 8.4, Cudwort, endweed, see luibh- 
a'-chiit. 23 Nauphire, see saimbhir. [Pre- 
ceded by the art. an.] 

topatanam, -aidh, -ean, s.. The shame 
bles. 

tcnamh-naireach, a. Demure, sober, decent, 


grave. 
(AF) s. 


cramh-rionnach, 
bone-mackerel. 

fenàimh-ru:ghe, -an, s.m. Cubit. 

cuàmhtach,** a. Wasting without flame, 2 
Cousmining. 3 Corrosive. 4 Chewing. 

cnauihninn,|| -e,-ean s.f. Gangrene, lupus. 

tenavidhteach, a Consuming, corrosive. 

fenaorghteach, see cnaoidhieach. 

cnap, -aip, -an, s.m. Knob. 2 Button. 3 Lump. 
4 Boss, stnd. 5 Little hill. 6 Little blow, 
thump. 7 Potato. 8** Stout boy. 9**Knot 
in wood. 

cnap, pr. pt. a’ cnapadh, v.a. Thump, strike, 
beat, knock, rap. "Gam chnapadh, thump- 
ing me. 

-——ucli, -aiche, a. Knobby. 2 Hilly. 3 Lumpy. 
4 Bossy. 5 Stout. 


decaying, 
2 Digesting. 3 
A’ c—, pr. pt. of 
C. a’ chinn-aghairt, bitter rejlect- 


Horse-mackerel, 


-——ach, -aich, -aichean, 8. m. Youngster, 
St nt, sinarc, middle-sized boy. 

-— ac'nd,ti s.j. Mnottiness. 

cnapauair, -e, -ean, sm. Thumper. 2 see 


eucapadair. ; : 
cnapadh, -aidh, s.m. Thumping, beating, rap- 
piug, knocking. 2 Falling with a great 


enapadh 





noise. 3**3hrinkiu; contracting. 4**Orush- | 
ing. A’ e—, pr. pt. oi cuap. 

enapa;z,tk -aiz,-an, sf. Little stool or biuck. 2 
Shinty ball. 

cnapach, pr. pt. a’ enapachadh, v. a. Collect 


iuto bnuehes. 2 Accumulate. 3 Ei:uboss. 4 
aggregate. 5ttGather into lamps. 
enapain,** see cnapan 5. 
cnapaiu, gen. sing. of cnapan. 
enapair,-ean, s.m. Stout, strong article. 2 


Thumper. 3 Stont fellow. 
-neach,-ich, see cnapach. 
cnapan, 2. pl. of cuap. 

, ain, s.m. Little lump. 2 Small Knob. 
3 Little boss or hillock. 4 Piece of wood to 
sayə the elge of a hatchet in cuctin;z or split- 
ting wood. 5(AF) Louse. Is e leigheas a’ 
chuatain c. itheadh, the cure of a cold ia to 
eat a bit. 

ach, -aiche, a. Knobby. 2 Abounding 
in litule hillocks. 3¢¢ Full ot lumps or blocks. 

ach, -aich,s m. see cnapach. 
cnapin-dabh, § 8. m. Knapweed—centaurea 
qigra. 














169, Crapan-dubh, 


enapan-trusgnidh, s.m. Button. 

evap-lus,* 8.2. Marsh-mallow. 

cnaparra, a. Stout, strony, bulky, sturdy. 2* 
Faliing with a thumping noise. An t-suiridh 
ch., the s‘ureyu wooing. 

cnap-gaoiche, (MMcD) 38.7. Squall, strong gust 
of wind—Lewis. 

cnap-saic, -e, pl. -ean & -anna-saic, $.m. Knap- 
sack. 

enav-starradh, -aidh, s.m. Obstruction. 2 
Brass ball at the end of a spear, to terrify an 
antagonist or distract his attention with its 
noise when shaken. 311 Interruption. A’ 
dearg-shruthadh mu a ch. phraiseach, pour- 
ing red about his brazen ball. 

cnap-tru:gain, see caapan-trusgaidh. 

*&cnarra, pl. cnarradha, s,f. Ship. 

cnatan,|| -ain. s.2n. Cold. 2++Coush. 3 Obstruct- 
jon of perspitation. [Pre:eded by the art. 
an.) Fhuair mi cnatan nach gann, I got a 
severe cold (lit. a cold that is not meagre— 
Duanaire. 78. 

ach, -atche,a. Having, inducing or ex- 
posed to a cold (** or cough.) 2 Pertaining to 
a cold. Mios c., the cold-causing month. 

cneaball,s.2n. Garter, belt of thrums tied round 
the hose. 

cnea-chritheach, see cneadh-chritheach. 

cnóad, see cneutag. 

cnead, -a, -an, s.n, Sigh, moan, groan, grunt. 
2 Scoff. 3* Sudden sigh or gruan, as when 
one getsa blow unexpectedly. 4*Anything. 
Cha bhic. ort, nothing will be wrong with you; 
cha’ 'eil e air, nothing is wrong with him: 
chan oilleam c. mo leas-mhathar, I pity not 
the sigh of my step-moth-r, — [** says s.f.] 

-————, pr. pt. a eneudail & a’ cneadadh, v.m. 





213 


eneasnaidh 


Sgn, moan, groan. 2**scoff. 

ach, -iich, a. Sobving, sighing, groaning, 
querulous. v**Asthmacc. 3**Puny. 

ach, -aich, 8.12. Puny person. 2 One 
why subs or sighs. 3 Asttunatic person. Is 
tric à chinn an c., agus a dh’ fhatbh an sod- 
arnach. ofen the puny thrive anu the vigore 


ous drooped. 
enóndag.,CX)s.f. Fir-cone. 2 Shinty—Loch 
Tay «y strathtay. Cluich-chnéaciag, shinty. 
eneadail, -e, s.f. Sighiag, groaning heavily aml 
quiesiy. 2 Opvression ot breathing. A’ c—, 
pr. pt. of cnead. 
cneadh, -eilhe, -an, 
2 Disaster. 
a wound. 
ach, -aiche, @ Full of wounds, hurts, 
or sores, wounded. 2 Causing wounds. 
cneadhbalach, -aich, s. One who is wounded, 
2 Sutferer. Ge b'e an cireach, is mise c., 
whoever is to b/awe, 1 am the sforer. 
cneadn-chritheach,(AC) a. Wound-quivering, 
CSC title 8.f. The touth-ache, 2 Gum- 
oil. 
cneaah-shliochd, sg, 








8.f. Wound, bruise, hurt. 
Gurme eneidhe, the blueness of 


Scar. 

——— ach, -aiche, a. Full of scars. 
eneadraich, -e, s.f. see cneadail, 

cneamh, -a, see creamh., 

tcneamhaire, -an, s.m. Artful, designing fel- 


low. 

cneamh-mac-fiadh, s.f. see Aspàrag. 2 (CR) 
Elecampane. % CR) Hart’s tongue. 

cneap, -eip, -an, ım. Button, 2 Bead. 3 Spheri- 

cal gem. 4 Pebble. 

adair,* ssm. Button maker. 

cneapailt, skye & Lewis for cneaball, 

ené.pan,(CR) san, Stool, low seat— W. of Ross, 

cneap- holl, San, Button-hole, 

cneas, -a [& **cneis,]-an, s.n. The waist. 2 
The hunan skin, 3 The breast, bosom. 4** 
Form, body. 5**Neck. C. mo ghràidh, the 
form of my love; is lionmhor c. "san do chuir e 
lann, many were the breasts he stabbed ; léine- 
chneis, a bodyguard. 

achadh, ** -aiih, s.m. Sqeeezing, tight- 
ening. ZilHealing. Is fheairrd gach cneadh 
a C., every wound is the better of being healed; 
N.G.P. says, is fheairrde gach c. a ceasnach- 
adh, a wound is the better of being proved. A’ 
c—, pr. pt. of cneasaich, 

cneasaich, pr. pt, a cneasachadh, v. a. Cure, 
heal. 2 Shape. 3 Make slender, as the waist.- 
4**straighten, press, 5**Squeeze, tighten, 6 
trBeautify. 7**sShake a person. 

cneas-Chuchulainn.3 s.m, Meadow-sweet, see 
lus-chneas-Chuchulainn, 

cneasda, a, Humane, temperate, moderate, 2 
Modest, meek. 3 Pious, religious, 4 Fortu- 
nate, auspicious, of good omen. Din the nega- 
tive only Ominous, 6 Canny. Gu c., temper- 
ately; chan 'eil seo c., this is uncanny. 

———ch, see cneasda. 

chd, s.f.ind. Humanity. 2 Mildness, 
meekness, 3 Piety, religion. 4**Temperance, 
moderation, 6**Modesty. Gun ch., intem- 
perate, s ‘ 

cueas-gheal,--ile, a. White-skinned, fair-skin- 
ned, 2 White-bosomed. 3 White-hodied. 

cneasinhoireachd, s.f. Shapeliness. 2 Hand- 
someness, 3 Huinaneress, 4**Mildness, 

cneaswhor, -oire, a. Shapely, handsome, well- 
formed, 2 Humane. 3 Modest, mild, meek, 

cneas-inara, &,f. Firth, strait of the sea. 

eneas-injhuir, see encas-nia va, 

cneasnachadh, see cneasachadh, 

enea naich, see cneasaich. 

eucasuaiGh,* a. Delicate, tender, 2* Slender, 














eneasnaidneachd 


219 


enoidheach 


eege 


cneasnaidheachd,* s.f. Delicacy. 
cneast,-a, see cneasdaclid, 
achd, see cneasdachd. 
cneasucnadh, see cueasachadh. 
eneataich, -e, sf. Sighing, groaning. 
ceneatan,-ain, see cuatan, 
eneatas, -ais, -an, s.m. Knitting, 2 Running 
thread or tape in à woinan's head-dress, 
cneath, see cnealh, 
eneatraich, -e, $./. see cneataich, 
+cneatrum, 8.5. Kind of horse-litter, 
tened, s. Wound. 
cneid, -e, s.f. see cnzid. 
cneidh, v.a. Wound, 
-——— -chuthach, s.f. Whitlow, kind of sore, 
eneidhe, gen.sing. of cneadh, 
tenekiheach, a. Wounded. 
cneidh-fhiacall, see coeadb-fhiacall, d 
cneidh-ghalar, s.m., Painful complaint—Dain 
Iain Ghobha. 
*eneidh-shliochd,** s.f. Scar. 
teneidh-shliochdach.** a. Full of scars, 
cneidsinn,* s.m. Kuitting. 2 Tape. 
cneim, v. & &, see creim, 
cneis,-e, a. Tender, compassionate, mild. 2 
Feeble. 
«—— eachd, s.f.ind, Tenderness, mildness, 2 
Feebleness, 
cneisne, a. Slender. 
cneut, see cneutag. 
eneutag, s.f. Simall ball, as for shinty, tennis, 
&c. 2**Football, 
eniad, see cneutag. 
cniadach, -aiche, a. Caressing, patting, sooth- 
ing, stroking, prone to caress, 
adh, -aidh, a.m. Caressing, touching or 
rubhLing gently. A’ c—, pr.pt. of cniadaich. 
cniadaich, pr. pt. a’ cniadachadh, v.a. Caress, 
stroke, touch or rub gently. 
—e, see cniadaire, 
eniadaire, -an, s.m. Fondler, 
fcnioc, s.m. Niggard. 
teniochd, em. Knight, soldier, 
eniodachadh, see cniadachadh., 
eniodaich, see cniadaich. 
feniopaire, -an, s.m. Poor rogue. 
]-————àaeud, $.7.ind. Roguery. 
euis, -e, -ean, sf. Opening in the warp for the 
shuttle to pass through the weft. 
eno, pl. cnothan [cnomha & mem, e 
Nut.2 Filbert. 3 Sheil of a species of cockle. 
Lios nan cnò, the nut garden; coille-chnd, 
hazel-wood. 
Ebene, a. Famous. 2 Excellent, 3 Gruff. 
eno-almoin, $£. Almond. 
eno-bhacha.:1!,, MMcD ef, Species of nut, some- 
times called Mary's nut, found cast up on the 
Sea-shore. lIt was strung on a string and 
worn by young wowen round their necks as a 
charm,— Lewis. 
«enó-bhàchair, oi. cnothan-bachair, sf. Acorn. 
2f Molucca beau. 
cnò-bhainne, $.f. The milk-nut, a wooden ves- 
sel used for carrying home the milk from the 
buaile, and mads in the form of a nut. 
€noc, gen. cnuic [& cnoic, | pl. couic (& enocan] 
em. Hul, knoll, hilloes, eminence. 2 | iteel- 
kibe. 3(AC) Council, court, 4(AC) Wisdom. 
€. seallta, hill of ovservation ; cha racaainu 
gn cul cnuic leis aig meadhon latna, Z would 
not go with him behind @ hill at mid-day— 
sail of a donbtful character ; an latha baat- 
ar a’ roinu na céille, cha robii mi flié a air a’ 
chiwe, the day thut sense was avportioned, 1 
myself ts net on che hil/ock (i.e, was not pres- 
ent at tue funcuvu—ulluding to the ancieat 











custom of holding ceremonies of importance 
in elevated positions’; cuirm-chnuic, @ pice 
nic; sedis ann ris na canica tha mi 'ga rach, 
though Lam saying this between us and the 
pest Lit. to the hillocks.) 

cnoeich, -aiche, o, Hilly, full of Knolls. 2 
Rugged. 

cence, see cnomhagan, 

enócav, see crocag. 

enocail. s. f. Young woman's hair bound up 
ina fillet. 2* Lanlmark. 3 Balk. 4(DC) 
Swelling,as froin a blow with the fist—Argyll. 

each, -eiche, d. Wearing hair bound 

with fillets. 

cnocair, -e,-eau, s.m. Saunterer, loiterer. 2 
**Crabbel little fellow. 3ftfsee enoc-faire. 

eachd, sf.ind. Saun.ering about the 
hillocks. 2 Walking idly abroad, airing. 3 
** Merrymaking. 

cnocan, -ain, -an, 8. m. Hillock, little hill or 
knolL 2** Mound, little heap. 3 Barrow 
(tumulns.) 4 MMcL) Ball of thread. 

ach, -aiche, a. Abounding ia little 





hills, or knolls. 2**Rugeged. 
Tenoce.] ge, *'Gibber." 


cno-calltuinn,(WC) s.f. Hazel-nut. 

cnoc-faire. pl. cnuic-fhaire, s.m. Alarm-post. 2 
trWateh-hill. 

cnd-chanaich, pl. -than-canaich, 8.f. Quince. 

enó-chónihlach, pl. -than-cómhlaien, s. f. Hae 
zel double nut. 

enoc-sealiaidh, see cnoc-seallta. 

Soca, pl. enuic-sheallta, s.m. Watch- 

ill. 

enód, -did, -an, s.m. Patch. 2 Piece on a shoe, 
3 Ciamp. 

cnod, Gaelic spelling of knot. 

enód, mr rt. a’ enódadh, Patch, repair. 2 Darm. 
8(DC) Chew greedily, *gulch"—A rgyll. 

——Aach, -aich, s.m. Acquiring, eaiuinz, collect- 
ing together of goods or money by industrious 
habits. 2 Goods or ettects so won. 3( WC) 
Clothing. 

— cen, -aiche, a Patched, clonted, patchy. 
?til.dustrious, 3**Scraping together.  4** 
Gaming. 

enoda-h. WC) pr.pt. a’ enodach, v.n. Accuse, 
lay to the charge of (in the sense of guilt.) 
Bha siod air a chnod&ch air, he wes accused 
of that, 

——achd.ff s.f.índ. Patchiness. 

cnodaciadh, pr. pt. of enódaich. 

cnudach.cinn,( WU) s.m. Head-dress, 

cnodadh, -aidb, s.m. Patching, eclouting. @ 
Knitting. A’ e—, pr. pt. of cnód. 

cnodaich, pr.pt. a’ cvódachadh, v a. Acquire, 
collec;, lay up with care. 2**Entangle. 3 
*fsee cnòd. 4( WC) Dress, 

cnoidair, ff e, -ean, s.m. Patcher. 

cnòdan, -ain, -an, s.m. Gurnet (fish) species of 
the genus trig/a of Linn. (~c ts, crooner.) 

ach, vehe, @ Dwarfish. 2 Careful. 8 
Opinionative. 

enodhach, -i.che, a. see cnòthach. 

cuódhair, -e, -ean, sm. see cndthair 

enó-dharaich, s./. Oak apple. 2 Fionn) Acorn, 

cuo Fhrangach pé. -thau-l'rangach, sf. Wal- 
unt. 

cnó-sheanmmuidh, s.f. Chestnut. 

cno-Glreugach, s.7. see almon. 

cnoic, gen. sing. d nom. pl. of enoc. 

cuóid, -e, -ean, 5 f. Nplendid present. 

enoidh, 8m. Severe pziuj, throbbing pain. £ 
''ooth-ache. 

each, d. Painful, giving pain. 

lotach, causing pain and wounds. 








Gue., 
Q2 


enoidheag 





cnoidhea*,* see cruimheag. 

enoidh-fhiacall,* see cruimh-fhiacall, 

cnoimh,* see cruimh. 

eag,* see cruimheag. 

enditeachan,(CR) s.m. Snrugging—W. of Ross. 

cnd-leana,§ s./. Marsh-cinquefoil, see còig- 
bhileach. 

enouih, A. -an, see cnò. 

tcuomhadh, -aidh, s.m. Breaking, as of a nut. 

cnonthag, s.f. see cnoinhagan, OAI Mel" Blow 
with one of the fingers. Mharbh mi le c. i, 
lkilied her with a blow from one of my fingers. 

cenonihagag, aige, 8.7. Skye for en oinnazan. 

cnoinha.an,-ain, 8. m. Large whelk or peri- 
winkle, buckie, conet. 

cnó-mneamat,* sf. Nutmeg. 

¢cnombuine, s.f. Iazel wood. 

euó-shamhna, af, The Hallowe’en nut, nuts 
eaten or burnton lHallowe'en in divination of 
marriage. 

eno-shearbh, pl. -than-searbha, gr, Filbert. 

cno-spuinge, pl. -than-spuinge, 3.f. Molucca- 
nut ; nuts washed by the Gulf-stream across 
the Atlantic Ocean in the seaweed Known as 
txrusyar. Their kernels are used as a cure 

* for diarrhoea and dysentry. 

enot, Gaelic spelling of knot. 

cnot, pr.pt. a’ euotadh, v.a. Unhusk corn. 

cnot,* s.m. Oarslip—Skye. 2 (DC) Door-bar— 
Uist & Lewis. 

enotach, -aieh, s.m. Nod. ; 

4enotadh, -aidh, -aidhean, ga. Gaelic form of 
knotting. 

enotag, -aig, -an, sf. Block of stone or wood, 
holiowed out for unhusking corn ; mortar. 
2ttHunch-backed woman. 

Cnolainn, v.a. see cuot. 

,** 3. Barley hulled by Wë 2 

Broth in which barley so hulled „is a princi- 

pal ingredient 


e 











enotal, sce crotal. : 
-coille, see crotal-coille, 
cnoth, see cno, 


cnòthach, -aiche, d. Nuciferous, nutty. 2tt 
Mastínl. Coille ch., @ wood abounding in nuts. 

end-thalinhuinn, pl. -than-talmhuinn, 8f, 
Earth-nut, see braonan-bhuachaille. 

endthair, -e, -ean, 8m. Nut-cracker. 

enothar,ti -aire, a. Nuciferous, nutty. 

cnothan, n.pl. of ceno. 

cnotuinn, v.a. see cnot. 

tcnotul, see crotal. 

cnù, -mha,-mhan, &.f. see cnò. 

enuac, -aic. s.m. Costard. 2 see cnuachd, 

cnuacag, (WC) s.f. Thump, smart blow. 

cnuacaid, s.f. Baug. 

cenuacarra,fi a. Deep, shrewd. 

cnuacbd, -an, s.f. Lump. 2 Head. 3 Brow, 
forehead, temple. 4, DO) Roun led hill shap- 
ed like a head. AT sgoltadh chnnachi, 
splitting heads; 'nuair a thàirngteadh leibh 
lanntaidh, ’ghearradh cheann agus chnuac, 
(chnuachd), when blades would be drawn by 
you that would cut heads and crowns. 

cnuachdach, -aicne, o. Lumpish. 2 Round, 
asthe head. 3 Deep, shrewd, cunniny, 4 
Steady. 5**Large browed. 6**Little biuwed. 

enuachdadh, s.m. Munching. 

ennachdair, -e,-ean, s. s» Cunning, deep, 
shrewd fellow, 2 Crumpy fellow. 

enuachdanach,( AH) a. Careful, shrewd, astute. 

enuachd-chasach, -aiche, à. Crump-footed. 

cnuaichdein, -e, -ean, s.m. dim. of cnuachd. 
cnuaichdein-giuthais, @ roughly cut piece of 
bog-fir. 

—each, 

cnuaipeadh, s.m. 





see enuachdach. 
Muneing. 


290 cd 


en, ŮŮŮÍŮ—— Saa 


cnuaiste, past pt. of enuas. Gnashed, chew- 
ed. 2 Collected, gathered, scrape together. 

fenuas, -ais,s.m. Collection, acquisition. 2** 
Gnashing. 3f{Uhewing. 4**Sciaping. An 
c. &'s thearr, the best collection, 

cnuas, pr.pt. a’ cnuasadh, v.a. Gnash, chew 
voraciously, crunch. 2 Collect, gather, as- 
semble. 3ttPonder, meditate. 4* Quash. 
5* Gather eatables. 

Tenuas-aouich, a, Fruitful. 

cnuasach, -aich, s.m. Earning. 


: 2 Purchasing. 
8 Hourding. 


4 Pondering, ruminating. 5 1n- 
vestizating. 6 Fruir, growth. 

-——————, Q0. See enuamhor. 

cnuasachailh,** -aidh, a, am. Gathering, accu- 
mutation, scraping together. 2 Ponderiug, 
ruminating. 3 Guashiug, ehewiug. 4*Agi- 
tation. A €—, pr. pt. of cuuasaich, 

enuasachd, s.find. Pondering, rumumating, 
investigating. 2 Gathering, coflecting, com- 
piling, hoarding.  3** Tevcoliection. 4 ** 
Agitation. 5 Unripefruit. 6* Gathering 
eatables. C. le ’n lùbadh slat, a collection 
beneath which the bough bends ; c. na gràin- 
eig, the storing up of the hedgehog—useless 
labour. 

—ach, -aiche, a. That gathers, collects, 

ruminatesor investigates. 2** Providing. 

enuasadach,** a. Accumulative. 

cnuasattair, -e,-ean, s.m. see cnuasaiche. 

enuasadh, see enaasachadh. 2 pr. pt. of cnuas. 

cnuasaich, pr. pt.a’ cnuasachadh, v.a. Ponder, 
sift, ruminate, reflect, review. 2 Investigate. 
3 Assentble, gather, collect, accumulate 
compile. 4 Earn, win. 5 Gnash, chew. 6 
**Procure. 7 Aggregate. 

e, -an, s.m. Searcher, gatherer,hoard- 
er, scraper. 2 One who ponders or rumina- 
tes. 3 Provider. 

————te, past pt. of enuasaich. Investi- 
gated, pondered, ruminated, 2 Collected, 
gathered. 3 Earned, won, purchased. 4 
Guashed, chewed. 

cnuasair, see enuasaiche, 

cnuasmhor, -oire, a, Fruitful, fertile, product- 
1Ve. 

Tenuasta, n.pl. of cnuas. Gatherers, collectors. 

enuasuichte, see enuasa' chte, 

enubhan,(CR) s.m. Knuckle of the second or 
middle joint of the fingers.—W. of Ross. 

enüdan, see cnodan. 

enüdhach, see enódhach. 

Tfenudhaire, -an, see cnodhaire. 

enugau, see enubhan. 

enuidh, see cruimh. 

cnuimh, -e, -ean, s.f. see cruimh. 

ean,(MMcL) s. pl. Tips of the fingers 
gathered together. 

enuimh-fhiacall, see cruimh-fhiacall. 

cnuiniheach, -eiche, see cruimheach. 

cnuimheag, -eig, -an, see cruimieag. 

—— ———-—ach, see crumheagach. 

an, see cruimheag. 

cnuimhean, see cruiinhean. 

cnuimh-itheach, -eiche, a. see cruimh-itheach. 

cnuimh-shioda, see cruimh-shioda. 

cnumhagan, -ain, sm. Handful. 

tenüs-mhor, -mhoire, see cnuasmhor, 

co P interr. pron. Who? 2 Which? Cò e? who 
is he? có 1P who is she? có a sgriobhas an 
rann P who will write the verse? co e seo ? 
who is this ? co aige tha fios gu'n d'thàinie e? 
who knows that he came ? (lit. at whom there 
is knowledge that he came P) ;or có aig am 
bheil fios gu’n d’ thàinig e ? (dit. who is [the 
man]at wnom is knowledge that he came? 
ceòan seo à thig leam ? who here will come 











CO 


with me ? f 
Q0, conj. As. This word is placed beforean adj. 


as, cho mór, ax great ; cho eireachdail, as 


Lan some ; and it should always be written 


cho when so placed, except after is, as, is co 
lonmhor osua aig au righ agus aig an duine 
a’s isle staid, the xing’s sighs are as plentijul 


as those of a man in the humblect position. 

co, pr-fiz, used 
coimh- 

Coail, -e, -ean, see comhdhail, 

co'ainin, see comh-ainm. 

cò air bith, comp. rel. Whoever, whosoever. 

co’-Aiteachadh, see comh-aiteachadh, 

co’-aitich, see comh-aitich. 

Qo'-ilta, see eomh-dhalta. 

co’-altas, see comh-dhaltas. 

€2'-aois, see comh-aois. 

go'-aoutackadh, see comh-aontachadh, 

co’-auntachd, see comh-aontachd. 

co’-aontaich, see combh-uontaich, 

co'-arguinn, see coiuh-arguinn. 

co’-astaraich, see comh-astaraich, 

cob, -oib, s.a. Plenty, abundance. 

cobair,** s.m. Jockey. 2CR) Horse-dealer. 

cobaraid,* s.f. Coffer. 

tcobh, am. Victory, triumph, conquest. 

cobbach, -aich, s.m. ‘Tribute, 

, aiche, a. Stout, brave, victorious, 

co’-bhaigh, see eomh-bhaigh. 

each, see comh-bhaigheach, 

tco’-bhail, see combhail. 

cobhair, gen. sing. eobhrach & coibhre, s.f. As- 
sistance,relief,salvation,a&id, Fear-cobhrach, 
a saviour. 

eobhair, op, rt. a’ cobhair & a’ cobhraith, fut. 
aff. coibhridh, v.a. Relieve, help, aid, assist. 
C. oirnne, heip us; an luibh nach fat, hear 
cha'n i a clhobhaireas, t^e herb thut cannot be 
found will heal no wound. 

cobhair,**-ean, s.m. Dry-stone mason, dyke- 
builder. 

cobhaireachd,** s.f.ind. Dry-stone building. 

cobhais, see cubliais. 

tcobhais,(DC) st Any foul language—A rgyll. 

coblialtach, -eiche, a. Triumphant, victorious. 
Gu ¢., successfully. 

eobhan, -ain, -an, s.m. Coffer, box, 2 Ark. 3 
Coffin, 4 Chariot, cur. 5 Hollow, 6 Walking 
side by side. 7 Small creek, Naomh ch., a 
shrine. 

ach, -aiche, a. Hollow, eddying. 

Full of coffers or boxes. 

cobhar, -air, s.m. Foam, froth, sillabub. 











waves. 

—-ach, e. Foamy, frothy. 2 Aiding, re- 
lieving. 3 Helpful, supporting, suecouring. 
Fear-c. an ri gh, the auxiliary of the king. 

tach, -aich, 5.5n.«& f. Buoty,plander, prey, 
2* Any property coming on snore. 
tach, -aiche, a. Assisting, aiding, relie- 
ving, in.” 
tachail.1f -e, 2 
Helping oneself, (20) 
tachd,11 s.f.ind. Prize, plunder. 
«tachd-srutha, tł s.f. Alluvion, 
thach, -aich, s.m. Saviour, helper, com- 
forter. 
thach, -aiche, sre cobhartach. a. 
tcobhludh, s.m. Strength. a. United. 
fcobhra, s.f. Shield, target. 
eoblirach, gen. gitt, of cobhair. 

(AC' a. Foam-white, 

l'rone to aid. 
— ail tf -^, a, Assistant, 
cobhragach, -aieü, sm. Fon, sillabub, 














&, Predatory. 














2**Foamy, Zi 





as a contraction of com -or 


2tt 


2 
see gobhar. March. thonn, like the foam of 


codaiche 


tco: lisach,** a. Victorions, triumphant, 

teobhthach, -aich, sn. Creditor. 

teobhthach, -aiche, a. Victorious, triumphant, 

co-bhoinn, see comh-bhoinn. 

coc, pr. pl. &' cocadh, v.a. & n. Cock. 2*Bristle, 
3. MMcL) Make small haystaeks. 4*Hold up 
in defiance. C, do bhoineid, cock your bonnet. 

coc,** A. s. m. Cocking or stiffening, as of a 
Highland bonnet. 2(AC) see cochull. 3 Hay- 
stack. 

coc, ** s.m. Cooking. 

1coc, -a, a. Manifest, plain, intelligible., 

cóca P (for co aca ?) Which of the two? 

fcóca, s.m. Boat. 2 Cook. 

teoea, a. Void, empty, hollow. 

cocadh, -aidh, s. m. Cocking. A’ c—, pr.pt. of 
coc. 

cocainn, s.f, Cocking or dressing of a bonnet. 
Tha a bhoineid air a cocainn, his bonnet is 
cocked. 

còcaire, -an, s.m. Cook. Is math an c.ant- 
acras, hunger is a good cook. 

———achd, s.f.ind. Cookery, cooking. Ris 
a’ ch., engaged in cooking. 

cocannta, a. Airy, perky, gay, jaunty, ‘‘cocky.” 
'Bhi shuas 'na taobh gu cocannta, to be up ta 
tts side jauntily.—Filidh, p. 33. 

+cocar, a. Systeiratic, perfect. 

cocàtd, s.m. Cockade. 

coc-bhran,(AC) ¢.n. Jackdaw, see cathag. 

coch, see cochull, 

cochall, see cochull. 

ach, see cochullach. 

cochionta,tf see coitchionn. 

cochla,(A EF) em. Snail. 

cochlaeh,** s.m. llair-lace, 

cochlach,** o, Braided. 

co’-chomunn, -uinn, s.m, comh-chomunn. 

cochull, -uili, s.m. IInsk, shell of a nnt or grain, 
2**Kar or beard of barley. 3 Cap, capsule, 
hood, mantie. 4* Skin of a snake. 5 (AQ) 
*heath, shrine, screen, — 6ff Dust of timber, 
7 shell of a pulley, see ulag, p. 73. &Corn- 
cockle, see bróg-na.cubhaig. Chnirei á c. a 
cridhe, he friglt-ned her out of her senses (lit. 
ont of the husk of her heart.) 

cochnllach, -aiche, e, Capsular, 2 IIusky, 
branuy, 8 Coated witha shell or husk, 4 
Bearded, or having ears, like barley. 

*eoeol, -cil, s.m. Cuckold. 

covontach 1, $.f-Zud. Smartness, quickness, fore 

wardness. 

cocraich,** v.a. Challenre. 

coc-shron, -a, -an, s.7. Cocked nose, 
— ach, -aiche, 4, Uuck-nosed, 

teod, s.m. Victory. 

tcod, -a, s.f. (cuid) Piece, part. 

feoda, s.m. Law, equity, justice. 

tcoda, impers. verb, Jt is er:cumbent. 

cudach, yen. sing. of cuil. Air son mo chodach- 
sa dheth, for my purt of it.  2**sShare, part, 
portion. DCO) s.f. Result of one's labour, 
as of harvest, Ee, 4(DC) Benefit. 





















feodach, san, Invention. 2 Pieceofart. & 
Friendship, 

códach, see comhdach. 

codachadh, -aidh, san. Shar'ng, dividing, 2 


Accession, addition, 3 (MMcL) Swearing on 
oath. A thoirt ach., to swear on his oath. 
A’ e—, pr. pt. of codaich. 

colachadh, see combhdachadh. 

codag, (Al) see cudainn. 2 Haddock. 

coda.ch, pr. pt. a’ eodachadh, ». a. Divide, 
share, 2(MMcL) Swear on oath, give wit- 
ness. 

còdaich, see comhdaich. 

cuuaicne, (a ch— 1) voc. pl. of cuid. 








codaichean oF eoidil 
codaichean, pl. of cuid. k ge -—, v.n. see cagarsaich. 
codaichte,** past pt. of codaich, Divided, -—e, -An, 8.m. see cugaraiche. 
codaichte, see comhdaichte. cogarsnach, see cagarsaich. 
codail, see calal. coghain,** v.n, see conjmain. 


codal, -ail, see cadal, 

codalach, see cadalach. 

—d, see cadalachid, 

codalan,§ sam, Common opium poppy—papaver 
somniferum., 92**Mandrake, 

codaleun,** -eoin, $.5. see cadalan 2. 

codalta, see cadalach. 

ch, se cadatach. 

chd, see cadalachd. 

€odarsnachd,** 8.7. Contra- 
riety. 

Tcodh, adv. Alike. 

eo dha ? adv. 'l'o whom? 

co'lhail,-e, sJ. Meeting. 
dhail. 

eolhalach, -aich, s.m. Op- 
position. 

codhan, see cobhan. 

co dhiù, conj. However, 
2 Whether. 3 In any ease, 

fenibnach, sam. Kune, lord, 
2 Disease in cattle. 3 
Wealth, guods, 

colla, see cadal. 

codladh, see cadal. 














170. 


i Cadalan. 
teodlaim, Ir. form of Ist. per, sing. pres. aff. 
€o'lrum, -uim, s.m. -ea-calf, seal, 


eddnich, see cod ich, 

¢coech,|} a. Blind, see teoic. 2 see caoch. 

eofar, Gaelic spelling of coffer. 

cof ran, dim. of cofar, 

c fra, see cofar. 

teog. s.n. Drink, dranght, 2 Mill-cog. 

cog, pr. part. a’ cogadh, v.a. War, tight, earry 
o" war. 2* Gibe,jeer. Ch. iad, they warred; 
tha e a'cogadh air, he îs jeering at him; có à 
chogas rint ? who will fight against thee ? 

eogacn, -aiche, e. see cogail. 

cozadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s. m. War, warfare, 
fightinz. A’ c—, pr. pt. of cog. C.-choilleach, 
cock-]ijhting ; d auta ri c., trained to war; 
luingeas chogaidh, a acar-ship; c. no sith, 
peace or war «motto of the MacCrimmons.) 

eozaidh, a. Just, lawful. 

Jut. aff. of cog, 

cogail,a. Warlike, belligerent, 

cogair, gen. sing. of cogar. 

cogair, v.a. See cagair. 

seach, -cich, s.m. Whisperer. 

cogais, -e, -ean, SJ see coguis. 

eogais,* s.f. Prodigionsly large red carbuncle 
nose.—Islvs. 2 Cog of a wheel. 8 Ludicrous 
name for a large pinch of suuff. 4 Nose— 
Skye. 5 Nasal canal—Lewts. 6 Cork of a bot- 
tle— Ross & Caithness. 7 Huge frog—dnver- 
ness-Shire. 8 Throttle—Arran. 

each, -eiche, a. see cuguiseach. 

cogal, see cogull. 

eozall, -aill, see cogull. 

cosallach, see cogullach. 

cogallaidh, see eugallaidh. 

cogan, -ain, s. m. Loose husk, covering. 
Drink, draught. 3 Sinall drinking dish. 

fcozanta.** a. Bean eh., a midwife, 

cogar, -air, see cagar. 

Teosar, -air, s.in. Insnrrection. 2**Conspiracy. 

cog? rach,-aicae, a. see cagarach. 2**Auricular, 

co'"iraich, -e, -an, s.m. see cagarsaich. 2 see 
ergaraiche. 
————, v. see cagaraich. 

teogaras, s m. Peace, amity. 

‘garn, Af) san. Large periwinkle. 

€ogirsaich, -e, af. sce caparsaich. 








2 


| $coilbh-dhealcehacdh, s.m. 


coghnach,** a. 


eongna-^n. 

ail,** a. see congnachail 

eoghnadair.** s.m. see conynadair. 

cog Binadhi,** -aidh, s.m. see congnadh. 

cozhnath, -aith, sm. see congnadh. 

-—— —üch,**a. see congnathach. 

comadh, -aidh, s.m. see cagnadh. 

teogoirse, $f. Regular system. 

teogradh, s.m. Conspiracy. 

cograich, see cagarsaich. 

coguill, sm. see cogull. 

cognis, -e, -ean, s.f. Conscience. 2ttCors of 4 
wheel, Agartas coguis, remorse of conscience . 

cogniseach, -eiche e. Conscientions  ?ff 
Coggea. 

—— d. 1$ s.f.ind. Conscience, honesty. 

cogull, -uill, sm. Tares, the plant cockle. 2 
Friction, rubbing. 3 see cochull. AT Saw- 
dust. 5** Bear:l of barley. C. ràmh, fric- 
tion of oars on the fulerum. 

ach, -aich, sm. Filings. 

——~—ach, -aiche, a. Full of tares 2 see coch- 
ullach. 

coi-, contr. of prefix coimh-. 

coi,(AF) s. f. Cuckoo, see cubhag. 

teoib, s.f. Com any, troop. 2 Copy. 3 Cope, 

fcoibh-dean, s.f. Troop. 

¢coibh-dhean, see coibh-dean, 

——aehd, s.f. Captainship. 

Relationship. 

coibhearan, (AF) 3.1%. Dog. 

— «dlobhar, (AF) san, Otter. 

-— -muirt, (AF) s.m. Rabbit. 

tcoibhgioch, see coimheach. 

Coibhi, s.n. see teoimhdhe. 

tcoibh-lizhe, s.f. (coimh-dhlighe) Law of eo- 
relatives às lord and vassei. 

eoibhneas,tf Same meanings as caoimhneas. 

ach, Same meanings as caoimhneas- 























ach. 

coib:neil, Same meanings as caoimhneil. 

tevibhreacnaudh, s. m. Relieving, comforting, 
A’ c—, pr. pt. of coibhr ch. 

¢coithrich, pr.pt. a’ coibhreachadh, v.a. Com- 
fort, relieve. 

coibhseach,tt a. Sufficient, proper. 

-—(d, S.E, Propriety, decorum. 

teoibhthe, s.f. Hire. 

tcoic, 8.f. Secret, mystery. 

-——, a. Blind. 

coiceig,tt sf. Trouble, hindrance, 

coivh, see cochull. C. anama, soul-shrine s 
c. chua che, couch-shrining—prayer before re- 


tiring at night. 

coicheid -e, -can, 8f. Doubt, suspicion. 2* 
Objection, ovstruction. Có achuir e. ? who 
objected ? f 

each, -eiche, 4. Doubting, suspicious. 
2 Objecting, hindering. 

¢coil, s.f. Sticks, firewood, brushwood. 

coidhean, AF) s.m. Vessel to hold cream, 
similar to, bnt much broader at the bottom, 
and narrower at the month than, **cuinneag." 

feoidhean, -ein, s.m. Barnacle. 

coi'-dheas, -d»eise, a. see comh-cheas. 

—aclid, see comh-dhe sacha. 

coidheis,** a. Lukewarm, indifferent. Tha 
mi c. ma dheidhinn, f ain indifferent about it. 
see coingels. N 

coidhiseacud,** s. f. Convenience. 2 Reek- 
lessness. ; 

coidh rp, th sf. Rivalry, emulation. 

Guill, see caidil., 














enh 

o Sj. 
coi, Ga lic speliing of cofee, 
cois, a. live. Car nan c. € 

tne fiv» circwts ` c.-air-fsichead, 

c. ceu —pe hundred. 
eóig-blileaeh 3 a.m, Cingnefail, see meangach. 
——,**a Cingnefoi ated. 
—— —-.—— nie. § sm. Marsh einquefoil— 

comarum palustre. 


twenty-five; 








x 
4M 
171. Céig-bhileach-uisge. 
feoigchreach, $.f. Plundering, sacking, pillaz- 
ing. 
fcoigereach, s.f. see comh-chrioch, 


coig criach, see combh-chrivch. 
¢coig-crich, s.f. Strange country. 2 see 
comh-chrioch. 


Goig-ieng. a. Fifteen. An cóigeamb fear deug, 
the fifteenth man. 

céigeach, Ach, sJ. Hand ; so named from the 
tive fingers. 

edigead, sn. Fi'ty. 

*coizeal,3.m. Noise. ontery. 2 Clap. 3 Thrift. 
&4seecutgeal. 5 see cogil. 

Qoigealta, see cotyilte. 

ediveamh, a. Fifth. 

Cóigeamh (DU) s.m. Fifth. 2 Province. 

Gvigeann, see caigeann. 

€óigear, see cóignear. 

coigeart, -eirt,s.m. Judgment. 2 Question. 

coigil, pr. pt. a’ coigleadh, v.a. Spare, pre- 
serve, keep alive,sive. 2 Economise. 3 Cover 
Greito keep it from extinguishing Cagail (c.) 
an teine, secure the fire.—Arran. 

coigill, sf. Thought, secret. 

coigilte, past pt. of coigil. Spared, preserved, 
saved alive. 

fcoigle, s.m. Comnanion. 2 Secret. 3 Vas- 
salage. 4 Wisdom. 

coigheachd, s.f.ind. Sparing. 
Train, retinue. 

coigleadh, -idn, s.m. Act of sparing or saving 
alive. A’ c—. pr.pt. of coigil, 

eo ich, v.a. Bis areomncany 

eóie-mhbeóir-Muire,? five-lesved clover, cinque- 
foil, see meangacn, 

Peoizne, sf. Spear dart. 

coignear, s, Five (geaeriliy only used of per- 
«ons, and is followed by xeuitiv37lural.) O. 
buan, Ree weer. 

coigreacii, -ich. san. Stranger, foreigner. 

———-, -iche, & Strange, forvign. 


2 Commerce. 3 


Dpüth- 


nairt, the tern of 


cotleach-Frangach 





















aich ch., à strat 
ail, 
fore’en, 


ue country. 


-e, à. Struge, like a stranger, 

co'grich, gen. sing & nom. pl. uf coigreach. 2 
tte con-h-chrioch. 

coigrith, (for comrich) voc. pl. of coigreach. 
Guiliba, a ch., au laoch, ye strangers wueep jor 
the hero. 

enigrigheach, -eiche, a. seecoigreach. 

edizrinn, see có g-roinn, 

eóir-roinn, S.E. Five parts or divisions. 

cóigsheag.3 Marsh emqnoefoi, sce coig-ohileach. 

cóiz-shliosuach. a, Peurelateral, pentagonal. 

cóig-shliosnag,** s.f. Pentacon. 

eéiw-ihaobhach, see cóiz-shliosnacà. 

fcoil, St, see cùil. 

—,** s.f. Coil. 2 Cock of hay. 

——,** v.a. Coil or gather hay into cocks. 

coilbhein, an, -ean, s.m. Stein, stalk, 2 Small 
shaft. 3ttsmail rope for cairy.ng burdens, 4 
see coilpein. 

coilbhinu,** see coilbhein. 

coilbhinn,(AF) s.f. Young pig. 

fcoilce, 2.7. Bed. 2 Bed-clothes. 

-——adha, (pl. of coiice.) Bed materials put 
under the sheets or blankets, as, feathers, 
straw, heath &c. Tri e na Féinne, bàrr 
gheal chrann. còinneach, agus ur-luaciair, 
the three bedstuys of the F., fresh tree-tops, 
moss, and fresh rushes 

coilchean, -ein, -ean, s.m. Water gushing from 
an orifice. 2 Smail cock. 

coilchiun,(AC «Stunted Coireec., dwarf oats ; 
eorua C. meagre bere; seagal c.. stunted rive. 
This is the name given to corn grown on the 
sandy machairs or the W. Isles, which is 
stunted in dry seasons and prlled up by the 
roots instead of being cnt in the usual way. 

coV-leabach, see comb-leapach. 

coileach, -:eh, 8. m. Cock. 2 Barr-cock. 3 
Rill of water. 4 Eedy, rapids. 5,CR White 
erest on the waves—W, ef Rass. 6 AH ‘the 
apex of a thatched hay- or corn-stack. Ann 
an c. an t-sinith, dz the ed 'y of the stream ; 
2 in a serious. pridi-am^nt; tha c. air (na 
tuinn an dmgh the waves are white-cristed to- 
day:is inn mseag 'sa chamhanaich, ach "a 
biure eveach an mbeadhor-sidhche, sweet 
isthe lars at dawn, but sweeter the cock tat 
midmgh'—when th cock begius to crow, the 
ghosts, &c. disappear. 

ach, Take a cock. 2 Of or belonging to & 
8 Ar'onr ding in cocks. 
see coille:cchadh, 

-aifrinu, see cao'ach-aifrinn. 

ail, see coileachach. 

an, -ain,s.m. Littlecock. 2 Rivulet, 


nnach,tt a. Liken little cock. 
-an-diniin, s.m. Barn-door cock. 
anta, a. Lively, active. 2 Like a 








cock. 














rill. 











cock. 





-Àrcain, s.m. Shutt'e-cock. 
buadha, (AF) s.m. Victor in a cock- 





fight. 
——-— catha, T sm. Game-cock. 
ecatraiz,(AF) sam, Jackdaw. 
-coille € pl. -ich-choille, s.m. Wood- 
coek—acolopam rustico’a, (see illust. 172.) 
coite1ch-dnbh €T 57, -lich-"h"^ha, s.in. Black- 
cock—t^»! ao tetriz. sec illust. 173.) 
coiloach-Diiseech, pl, -lich-Dhuitseach, 8. 1n. 
Gurtait d eack. 
coitfereh-danuain, see coileach-an-dünain., 
coi'each foncoiz, see peuecaT. 
coileach-Zrangavch, pl -lich-Fhrangach, s.m. 











178. Coileach-dubh. 
Turkey-cock. 2* Bustard. 
coileach-fraoich, pl. -lich-fhiraoich, s.m. Moor- 
cock, heath-cock, red grouse cock, — lagopus 
oticus. 





e 174. Coileech-fraoich. 
€o.lenc^-*aoitue, pl. -lich-ghaoithe, s.m. Wea- 
thir-cock, vane, 
coileacu-gróid, (AF) s.m. Fireplace of a kiln, 
ev)leach-lnnseanach, sm.  Guinea-fowl. 


coileach-lacha. aam, Drake. 

coileach-maragan, WC) s m Boy riding strida- 
legs on another boy's shoulders. Bha e 
'voileach-miara;an. he was riding stride-legs. 

coleuci og, sm. Cockerel, 

Gi leach-oidhiche, see ca.lleach-oidhche, 

colleach-otraich, s.m. Barn-door cock. 

coii ach-pheucaiz,.§ see peucag. 

emleach-ruadn, see co.leach-fraoich. 

col eacn-spodhta (AF) sm Capon. 

co.leach-<raile, s.m. Shuttle-cock, 2(WC) 
Fireplace of a kiln—/ ootate. 

coiteach-teas, (WC) sm. Mirage, shimmering 
etiect on a hot day. 

coilvacii-tomain, mi, -lich-thomain, s.m. Cock- 
par rise, 

coileach-iurcuch, see coileach-Frangaeh. 


221 


coillinn 





coileadh, (WC) s.m. Romping about in an aim- 
Jess manner,—J/oolewe, 'De c. a th’ ort? 
why are you romping so ? 

coiieag, an, 8.f. Coil, 2 Cock of hay (rue.) 

dch ro Like a cock of iay. 

wen. pr. pt a’ coileagacaoadh, v.a. Coil, 
or gather ha» into eo ks, 

cóileid, (WC sr, Romping girl.— Poolewe. 

coileid, e, -ean, E, SU, movement, 2 Noise, 

each, -eiche, @ Noisy. z Stirring, im 


coufusion, 

coileir, -e, -ean, 8.m. Collar. 2 Necklace. 3 
Neck. 4 Quarry, mine. BAH) Prace-suck, 
see G 2 p. 73. 

each, -ciche, a. 
collars. 

coilichin, s.m. Large cravat or muffler.—Sgeul- 
aiche«-nan-caol, p. 138, 

coilidcach,* a. Patri-vllabical, 

COi-iige, see conulhlion:. 

coilizeann,** -inn, s.m. Colic, C. adhaireench, 
a ludicrous name for pregnancy, or for the 
pains of childbed. 

coilinn, see conmneal, 

eoiiiobhar, -air, -ean, 8.7. 

coilion, a. see coimt:-lion. 

¢coill, sf. Sin, iamguity. Tha e fo’n ch., 
he i$ an outlaw (iit. under à sese of his 
guilt.) 

¢t——, v.a. Blindfold. 2 Trespass. 3 Castrate. 

coille, pl. coilitean [& coilltichean] s.f. Wood, 
forest, grove. Ca idhrean na c , the murmur 
oj the wood; maoi-co.ile, wood-keeper; cearc: 
choille, partrudye. 

coille, s.f. see Calluinn. Dàir na coille, the 
night of the fecunaation of trees—the tirst night 
of the new year when the wind blows from 


from the w.) 
2 Wood. 3 Blinding. 














Collared, abounding in 


see cnilbheir. 


fevilleach.Tf san. Hog. 
4 Infringing. 5 Plundering. 

eoilleachadh, -aidh, (AC) s. Stretching. 
A’ c— an aodaich, stretching the eluth ajter 
waulkini. 

coilleadair, see coinnealair. 

fecoibeadh, see fecilleach., 

coilleag, -eig, -an, sf. Cockle. 2 Smart stroke. 
8 Potato sprout. 4 Kural song. 5 Lond and 
cheerínl note. 6 contr. for buille-choilleag. 
7* Husk of lint. 8**Lucolic. 9 MMcL) Few 
peats put up together to dry— Harris. Nuair 
a sheiuneadh tu c., when thou wouldst sing @ 
song. 

Cam, -aiche, a. Fnllof cockles, 2 of 

potato sprouts, 3 Sonorous, melodious, musi- 

eal. 4 Cheerful. 

—ach,tt auch, sm. Song. 

co: lleannach, -aich, sm. Poltroon, truant. 

coileanta, a. Tail, straight, slender. 

coillear, -eir, san. Wood cutter. 2 see coinn- 


leir. 
8. Jf. 


-—nacb, -aich, 
Sbrubbery. 
coille-bionan, (AF) s.m. Soa animalcule. 2 
(MMeL) Gaseous light. Cbunnaic mi mu 'n 
cuairt dhiom na coille-bionain, 4 saw the gas- 
eons lights round about ame. 
coille-cnalltuiun, s.f. Hazel wood. 
coills-chuó, sf, Nuttery. 
coille-ciiu, (AF) son. Wolf. 
cuilleslhar ein, SP, Oak wood. 
coille«lh arcas, s.f Wood where brambles 
(olackb. rries) grow, 
coille-5n:utnais, sf Pine wood. 
coille-shlut,( AH) sf. Wood where wattles may 
be cut. P 
coillida, prov. form of dat. sing. of eoille. 
collun, see coipueid, 








Woody place. 2 











et Log, see co lleag. 

coill-mhias, sf Wooden plate, 2 Mess. 

coilite' (foi coniltegaa) n.pl. of coille. 

coillte, a. & pa t pt. of coill. Gelded. 

ach. -eiche, a. Woo y, wooded, sylvan, 

woodland, Chlisg na sléi: hte c., the wood- 

ed hills startled. 

ach, ch, s. f. Wood, forest. Mara 
chlaoitheas teine c., as fre consumes a wood. 

——achail, -e, &. Woody. 2 Wild, savage. 
8 Univuhabited. 

coilltean, pl. of coille. 








ach, see caillteanach. E 
colitear,-an, s. m. Absconder, fugitive. 2 
Wood-wanderer. 8 Saunterer. [tf gives 


-eir as non.) 

—achd, s.f.ind. State of a fugitive or 
wanderer. 2 Banishment. 

@villte:l, a. Savage, untamed, wild, 2 Sylvan, 
Wood and, 

eoilich,** v.a. Afforest. 

ean, pl. of coille. 

coilmein, see coilmhinn. 

cuiliibiun,(AF) s.m. Young pig. 

coilpeach, see culpach. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. see colpachadh. 

eoilpein, -ean, s.m. Rope, tow. 

coli,** sf. Heifer. 

@imeachd,** sr, Attendance, 2 Company. 
8 Train. ’Nac., inher bain, 

€oimeas, -eis, s. m. Comparison, equality. 2 
Equal. 3 Resemblance, likeness. 4 Parable. 
6**Mate. Gun a choimeas ann, without his 
equal or ma ch; thusa is coimeas ri creig, 
thou who art like a rock ; gun do ch. ri taouh 
do xhoillse, without thy mate near thy efful- 
gent light. s 

coimeas, v.a. Compare, liken, equal. 

————, 4. Cu-vqual, like, comparative. 

ach,tt -aicue, a. Co-equal. 2 Exem- 














plary. A e 
a———ae''il ff s.f.ind. see coimeas. 
—— ——AÀ Cu, 12 pt. a’ coimeasachadh, v.a. see 
coimeis. 1 
Courcasg, pr. pf. a’ coimeasgadh, v. a. Mix, 
ni: le, cor ound. 2 Adu]terate. 8 Commix, 
adiulx, amalgamate. 

-—— —— , e Ca Ze HERE 
compound. 2**bizht. 

acn,** a. Cuaotic. 

—&ac^d, SF. Conposition, mixture, 

auh. -aith, s.m. Mixing, conjnmbling, 
compounding, combination, 2 Mixcur-, ad- 
mixture, composition, compound. 3 Batter. 
A’ c—, pr. pt. of coimeasg. 

coincasgta, past part. of coimeasg. Mixed, 
confused, adulterated, commingled, com- 
mixed, compounded. 


Mixture, composition, 











coinieasta, past part. of coimeas. Likened, com- |. 


pared, of equal worth or value. 

¢cvimeirce, s.f. Dedication. 

eoimh, Prepositive s\llable which takes the 
place of the prefix comb-, in words whieh, 
haying been originally compounds, with a 
sinall vowel in tlie first syllible of the second 
element, are now accented on the first ele- 
ment and no longer written with a hyphen, 
as, comh-lion, now written colmhiion. €onnh 
should never be used asa compound. When 
coimh is used, it signifies that Lhe com] ound 
has beecme con«o'idated into a simple word, 
(This rule isnot consistently observed in most 


Gaelic Dictionaries, so many words given in! coituhearsnai, a. 


them as beginning with coimh, wiil be found 
here under comA-.] 
$tcoimh, sn. Protection, guard, Cefence. 
eOounh-cheangal, see comh-cheangiul. 


225 





coimheartas 
—— 7 J ET 
cuinihdeach, -eiclie, a. 


Sate, secure, 
d, $. see coimheadachd. 
teoimhdhe, s.m. God, the Trii ity. ae fan- 
ciful ** Coiuhi, the Celtic areldruid,”’ is due 
toa confusion of the obsolete coimAdAe and 
the Northumbrian Coif of Bede.] 
coimhdheas, see coingeis. 

Ven a OENES, -ais, s.m. see comh-dlreim- 
evchd, 

fcoimhdhreimeachd, s.f. Competition. 

coimheach, -eiche, a. Foreign, strange. 2 Shy. 
3 Darbarous, 4 Fierce, crnel. 5 Wrathful. 
6* Unkind, 7**Terrible. 5**Bitter. 9**Care- 
less. HO Safe. +11 like, alike. 12 AH In- 
affable, ungracious, unneiglibourly. 13(AH) 
prov. Exceeding, excessive, singular. Tha e 
c. làidir, he is exceedingly strong: is c. 
an tom ùire, stranse is the earthy mound; ged 
nach bi mi bruidhneach, bithidh mi c., 
cuimhneach, t^ow:h 1 wiil not be talking, 
Pil be shy and mindful; a h-uile cù air a’ chù 
cù., all dow doun on the strange dog; is c. a’ 
bhliadhu' ur do 'n t-seann duine, the New 

‘var isu kind to the old man; duine c., a 
slrange person; guothach c., a terrible affair; 
sLé d osnadh e, a sharp wind blew ; diac., 
a strange god. 

coimheach, -ich, s. m. Stranger, foreigner, 
alien. Aig na coimhich, with strangers. 

coimheachas, -ais, s. m. Estrangement. 2 
Strangeness. 3Shyness. 4 Fierceness, bar- 
barity. 6 Coldness, uv kindness, incivility. 6 
ithrowardness. 7f{strange punishment. 8 
**sharpness, as of wind. 9ttAlicnated af- 
fection dislike, revulsion. 10* Svourness of 
disposition, C. an teauga, the strangeness of 
their tongue. 

counhead, fut. aff. coimheadaidh (contr. coimh- 
didh), pr. pt. a’ coimhead, va.d à. Wate, 
2 Keep, preserve. 3 Look, observe. 4* Re- 
serve. 5(CR) Show—W. of koss. UCR) Look 
at, not keep—Perthshire & Lewis. C. ri, 
look yor ; dha coimhideam gras, I will keep 
grace for him; coimheadaidh mi dhuit e, I 
will show it to you; c. orin, lock at me; a! c, ri 
bas, expecting dea:h. 

——--—, -hid, s.m. Looking. 2 Watching. 3 
Watch. 4 Obsersing. 5 luspection. 6 Wea- 
yer's Jaze—Islay. T Keeping. $**Reserving. 
Fear-coinhid (pl. lucid-comnhid), inspector, 
watch, scout. 

— ach, -aiche,a@ Wary, vigilant, watch- 
ful, circumspect, diligent. attentive. 

co'mheadach, -aich, sm. Keeper, guard, war- 
der. Z**Attendance. 3(AH) lhe vagina, es- 

ecially in cattle and sheep. 

colnhealachd, s. find. Cenvoy. 
watehing. 3 Inspecting. 4 Escorting, at- 
tending. 54fConveving. Luchdc., an es- 
cort suite, rerinue; thoir €., cunvoy. Ris a’ 
ch., aclina asa township herd. 

co.nilicada che, -an, sm. Keeper. 
3 Inspector. 4 Scout, spy. 51iGrass-keeper. 
€ttWateh. 7 (DO) Township herd—Vist, 

cohulis arsnach, -ich, s.m. Neighbour. C. bun- 
an-aoruis, or c. na h-ursainn, the next-door 
neigh bour. 

-——ail, -e, a. 

modating. 








2 Observation, 


2 Observer. 





Neighbourly, accom- 








-—d, s.find. Neighbourhood, 2* 
Neighbourly conduct. Air fad na c., through. 
Out the neighbourhood. 

see coimhearsnachail. 

e: imheart, -a, -an, 8.31... Comparison. 
convhearta,tt a. Equivalent, equal. 
coimheartaich,1ft v.a. Compare. 

coimbeurtas, see cuimhcart., 


coimheas 





¢ceoin:heas, s.m. Comparison. 
3 seo c r heachas, 
eo imivas.** a. Equal, 


2 see coiugeas. 


2 Indifferent. 3 Alike. 








- ail,** a. Eqnally respectable. 2 Or 
eqral worth. - 
-- dn, d, Of equal worth, equivalent, 


comparable, 

counhcasg, v.a. see coimeasg. 

coimheas,xicnd, sj. see coimeasgadh. 

© inubcisgadli, -aidh, see coimeasgadh., 

co mneassaich, sce coimeasg, 

Je inilea-gar, 8.4 Conilies. 

cohinhéeiehcas, -eis, &y. see coimheachas. 

co'mheirbse,t xf. see coimnh-eirbse, 

coinheis, a. Listless. see ceingeis. 

coin heiseach,** a. Indifferent. 

counheiseachd,** s.f. Disinciiuation. 

fcoanliend, a. Even, equally 1 atcued, proper- 
ly adjusted. 

ecimiich, pl. of coimheach. 

counhchead, -eid, see coimheachas. 

ccimhicLeas, -eis, 8.m. Aryyll for coimheachas. 

counbid, pa, see coimbead. 

— eachd, see coimheadachd. 

coimhileadh, -idh, -idhean, see comb-mhileadh. 

coiinhiecas, -ais, s.m. Retribution, compensa- 
tion. 

ecimbirp,tt see coidhirp. 

cormhis, a. see ccingeis. 

coimhiseach,tt -eiche, a. sce coingiseach. 

——A,iisJ.ind. see coimgiscachd. 

2oimhlion, -ean, s.m. sce cuinu au. 

seinhlion, auv. As many as. z As often as. 
3 kqnalinnuuber, [Wher aspirated it sig- 
uifus “sucha large quint.ty,” a^, ba thruagh 
leac gnu robh a ch. iech ayns ib eau 
rachad, Z was to be pitied Lee were such a 
number of lochs and pudules in the way.) 

c imnron, a. see copth-tionta. 

e Zut lung, -inge, -ingean, » f. Race. 2 Course. 
5 Runnug tezether, 4 Career. Hunheam- 
a d a’ ch, let vs run the race. 

comihiengadh, -idh, s.n. bacing. 2 Confict- 
ing, contending. 3 Regular march of an 
army, 

tcoimilincas, -a, -an, s.n. Neighbour. 2**Neigh- 
! ourhood. 

Teo inncasda, SE Neichbourhood. 

450 winreacc, Aeh, 8308, Assistant. 

courh-erciadh, nidh, SA, Perception, com- 
pe bist, n, A’ e—, pr. pt. of coinihsich. 

ec',rhsezd,** s.. Lusew crinness, 

cvimiseas, xf, Conscience, 

connhbseasach,* a. Cuusctentious. 

com; hsegsas :d,* sf.ind  Co.scicutiousness, 

col i. lsich, pr. gt. a’ ecimhseachadh, v.a. Fer- 
ceive. 

co n:lisichte, a. & past pf. of coimhsich. Per- 
ceived, understuud, 2 Compreheusible, 3 
it! revident. à 

Te o hsinghadh, see coimhseachadth, 

4coimhteach, s m. Monastery, cunvent. 

4c imin, s.f. Conuneoun, suburbs, 

co unre, -e, &.f. Mercy. spamng, giving of quor- 
ter. C. DEé cibai muy God Sie you—said 
io Uist to the at le as they were driven to 








= 


pasture ; fo ch. 1a b-cagiais, under the Gu: 


tection of the c) wrcá. 
counireeadh, -idh, s. m. 

staring or savipg. — | 
co mure, An, see conrpire, 


Protectirg, act of 


2^6 





coineadach 





ccimpire, -an, s.m. Equal, match, 
eqnal in rank, abilities or means, 3** One 
cÍ the seme mird with another. Feara bu 
ch. dhomh fhé n, a man who was my equal, 

coir,jpireachi, sf. Equanty in rank, common- 
weilth, 

coim] readh,** cul, s.m. 

Coturc,-e, See connirc. 

conu, -e,-ean, $./. Interruption, impedi- 
wert. 2 Trouble, embarrassment, strait. 3 
see colnire. 


coimrig, prat. a’ coimrigeadh, v.a. Interrupt, 
hnpede, 


2 One’s 


Conception. 


2 'lroubie, molest, embarrass, 
straiten, . 
coiurigeuüch, -eiche, a. Iwterrnptive, full of 
obstacles. 2 "I roublesoire 


ccimr'geachd, s.f.ind.  'Ircubtesomeness. 

comurgeadh, -idh, s. s. ‘Llrvabling, act of 
troutling, molsting, 2 Interiuptiung. A’ 
c—, pr. pt. of comig, 

cohnrigte, a. «& pas: 71. of coimrig. Troubled, 
molested, @ in'eiiupted. 

tceuimse, sce Cuil se, 

coan-ersch, -eiche, a. 
D«ctibeiate, 

coim» ch, see coimeas. 2 see coimsich. 

cain, gen, sing., & n, & dal. pl. of cà. 

fecinbh.adh, see coinbheath, 

feciucneaehach. see coirbheuthaiche, 

teou.Lh arsaid, sr, Conversation. 

tevinLheath, ssm. Feast, entertainment. Te 
given a.f.] 

cul). bheathaiche, 8.m. 
ment. 

coin-bhile, s.f. Dogwood, cornel-tree—£corna 
sanyuinet. 


Indifferent, careless. 2 


Guest at an entertain- 





175. Coin-bhile. 


teoin-bhlicch.l, ar Conflict, battle. 

coin-bhrà-had., -aid, 2sm. Disease in the throat. 
2 King's evil. 

coin-chriche, s27. Gag-teeth, canine teeth in 
inmost mammals separating the incisors from 
tbe bicuspids. 

coin-deaig, -eilg, s m. Simiiitnile, comparison, 
2 Criticism, 3 Counsel. 4 Contention. [** 
marss this t.] 

coindealz, v.a. Persuade. 

coindean, -ein, $32, Kit, small tub. [tf gives 
coi ndean.] 

co nd'd, s. Leek, see leigis. 

feaindreach. v.a. Direct. 

ceindreach,** sm. Impecimert, restriction. 
2 Mischief. 3 Instruction, direction. 

coin-dris, -e, -ean, 6.f. J-og-briar, See rós-nau- 
COU, 


4e rire, af. Uri:f, abridgment, compendium. ledinesch,**® see còinneach. 


(/^* gives coimirce.) 1 
c on'sacar, see comasdair. 
c,nnisdeargschd, see comasdaireackd, 
G iniseBY, see comasdou., 
cunnisearüchd, see cor.ascaireachd. 


Coii-dreoighbionn, 
còineachan, -ain, 

fiirieg, 
cóncachan,(AF) s.m. see coinneachan., 
coiLeadach, see eoincan, 


seg ros-non-ron, 
Sm. Child stolen by the 





cun ath 





cneidh. sam Reproof. d 

enert, -viz, -Aan, 3.f. see coinneag. 

vi eall, see coingheall. 

coi eallach, see cvingheallach. : 

cuinean, -ein. pl. -a & -an, s.m. Rabbit, coney. 
Tra 'nc. neo-.hian, the ravvit is unclean. 

Ltt gives en as nom. | 

ach, see coinean, 

ach.** a. Aboundingin, like, Or belong- 
ing to, rabbits. 

coinearb,** s. bull-haiting. 

coineil, see caoiinhne:l. 

Quinein, -ean, see coinean. 

--————— eath, -e.cüe, a. Abonnding in rab- 
bits or conies. Of, or belonging to, a rabbit 
or coney. 

each,( AF) s.m. see coinean. 

fcoin-flieas.ar, -air, s.m. Evening. 

$—— ———-.—aeh, -aiche, a. Late. 

coin-fh'aenil, -cia, -clan, s.f.  Dog-tooth. 2 
Ganne madness. 

fcoin-fhodhairne, s. pl. Otters. 

q@ in-ihuadact,(Al’) s.m. it. dog-chaser) Vul- 
ture, see fang. 

fevintidir, s f. toman formula of confession. 











feointliochd, sJ. Debate, 2 Battle, conflict. 
f oiugbheal, see cumail. A 
co ngeal, s.m. Vortex. 2 Whirlpool. 


coingeis, -e, a. Indifferent, free, independent. 
?tflóqually realy. Tha mi c., Z am indiffer- 
ent; is C. co aea, tt is no mater; is c. dhuit, 
tt is all the saine to you ; an c. co aca a bheir 
mi leam? does it matter to me which of 
them I take? is c. leis a’ chist a bhi air muir 
no air tir, it is all the same to the (mayic) 
chest to be on sea or land—W. Highland Tales. 

coingeas.** -eis, s.m. Coulness, indifference. 2 
Equality, 3 Comparison. 

cuingheall, il, sm Loan. 2**Condition. 3tt 
Whirlpool. 4 J::M) Dog’s collar, ‘Thoir an 
€., lend ; vabh c., borrow. 
: —ach, -iucie, ea. Accommodating, 
ready to lend. 2 Of, or pertaining to a loan. 
S Offitieus. 4**Couditional. Dune a bhith- 
eas c., a man who ts ready to lend. 
——achadh, -aidh, am. Act of lending or 
accommodating. 2 Violent quashing or 
Suattering. A’ c—, pr.pt. of coingheallaich. 
——achi,tts.f. Obiigiugness. 
aich, pr.pt. a’ coingheallachadh, v.a. 
Lend, aceomiuodate. 2 Quash, shatter. 
archy,** s.m. Borrower. 
aichte, a. & past pt. of coingheall- 
aich. Lent. 2 Quashed, snattered. 

coingioll, -ill, -àn, s.m. Qualification. 2 Condi- 
tion. AT Pass. 

—aun, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Complaint. 

coingir, -ean, 8.f. Pair. 

Cuingiseach, a. Indiscriminate. 

d, 8&.f. Indifference. 

eoinicear, -eir, s.m. Rabbit-warren. 

coinigin,* see coinicear. 

fcoinin, see coipein. 

COWivsg, prov. fer conusg. 

coinle, -an, sce coinnlein. 

¢coinleach, see connlach. 

coinleag, -eig, -àn,,s.f. stalk. 2 Bud. 

n «ean, 8.. see cuinnean. 2 see coinn- 
eiit. 

coinlin,** see coinnlein. 

coinhon, -lin, -lionn, s.m. 

coi:.-luirg, 
hounds. 

coinn, ( for cuinnean) 8. m. 
— Dain lain Ghobha. 

eoinu, s.m. Fit of coughing. 

*oiundeau,ff-ein, 8m, Kit, small tub, 





























see cuinnean. 
€, m. Lurchers. 2(JGM) Blood- 


Nostril. 2 Prow 


227 


cdinneamh 





coinue,* s.f.ind. Keproach. £ Imitation. 8 
see euinneamh. A’ c—, pr. pt. of coinne. 
Cha n thai,h mi c.airson m’ athar, Z shall 
never be reproached on account of my father ; 
an ann a’ c. riums’ a tha thu? are you mi- 
tating me ? 

coinne,* pr.pt. a’ coinne, v.n. Imitate, follow 
the example of. 

tcoinne, &.f. Woman. Scots, quean. 

coinneach, Ach, s.f. Moss, fog. 23 Order of 
ferns called bryacec. Air lic chòinnich, 
on mossy slopes. 

coinneachadh, -aidh, s.m. Meeting, assembly. 
2 Act or circumstance of meeting. A’ c—, 
pr.pt. of coinnich. 

còinneachail, tt. a. Mossy. 

coinneaclan,(AF) s.m. Wild yellow bee; Scots, 
fo:gy bee. 

coinneach-dhearg,$ s.f. Bog-myrtle, see mòin- 
teach-liath. 

coinneag, -e1g, -an, 8.f. Nest of wild bees. 

coinneal, gen. coinnle, pl. coinnlean, s.f. Can- 
dle. 2 Torch. 3 (DC) Straight piece of 
wood on which, after being waulked, the 
web of tweed is tightly and evenly wound, 
thereafter being placed for some days under 
a heavy weight to press it. When unwound 
the tweed is found to be much improved in 
appearance, Cha téid a c. as, her candle 
does not go out; rannsaichidh mi le coinnlibh, 
I will search with candles; las a’ ch., light 
the candle; 'nuair à bhiodh an clo deas air son 
a chur "sa choinneal, when the web would be 
reudy to wind round tha stick—Sgeulaiche-nan- 
caol, p. 46; “air coinneal’’ is the phrase in 
Uist—DC. 


ach, -aiche, a. see coinnleach. 


aich,* v.a. Brandish, flourish. C. do 
bhata. flourish your stick. 

air, s.m. Tallow-chandler. 2 Candle- 
maker. 


-bhàite, a. Excommunicated. 
-bhàth, pr. pt. a’ coinneal-bhàthadh, 
Excommunicate. 
— -bhathadh, -aidh. s.m. Excommuni- 
cation. A’ c—, pr.pt. of coinneal-bhath. 
— -bhathaidh, s.j. Symbol of excommu- 
nication. 
—— — — -bianain, ff s.f. Ignis fatuus. 
— ——— -buaic-sitheig,* sf. Rush-light. 
-cliéire, s.f. Wax-candle. 
- dair, see coinnleir, 2** see coinneal- 
air. 
- -ghiubhais, s.f. Fir-candie. 
-ghlas,(Fionn) s. f. Candle made by 
rolling the refuse of suet (cnàmhag) in a rag, 
coinneamh, -imh, -an, $.f. Meeting. 2 Assem- 
bly, convention. 3 Interview. 4 Facing. 5 
Opposing. 6 Assignation. "II Supper. 8 
Pic-nic party. 9 Party to which everyone 
brings his own provisions.— Hebrides. C. 
nan càirdean, the meeting of friends; rach 
'nan coinnimh, goto meet them; mu 'ch., oppo- 
site him; wu ’c., opposite her ; cum c., hold a 
meeting; "aa ch. mhóir, in the great congrega- 
tion; ma tba am barrachd agad mu m’ ch., 
if you have anything further for me to do— 
Caraid nan Gdidheal; cuiridh mi mu d’ ch., 
I am asking you to do, dc. 


EXPRESSIONS FOR USE AT MEETINGS :— 


coinneamh fhollaiseach, a publi: meeting. 
coinneamh ebnatnaichte, a general meeting. 
coinneamh cuiumauta, an ordinary meeting. 
coinneamh shònruichte, (c. churamach, or c. 
chowharraicite, e. air leth, c. eugsamhuil) 
Q special meeting, pariicuiar meeting maried 











coinneamh 228 


out for a particular programe, 

coinneamh a ghairm (no a chumail), to call 
(or hold) a meeting. 

fear-na-c ithrach, the chairman. 

iomarbhaidh, debate. 

sgriobhadh, docinent. 

a riaghladh, to preside over, 

a’ choinhairle, the committee, 

tha a’ Chomhairle 'na suidne, the council is 
sitting. 

a’ chathaira ghabhail, to take the chair. 

rinn e gnìomn fear-cathrach dhuinn, he fill- 
ed the chair for us, acted as chairman for us. 

dealachadh, division for taking a vote. 

fear-iarraidh oitig, candivate. 

inbhe - dreuchda, còir - dreuchda, 
dreuchla, ex-oficio rank. 

ball, a member. 

bha e air à thaghadh mar bhall, he was ad- 
mitted a member. 
a chur buill an tairgse (no ball ’ainmeach- 
adh), to propose a member. 
fear-dreuchda, ball-dreuchda, 
member. 

lion-coinhairle, quorum. 

lion-gnoubaich, a business quorum. 

is lion-guothaich còignear, five shall form 
à quo: tm. 

an gearr-sheanachas, the minutes, 

leugnadh an rünair an gearr-sheanachas, 1 call 
on the secretary to read the minutes. 

leughadh gearr-sheanachas na coinnimh 
Inu dheireadh, agus chaidh a dhearbhadh, 
the minutes of the last meeting were read and 
confirmed. 

ain bheil duine sam bith 'cur an aghaidh m’ 
ainm a cliurris a’ ghearr-sheanacilas ? does 
anyone object to the minutes being signed ? 

iomchar ghuothaich, procedure. 

dol a mach na Dhuhne proceedings of the 
company. 

ordugh na coinnimh, programme. 

gnàth-imeachd, gnath-eagair, routine. 

briseadh gnàth-imeachd, infraction of rout- 
ine, 

1uua chumadh, to draft a resolution, 

tairgse, proposal, proposition. 

rün, resolution. 

rudanachd, mion-chuis, minutiae, details. 

inion-fhiosrachd mu gach rudanachd a bhuin- 
eas da, Jull information of every point con- 
cerning it. 

athair an rüin, athair an leasachaidh, ini- 
tiator (mover) of a resolution or amendment. 

nann biodh esan comhia ruinn, b'ann a b 
àirde bhiodh gach gnìomh dhuinn, were he 
with us, our proceedings had more weight and 
eficiency. 

aobhar-rüin (rin a resolution; aobhar-rüin,the 
makings of a resolution, i.e. a proposal, a 
notion) a leasachadh, to amend a motion. 

aobnar riaghailt agam dnuibh, Z have to pro- 
pose a rule to you. 

aobhar ( leasachaidh proposed amendment. 


urram- 


an ex-officio 


ùghdar j rùin, @ proposed resolution. 

còir coinnimh, makings of a meeting 
..(people.). e 

gleus buill, materials of a member (i.e. 


(a prospective member.) 

aobhar iomarbhaidh, or coir deasboireachd, a 
question for debate. 

tnigear sin as, ged nach deach a labhairt os 
ard, that is implied, understood, though not 
strated formally. 

aobhar a shaoid 's a shiubhail, materials for 
his activity and holding forth. 

tarsnachan, dubh-cheisd, a debateable ques- 


pation of the matter. 


coinneamh 


tion. 
oo na h-iomarbhaidh, the subject of de 
wie, 
raunsachadh ceisde, todebate a question. 
fear-iomarbhaidh, debater. 
WT 'san iomarbhaidh, order in de 
ate, 
ar sruth-rannsachaidh, the lines upon which 
the subject 18 discussed by us. 
bun agus barr na cuspair (an seedil), mion 
agus garon na cùise, fad agus gearr na 
cùise, sniior a’ ghnothaich, all the substance 
of the mutter. 
an dail qan luib, fa chomhair, an coinneamh) 
a’ ghhotnaich, in preparation Jor, in antici- 


— 





— Opening remarks—— 

a’ dol an ceann ar turuis dhuinn, 

a’ dol an tarruing cire, 

a’ teannadh gu feum, 

ciod a théid sinu ’na dhàil an toiseach P 

is eis toiseach-gnottmch dhuiun......, the 
first business for us to transact i5..... : 

an niis toiseach seanachais dhuinn, (an ni 
atha an uachdar seanachais dhuinnj, the 
chi») mut'er or subject of our discussion., the 
bur ing question of the occasion. 

faigheamard fios na fìrinn agus cura’ ghno- 
thaich, let ws ascertain the truth and tre 
state of afarrs. 

bheireamaid ruith air gach cùis, (cuspair, 
obir, gnothach, or aobhar ar saoid ‘s ar 
siubhail , det us treat of, consider everything, 
our offairs, de, 

ceisd ra raunsachadh, a question yet to be 
settled, 

[The foliowing sentences bracketed together 

all mean '*what we are eugaged about, ''&c] 

ani an los na coinninth, | 

'fhad's a tha sin 'nar taic ('nar cois,; 
'nar fochair.) 

ar ceann-steidh, fath ar turuis. 

an fhéill,(an ceaird) air am bheil sinn. 

aobhar ar saoid ’s ar siubhail. 

ann an lorg an aobhair seo. 

am bonn (an car) ath’ againn ri'dheanamh 

tha ar lamhan 'sau taois. 

o’n a tha sinn aun an ionad breithneachaidh 
co eile a bheir ruith air a chuis duinn ? 
since we are in the full swing of debate, 
will some one else hold forth to us on the 
matter } 

tha mi 'cur air Mgr.... a nis mion agus garbh 
na „cùise "óónnseadh dhuinn, breithneach- 
adh cothromach—or rannsachatth—a thoirb 
air a’ chuspair, a’ chuspair a chur air a 
ballaibh dhuinn, Z now call on Mr.... to 
give usa full summary of tle matter. 

is math an airidh, &2us fear-na-cathrach ’ga 
iarraidh orm, certainly, seeing that it is the 
chairman who wishes me to do so. 

bheir mi dhuibh dlith-ehuir air na cùisean 
seo, I will give you a close survey of these 
things. 

cha dean mi car rannsachaidh air, cha rach- 
aion féin an seilbh na h-oinre, Z will not ao 
into the subject at all, [ would not undertake 
such a thing. 


thar rian, wandering from the point, out of or- 


riaghailt, order. 
rian is riaghailt ! order, order ! 
cha’n el thu an eiseimeil orduigh no rian, 
you have a lordiy contempt for order. 
tha 'n gnothach gu riaghailteach uile, the 
matter is entirely in order, 





eoinneamh 229 





tha’n gnothacu a’ dol mu seach oirnn (or cha 
bhuin sin do "n chùis), the proceeding is out 
uf order. 

tha e'dul ’sa mbu'leann orm, (dol mu seach 
orm, a’ fairtles. hadh orm, Team sharach- 
adh) it rlabberyasts, puzzles, dumfounders, 
ba sies me. 

tha mi 'cur an teagamh riaghailt a’ ghnoth- 
aich sin, / rise 10 a point of order,—1i.e. I 
contes! the orderliness of the present remarks. 

cha chuir sin an aphaidh an riaghailt, ach 
ta aidh ean riaghailt cho slàn ’s a bha e, 
that is uct aptinst the rule at all, but it 
lewoes the rule as unbroken as ever. 
cha chuspair riaghailt sin idir, that (e 
not a point of order. 

tha unu toirt beum do ’n leasachadh sin, is 
e tha mi togail dnuibh eur briseadh air 
riazhàilt au ivasscnauh, L wish to point out 
that the wording of Lie resolution is out of 
order, 

tha sin as ar gabhail, chan ’eil sin 'nartaic, 
that is not the subject ander discussion. 

cha tivchd sin ‘san iomar: haidh., that ts not 
within the area f the discussion. 

ma chaidu mi cèarr air mo rùn, cha b’ ann 
do an’ dneò.u. eadar aha naigheachd, 
chaidh gutu tbairis air a’ chuspair again- 
nc), if 4 kare strayed from my motion, it 
was not willingly. between two discussions 
ou affair hax quite been lost sight of. 

chaidh sivu tnar ar siubhail, ar sgeòil, or ar 
guothuien, we have wandered from our 
subject. 

gabh mu chil do chruidh agus ar cruidh 
fhéin, direct speech to the question. 

cha bai urram-guothaich againn air a sin, 
ace shail not deem that to be business; 
(leizeamaid troimh ua meòir e, or gabha- 
mad ealla ris,) we shall ignore that. 

{The terms in the next bracket are all re- 

quests for relevancy. } 

cha'n e sin an 1hior-obair a th'againn an) 
drasd. 

tha cuid dheth sin nach ’eil a thaobh a’ 
ghnothaica asainn. 

tha sinn au gréim (au sàs) ann an ceisd eile 


an dràsd. 

aun am bun ceisd eile. 

cha’ni sin a’ cheisd a tha 'nar cois: na 
biodh ruith coin an dà fhéidh agaiun. 
gabh mu chu. do chruidh. 

ra bi againu bhos is thall. 

&irg:od (hall, airgiod a bhos ! money there, 
money here I— money is not the question 
just now. 

cairleas fad as aigan dara cheisd ris a’ 
cheisd eile. 

is bacadh air rùn sin, that is blocking the 
proposal or resolution. J 

chuireadh sin caocnladh cuir an clò Chal- 
uim, that would confuse ovr aims and posi- 
tim. 

chuireadh sin ear 'san rùn againn, that would 
upset, or alter our proposition or resolution. 

bh ureadh sin ar n-anam-fàs asainn. that will 
pow us developing, take away our raison- 
d'etre. 

na tog mi gus an tuit mi, do not interrupt 

unless 1 go wroiv;, out of order. 

sin an ni is lugha th' air m' aire, b' fhada 
bhuaidh sin a ghabhainn, that is far from 
my inten ion. 

anns gach daimh agus snidheachadh, in all 
circumstances and relations, on every occa- 
rion. 

auus an riochd sin, in that connection, relation. 





coinneamh 


fuaighte, (an comh-cheangal) ris air dha 
ghlens, bound up with it in two ways. 

tha ’n dara ni an eiseimeil aon a chéile, the 
KS things depend upon, arise out of each 
other. 

tha le:nmhuinn a thaobh-eiginn eadar an dà 
cheisd, there is a certain amount of connect- 
ton between the two things. 

thoir an aon ruith da seo, 

deanamaid an dalta (tomhas) ceudna da seo, 
treat this in the same way. 

cha’n "eil sin ann an ìnnleachd na coinnimh, 
SCH is not tn the power of the meeting to set- 

e. 

air a shon sin dheth, as far as that goes, 
touches the matter. 

air son na rinn sinne, as far as regards what 
we did in the matter. 

tha sin agus a rogliainn aig a’ choinnimh, 
the m-eiing can do so if it please. 

tha A.B. a’ cur suas, agus C.D. Si cur taic 
ris gu'in...., it is moved by A.B., and se- 
conded by C.D. that...... 

tha mi 'tairgse, I propose. 

tua mi "eur suas gu in.., J deg to move that.. 

tha mi eur snas an rùin seo, 
is e cead-rüin à tha mi 'g iarraidh ort, 
bu mhath leam rin a chur nur cead, 
I beg to move the following resolution. 

tha mi cur f’ ur comhair, air bnur beulaobh, 
or mu bhur coinneamh, mar leasachadh, 
gnun fàgar na facail a ieanas a mach, £ 
move as an emendinent, that the following 
words be omit ed. 

tha mi’cur f’ ur comhair, air bhur beulaobh, 
or mu bhur cuinneamh, an leasachadh a 
leanas a chur air an run, JI move the 
following amendment to the motion. 

tha mi ’cursuas leasachaidh war a leanas, 
2 move that the motion be amended as follows. 

tha mi 'cuideachadh leis an leasachadh sin, 
I second that amendment. 

cha bu ruith lea ach eum gu cuideachadh 
leis an leasachadh sin, ( tha mise a’ cnid- 
eachadh leis a sin le failte—or agus bean- 
nachd 'na cheann), I have much pleasure 
in rising to support the amendment, 

is tu fhéin a th’ ann fhathast, is math a 
fhuaras tu, tha thu air chùl do sgeòil, 
buaidh leat ; sgailc thu air ! hear, hear! 

a’ cheisd roimhe, the previous question. 

tagrain (or iairam) gu'n rachadh a’ cheisd a 
cnura nis, I bey to move that the question be 
now put. 

cha leig sinn lede, we will not allow them to 
carry it out. 

cha’o thaigh thu sin leat, you will not be able 
to carry that. 

cha toz siu buannachd dhuinn, that will not 
benefit va. 

leasachadh a dhiültadh, to reject an amend- 
ment, 

rùn a chuir an neo-bhrigh, to rescind « resolu- 
tion. 

rùn a dhubhadh as, to expunge a resolution. 

rana dhitliadh, to negative a proposition. 

diùltadh (s.), diü!tach (a.), negative. 

an aghaidh an aobhair, against the proposi- 
tion. 

gabhaidh sinn an leasachadh de roghainn air 
an rùn. we accept the amendment tn prefers 
ene tothe motion. 

chan fhaod sinn a mhilleadh, (a sbarach- 
adh), we cannot do better than that. 

iarram cead o 'n chathair an aobhar-rüin a 
tharruing air ais, à dheòin a’ chinn-suidbe 


coinneamh 


euiridh mi aobhar mo chuspair air chùl, 
4 veg to withuraw the motion, with the 
consent of the chair. 

tha wis agam mw’ ur coinneamh gu'n glac 
sibh mar run leis na leanas, 4 now propose 
to you inat you adopt ds u suvolantive reoviu- 
tion what joliows 

bha an tairgse air a chur an cruth rùin, the 
proposds uas putin tue form of u resutuiton. 

euirealuakl aus uara taobh e det us setue it, 
Qis pose oJ it. 

b' e'u turus gun bhuaidh dhuinn a’ chòir a 
thoirt seucuad air à cheisd seo, it were a 
great mistake on our purt, not to deal justo 
and fairly with this quesuon 

Cuirecamau seachad seo, tet us dispose, or get 
ru oJ this 

gncibnear deireadh gaci sgeòil a nasguidn, 
uon’ t hurry, thrash the matter out at ccusuie. 

comh-dhunath na h-iomarbhaidh, cur a’ 
gluas-guuibD orra, closure of the debate. 

facal anu | hurry up | finish the discussion ; 
say the final word / 

craluamaid an t-slabhruidh-éisdeachd, 
cule Jor otlence, 

èst dO bheul ! silence ! 

o n atharla mar seo dhuinn, since we are so 
placed, cercumstanced, 

leis a h-uiie rud a th’ ann, under the circum- 
stadiwes. 

ann a vhi ’togail dhuibh cur na h-iomar- 
bhaigh, (or da thaobh na h-iomarbbaigh), 
in suming up to you the stute, or pros. and 
cons. Of the devate. ; 

ciucla sibh an dà thaobh, 'fheara ! tha a 
cous nur memp féin a nis, cuir to ’r 
siuaointean i, dèan bhur roghainn ris! you 
have now heard voth sides 0) theagair, think 
well ove? it and give your decision, for the 
issue is entirely in your hands. 

gach duine a tha ag aontachadh leis an rin 
seo, abladh e **biudh—an aghaiun sia ‘ua 
biodh,” ali whe are in favour of this reso- 
ivt.on, say aye’ —to the contrary, “no.” (or 
cò à chuireas leis an rial seo ? thugadh iad 
an làmhan, co tha "ua aghaidh ? thogadh 
iad an 1à:nhan, whoever is in savour of this 
let them hvid up their hands; against, hulu 
up their hands.) 

aoutachadh iomlan, unanimous consent. 

taghadh fola:chte, voting by ballot. 

taghadh fosgailte open voiing. 

taghudh a sheachnadh, to abstain from vo- 
ting. 

Poker a thaghadh, to vote for a candi- 
date. 

guih fear-na-cathrach, casting vote. 

iarram (or tagram) comh-àireamh, (leig gu 
rà'lh an taghaidh e), Z demand a poll. 

thatar a’ glaodhach taghaidh (or comh-air- 
inth,) they are demanding, clamouring sor a 

oll. 

ien (or tagram) togail làimhe, J demand a 
show of hanus. 

taghadh, act of voting. 

fear-taghaidh, voter. 

cuir gu toil na coinnimh e, put tt to the vote 
of the meeting. 

Kéier? fear-na-cathrach, the decision of the 
chair. 

chan 'eil dol thar breith fear na cathrach. 
there is to be no disputing the chairman's 
PUAN. 

cha'n Mn *gad sharachadh, or a’ cur cosg 
ort a tiia mi, J do nut wish to contradict or 
siup you, 


















coinnleag 





dearbhadh (s.), dearbhtach (a.), afirmative 
a’ bueag chuid, the minority. 
a’ mhòr chuid, the majority. 
a buanachd,eacess of mujority over minority. 
tha e runichte, dainguicnte, gu'm bitheadh, 
&c., resolved that, dc. 
cual tear macan rü.n seo do...., let a copy of 
this reso.ution be sent to.... 
mac-an-raunsachaidh seo, the upshot of this 
vevale, 
leigcar a’ chuis fa chomhair an rünair, bidh 
esan a’ freasdal an deis gach ni, let the 
matter be referred, dele,ate, or entrusted to 
the secreta, y —he will atiend to everything. 
tha a’ chuiuneawh air a cur fa sgaoil, the 
mweling is dissoived. 
sguireamaid war tha sinn, let us stop at thia 
(lit. stop as we are.) 
có chuireas an aghaidh na Gàidhlig gur a 
bacadh air spot bach 1 ? 20/0 opposes the use 
of Gaelic as being a hindiance to business ? 
la na coinniuh a shiucadh, to postpone @ 
meeting. 
tha dail air a chur 'sa choinnimh gu seachd- 
uim o "n diugh, the meeting is aujourned til 
this day week. 
sonruicheamaid la do ’n ath choinnimh le 
cion agus Lach 'eil lion-gnothaich againn, 
let us pc a date fur next meeting, as we have 
not a business quorum present. 
sinendh gu dibuna (gun chàirde, am feasd, or 
gu sulhaiuu, a Chur 'sa choiunimh, to ad- 
journ the meeting ‘xine die.” 
grnàtuh-riagha.ltean, standing orders. 
na guach-riaghailtean a chur au dail, to sus- 
pend standing Or ters. b. 
keln the above list the reader follows the 
course of an imaginary debate, and tle 
sentences are divided into five sections fur 
facility of reference, thus ;— 
(1) Names of processes and equivalents for 
amendments, &c. 42) Opeviug remarks, 
dealing in general with the subject of dis- 
cussion, aud calling uson people to speak, 
(3, Matters of order and relevancy. (4) 
Amendments, and the putting and with- 
drawing of same, and requests for the 
thorough thrashing out of any matter. (6) 
Closure and suunning up, voting, upshot, 
sending out notices, dissolving and proro- 
guing. [Thisis the first such list publish- 
ed in Gaelic. } 
coinncanaeh,*-aiche, a. Ruttish. 
tcoinneas, -eis, 8.7. Ferret. 2 AF) Dog-weasel. 
+ —ach, æ. Abounding in, like, of, or be- 
longing to, ferrets, or dog-weasels, 
coinnegialluceh,ff 8.f. Complaint. 
tfcoiuniceir, SA, Rabbit warren or burrow, 
coinnich, pr.pt. a’ eoinneachadh, v.a. & u. Meet, 
face, oppose, eucuniter, z**»top procress of 





a person or thing. 8* Assemble, Coinnich- 
idh na daoieseach cha choirnich na cnuic, 


men meet but the hikes do not; e iun chieth an 

da fiacal a chee, the two words man the 

same then). > 

te, past part. of coinnich, Met, oppos- 
ed, faced, encountered. 

coinnimh, gen.sing. of coinneamh. 

coinnir, -e, can, 2./. Pair, brace, couple, 

coinnle, sce Calluinn. 2 ae4.55«. of coiuneal, 

coinnleach, -e che, a, Fuilof candles, 2 Of, 
pertaining to, a candle. 3 Lire a candle. 

-——adh,-aidh, sn. Winding of c.oth 
on a stick in order to dress it. 

coiunleag, iz, -an, 8.7. Oily surface of broth. 
2 Fiery sparkiiag of the eyes, 











coinnleagach 





coinnleayach, -aiche, a. Having an oily sur- 
fac’, as broth. 2 Bright, sparkiing (of eyes.) 

coinnlean, see combplein. 

— -bianaiu, s.m., Wild fire, phosphoric 
light seen in the sea, when agitated by oars 
in the dark, 2 DC) Infusoria. 

Coiunlein, -e, -ean, s.m. Stalk of grain, espe- 
cially barley. 2**Bud. 3ftf see cuinnean, 

each, -eiche, a. Stalky. 

colnnleir, -e, -ean, s.m. Candlestick, Annan 
c., ina can ilestick, 

each, -eiche, a. Of, or pertaining to, a 
candlestic«. 

——— ——eachd, s.f. Office of holding the candle. 
2**Candie-inakiug. 

coinnlin, -e, -ean, see coinnlein. 

c-icnlineach, -eiche, a. see coinnleineach., 

m a. Conscientious. 2 see cuguis- 
cac LI 

coinnseas, -eis, -an, s.f. Gaelic spelling of 
conscience. 

*coimnsi, a, Fit, proper. 

coinnspeach, -a, -an [& tfcoinnspeich], s.f. see 
connspeach. 

fcoinnt, 6.f. Woman. 

coinnteach, see còinneach. 

teviuntibhe, s.f. Gube, scoff, sneer, expression 
of scorn. 

tevinreachd, -a, s.m. Law of the chase. 

Cuin-ros,$ s.m. Dog-rose, see rós-nan-con, 

coiuseas, Gaelic spelling of conscience. 

Cuiusianaich, v.n. Conjure. 

Cuinsias, see coinnseas. 

ach, see coinnseanta, 

fcoint, see coinnt. 

fcointean,** en, 8. m. 
wrangler. 2 Controversy. 

cointeanach.** a. Contentious. 

d,** sf. Conteitiousness, quarrel- 











Contentious man, 








someness. 

co’ionann, see comh-ionann. 

achd, see conh-io.annachd, 

tcoip, s.f. see tcoib. 2* Heap of foam or froth 

cuip, gen. sing. of cop. 

coip-yheal, -ile, a, see cop-gheal. 

Còir, -e, lst. cump. Cora, 4. Just, honest, vir- 
Lutz, good. 2 Kiud,civil. 3 Decent. 4 
Easy-minded. 5**Proper,. 6** Near. 7 Pions. 
S Au) Beievoleut,.— i^y country. Ott Atra- 
ble. WDC) of artmels, Docile, tame, do- 
mesticeated, 11 Kind-hearted—Uist. Duine 
C., Q piows person; ged is otce e, tha e glé ch., 
allhough he is wicked, he is very gen-rous; an 
duine e. ! the aror(^y man! is c. inomi, J 
ought ; bu ch. dha am maille trenn, he ought 
(would require) to be in strong armour. 

corr, irrey. a, declined thus :— 

Sing. N. coir, Plur. N. cbraichean 
[còirichean & cóirean,] 
G. còrach ( & còire] G. còraichean, 
D. coir, D. còraichean, 
V. a choir! V. à chóraiche ! 
Right, justice, equity, probity, integrity. 
Right, claim, title, charter, 3 sex comhair. 
4 Authority. 5f share. 6* Franchise, 7** 
Possession, property. s5**Dusine-s, 10**in- 
terest. 11**Custom, usage. Coirichean a’ 
bhaile, the frelon of the city, a’ cninail na 
eorach riui, docu justice to me; maintaining 
my right, 2 keeping time for me (as in inu- 
gic); rinn thu a’ choir, you have acted with 
propriety; coirichean an fhearainn, the churt- 
er of the lanl bheir mi dbnit coubsairle na 
corach, / will tell you what you should do, or 
what ought to be doas; tog romhain air ch. an 
Sgiath, carry the shield 6^fJore me as usua; 


-a 


9 


dei 


231 


Se ee, mengen EE 


coireach 





mar bu ch. dhuit, as you ought; le e, with 
authority; tuilleadh na còrach, tuilleadh "aa 
ch., more than the just quanti!y; cüis na cor- 
ach, the cause of justice; cumaibh c. rin, supe 
ort their right; tuilleadh 'sa ch.. (pres,) e 
leadh 's bu ch., (past) too much. 

coir, prov. for cuir. 

coir, gen. sing. of cor. 

coir, 8m. Spear. 2 Fault. 

coir, (an) adv. see comhair. 

coirb, -e, a. Accursed. 2 Perverse, untracte 
able. 3 Vicious. 4ft¢Cross-grained. 

coirb v.a. Corrupt. 2 Abandon. 

coirbeach, a. Impious, corrupt, vicious. 

coirbeachd, s.f.ind. Crossness, perverseness, 2 
Hostility, 3 Wickedness, corruptness, lewd- 
ness, carnality. 

coirbidh,f s.m. Raven, see fitheach. 

có'r-bhreith, -e, $,/. Birthright. 

coirbte, a. Accirsed. 2 Perverse. 3**Corrupt. 
4**Cross. 5**ilostile. Gr Abandoned, vicious. 
An triath bn ch. colg, the chief of the most im- 
placable wrath. 

coirbteacnd, see coirbeachd. 

coirce,s.m. Oats—acvena sativa. 
manna, 

coirceach, -eich, a. Abounding in oats. 2 Of, or 
belonging to oats. 3 Made of oats. 

coirceag, -eig, -au, s.m. Bee-hive niade of straw. 
* Tub or dish made of straw, to hold seeds, 
CC. 

coirce-circe, &.m, Quaking grass, see conan. 

coiree-dubh,} s.m. see coirce-fiadhain. The 
name ''eoirce-dubh" is applied to all kinds 
of oats when black with blight, but especial- 
ly to avena strigosa. 

coirce-fia.lhaiu,? s. m. Wiid oats—avena fatua 
and avena pratensis, 

coirceil,t+ a. see cu:rceach, 

tcoircheaun, s.n. Spindle. 

teoir-cheann, r.a. Make ronnd at the top. 

+ oir’-ch.éireach, -ich, s.m. Dishonest clerk. 

coird, v. see cord. 

-——ealaiche, -an, s.m. Rope-maker. 

coirdean, -ein, s.m. Small rope. 2**String. 

tedirdeas, suis, s.m. Agreement, coalescence, 
2 Reconciliation. 

tevildieabh, v.a. Fight with a spear. 

còrdte, a. & past part. Agreed. 

cuire, pl. -aunan, sf. Fault, offence, charge. 
Sin, guilt, crime, harm, wreng, trespass. 3 
Defect. 4 Complint 5* Blame. 6 Damage. 
Dean c., offend; gaech gne c., every kind of 
damage; mur dean mi H fhaotainn le coir 
dnaoine, if Ido not get thee owing to the op, 
postion of men; c. bàis, a capital crime; ia 
iomadh c. a gheibhear air an duine bhcehd, 
manu Q taut may be found in a poor man, 

coire, pi. -aclian, s.m. Cauldron, kettle, boiler, 
vat. 2 Bath (in weaving.) Cuir air an c., 
put the kettle on (the five.) 

cõire, pl. -achan, s.m. Circular hollow sur- 
rounded by hills. 2 Mountain dell. 3 Whirl- 
pool. [Often erroneously pronounced like 
the last word.) 

fcoire, s.m, Wherry. 2 Ring. 3 Girdle. 

lcóne,s.f. Raw flesh. 2 Syntax. 

coireaen, -icLe, a. Full of circular hollows 
or dells. 

coireach, -iche, a. Faulty, at fault. 2 Guilty. 
8 Criminal. Istusa’sc., it is you who are to 
biame; 2itis you hat caused it \withont any 
disparagement); có air vith is c., is mis’ an 
creanaiche, whoever is guiliy, I am the sufer- 
er—said by “Seumas a’ Ghliane" at his tral, 

coireach, -eich, sm. Defaulter. 2 Gui:ty Dr, 


811Musical air. 


C.-nan-speur, 


2 


coireach 


son, 8**Ageressor. 

eoireachadu, -aidh, s,m. 
accusing. 2**Accusation, arraigninent, 
c—, pr.pt. of cuirien, 

coireachail, -e, a. Apt to blame, censorious. 

cuvireacnalachd, s.f.ind. Censoriousness. 

coireachan, n.pl. of coire, 

ecvireachas, ft -ais, s.m. Injuriousness. 

coireacnd, s.t, Cu:pabuity, blaineableness. 
ziflüouesu. 

eo.read, -il, SP, Probity. 2 Goodness, kind- 
ness. L** gives sm. | 

evireailh,** see coire. 

cuireal,* s^. Loud tone of voice, as of a per- 
son seoldiiz or in a passion, 2(JUM) Choir. 
8(JGAM ruse 4, DC Sxkirling, as of sea-birds. 

Cuoireal, el, s.j, Coral—coralina officinalis. 

coirealuch, a, Like coral. 2 Abounding in 
coral, coralline. 

coireall, sam. Quarry. 

ceoireain in,y AU, s.m. 
choire. 

cvirealnanach, a. 
Like coriander. 

cirean, -ein, -ean, sm, Little circular hollow. 
2 Little mountain dell. 

eóirean, -vin, -ean, .m. Little cauldron, 

cvirean-coilich, s.m. Wild campion. 

coirean-nimnice, s.m. Pis-nut, 

cuireannan, n.pl, of coire. 

eoireineach, -eiche, a. Full of little hollows or 
della, 

tudireiseach, a. 
aut air. 

coire-togalach, -aieh, ssm. Brewer's cauldron. 

cuir-ghniomh, -a, -ghniomhran s,m. Virtuous 
action. 2Zt{Satiscactiou. 

feoir.asach, -aiche, a. Lnportant. 

curlb,** v.a. Corrupt. 

cuirich, pr.pt. a’ coireachadh, v.a, Blame, find 
fault with, reprove, reprimand. 2 Arraign. 

coirich, pl. of coireach, s.pl. Lhe guilty, 

coirieneun,** s.pl. t.ecords, vitle-deeds. 

cuirichie, past pt. of coirich, Blamed, charged, 
reproved, avcased, 

fevirigh, s.m. Ranges, ranks, enclosures, 

colrili, see caireal, 

coirioll, -ill, s.m. see caireal. 

coirioilach, -aicue, see cairealach, 

Tcoirip, v.a. Corrupt. 

t¢voiriewhie, a Correetly written or read. 

teviripidh, -e, @. Corruptible, wicked,impious. 
Gu ¢., wickedly. 

+voiripte, past pt. of coirp. Corrupted. 

te nriptheaend, s.fiiad, Corruption, 

tearm, sf. Kind of boer or ale used of old by 
the Gael, 2 Potcompanion. 31[ see cuirm. 

fo»irureach, sem. Dran&ard. 

icoirmeag, -eig, s./. Female gossip. 

teoirneach, san. Ixingüsher. 2 Part. 

te irneach, a. Corncred, angular. 

corrueal, -eil, Sit,  Colonelin the army. 211 
Cornel tree. 5ftCorner. 

eoirunean,** -ain, s.n. Curl. 

eorrneaàunaen,** a. Priazled, curled. 

Coirueiteir, -ean, s.m. Colouel in the army. O 
'nehaidh au e. fo thalaimh, since the colonel 
was buried, 

+coirneineren, -eiehe, a. see coirneanach, 

Teoirn-stiall, s f. see córn-stiall. 

teoir veacnd, see coirbeachd. 

coirpilcir, -e, -ean. s.m. Corporal. 

e»rpte, see eoirbto., 

co r-izteach vy, prov. for corr-sgreuchag. 

Gu, TU, prov, Tor cairt, 

co r hei h, -eiche, a. 

CoirUeAr, see cairtear, 


Blaming, censuring, 
A’ 


Coriander, see lus-a’- 


Abounding in coriander. 2 


Important, with an import- 


see coireach. 


gen 


coiszte 

teoirthigh, v.a. Sin. 2 Blaine. 

Troirihinghauh, see coireachadh, 

eois, dat.stng. of cas. 

eois, gen. Siny. of eos. 

cois (an & ri, s. Near, beside, by, along with, 
close bv. An cois na mara, mear the sea; "na 
civis, near him, or it; 'nan co.s, mar them; 
an cois nan aibhnichean, close by the rivers; 
ri cois pa Mara Ruaidn, near the Bed Sea $ 
cenut caora "Dan chois, à. Auudred sheep along 
wita me, bithi tu beannachd an e. do -havithe 
reucu, your lubvur wul be crowned with suo 
Cess. 

evis-bheart, -bheairt, 

coise, see Cuisg. 

cois chéinuich see cois-cheum)aich. 

Cois-clieuin, -é m, -an, 8m. Sicp, pace, stride. 
2(DC) Footpriit—2ibie. 

eois-etieunipach,** a. Svepping, paein. 

cois-eneumnaich, v.d. Step alung, Walk, pace, 
2 Measure by pacing. 

fcoisde, s.f. Coaen, 2 Jury, 

cóisd -aehd, (cumh-éisdeacud, s.f. Act of hoark- 
ening, listening, 

cois learaeud, s.f.ind, Coach-driving, business 
of à coachinan. 

tcoisdear, -an, 8. m. Coachman. 

fcoisdear, -an, s.m. (colnh-éis:teur ) Juryman. 

coisdeargan, -ain, an, s.m. Red-shank bg 
see caim-ghl«s. 

coise, ;en.stnj. of eas. 
the sole of his root. 

coise,** s). Cooch. prov. 

cuiseachadn, -auih, san. Walking. 2 Pedes 
trianixin, A’ c—, pr.pt. Of coisicn. 

coiseachd, s.f.ind. Walkiug. 2 Pedestrianism, 
A’ e—, pr.pt. of exsien. Bheir a Ca lamn a 
coiseachd ditn, her Heymunay will maket 
cripple of her—said of a woman much given 
to visiting her neihhours; cit asa tuug tha 
a’ eh P, where did you walk from ? 

coiseachdail, tt -e, a. Pedestrian. 

coiseag, -eig, -an, s.f. prov. for cuiseag. 

cóiseag, -eig, -an, sf. Small nook, suug corner, 

ach, d, Snug, warm, sheltered. 

fcoiseamhan, -ain, s.m, Shvemaker. 

eoisean, s.m., walk, stem. 

ach, -aiche,a. Sieuder-legged, 2 Hav- 

ing a stalk or stein, 

tach,** -aich, 8.22.  Pro'ec"or, 

cois-éideadh, adi, -ean, s.m. Shvoesand stock- 
ings, boots, greaves, fuo.-arinour. 

coiseineal,** s.m. see coi-iuiol. 





































see caisbheart. 


Do bhonn a choise, to 














feoiseun, see coiseunaich. : 
+ achadh, s.m. Preservation, 
ance. A’c—, pr.pt. of coiseunnich. 





aich, v.a. Conjure. 2 Bless, ted 
ta, past pl. oi coiseun. Protected, d 
fende. 2 Consecrated. 
tach, -aidh, s.e. Protector, defender. 
coisg, pr. pl. a’ cosg Ia caig & a’ cosgadh] 
v.a. Stop, restrain, wean. 2 Quell,suppress, 
pacify, quench, extinguish, quiet, staunch 
subside. 3 Put an end to. Choisgzeiah 
teine, the ire was quenched; choisgeadh au t- 
uisge, the water was restrained; ch, do chat 
air bho thuiteam, keep your chair from i 
ing. 
Lan a. Quenching, quelling, restr 
ing, staunching. 
eadh, -gidh, s.m. see cosgadh. 
eoisgear, -eir, -an, 8.34. See e»sgair. 
coisgear, fut. pass. of coisg. 
coisginh, fut, aT. a, of cosg. 
coisyiith, a. Still, quiet. 2 Diligent. 
euli.te, past pt. of coisg. Quelicd, stilled, re 
svrained, paeihed, calineu, appeased.quencli- 











coisgte 


ed, settled, tranquillized. extinguished. a 

eoisich, pr. pt. a coiseacud [& a’ cotscachadh |, 
v.g. Walk, travel on fout, 2 Move of, de- 
part. i 

coisiche, -an, s.m. Walker, pedestrian., 2 Foot- 
man. 3**lraveller. 4ttlovot-solcier. Sè 
mile c., siz thousand foot-sol liers; a ch. na 
beinne ! thou traveller of the hill ! saizhdear- 
coisiche, a foot-soldier. 

teoisin. -e,-ean, 8.2m. Stem, stalk. 2 Defence. 

*veoisiniol, s.m. Gaelic spelling of cochinea!, 

coisiun, fut. coisnidh (sync. of coisinidh) pr.pt. 
a’ cosnadh, v. a Gain, earn, win, obtain, 
acquire, 2* Deserve. Tha i aig a cosnadh, 
she is at service—this expression in Gaelic is 
used to signify domestie service, ant is not 
applied to any one working at a skilled trade. 
In such cases the name of the trade is al- 
ways mentioned, as, tha eris a’ chlachair- 
eachd, he earns his living asa mason ; thai 
"ei chosnadb, she is earning it. 

oominn,** s./. Gain, advantage, profit. 2; 
Earning. 

oeoi»innte, past part. of coisinn, Gained, earn- 
ed, won, obtained, acquired. 2 Expert. Auns 
gaci ceaird tha thu c., in every trade you are 
expert. 

eoisionta, see coisinnte, 

ooisiontach, -aiche, a. That gains, acquires, 
or wins. 

coisiontair, -ean, s.m. Gainer. 

eoisir, sre, $8. f. Choir. 2 Festive party. 3 
Wake. 4 Singing of birds, 5 Military band. 
6HParty of singers. 7tt Attendants. of 
C..orus. 9**Company. 10**Yeast. 

coisir-chià:l, s.f. Choir. 

coisireach,ff -eiche, a, Choral. 

cois-leathann, a. Broad-footed, 

coisueadh, -aidh, see cusnadh. 

coisreacii, -ich, sf. Parish feast. 
Wed ling. 

coisr2adh, -ridh, -ridhean, see coisir. 

ovisrvagach,** a. Bushy, as hair. 

coisreagan, -ain, 8m. **Consecration, 2(AC) 
Consecrator, Dana-choisreagan, the woman 
wholeads the singing in the ceremony of 
consecrating the cloth after waulking. 

ocn -e, s. f. Infantry. 2 Company on 
oot. 

oo.sridh, -e, 8,f. **Jovial club. 2**Entertain- 
ment. 3**Concert of birds. 

coisr.g, pr.pt. a’ coisreazadh, v. a, Consecrate, 
sanctify. 2 Dedicate, asa book. 3**Bless. 
4**Anoint. 5** Addict. 

eoisrigeach, a. Consecrative. 

ooisri:e.dh, -dh, s.m. Consecrating, act of eon- 


2 Wake. 3 


secration, sanctifying. 21fDevotedness. 3 
** A dilictiou. 

coisrzidh, fut. aff. a. of coisrig. 

coisrigte, past pt. of coisrig. Consecrated, 


sanctified. 2**Ad licted. 3**Anointed. Uisge 
C.. holy water. 
fcoisrio;hadh, -aidh, s.m. Savcritication. 
coisriomhadh, -aidh, s. m. Elegant arrange- 
ment of feet in verse. 2f{Scanuing of verse. 
eoiste, tsee cosd. 2 see coisde. 
coistear, see coisdear. 
achd, see coisdearachd. 
coistre,(AC) a. Benign. 
coistri, see combiestri. 


coit, -e, -ean [& "imn 8. f. Small fishing 
boat, canoe. 2 Coracle. 3 Punt. 4 Hut. 5 
**Quoit. 6**Dos-hole. 

teoit, sm. Word. 


coitcheann, -4, a. Vuminon, public, eommunal, 
general. 2* Exposed to may clers, as à. 
house by the hizuway. Guc., publicly, com- 


233 


cólan 


monly; air aithris gu c., commonly reported. 
coiteheann,(AC) s.m. Common grazing. 
—ach, -aich, sm. Commoner. 
—aclid, sf.ind. Community, common- 
ness, generalness. 2 Universality, catholie- 
ness. 





as,-ais, sm. Community, state of 
having things in counnon. 2 Universality. 3 
Exposure, 4* Tne state of being su b;ect to 
calling. 5 Public situation. as of a house. 6 
Frequency. 7**Cc-partnership. 
coitcheanta, see coitcheann. Gu C., adv, com- 
monly. 
coiteheanntachd, see coitcheannachd. 
coiteheauntas, -ais, see coitch.annas, 
coitchionn, -à, see coitcneann. 
colichionnas,* -ais, see cottcheannas. 
coite, $.7. see coit. 
REES Ce -5ch, 8. m. Pressing to take anya 
thing. 
adh, -aidh, s.m. Pressing to take any- 
thing. z* Contending, asin argument. A 
c—, pr. pt. of coitich. 
coitear, -eir, -an, s.n. Cottayer, cottar. 2ft. 
Boatwri:ht. 
coiteireachd, s.f.ind, Thu state of a cottager 
or cottar. 
1coi-teoraisn, sm. Limit, boundary. 
fcoi-theoran, see coi-eora2inn, 
coi'thional, see conih-thional. 
coitich, pr. pt. a’ cviteach (& a’ coiteachadh}, 
v.a. Press to take anything. 2 Urge an are 
gument, contend, inaintain. 
coitidh,tt «a. Common, general. 
teoiting, sf. Battle, combat. 
lcoitinn, see coiting. 
coitinu, a. prov. for coitcheann. 
fooitit, s.f. Awl, bediin. 
col, v.a. Hinder, restrain. 2 Prohibit. 3ff 
Plaster. 
col, -a, s.m. Impediment, obstacle. 2 Prohi- 
bition. 3 Incest. 4 Sin, crime, stain. 
cola, see combla and commiau. 
colach, see coltach—Dain lain Gho^^a. 
coiach, -aicne, a. Forb.dden, pronibited. 2 
Wicked, impious, incestuous. More usually 
coilaidh. 3 Lewis, for coltach. 
colach,** -aich, sam Flocs-bed. 
co!ach,** -aich, -aichean, sm. see cómhlach. 
-Olachadh, see comuiach+dh. 
colacad, s find, Plastering, daubing. 
Tcoladh, s.m. coh 
colag,§ -aig, sf. Cauliflower, 2tł Cutlet of 
weat, collop. *3(AF) Youug cow. 
colagaz, see colgaz. 
Tcolagau,** -ain, s.m. Salmon. 3 Salmon-trout, 
colaicn, v.n. see co.nhdhalaich. 
co.aidh, see collai ı. 
eachd, see coliaidheachd. 
coiais,** sf. Cabbage. 
co;aisde, id, s.m., Cull so, academy. 
ach, a. Oi, or belonging to, a college, 
collegiat - 
fcolam,, AF) af. Young cow. 
fcolama&h, s.m. Mine. 
column udh, (AF) s. Coal-fish. 
culaman, see caiman. 


er^ d erst 





XS 
NN 





tX 


Y 

>ar BBS 
- E — 8 eg MÉ 2 
Z Deg Aalt ei 





LI ES 





176. Colamoir. 
enainoir, -ean, s.m. Hake, (fish) 


.cóian, -ain, -an, s.m. see còmhlan. 


colan 234 colpa 
¥colan, -ain, sf. Young cow. Brisk, lively, smart. 8**Bitter, biting, as 
colann, gen.sing. -ainn [colla & colna], pl. col-| frost. 4**Freezing. b**Prickly. Mios c., 
lainnean, s. f. The body. 2 In good condi- month. 


tion of habit or body. 3**Carcase. 4**Flesh. 
Is math ach., heis in good condition. 

co’lannachd, see comh-lanuachd. 

co'lannaireachd, see coinh-lapnnaireachd, 

colar,(AF) s.m. Dove, see calman. 

colbain,** s.m, Rope of a ship. 

Tcolbh, see calbh. 

colbh, cuilbh, s.m. Sceptre. 2 Post, pillar. 
8 Plant, stalk. 4* Frontof a bed. 5(AC) 
Wile. 6'*Reed. Bho chuilbh an fhir-cheilg, 
from the wiles of the deceiver; e. nam buadh, 
the sceptre of victory. 

tcolbh, v.a. Sprout, shoot. 

tcolbha, s.m. Love, pie esteem, regard. 

colbhach, -aiche, a. Seeptred. 2 Pillared. 

colbhaidh, -e, a. Having pillars or columns, 

colbhairt,** sf. Colewort. 

colbh-sedlaidh, 8m. Finger-post, sign-post. 

tcolbtha, s.m. see colpa. 

tcolbthach, see colpach. 

co'leagh, see comh-leagh. 

cole, -a, -an, s,m. d f. Eider-duck, 

colca,4 s.f, Great auk, see gearra-bhall. 

jcoleach, s.f. Bed. 2(AF) Eider-duck, see lach 
Lochlannach. 

colcach bheag, T 6, E 


Little auk—mergulus 
melanolencous. 





177. Coleach bheag. 
t+colcaidh, $.. see colcach. 


coleair,S 8s. Great auk, see gearra-bhall, 2 
AF) Eider-duck, see lach Lochlannach. 
coldach, see coltach. 

co’leagh, see comh-leagh. 

co-leic’, (CR) s.m. Cuff, slap. 

colg, cuilg, s.m. Rage, ardour, wrath. 2 Fierce 
Tu, 311Manly hue, cheerful aspect, 4 see 
ealg. 

-—ach, &. Fierce, furious, wrathful. 2 Fret- 
ful. 3 Stern. 4 Ardent. 5 see calgach. A 
shùl ch., his fierce eye; mar thanasg "oa leum 
ch., dike a furiously bounding spectre. 

colgach, T s.m. Puffin, see fachach. 

———d, $.f. Prickliness. 

colgag, -aig, An, sf. Forefinger. 

colgaiche, s.f.ind. Peevishness. 2 Sourness. 
3 Fierceness, wildness, 4 Alacrity. 

colgaiche, comp. of colgach. 

colgaichte,** a. & past pt. Barbed. 

colgail, e, a. Lively, martial, smart, brisk. 

colgair,T em, Puffin, see fachach. 

¢colgan, -ain, -an, s.m. Salmon-trout. 2 Sal- 
mon. 

+colgan, (AF) 8.m. Dove, see calman, 

colganta, see colgail & colgarra. 

colgantachd, see colgarrachd. 

colgantas, -ais, 8. m.  Briskness, liveliness, 
smartness. 2ffWildness. 3**Bitterness, 

ecolgaradh,** a. see colgarra. 

colgarra, a, Fierce, stern, angry-looking. 2** 


a CH 

chd, s.f.ind. Fierceness, sternness. 2 
*New year’s eye. 38* Absurd hammering at 
anything. 


fcolz-bhealaidh, see ealg-bhealaidh. 
colg-bhruidhinn, s.m. Buteher’s broom. 
eolg-chu,-choin, s.m. Hound, fierce-looking dog. 
colg-raineach,} sr, Holly fern—Breadalbane, 
see raineacb-cuilinn. l 
eolg-rasgadh, -aiche, see colg-rosgach. 
colg-rosach, -aiche, a. Having strong eye-lash- 
es, 2**Prickly. 
colg-rosgach, -aiche, œ~ Fierce-looking. 2 Live- 


y eyed. 

colg-sheóol, -iàil, @.. Quick moving sail. 

colg-throid, v.a, Fight with the sword. 

teoll, s.m Hazel. 2 Gaelic name of the letter 
C.. 8 Neck. 4 Destruction. 

feoll, v.n. Sleep. 

colla, gen.sing (bad) of colann. 

colla,** s, Epicurisin. 

tcollach, -aiciie, see collaidh. 

A e? s.J. Fat heifer. 2 Boar. 8 Yearling 
calf. 


eollachail, -e, a. Boorish. 

colachd, see eollaidhneachd. 

Zeolladar, v. They lodged. 

tcolladh,** -aidh, s.m. Sleep, rest, 

collag, see collag-lin. 

¢eollag-lin, s.f. Earwig. 

coliag-lion, see collag-lin. 

collaid, -e, -ean, sfe Clamour, scolding. 2 Lo- 
quacity. 3 Quarrelsome woman. 4 more fre 
uently ‘‘cullach”’ Heifer of two years old. 5tf 

la. 
each, -eiche, a. Clamorous, vehement, 
quarrelsome, loquacious, turbulent. 








| coliaidh, -a, a. Sensual, carnal, lewd. 2 Wick- 


ed, impious, incestuous. 
hibited. Gu e, carnally. 

eolluidhea:hd, see collaidhneachd, 

collaidhneachd, &/.ind. Carnality, lewdness 
2 Lucestuousness. 

collaidin-ban, -e-baine, s.f. Opium poppy, see 
codalian. 

tcollaim, v, I sleep. 

Collainn, see calluímn. 

collainn, -e, -ean, s.f. Smart stroke. 

—— —ich, v.a. Strike, thresh, thump. 

collaire-bothain,(AF) s. Cormorant, shag, see 
sgarbh. 

collas, see coltas. 

fcoll-chnó, s.f. Filbert (cnó-challtuinn.) 

Teoll-choille, s.f. Hazle-wood. 

coll-leabaidh, ** s.f. Bedstead (of hazel,) 

collnach,tt-aich, a. Incestuous. 

tcollotach, -aiche, a. Soporific. 

colltach,** -aich, s.f. Fleet, navy. 

colluinn, -e, -ean, see calluinn, colann & call- 
tuinn. 

fcolm, s.m. see calman. 

colmach,** -aich, s.m. Dove-cot, pigeon-house. 

colman, see calman. 

colman-coille, see calman-coille. 

colman-taighe, see calman-taighe. 

eolmh, cuilmh, see calbh. 

colmhuinn,** see colbh. 

————each, see colbhach. 

colm-lann, -an, s.m. see calm-lann. 

colna, gen.sing. of colann. 2**[emperamenb, 

colnach, -aiche, a. Incestuous. 

fcolog, s.m. see colag. 

cologag, see colgag. 

tcolp, -a, 6m. Head. 2 Thigh, haunch. 

icolpa, s.m. Cow, 2 Horse, colt. 3 see calpa, 


3 Forbidden, pro- 





eolpaeh 


ipach, 
e. en 4 Colt. BAR) Cow-calt. A Cow 
that has never calved. Bheirear 


colpaich dhuit, heifers shall be given to thee. 
4ecipach, s.m. Duty payable by tenants to 
lanudlords— Martin. 

00] voten ih, -aidh, s.m, Equalizing cattle stock. 
‘his varies ina slight degree in some of the 
Za. ud, tut the following is fairly represen- 
tative of the whole Outer Hebrides. 

1 horse is equal to 8 foals. ] 
4 one.year-old fillies. 


A d 2 two-year-old fillies. 

T »» 1 three-year-old, and 
1 one-year-old filly. 

LED 29 2 cows. 

1cow  ,, 8 calves. 

e ef 4 stirks. 

P e 2 two-year-old queys. 

en » 1 three-year-ollquey & 
1 one-year-old stirk. 

ay 19 8 sheep. 

” » 12 hog,s. 

T » 16 luubs. 


= ET 16 geese, 

2 sheep ,, 8 one-year-old hogs. 

ww. A^ 1 two-year-old hogg. 

— In A rayll : 

1 cow is equal to 4 calves. 

2 stirks. 

E 1 two-year-old and calf. 

A 1 three-year-old, 

5 sheep. 

10 bus a, 

e 20 lames. 

colpach-seamlaeh,(AF) s.m. Uncalred cow. 

colpindach, see colpach. 

colsuch, see coltach. 

fcolt, -a, &.m. Meal, victuals. 

coltach, -aiche, &. Like, similar. 
nrohab:e. 

coltachail, see coltach. 

coltach4, s.f. see coltas. 

coltair-cheancach,§ Puffin. see fachach. 

coltar, -air, 8.5», Coulter, that part of a plough- 
iron. which cuts the soil. 

coltas, -ais, s. m. Likeness, resemblance. 2 
Liketihood, probability. 3 Appeararce. 4 
Gvol-looks. A réir coltais, in all likelihood; 
m. r sin bha a choltas, such vas his ap wir- 


2 Likely, 


ance; fear do choltais, & man like thee ; tha c. 


miliidh air na béistean, the insecis look Une 
doing damage; tha a choltas siu ort, you look 
as i? vou had, or as if you were. 

achd, see coslachd. 

£coltra, a. Dark, gloomy. 

eultrachan,? Pufu, see fachach, 








178. Colt. aiche. 


235 
Regen 
-aich, zm. Heifer. 2 Steer. 3 Bul-| coltraiche, -an, s.m. Razor-bill—alca aorda. 


comanaich 


feoltur, see coltar. 

co'luadair, s.m. see comh-luadar, 

colnaisg, 8./. Conquassate. 

Coluivn, see Calluinn. 

coluinn, see colann. 

colum, -uim, s.m. see calman. 

columan, -ain, s.m. see calman. 

tcolumhan, -ain, -an, 8. m. Pedestal, pillar, 

rop. 

co — -uinne [colla & colna,] pl. -uinn [& 
-àn,] sf. see colann. 

e om ? fur c' uime? 

com, @ see coma. 

fcom, sm. Kindred. 

¢com,v.a@. Frame, shape, 

coin, cuim, s.m. The cavity of the chest, the - 
region of the viscera. 2 The trunk of the 


body. 38** Breast. bosom. 4**Waist. 5** 
Belly, bowels.  6**Womb. 7**Protection, 
guard. Corruich a chuim, the rag» of hie 


breast; chlisg a cridhe ’na com, her heart 
started im her bosom ; tinneas-cuim, bloody 
jluz; 2 any disorder of the intestines, 

coma, e. Inditferent, not caring, regardless, 
Is c. leam thu, J hate you ; nach c. leat-sa P 
what is that to you } is c, dhomh-sa có aca, 
it is no matter to me (which of them) ; is c. leis 
an righ Eòghann, agus is c. le E. co dhiù, the 
kina doesn't like Ewen, but E. doesn't care 
whether the king likes him or not. 

coma, conj. However. 

feonmach,** -aich, s.m. Breach. 2 Defeat. 3 
Tax, toll. 

1eoniadair, -ean, s.m. Romancer, story-teller, 

+—————eachd,** s.f.ind. Fiction, romancing. 

comadh,** a. Desirous. 2 Lukewarm. 

comaidh, -ean, s.f. Mess. 2 Eating together 
or promiscuously of the same food, particu- 
arly if out of the same vessel; bi'd thosd 's 
bi 'd chowaidh, be silent and take your share 
—ask no questions for conscience’ sake; thoir 
dhoinii c., give me a share of your food; gabh 
c., take out of the same dish with him; is sona 

ach cuid anc., pleasant is every morsel that 

ts shared. 

comain,-ean, s.f. Obligation for favour re- 
ceived. 2**ltecompeuse. 3**Gratui.y. Tha 
mi fada ’nad chomain, I am much ovliged to 
you: cha’n "eil mi ‘nad chomain, J am not 
obliged tu you; cha b’ edo chomain e, J vid 
not deserve that at your hand; c. do laimhe 
fèin, tit for ta, ; f ch. agad-sa, under ovliga- 
ticns (0 you; c. an uile a ni, repri:a/s, evil for 
evil ` bu ghaol gun ch, mo gh rài hi dha-san, 
1 love him for nis own sake, and not fur ary- 
thing he has done for me; aun an c. nam 
b.iathran ceudra in much the same words op 
ayrevubiy to what haa been previously said; 
seallaidh cù air c., a doy reuemoero a favour. 

eomaineach,ff -ecne, a. Obligatory. 

comair,tt eau, SE Meeting or cuniluence of 
waters. 

tevinair, v.a. Liken, compare, 

fconiair, @ see cuimir. 

tevmaires, 8.f. see comraich. 

comaith,* sf. see comaidh. 

teumal nae, s. Dropsy. 

fconaltach, o, Fuifilied, performed. 

teomamar, $51. Comparison. 

cowanach,** sce comanachadh. 

comanachaidh, A dn, 8m Sucrament. 2 The 
celebration of cho Lord's Super. 3 Aet of 
partasing of it. Luchd-comanachaidh, rem- 
2i cauta, A’ c—, pr.r?. of coimanaiclr. 

culnana.ch, pr.pt. a’ comanach dh, v.a Come. 
Liuuicate, partake of tie Lord a Supper, 

BA 


comanaiche 236 


comanaiche, -an, s.m. Communicant, one who 
partakes of the Eucharist. 

Tcoman-mionla, s.m. Corn-camomile, see mìn- 
lacha. 

comann, -ainn, see comunn 


D 


tcomann-searraich, s.m. Pilewort (plant.) 


comannd, -a, s.m. Gaelic spelling of command. | 


comanndair,-ean,  8.7n. Gaelic spelling of 
commander. 

commanta,** 8.m. Captaincy. 

+comaoine, see comain & vomanachadh. 

Tcomaontoir, -ean, s.m. Benefactor. 

tcomar, -air, -an, s.m. Meeting. 2 Confluence 
of waters, place where two or more waters 


meet. 3**Help. 4**Nose. 5EIIWay. 6ftValiey. f 


comarach,** a. Confluent. 2 Auxiliary, help- 
ful 


comaradh,-aidh, s.m. Anything thrown on| 


the shore. 2 Booty. 8 see comradh. 

comarag,(AC) s.f. see comraich. 

comaraich, $8.f. see comraich. 

comaraich, pr. part. a’ comarachadh, v. a. 
Protect. 21f Help. 

comarath, v.n, Strive. 

comare,**.aire, s.m. Part, share. 

tcomart, 8.m. Death, killing. 

, v.a. Kill. 

comas, -ais, sm. Power, authority. 2 Ability. 
8 License, liberty, permission. 4 Practica- 
bility. 5 Virility. 6 Datum. Gun c. ruith, 
without power of running ; thoir c. dha, give 
him liberiy; orra chomais, an amulet to de- 
prive a person of his virility. 

, “ais, s.n, Pulse. 

ach, -aiche, a. Powerful, able, capable 

2 Active. 3 Potentialin gram. 4*In good 

worldly circumstances. 5**iZdective, Daoine 

comasach, effective men. 

achd,** s.f.ind. see comas. 

aiche, comp. of comasach. 

dair, -ean, s.m. Commissary. 

———daireaebd, SE Commissariat, business 
of a conunissary. 2 Commissaryship. 

comasg,-aisg, see coimeasg. 

aclid, see coimeasgachd. 

1comasg-ghnumh, s.m. Confused mass, chaos. 

combach, -aich, s.m. prov. for companach. 2** 
Breach. 3**Defeat. Ceud c. do mhnà, the 
first companion (husband) of thy wife. 

cumbaiche, s.f. Friendship, eompanionship. 

combaiste, -an, 8.2». Compass. 2 Circle. 

—ach, -eiche, a. Of, or belonging to, 
a compass. 

combanach, see companach. 

+combrughadh, -aidh,s.m. Oppression. 2 Con- 
trition. 

pode ees, -àiche, a. Wrapping up the 

ody. 

comeirce, 8.f. given in some Diets. for coimeirce. 

co meud ? see cia meud ? 

comh-,insep. particle. ‘‘Comh-” should always 
be used before a hyphen, *''coimh" only in 
composition, when first vowelof next syllable 
is à small one. 

Tcomh, v.a. Preserve, keep. 

comh-abairt, «ean, £. f. Conferenee, dialogue, 
conversation. 

comhach, -aich, s.m. Prize. 9 Prey. 8 Pre- 
datory life. 4**Cense. 

comhachadh,1] -aidh, s.m. Dispute, fight. A’ 
c—, pr.pt. of comhaich. 

comhachag,-aig,-an, s.f. Barn-owl—siriz u- 
lula. Chualas a’ ch. .4 creig, the owl was 
heard from a rk. 

— -alharcaiche,™ s.f. Long-eared owl, 
—otus vulgaris. 

comhachag-bhan,{ 8. f. Snowy owl—surnia 





























comh-acmac 





181. Comhachag-bhàn (1.) 
nyctea. 2 Barn-owl, see cailleach-oidhche. 





- s» L 
* n Tide: 


188. C.-chluasach. 


182. C.-bheag. 
comhachag-bheag,™ s. f. Little owl—noctua 
passerina. 
cowhachag-chluasach,1 sf. Short-eared owl 
—otus brachyotus. 
comhachag-dhonn,fi s.f. Tawny owl—syrni- 


um or ulula stridula. (illust. 184.) 
comhachag-gheal, see comhachag-bhan. | 
comhachag-mh6ér,f_ s.f. Eagle-owl. see caill- 
each-oidhche-mhór. , 
comhachag-mhér,(2) 8 f. see c— -bhan. 
comhachag-ruadh,fl st see c— -dhonn, 
combachag-shneachidaidh (AF) sf. Snowy owL 
+comhachd, see cumhaehdf. 
————-— ach, seecumhachdach. 
Tcomh-acmace, 8.1». Circuit. 


comh-acmach 





184. Cum} aoh ag-dh onn. 

feomh-aem»?ch, see seomh-acmac. 

eciuliad, -aiu,-a/dcan, s.m. (comh+fadat) Com- 
parison, similitude. % Elegy. 5**l'arable. 
4**Two last quatrains of a verse. Gu c., arow. 

comhad,** a. Equal, even, lineal. 2 Like. 

achd.**5,7. Equality. 

comhadh, see cumhadh 

feomh-agal,-ail, see couh-agaliadh. 

— ——— —. ladh, -aido, s.m. Conference. Ann 
an taigh coiih-agallaidh, ta uncertainty, 

comhaib,* s.f. Con ention about right. 

»* v.n. Contend about rights or time to 
do something. 

eomhaich,t pr.pt. a’ comhachadh, v.n. Dispute, 
assert, contend, 2**Collect, gather. 3(DU 
Defeat. Chaidh a chombachadh, he was de- 
Seated. 

—eadh,ft -idh, an, s.m. Cou petition, 
2 Contradiction. 

comhaideach,** see coimheadaeh, 

_ «t, see coimheadachd. 

comhaidh,** s.m. Keeper. 2 Reward. 

+comhaidhcreas, -eis, see comh-àiteachas. 

comhaidich,** v.n. see comhaidrich. 

comhaidrich,tt »r.pt. a’ comhaidreachadh, v.n. 
Squire. 2 Convey. 3 Attend. 

fcomhaightheasch, -aich, a. see coimheach. 

comh-aígne, ef. Similar turn of mind, 2 wimi- 
lar passion or affection, 3 Fellow-feeling. 
Duine aig a1 robh c. ruinne, a man who hau 
like passions with ourselves. 

—ach, a. Having similar passions 
or affections, 

feomhail, -ean, 

T——— , v.a. 

t, v.a. 

comhailteach, 
pleted, 

—— — ——-4,8.f. Convoy, convoying. 

teomhaim, s.f. KAL, spouse, 

icomh-annsear:llia, a. — 

Gouileniwsireach, } see comh-aiinsireil, 

— -———__,** ich, s.m. Coutemporary. 

————————4, s.f.ind. Conenrrenes of 
events happening at the same time. 

comh-aimsireil, a. Contemporary, coeval. 

couh-aimnsirich,1? v.n. Coutemporize. 

eomh-ainm,-ean, 8. m. Surname, additional 
name, 2**Namesake, 3ttAnniversary. Is 
eseo c. là a bhreith, this is his birthday, 
(lit. the anniversary of his birth.) 

eomhi-air, v.a. Count, nuinber. 

cómhair,** -ean, s.m., Dry-stone builder. 

feonmhair, s.m. Certainty, sure sign. 

comhair, ¢8.f.ind. Directioun or tendency —for- 
ward, backward, headlong, sideways, &c. 2 
Presence. 3ttView. 4 Opposite, ayainsc, be- 
fore, over against. An c., nearly, almost; an 
e. a’ cbinn headlong; an c. a’ c iüil, backward, 
a ch. a bhaile, near the town; na tig 'gam ch., 














see còmhdhail. 

Discharge an office or duty. 
Join. 

a. Fulfilled, performed, com- 


PRT 


comh-altrumas 


do not come near me. 

comhaire, -ean, s.f. Outcry, clamour. 2 Fore- 
warning. 3 Mercy, quarter, protection. 4tf 
Appeal, 

-————-, v.a, Cry out, bewail. ?1iProtect, 
assist. 

tevmhairce, see comhairc. 

tcomhaircis, -e, $.7. Assistance. 

comhaireachd, s.f. Opposition, 2**Dry-stone 
building. 

comh-àireamh, -e, s.m. Numbering together, 
2 Poll, as of votes. 

co'inhaireaun, o. Equally lasting. C, ris a’ 
ghréin, as lasting as the sun. 

tcomhair, s.m. Certainty, sure sign. 

comhairle, -an, s.f. Advice, counsel, 2 Coun- 
cil, synod, convocation. Eheir mi comh- 
airle ort, J will give thee advice; c. na còrach, 
right advice; is diù nach gabh c., agus is dik 
a ghabhas a h-uile c., he is foolish who won't 
take advice, and he is foolish who takes allad- 
vices— ihe over-wise in his own conceit, and 
the man who is too easily led by all iniluen- 
ces ; c. càraid gun a h-iarraidh, cha d'fhuair 
i riamh a mea» bu choir dhi, a frienc's advice 
unasked is «ver appreciated; is ann air c. na 
gaoitbe 'tha 'n cuan, the wind controls the 
ocean—ths dwellers in Uist, the land of 
fords, know this from experience; gabh e., 
take advice; cuir c., confer, ask adv.ce; chuir 
e c, ris na daoine òga, he consulied with the 
young men. 

cemhiurleach, -ich, -ichean, 8. m. Adviser, 
conuselor, monitor. 2 Councillor. C. diomh- 
air, a privy councillor. 

JI iche, a. Persuasive, 

—— —.——4.1t5..ind. Advisedness, 

comhairleachich, -aidh, s.m. Advising, act of 
advising. A’ ec ,pr.pt. of comhairi:ch. 

comhuirle-dhii:mhair, s./. Private advice, 2 
Privy council. Ball na comhairle diomhair, 
a member of the Privy council. 

comhairlich, pr. pt. a’ comhairleachadh, v. a, 
Advise, counsel, admonish, put on one's 
guard. 

—— — —— e, -an, 








see comhairleach. 

—— te, a. & past pt. Advised. 

comh-airp, af, see comh-fharpuis. 

——each, a. see comh-fharpuiseach. 

comh-airpeas, see comh-fharpnis. 

comh-airpse, see cumh-fharpuis. 

comhaii-thra na h-oidhche, 8.f. Evening twi- 
lix hi. 





coml-aistreach, -ich, -ichean, s.m. see comh- 
astaraiche, 

eomiràiteachadh, -aidh, s.m, Dwelling toge- 
ther. 


comh-àiteachas, -ais, 
2 Colony. 
comh-àitich, v.a. pr.pt. a’ comh-àiteachadh,v.a. 
Co-habit, dwell or reside together. 
comh-àitiche, sm. Neighbour. 2 Townsman, 
comh'titheach, -ich, gan. Competitor, 
comnal,** a. Brave, courageous. 
fcomhal, -ail, -an, s.f. Waiting-maid. 2 Per- 
formance or execution of anything. 
teomhil, v.a. Keep. 2 Perform. 3 Connect, 
join together. 4**ileap together. 
comhal, -ail,-an, sm. Binding or joining to- 
gether. Droch c. air, evil be his jate | (lit, 
may he be bow d by death 1) 
aiche, An, s.m. Confederate. 
ta, -n,s.m. sve comh-dhalta. 
———ttas, see comh-'ihiltas. 
comh-altaich,** v.a. Jwa together 
tulate. 8 see comh-dhaltaich. 
comh-altrumas, -ais,s.m. Muuwual fosterage. 


8.m. Neighbourhood. 


2 Congras. 


~ 


comh-amar 238 


comh-amar, see comair. 

‘comhan, -ain, s.m. Shrine, 2 Kiln-pot. 

comh-aogas,**ais, s.m. Equiformity. 

cumb-aois, -ean, s.m. One’s equal in age. 

comh-aoiseach -ich, -ichean, s.f. One’s equal in 
age. 2 Contemporary. 

—— ——, -1che, a. Contemporary. 
comh-aolachd, s.f.ind. College. 
coumh-aomiuch TT a. Convergent. 

——————&ail, see comh-aomach. 
comh-aom,ff v.a. Converge. 
comh-aonta, s.f. Consent. 
comh-aontach, -aiche, a. Consenting, agreeing, 

concordant, concurrent. 
—— — adh, -aidh, s.m. Consenting, ac- 
ee. A’ c—, pr.pt. of comh-aonc- 
aich. 











——— d, sf.ind. Agreement, accord, 
concord, unanimity, consent, agreeableuess. 

comh-aontadh, -aidh, see comh-aonta. 

comh-aontaich, v.a. dn. Agree, unite, con- 
sent. 2 Yield, admit, grant, asa point in an 
argument. 

comh-aontuich, 

comh-aosda, @. Of equal age. 
porary, co-eval. 

oomhar,** s.m. Forerunner. 
**see comharradh. 

comhar (mu) ** Opposite. Mu comhar, oppo- 
site her; mu 'n comhar, opposite them. see 
comhair. 

comhara, see comharradh. 

comharachail,** a. Assignable. 

comharaich, see coinharraich. 

comharan ( for comharraidhean) pl. of comh- 
arradh. 

comh-arba, s.m. Partnerin church lands. 2 
Successor. 3 Vicar. A Order of monks, 15 
Protection. 

comh-arbachd, s f.ind. Vicarage (office.) 

fcomh-arbaich, v.n. Succeed. 

tcomh-arbas, -ais, s.m. Succession. 

comh-àrd, a, Equally high. 

comhard, -aird, -airdean, see coimheart. 

comh-àrdaiehadh,f] -aidh, s.m. Agreement, cor- 
respondence, in poetry. 

fcomhirguin, s.f. Syllogism. 

neach, a. Syllogistical. 

tcomharnais, -e, s.f. see comh-fharpuis. 

comharrachadh, -aidh, s.m. Marking, distin- 
guishing. 2 Spying, descrying. A’ c—, pr. 
pt. of comharraich, 

comharrachadh-clàir, 
music. 





see comh-aontaich. 
2**Contem- 


2 Presence. 3 








s. m. Staff notation in 





185. Comharraidhean-cluais chaorach. 
(ill. by MMcD.) 
comharradh, -aidh, -aidbean, 8m, Mark, im- 


comharradh-elnais 


ee A token, sign. 2 The sexual mark. $ 

anner. 4**Print. 5**Vestige.  6**Proof, 

Mar ch. air am buaidh, as a sign of their vic- 

tory; is ole an c. e, it is a bad sign; c.-cluais, 

an ear-mark ; deagh ch., @ good sign ; droch 
ch., a bad sign. 
NAMES OF EAR-MARKS ON SHEEP :— 

1 ee made in the centre of ear.— 

ole. 

2 Barr—tep eut off the ear—tip, crop.. 

3 Roibeadh—slit made downwards from 
the top of ear—Lewis,—slit. Sgoltadh 
(AH)—Argyll—split. 

4 Shileag—Top cut off in the form of av 
with the apex downwardls--'*eal stob,” 
fork ; swalluw-iail.— Lewis. Smeòrach 
(AH)—Avgyll. 

5 Geagan—triangular piece taken from top 
of the ear—cut. 

6 Beum—semicircular piece taken from 
under-sde of ear—hind-bit. — Lewis, 
Beum fo chluais,AH), beum cülaoibh 
(DM) back-nip. 

7 Gearra&lh erócan—Slit taken diagonally 
upwards at the side of the ear. 

8 Gearradh—slit made at the side, across 
the ear. 

9 Slisinn, cas,—sliee taken from the side 
of the ear. 

10 Amalath—dovetail-shaped piece, taken 
from the sile of the ear. 

11 An t-snathad—slit made in the centre of 
ear by bending or doubling the ear 
lengthwise and eutting down, leaving 
a tongue like that of a net-needle, 
from which it takes its name, 

12 Bacan àrd „ AH) the fore, or upper half of 
barr cuc oit —fore-quarter — A rgyll. 
—high-notch (DM.) 

18 Bacan ioxal,(AH) hind, or lower half of 
barr cut off—hind-quarter—A rgyll. 
—lo-v-notch (DM.) 

14 Beum os cionn na cluaise,(AH) Semi-cir- 
cular piece takea from "PEF side of 
ear, like No. 6 on under side—fore-bit. 
Beum beulaoibh,( DM) fore-nip. 

15 Cas-chaibe, piece taken from side of ear 
shaped like a eas-chomiDU)—Gairioch, 
In Argyll, this mark is taken from the 
top of the ear, so that when the mark 
bàrr is made, cas-chaibe disappears— 
(DM) spade-shaft. 

16 Da-svoltadh,(DM)two parallel slits made 
downwards from top of ear—two splits— 


Argyll. 

17 Da-bheum,(DM) [like No. 6 duplicated} 
—two nips. 

18 Beum mhéirleieh, varies. Jf a sheep- 
stealer cuts off a cas-chaibe mark, the 
ear will then be like one marked barr. 
When lower marks than cas-chaibe have 
to beremoved, a larger part of the ear 
is cut off, leaving only a stump. 

In Lewis, the marks 1to 9 are the old ear- 
marks, known as **na naoidh deargadh.'' 
Nos. 10 & 11 are of modern origin—(MMD) 

The near" ear,is ‘‘cluas ehli," or ‘‘cluas a’ 
ghlaeaidh;" the “far” ear, ‘‘cluas dheas.” 

By combinations of these marks, and the use 
of either or both ears, a practically endless 
variety may be obtained. 

There are some who put age-marks on their 
sheeps' ears,—one nip for one-year-old, two 
nips for two-year-old, and so on upto five- 
year-old, when the marking ceases—(DM.) 

We are indebted to MMcD for names above, 
against which no references are given. 


comharra 'h-crniche 





comliarradh-c.iche, s.m. Barrier. 
comharraich, pr. pt. a’ comharrachadh, v. a. 
Mark, point ont, z Distinguish. 3 Observe, 
desery. 4 Remark. C., iad-.an, mark them. 
—e, s.f. Index in grain. (Le) 
comharraichte, a. & past part. Marked, point- 
ed out, 2 Noted, singular, notable, notori- 
ous, distinguished. 3 Goodly. Dune c., 
a goodly man. 
comharsachd, see coimhearsna chil. 
conrharsagachd, see coimhearsnachd. 
comnharsanta, see coimbearsuachi. 
comharsnuail, -e, @ see coimhearsnail. 
comhart, -airt,-an, s.m. Bark of a dog. 








2CR) Barkivg at nothing—barking ac sume 
object is tabhannaich— West of Ross-shire. 
comhartha, s.m. Sign, print, mark, vestige, 
token, proof. 
comhartlian, n.pl. of comhartha. 
tc Mm ts, -Ais, &m. see c.mpanas. 
eomu-astara che, -an, ëm. Fellow-traveller. 
comh-bhagair, v.a. Comminate, threaten, de- 


nounce. 
-————t, -ean, 8 J. Commination, 
threatening, denunciation. 
comh-bhagradh, s.r. see comh-bhagairt. 
comh-ohiidh, -e, s.f. Sympatuy, fellow-feeling. 
iha c. agam ris, I have a fellow-feeing for 
hunn. 





——-——e ich, a. Sympathetic, compassion- 
ate, tender-hearted. 

€omh-hhann, -an, $.f. Confederacy, league, 
buvu, compact, coutract. C. na sith, the 
bond of peace. 

comh-bhav-oiznre, s.f. Co-heiress. 

comh-bheanallteach,tf eich, s.m. Co-tangent. 

—___—__—_—_-—__,, -eiche, a. Co-tangent, 

¢comh-bheir, v.a. Contribute. 

comh-bheothachadh, -aidh, s.m. Quickening 
together. 2** Maintaining or feeding together. 

comh-bheothaich, pr.pt.a’ comh-biieothachadh, 
v.a. Qnicken together. 2 Revive together. 
3 Maintain together. 

comh-bheurla, s.f.ind. Conference. [McL. & 
D. gives ''eonference in the English lan- 
guage ;” but beurla, means ‘“ language, "' 
and m no connection with Engiish in this 
case. 

— ——— ——ch, a. Closely united. 2 Conjunc- 

tive, in gram. 
— ——-—chadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Con- 
juzation, union, 

eomh-i.hith, -e, s f. Co-existence. 

ecomh-bhitheach,** a. Co-existent. 

——-—adh,11 -aidh, s.m. Consubstan- 


tiation. 

conih-ohi.h-bhuan, a. Co-eternal. 

———— tachd, xf. Co-eternity. 

comh-blitheach,** a. Co-existent. 

com 1-bhogartaich, -e, sf. Quiveriug, shivering, 
shuddering, 

com '-bhoinn, gen. & dat. of comh-bhann, 2 
Support, An c. ris, supporting him—Dain 
lain Ghubha, 

D Tàithreach, -eiche, a. see comh-bhrath- 
arel, 








—eil, see c— -bhrathaireil. 
—- d, &. f. see c— -Lhraithr- 
eachas. 


comh-baràithreachas, -ais, sn. Brotherhood. 
2 Fellowship. 3 Consangninity. 
Toomh-bhraoch, -aich, -an, s.f. The borders of 
acountry. 2 Hills or eminences whici se- 
parate countries from one another. 
-— — ach, @ Bordering, contizuous. 
2 Marching with each other, as countries. 








239 


—aich, -e, SE, Barking, act of Larking.. 


comh-charaid 


comh-bhrathair, ahar, bhràithrean, s.m. Bros 
ther. 2 Companion, fellow, chum. 

comh-bhràtbaireil, -e, œ. Fraternal. 

comli-bhreith,ft -e, sf. Connascence. 

comli-bhrizheach, a. Of the same substance, 
consubstantial, 

comh-bhrigheachadh, -aidh, s.m. Consubstan- 
tiation. 

comh-bhrigheachd, s,f. Consubstantiality. 

conth-bhrigheil, ** a. Consubstantial. 

coinh-cbrighich, pr.pt. a’ comh-bhrigheachadh, 
va, Consubstantiate. 

comh-hhrioghachadn,see comh-bhrigheachadh. 

i -sidh, -sidhean, s.m. Defeat. 
2 Fright. 

comh-bhrodadh, -aidh, -aidhean, 8. m. Com- 
punetion, 

feomh-l-hruach, -aich, see comh-bhraoch. 

te mh-bhrnachach, s: e comh-bhraochach. 

comh-bhrüite,past pt, of comh-bhrüth. Contrite, 

üch.l, s f.ind. Contrition. 

comb-bhrath, v.a. Bruise. 2**Oppress. 

——— — ——adh, -aidh, s.m. Contrition. 

Teomh-bhuaidhreadh, -ridh, -ean, see comh- 
bimaireadh. 





| comh-bhuaii, v.a. Touch upon, come into con- 


tact, strike mutually. 
comh-bhnailte, past pt. of comh-bhuail. 
comh-bhuair, v.a. Tempt, disturb, trouble, em- 
broil. 2**Raise a tumult. 
tcomh-^huaireadh, s.m. War, tumult, uproar. 
comh-bhuairte, past pt. of comh-bhuair. Temp- 
ted, Ser Id, infuriated. 
comh-bhualadh, -aulh, s.m. 
2 Coutact. 3ffAllison. 
comi-bhna'l. 
comh-br5uintinn,ff s.m. Inosculation. 
comh-breith, see comh-bhreith. 
comh-c'agar, -air, 8.5. Conspiracy. 
comh-chaidir, v.n. Live, dwell. 2 Unite affec- 
tionately. 3 Trade, traffie, correspond. 
comh-chaidreach, -e:che, a. Corresponding. 2 
Linked in affec ion, companionable. 3 
Trafficking. 4 Dwelling together. 
comh-chaidreachas, -a's, s.m. Close friendship, 
companionship. 2 Correspondence. 3 Coms 
merce, traflic. 
combi-chaidreachd, 8$.f. 
comh-chaidreadh, Sa. 
comh-chaidreamh, s. m. Mate, 
chum. 2 see comh-chairdeas. 
comh-chainnt, -e, s f. Conference, dispute, 
dialogue, Cnm c., hold a conf-rence. 
comt:-chaiunteireachd,see c— -cnanntaireachd. 
comh-chairdeas, -eis, s.m. Correspondence, sos 
ciety. harmory. 
eomhevhaircucid, see c— -charachd. 
comh-chàireadh, s.m. Allocation, 
comh-channtaireachd, s.f. Choir. 
music. 
coinh-chaochladh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. 
mutation, exchange. 
coinh-chaoch!aideach, -eiche, a. Commutab!e,. 
exchangeable. 2 Equally subject to change. 
comh-chaochlaideachd, s.f.ind. Commutahi'ity, 
exchaugeableness. 2 Circumstance of being 
capable of exchange, or liable to change. 
comh-ctaoidh, v.n. Condole, sympatnize. 
—-—, 8 f.Condolence, sympathy, coms 
miseration, 
comh-chao'n, v.n. Ween with another, condole,. 
comh-c.itoimeadh, -nidü, s.m. Weeping toze- 
ther, condolence. A’ c—, pr. pt. of cm 
chaoin. 
comb-cirarachd, s.f.ind. Mutual struggling. 2. 
Contortions in wrestl ng. 
comh-charaid, -ean[ &-ci.àirdean,] s. m, Mutuak 


Mntual striking. 
A’ c—, pr. pt. of 


see c— -chaidreachas. 
companion, 


2 Chorak 


Com-. 





comh-charaid 


friend. 
A s.f.ind. see c— chair- 
eachd. 

«omh-chàrn, v.a. Accumulate, heap together. 
comh-chàrnadh, s.m. Accumu.ation, act of ac- 
cumulation. A’ c—, pr.pt. of c— -chàrn. 
conih-chàrnta, a, d past pt. Accumulated, heap- 

ed together. 
comh-eharraideachd, sf. Mutual struggle. 2 
Violent competition. 
comh-cheadachadh, -aidh, s.m. Consent. A? 
c—, pr. pt. of comh-cheadaich. 
ecomh-cheadaich, pr. pt. a’ comh-cheadachadh, 
v.a. Concede, admit, grant. 
—_—__--————-te, past part. Conceded, admit- 
ted, granted. 


treason. E 
"eomh-cheangail, 
Connect, unite, 


ind together, couple, league, 
confederate. 





te, past pari. of comh-cheang- 
ail. 
a. Corporate. 

eonih-cheangal, -ail, s. m. Tying, binding, 
uniting or linking together. 2 Covenant, 
treaty, league. —3** Conspiracy. 4 Conju- 
gation, agreement. A’ c—, pr. pt. of comh- 
eheangail. 

conih-cheangladh, -aidh, s.m. Covenanting. 2 
Stipulation, compact, agreement, league. 3 
Conspiracy. 

comh-cheanzlaiche, -an, s.m. Link of eonnect- 


ion, bond, person or thing that ties together. | 


9 Conjunction An gram. 
comh-cueannach, -niche, see c— -cheannachd. 
comh-cüeannachd, ar. al. Commerce, trade. 
comh-cheannaich, v.n. Trade together. 
eomh-cheannaire, s. Conspiracy, conspirator. 

————————each, a. Conspirant. 

comh-chearclach,** a, Concentric. 
comh-chearrach, -aich, «. m. Mate, eonsort, 

companion, playfellow, bed-fellow. 
comh-chearraiche,** s.m. Fellow-player, fel- 

low gambler. 





comh-creart, -eirte, a. Fashioned together. 2| 


Proportioned, adjnsted. 
comh-cheartaich, v.a. Fashion or form equally. 
comh-chéilidh, s.m. £ f. Paramour. 
comh-chéimneach, -eiche, a. Concurrent, con- 
eomitant, conjoined, associated. 
d, 8. f. ind. Concurrence, 
union, association, accompanying. 
eomh-chéimnich, v.n. see comh-cheumnaich. 
comh-cheol, -chiùil, 8. m. Concert. 2 Sym- 
phony. 3 Chorus. 
coirh-cheodlach, -aiche, a. Choral. 
comwnh-chedlraiche,** an, $.m. Chorister. 
coinb-cheumnaich, v.n. Concur. 2 Accompany, 
convoy. 3 Keep the same pace. 
comh-chiallach, a. Synonymous. 
cC., synonymous words. 
comh-chinneas, -eis, 8.m. Concretion, 
—ach,** a. Co-existent. 
comh-chinntinneach, a. Accretive. 
comh-chiontaiche, 8.m. Accessory. 
comh-chiseach, a. Contributory. 
comh-chliamhuinn, -chleamhna, pl. -chleamh- 
nan & -chliamhuinnean, s. m. Brother-in- 
law. 2**Son-in-law. 
comh-chnuasach, -aiche, a. Mutually investi- 
gating, pondering or scrutinizing. 
eomh-chnuasachailh, -aidh, s.. Mutual inves- 
tigation, pondering, or scrutiny. 
comh-chnuasachd, $./.ind. Mutual collection. 
2 Investigation, pondering. 3{{Corollary. 
comh-chnuasaich, v.a. Collect together. 2 











Briathran 








210 


| comh-chol tas, -ais, 


. .comh-chomhairle, Ap, sj. Consultation, de- 
-comh-chealg, -eilg, $.f. Rebellion, conspiracy, [ 





r. pt. a’ comh-cheangal, v.a | 






comh-chomharraichte 


Mntually ponder, 8 Sift, investigate. 
conih-chuuasaichte, past pr. of c— -chnuasaich 
Mutnaily oben d. investigated, pondered. 
comhi-cnogadh, -aidh, sm. Opposition. 2 Mue 

tual contention. 
comh-chozar, -àir,-an, see c— -ehagar. 
comh-choigreach, -ich, -ichean, s.m. 
stranger. 
comh-choimeasail,** 7. Comparable. 
comh-chóir, &.f. Lana richt. title, or claim. 
comh-chuisiche, s.m.  F^llow-pedestrian. 
comh-choitcheann, a. Catholic, universal. 
— — —achd, s.f. Univer.ality. 
—as, -Ais, sm. Universality. 
see eomli-chioxias. 


Fellowe 








liberation. 











ach, -ich, s.m. Fellow-coun- 
2 Fellow-councillor. 

achadh, -aidh, s.m. Consulta- 
tion. 2 Confederation. 


sellor. 











——— s comh-chomhairlich, pr. pt. 2’ c— -chomhairle- 
Couneeted, united, bound together. 2[ 


achadh, v.n. Advise, consult together. 


comh-chomhnuidh, -ean, s.m. Common abode, 


2 Co-habiting.. 


¢comh-chomhthrom, see c— -chothrom. 


comh-chomunn, -uinn, s.m. Fellowship, com- 
munion, partnership, society, associatiou. 
———— ——_—— archi ff s.f. Corporation. 
tecomh-chorbadh, -aidh, s.m. Destroying. 
comh-chórd, v.n. Accord, agree mutua.ly. 
--—ach, -aiche, a. Mutually aecordant, 
- —aáchd, sf.ind. Agreement, mutual 
understanding, congrueicao. 
— ———--—Adh, -aidh, &. Unanimity, agree- 
ment, concord. A’ e—, pr.pt. of e— -chórd. 
--——ail, -e, a. Compatible, consistent. 
-.——alachd, s.find. Compatibility, con-, 
sistency. 











conih-chorp, -chuirp, -achan, s.m. Corporation. 


-— c 





achadh, -aidh, s.m. 


Incorporation, 
act of incorporating. 


A’ c—, pr. pt. of c— 





chorpaich. 
comh-chorpaich, pr. pt. a’ e— -chorpachadh, 
v.a. Incorporate. 
—— -———te, past pt. of c— -chorpaich, 
Incorporated. 


eomh-ehós, -dis, -an, 8.m. Concavity. 

ach, -aiche, a. Concave. 

achadh, {tf -aidh, s.m. Coneavation, 

sich, v.a. Excavate. 

aichte, past part. of c— -chòsaich, 
Excavated, hollowed. 

comh-choslach, a. Conformable, like, equal. 2 
Bearing a mutual resemb!ance. 

comh--hoslachd, sf. Conformity. 2 Equality. 
3 Likeness. 4 Assimilation. 

comh-choslaich,** v.a. Assimilate. 

eomh-:hoslas, -ais, 6m. Equality. 2 Likeness, 
resemblance. 

comh-chosmhal, see comh-chosmhuil. 

eomh-chosmhuil, -e, a. Alike, similar. 2 Con- 
formable. 3 Equal. 

comli-chosmhuileachd, s.f.ind. Similarity, cone 
similitude, 

eomh-chothrom, -uim,sm, Counterpoise, equal- 

ity of weight, balanee, equipoise,equivalent. 
—— ——--.—aàch, a. Equipoiderant. 





— 











————————-.—Aachadh, -aidh, s.m. Kqualizin 


of weights, balancing. 2 Equipoising. A 
e—, pr.pt. of c— -ch thromaich. e 
——-——__--—---—aich, pr. pt. a’ c— -chothrom, 


achadh, v.a. Cou:terpoise, counterbalance 
weigh together, equiponderate. 


combh-chothromaichte, past pt. of c— -choth: 


romaich Weighed 


equalized, 
ce i o sed, balanced. 


together, 


co'h-chràbhađh 


comh-chràbhadh -aidh, s.m. Social worship. 

cviuh-chraitute, past pt. of c— -chrath, Cou- 
quassated, shakeu together. 

fcomh-chras, s. m. Good fellowship, 2 Mu- 
tual agreement ur understanciag. 

eomh-cnrath, v.a. Shake t get.or. 

comh-ehrathadh, -aidh, s.m. Concussion, act 
of shaking togecher. A’ c—, pr. pt. of c— 
chrath. 

comh-chreutair, -ean, s.m. Fellow-creatnre. 

comu-chriiheach, -eiche, a. A.reeing, unani- 
mous, of one inind. 

conin-chridheachd, s..ind. Agreement, unani- 
mity. 

comh-chrìoch, -iche, an, sf. Confines, border, 
cdze, march. 

oomh-chruch, v.42. & n. 2 Be 
conerent. 

comnh-ehrochach, -aiche, a. Coh»rent. 

comh-chrochadh, adi, s.m. Coherence, coher- 
ing. A’ c—, pr. pt. of c — chroch, 

eoumh-chrüb, v.a. «€ n. Snrivel up, contract. 

——— — — adh. -nidh, s.m. Contraction, act of 
shrivelling. 2 Become shrivelled. 

colnh-chruinn, v.a. Gicbulate. 

conh-ehruiun, -e, a. Globular. 2**Commea- 
surabie. 3**Concentric. 

— ere ‘ich, see c— -chruinneach- 
a D 

comh-chruinneachadh, -aidh, -aidhean, 
Cullection. 2 Congregation, assembly. 
c—, pr. pt. of c— -chruiunich. 

evinh-chruinnich, pr. pt. a’ c— -chruinneach- 
adh, v.a. & n. Collect, assemble, congregate, 
gather. 

@wh-chruinniche, -an, 8.m. 
plier. 

comh-chruinnichte, past pt. of c— -chruinnich, 
Collected, compiied, assembled. 

comh-ehrüpadh, see comh-chribadh. 

comh-chruth, -a, an, s.m. Sameness of form. 
2 Hesemblance. 3 Conformation, equiform- 
acion. 

¢combchuan-cogaidh, s.m. Theatre of war on 


Hang together. 


8. m. 
A’ 


Collector, com- 


sea. 

comh-chudthrom, -oim, 8.5. Equiponderance, 
equilibrium, equal weight, equipoise, coun- 
terbaiauce. 

comh-chudthromach, a. Equiponderant, equi- 
poised. 

eomh-chudthromaich, v.a. Equalize, equipon- 
derate, poise, wei» : together. 

comh-chuibhreach,-ic.i, -ichean, 3.f. Compound 
chain, coneatenalion. 

eomh-chuibhreachadn, -aidh, em, Chaining to- 
gether, aet of fettering or chaining together, 
emen. A’ c—, pr.pt. of c— -chuibh- 
rich. 

comh-chuibhrich, v.a. Chain together, concate- 


nate. 
comh-chuibhrichte, past pt. of c— -chuibhrich. 
Chained together, connected. 
oomh-chuideachadh, -aidh, 8. m. Joint assist- 
ance, aid, help, act of jointly assisting or 
h»lpiug. A'c-—, pr. pt. of c — -chuidich. 
comh-chuideachail,ff-e, a. Contributive. 
comh-chuideachd, -an, 3.f. Asscciation, con- 
comitancy. 2 Company, partnership. 3 Com- 
munity. 
eomh-chuideachdach,ff-aiche, a. Associated. 
eomh-chuidich, pr.pt. a’ c— -chuideachadh, v.a. 
Aid, assist jointly. 
comh-chuidiche, an, s.m. Assistant, coadjutor. 
oomh-chuimsich,ff v.a. Attemper :te. 
oomh-chuimte, a. Harmonized— Dain 1.Ghobha. 
eomh-chuing, -e, ean, $.f. Compound yoke, 
conjugation, 


241 


}comh-ciwum, v.a. Conform. 








comh-dhalta p. 


Yoking to- 


comh-chuingeachadh, -aidh, s.m. 
A’ c—, pr 


gether, act of yoking together. 
pt. of c— -chningich. 
—— ich, v.a. 





Yoke together, conju- 
gate. 





————— ichte, past pt. of c— -chuingich, 

Yoked together. 

comh-chnir, v.a. Apply. 2 Compose. 3 Ar- 
range, set in order. 4**Dispose. 

tcomh-chuisnich, v.a. Cong al. 

+ —te, past pt. Congealed. 

2 Proportion. 

comh-chum,** s.m. Conbguration. 

comh-chur, -uir, s.m. Application. 
sition. 3 Arrangement, 
ting in order. 

comh churaidheachd, see c— -charachd. 

coómndaeh, -aich, -aichean, $8. m. Covering, 
clothing, dress, 2 Shelier. 3 Proof, evi- 
dence. 4 Quotation. à K ivelope of a letter. 
6 Solemn declaration— Duin Iain Ghobha. 
Mar ch. air sin, as a proof of that; dé’n c. & 
bh’ air ? what dress had heon ? gorm ch. nam 
mór chrann, the green covering of the lofiy 
trees; c. luirgnean, armour for the legs. 

(AH) pr.pt. AN comhdach, v.n. 
semble, dissituulate, mis-state, mis-report, 
fib. fabricate. ’S anna’ c.a tha mi, I am 
only fabricating (telling lies.) 

cómlidachadh, -aidh, s.m. Cover, act of cover- 
ing. 2 Shelter. 3 Refuge. 4 Proof. 5 Quo- 
tation. 6**Cital. A’ c—, pr.pt. of comhdaich. 

comhdachail,** a. Convincing. 

cómhlachau,fi s.m. Pnifin (bird), see fachach. 

cómh'laich, pr.pt. a’ c mhdac^adh, v.a. Cover, 
cluthe, dress. 2 Shelter, sereen. 3 Prove. 
4Quote. 5 Witness. of Allege. 

-—te, past vt. of còmh laich. Covered, 
clothed, dressed. 2 Sheltered. 3 Proved. 4 
Quoted. 5 Witnessed. 

còmhdhail, -alaca Të -ala,] -ai-hean [& -ean,] 





2 Compo- 
allocation. 4 Set- 





Dis- 


s.f. Meeting, interview. 2 Assembiy, con- 
vocation. 3 Opposition. 4* Reproach. 6** 
Abutm:nt. 6ttLuck. ‘ttsee comhairle. 8 


(DU) Accommodation, as of wind, Fhuair 
iad c., they got a favourable wind ; droch ch. 
ort ! bad lucx to you |—the wish conveyed is 
that one may meet a person or animal that it 
was considered unlucky to meet; Am ch., to 
meet me; thoir „C. dha, reproach him. 
comh-dhail, (an) * prep. To meet. 2 In meet 
ing, in opposition. 
fcomhihaileam, see comhdhalaich. 
comuh-dhàmmheachd,ff sr, Correlativeness. 
comh-dhaingneac..a.lh, -aidh, 8. m. Confirma- 
tion, aet of conticming. 2 Strengthening. 
A’ c—, pr.pt. of comh-dhaingnich. 
comh-dhaingnich, pr. pt. a’ comh-dhaingneach- 
adh, v.a. Confirm, strengthen. 
comh-dhaingniche, An, s.m. Confirmer. 
teomiidhais, -e, s.f. (coltas) Resembiance. 
feomadaal, s.f. see còmhdhail. 
teomuadhala, s.m. Statute, law. 
có.uadhalach,, DU) a. Accommodating, favour- 


lug. 

comu:lhalach, gen. of còmhdhail. 

——— —--——AÀüh, -aiith, s.m. Meeting, act of 
meeting, or assembling. 2 Encounter. 3 
Opposing, intercepting. 

cómhihalaich, v.a. ZG n, Meet. 2 Coincide. 
3 Oppose, stop the progress of a person or 
thing. 4 Interpret. 

comhdialaiene, -4n, s.m. Mester, one who 
mets. 6(1)U) One who favours or accom- 
panies, companion. 

eomh-dina.ia, -a, sin. 
ter-sister. 


Foster-brother. 2 Fos- 
8 Higuland cousin. Iscaomh le 


comh-dhalta 


fear a charaid, ach "o e smior a’ chridlie an 
c., deur is a kinsman, but the pith of the heart 
iz the foster-brother (NGP) ; an nuaira théid 
a’ ghrian fodha, teichidh m' fhaileas, ach 
grian ann no as, cha teich mo ch., when the 


sun sets, my shadow forsakes me, but in shade 


or shine true is my joster-brother. [Chieftains 


of the Gael were in the habit of fostering their 


heirs with such of their vassals as had a 
promising family of sons, in order that nu- 
tual attachment might secure fidelity and 
friendship in future years. 
comh-dhaltaich,** v.a. Rear children together. 


comh-dhaltas, -ais, 8. m. Relationship of fos- 


terape. 2 Sucking the same breast. L 
comh-dhanns, v.a. Dance with another, 
comli-dhannsadh, s.m. Dancing in company. 

2 Mixed or promiscuons dancing. 
comh-dhannsair, -ean, 8 1, Fellow-dancer. 
conih-dhaoine, ap. Contemporaries. 
comh-dhas, -ais, sm. Equal right. 
comh-Dhé, see coimhdh«. 2 The Trinity. 
comh-dhealbh, v.a. Configure, construct, de- 

lineate. 
comh-dhealbhadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Con- 

figuration, construction, delineation. 2 Act 
of constructing, delineatiug. 8**Political 
constitution. A’ c—, pr.pt. of c— -dhealbh. 
com^-dhealradh, -aidh. aan, Coradiation. 
eonih-lteau, v.a. Compose, sett.e, adjust. 
adh, see eou1^?-dheauamh. 
amh, -aimh, s.m. Act of composing, 
A’ e—, pr. pt. of 











adjusting, compositiou. 
comh-dhean. 

ta, past pt. of comh-dhean, 

posed, adjusted. 

——tachd, 8.f.ind. Composition, 
justment. . 

comh-dhearbh, ? v.a, Prove fully or satisfact- 
orily, confirm by evidence, comprobate. 

— -——adh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Com- 
plete proof, full evidence. 

-_ ta, past pt. of comh-dhearbh. 
Demonstrated, clearly proved. 

comh-dhéarrsadh, s.m. Coradiation. 

comh-dheas, -cise, a. Convenient, ambidex- 
trous, well adapted. 2 Handsome. 3 Com- 
plete. 4 Commodious. 5.AH) Endowed with 
an appetite that refuses no kind of food. 6 
As ready to perforin or accept one thing as 
another, indifferent. 

—achadh, -aidh, s.m. Accommoda- 
tion, adjustment. A’ c—, pr.pt. of comh- 
dheasaich. 

—-——_—-achd, s.f.ind. see comh-dheasach- 
adh, 2f{Neutrality. 

comb-dheasaich, pr. pt. a’ comh-dheasachadh , 
v.a. Accommodate, supply. 

——— ——te, past part. of comh-dheas- 
aich. Accommodated, supplied. 

ecomh-dheas-lamhach,tt «. Ambidextrous. 

——— — ——üa,1f sj. Atubidexterity. 

comh-dheas-làmhaiclie,( A H) s.m. Man ready to 
undertake any kind of work, person not lia- 
ble to be defeated in any struggle. 

comh-dheuchainn, -e.-ean, 8.7. Competition, 
trialof valour, rivalry. 


Com- 
ad- 


























1comh-Dhia, see coinindhe. 

conib-dhilseachd,ff 5.f.ind. Correlativeness, 

comh-dhiol, pr.pt. a’ e— -dhioladh, v.a. Com- 
peusate, remunerate, make amends for. 2 
Retaliate. 


comh-jilicladh, -aidh, s.m. Compensation, ax : : 
A’ e—,| comil-fliazus, -uise, a. 


of compensating, 2 Remuneration. 


pr.pt. of e— -dhiol. 


comh-dlireach, -eiche, a. Straight,direct,plain. 


242 





comh-éigniclite, past part. 


aiche, -an, s.m. Competitor. 


comh-f.ad-chràthacn, a. 


comh-fhaighleadh 


comh-dhlighe, an, er. Kyual right. 

——— ach, a. Equally priviieged. 

comh-dhlüithte, a. Assemuled. 2 Bound to 
gether. 

comh-dhlüth, -üithe, a. Compact. 

comh-dhlütha, a. see e— -dhiüithte. 

chd,1f s /.ind. Contiguity 

cuadh, -aidn, s.m. Binding toge- 

ther, compact. 2 Contribution, A’ c—, 

pr.pt. of comh-dhlüthaieh. 

dh, see c— -thlüthachadh. 

ich, v.a. Fraime, conjoin, bind 





























together. 

comh-dhoilgheas, -eis, s.m. Condolence, cow- 
miseration. 

comh-dnreachta. a. 
**Proportioned. 

comh-dhualadh, -aidh, s. m. 
Sculpture. 

comh-dhüin, pr.pt. a’ e— -dhünadh, v.a Close, 
bring to an end, conclude. 2 Close together, 

te, past pt. of c— -dhüin, Conclu- 
ded, closed, 

comh-dhinach, -aiche, a. Conclusive. 

comh-dhünadh,-aidh, s.m Conclusion. 2 Act 
of cunciuding, 3 Act of ciosing together. A’ 
c—, pr.pt. of c— -dhüin. 

coinh-dhüthehas, -ais, s.m. The circumstances 
of belongiug to the same conntry, connection 
with the same country. 


Conformed, resembling. 2 


Embroidery. 3 





———-7——— —-àch, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging 


to, the same country. 

——— — ach, -aich, s.m. Countryman. 
comh-eagar, -air, s.m. System, order. 
amm E -aiche, a. Systematic, method- 

ical. 
comh-eagnadh, -aidh, s.m. Complex wisdom, 
privileges. 2 Knowledge of contemporaries. 
comh-éiginn, s.f. Force, constraint, compul- 
sion. 


comh-éigneachadh, -aidh, s.m. Constraining. 


forcing, urging, compelling. 2** Constrain- 
ment, compulsion. A’ e—, pr.pt. of comh- 
éignich. 


comh-éignich, pr.pt. a’ comh-éigneachadh, v.a. 


Compel, constrain, force, urge. 

of comh-éignich. 
Constrained, compelled, forced, urged. 

eomh-eirbse, s.f.ind. Wrangling, disputing, 
quarrelling. 

conih-eirbseach, -eiche, a. Contentious, quarrel- 
some. 

comh-é:righ, -e, s.f. Insurrection, rebellious 
commotion. 

comb-ediach, -aiche, 
knowing, equally informed. 2** Mutually 
acgnainting. 

couil.-colas, -ais, s.m. Consciousness. 2 Inter- 
kuowledge. 3 Mutual acquaiutance. 

co mheud ? see cia meud H 

comh-eud, -a, s.m. Emulation, rivalry. 2 Mu- 
tual jealousy or suspie:on. 

comh-eudmhor, a. Mutually jealous. 

comh-eugas,** see comh-aogas, 

comh-fhacal, -ail, pi. -ail & -clan,s.m.Synonym. 

comh-fhaclach, -aiche, a. Synonymous. 

comh-fhad, «. Equal, even, equally long. 2 
Lineal. 

comh-fhad-thrath, s.m. The equinox, at which 
time days and nights are of equal length. 
C.-f.-t- an earraich, the vernal equiinuz;c.-f.-t.- 
an fhogharaidh, the autumnal «quinoz. 

Equiuceval. 

see comh-f:.oghar. 

Equally near. 

coaih-fhagusgach, -aiche, s.m. Mntval relation, 

Conference. 


a. Conscious, equally 


t¢com.\-fhagharach, 


tcomh-fhaighbleadh, s.m. 


comh-fhàilteachd 243 comh-ghairdeachail 


bag E : &' comh-fhreagradh], v.a. Corres ond, agree 
comb-fhailteaclid, s.f.ind. Congratulation. 2| , i7 2 Re-ound, echo. Ch. ms citer 


Mutnal salutation., “i 
comh-fhàiltich, v.a. Congratulate, 2 Salute. enoc, every hi!. and knoll re-ounded. 
comh-fhàir, -e, s.f. Twil»hs, dawn, comh-fhreagairt, -e. -ean, s.f Con«on»ree, cor- 
comh-fhaire, 8.f.ind., VW a.ching, waking or sit- respondence, conform ity, snitab. Ne-S, COU- 

grnence, congruity, fitness, propriety, agree- 


ting up tozeth r. : T 
ge feed), see c— -fhaire, i D , j— ., 2* ite-echo. 
he EN c— . ab. —, pr. pt. of comh-threagair. 
MM. ze c "b jen conib-fhreagáirtear,** sm. e dés: 


comh-fharpuis, -e, -ean, s.f. KEntulation,rivalry. 

Miele. 2* Gibing, jcer.ng, taking og qu were, -aiche, a. Corresponding, 
conih-;harpuiseach, -viciie, a. kmulative, dis- tung, suitable, proper, answerable, tit, re- 

posed to competition. 2* Imitative, Sponstve, commensurable, 
eomn-fharpuiseacid,** s.f, Einulativeness. 2 comh-fhreagarrachd, s.f. see comh-fhreagartas. 

Frequent or coutinued emulation. conih-fhreagartas, “a's, Sm. Symmetry, 2** 
comh-thas, v.n. Grow together, iucrease toge. | Correspondence. 3**Fitness, 

ther. comh-fhreagradh, -aidh, 8. m. same meanings 
comh-fhàs, -a,s.m. Growing together. 2 Con- | 23 Comb-ihreagairt, 

Goton. coinh-fhreagraiche,** s.m. Correspondent. 
comh-fla<ach, a. Co-existent. comh-fhuaigh, v.a. Sew together. 
comb-fhasail, a. Accretive. comh-fhnaigheal, s.m. Sewing together. 
fcomh-fhà:g, v.a. Embrace. comh-fhuaighte, past pt. oi c— -fhuaigh. Sew- 
comü-fheadhaiun,-fheadhna, -an, &.f. Company, | Gd together. 

comh-fhuaim, s.m. Musical c ncordance, equi- 


troop, assembly. 
comh-fheall,-a, s.f. Conspiracy. tone, harmony, consonance. 
cvumn-fhealitach,t; -aiche. a. Conspirant. comli-fhuaimneach, -eiche, a. Consonant, har- 
coinh-fhear, -fhir, s.m. Equal, fellow. monious, sounding together, agreeing in 
comh-ihearsnach, see coimhearsnach. sound. | 
—— —d, see coimhearsnachd. comh-fhuaimneach, s.m. see c— -fhuaimneachd. 
comh-fhill, v.a. Convolve. 2**Complicate. comh-fhuaimneachd, tt ar (ad. Assonance, har- 
couh-ftilleadh,** s.m. Complication 2 Fold.| Mony. | . 

ing tovether. comh-fhuaimnich, -e, -ean, &.f. Sounding toge- 
comli-fhiilich, v.a. Fold together. PM dnos 

d. com-fhnaimnich, v.a. Attune. 


comh-fhillte, a. Folde h d : 

comh-fhilteadh, -idh, see c— -fhilleadh. comh-fouasglach, -aidh, saa. J oint relief. 

comh-fhilltich, v.a. see c— -fhillich. — -inola, s.f Consauguinity, relation- 
1p. 


comh-fhios, s.f. Conscience. 2 Conscious- e : à 
ness. Aninntinn agus an c., their mind and | COmh-fhuileach, -ich, s.m. Relation by blood. 
com! -fhujteach, -bche, a. Related by biood. 


conscience. " Ka QN d d 
———ach, -aiche, a. Conscientious. comh-fhuiliug, v.n. Suffer with, 1ecl with, con- 

—-———— rach, -aiche, a. Conscious, dole with, sympa‘ hize with. ' 
comh-fhuireach, Ach, s.m. Staying with or 


—— ——  ——rachd,** s.f.ind. Cousciousness. S. > d : 
comh-fhlaithe, s.m. see c— -fhlaitheachd, together. XAH) Brief delay, acs of waiting 
for one who is coming on behind. 


comh-fhlaitheach, a, Democratic, republican. i : 1 
2** Aristocratic. comh-fhuirich, v.n. Wait, wait together. 

com^-fhlaitheachd, s. f. ind. Democracy, re.|Comh-fhulang, -aing, s.m. Pellow-surtering. 
puche, commonwealth. 2 Republicanism. | ———— - ach, -aiehe, a. Suttering with, 
fré A ristocracy. condoling, sympathizing. 2 Feeling, tender- 

comh-fhlaitheas, see comh-fhlaitheachd. hearted. 


comh-fhlannas,** sm, Consanguinity. 

comh-fhlath, -aith, -aithean, sam. Fellow-ru- 
ler. 2 Demagogue. 3f{Vanguard. 

comh-fhocal, see comh-fhacal. 

comh-fhoclach, see c— -fhaclach. 

comh-fhoghair,** see c— -fhoghar. 

—— ———each,** see c— -fhogharach. 

comb -fhogzhar, -air, -airean, s.m. Consonant, 2 
Consouanes, 3* Resound, mutual stroke and 
sound. 4**Chime, as of bells. 

comh-fhogharach, -aiche, a. Consonant. 2 
Chiming. 

comh-fhoghar-chlag, s.m. Chime of bells. 

comh-fhoghlum, oun. $.m. The circumstance 
of being educated together, receiving the 
same education. 

comh-fhoghlumaiche, -an, s.m. Schoolfellow, 
fellow-learuer. 

eoinh-fhogus, -uise, a. see c— -fhagus. 

comh-fhogusach, -aich, see c— -fhagusach, 

comh-fhois, -e, s.f. Rest, mutual rest. 

comh-fheiseachadh, -aidh, s.m. Resting or set- 
tiing together. 2 Act of mutually ceasing. 
A’ c—, pr.pt. of c— -fhoisich. 

comh-fhoisich, pr.pt. a’ c— -fhoiseachadh. v. n. 
Repose, or rest with. 2 Mutually cease. 

eouth-fhola, gen. sing. of c— -fhuil. 

comh-fhonnmhorachd,ff eg, Chime. 

comhbh-fnreay,sir, pr. pt. a comh-fhreagairt | & 






























aiche, 

alr, 

—_ as, -ais, sm. Sympathy, compas- 
sion, fellow-feeling. Thà rou he jT a 
fellow-Jeeling. 

comhrfhurtac.adh, -aidh, s.m. Aiding, helping, 
consoling, coiuiorting. — A' c—, pr.pt. of c— 
fhurtaicn. 

comh-fhurtachail,-e, a. Comfortable. 9 Ana- 
leptic. 3**Cousoiatury. 

colu-fhurtachd, s.f.ind. Aid, help, assistance, 
2 Consolation, cointort, cointfurtabieness, 

comh-:hurtaich, pe pm. a’ c— -iburté chadh, v.a, 
Aid. assist. 2 Cumfort, relieve, cousole. 

coinhthurtaich, see comh-fhurtuich. 

cuinh-fhurtaicate, past pt. Aided. 2 Relieved, 
couiforted, consoled. 

couufaurtair, 6, -ean, s, m. Comforter, con- 
solator. 

fcomh-ghabhail, sr Harmony. 2 Love. 

Tcomh-ghail, a. Of the same iamily. 2 Fellow- 
heroism. 3 Battle, conflict, 

counh-glàir, v.n. Shout together. 

———-—, -e, sf. Conclaumation, simultaneous 
shout. 2 Congratulation. 

comh-zhair, v.n. Convoke. 

comh-güairdeachadh, -aidh, see c— -ghair- 
ueaciias. 

——deachail t e, a. Congratulant. 





} s.m. Fellow-sufferer. 








comh-għhàirdeachas 


comh-ghairdeachas, ais, s.m. Social joy, mu- 
„üa 50 ace. 2 Congratulation. 

comb-ghairdich, v.n. Congratulate, wish joy. 

comh-ghàir ch, -e, &. Shouting aloud, as of 
crowd or multitude. 

eomh-gliairxn, -e, -ean, 8.f. Convocation, 2** 
General shout, 

oom!i-ghairm, v.n. Convoke, call together. 

co:uh-ghlal, -a, see c— -ghul. 

eoniü-zhaol, -aoil, ssm. Mutuallove. :.**Con- 
sanguiinty. 

teoinh-ghavita, s.m, Kindred. 

comhghar, -aire, s.m. Nearness, juxtaposition. 
2** instrument. 

ecoinhgharach, -aiche, a. Near to. 

comh-gheall, v.a. Perform a promise, imple- 
went an agrcement, fulfil an eugageinens. 


eomh-ghealladh, -aidh, -aidhean, a.f. Perform-|——-——---—,, pr. pt. a’ comh-imrich, 


ing a promise. 

comh-ghearr, pr. pt. a’ coinh-ghearradh, v. a. 
Cut short. 

—— ——-.——adh, -aidh, s.m. Curtailing, cut- 
ting off, concision. 2 Reckoniug, score. 

comh-yhivl,s.m. Condition. 

cowh-ghleachd, an, s. m. Struggle, combat, 
conflict. 2 Wrest ing. 3 Competition. A’ 
c—, pr. pt. of c— -ghleachd. 

comh-ghleachd, pr. pi. a’ comh-ghleachd. v.n. 


Struggle. 2 Wrestle together. 3 Conflict. 
4 Compete. 
fconin-ghleie, see comh-ghleachd. 


feomh-ghleus, v.a Compose, adjust. 
couib-guleusaiche, -wn, 8m. Cumposer. 
comh-ghloir,-e, s.f. Equal glory. 2 Confer- 








ence. 3 Consonance. 
each, -eiche, a. Consonant. 
comh-ghlorach, see c— -ghloireach, 


comh-ghlórmhor, -oire, à. Equal in glory. 
comh-ghluasachd, s.f. see c— -ghluasad. 
comh-ghluasad, -aid, 8.m. Simultaneous move- 
ment, 2 Commotion. 3 Fermentation. 
——— ach, -aiche, d. l'ermentatüve. 
comhghnath,** s.m. Assistance. A ghaoil, 
comb-ghnaths, -àis, 8m. Even temper. 
comh-ghnathsach, -aiche, a. Genteel. 
dean mo ch., my love, assist me. [generally 
comnnadh. } 
Historical knowledge. 2 
3 Homogene- 





fcoub-ghné, s. f. 
Genealogy of contemporaries. 
ousness, like or similur nature. 

comh-ghué;theach, -eiche, o. 
cong «nal. 

comh-4nnéithealachd, 8. f. ind. Homogeneous- 
ness. 

coun-ghnéitheil, -e, see comh-ghnéitheach. 

coml-gnniomhar, s.m. Adverb, in gram. 

comi-yhnothach,tt -aich, -aiehean, s. m. Ne- 
gotiation, 


Homogeneous, 


t — — —-- adh, -aidh, s.m. Conversation. 
comh-ghràdhaiche, -an, 8.m, Riyal in love. 
comh-zhramach, -aiche, a Adhesive. 

— adh, -aidh, s.m. Adbesion, act 
of adaering. A’ c—, pr. pt. of c— -giirain- 
aich. 

comn-ghramaich, pr. pt. a’ c— -ghramachadb, 
v. n. Adhere, cling to, fasten to, cohere, 

grasp mutually. 
comli-zhreamach, -aiche, a. see c— ghramach. 
—— — — —Aádüh, -aidh, see coiuh-ghram- 





— 





achadh. ^ 
e W see comh-ghramaich 
eomh-pnrianach,ff -aiche, a. Rising or set- 
ting with the sun. 
comh-ghuil, pr. pt. a’ c— -ghul, v.n. Weep to- 
getuer, coudole. d 
1comh-ghuin, -e, s.f. Compunction, 


244 


‘comh-ghul, -uil, sn. Condolence, weeping with 


| comhlach, 8.f. 


còmhla ch adh 





one anoth:r. 
ccmi-ghutu, -a, 8m. Consonant, 
ach, -aiche, a. Consonant, sounding 








witb. 

cowh-iadh, tf pr. pt. a’ comh-iadhadh, oe 
Ciose round, environ. 

cowh-iadnadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Conspir 
acy. 2 Iiuclosing, encircling, environing. A 
€—, DEA of comh-iadh. 

comb-.asi.d, $t -aid, s.an. Mutation. 

comh-iath, see eomh-ia.h. 

comh-iathach,tt¢ -aiche, a. Conspirant. 

comh-imeachd, &.f.ind. Marching, walking op 
going together. 

conih-imeachdach,** a, Attendant. 

coi;h-inriceh, -e, -can, sf. Commigration. 

v.n. 
Cominigrate., 

comn-inbhneaca, qa. Co-ordinate. 

d, s.f. Co-ordination, 

comh-iomair, pr. pt. a’ c— -iomradh, v.n, Row 
togcti.cr. 

comnh-ioinlaid, -e, -ean, s.f. Commutation. 

cowh-iumlaideach,{{ -eic.e, a. Inierchange- 
able, exchangeable. 2 Commutable, 

comh-iomlaideachd, TT 8./.Intereuangeubleness, 
2 Commuta»itity. 

comh-iom:adich,* v.a. Bandy, exchange. 

comb-iomlan, -aine, œ. Perfect, coiuplete, 

EES: 8.f.ind. Compieleness, per- 
ve ion. 

conin-lomradh,(WC) s.m. Rowing competition, 
Bha ea’c.,he wasin a rowing compeiition. 
A’ c—, pr. pt. of c— -iomair. 

comh-ionaun, a. Alike, co-equal, same. 

eomh-ionannachd, s.f. Equality. 2**Simi- 

comnh-ionna,, -ais, 8.7n. arity. 

comh-ionaunas, -ais, see conih-ionnas, 

comh-ith, v.n. Eat with, partake of food. see 
comaidh. 

eadh, -eidh, s. m. Eating together. 
Taigh comh-itheidh, an eating house. 

comh-itheannaich, F 

omah e \ see comh-itheadh, 

comh-ith-thaigh,** s.m. Eating house. 

còmhla, -aidh, pl. -aidh & -chan [& -ichean], 
8.m. Door-irame, door-kaf, gate. 2(DC,One 
half of a door—Uist. 3(DC) Outer door of a 
house. 4 Barrier, obstacle. 5 Guards, 6 
Horn. 7**sluice. 8**Valve. 9* Shutter. A 
dh’thosgladh nan c., to open the two-leaved 
gates; comhlaichean de ’n or bhuidhe, doors of 
yedow gold. . 

còmhla, adv. (comh+lamh) Together, in com- 
pany. 2 At one time. Thigibh c., come to- 
gether; falbh c. riumsa, come along with me ; 
dh’ ith e na tri tràithean mar ch., he ate the 
three meals at one whack. 

comh-labhair, v.a. Speak together, converse, 
confer. 

———_--——-t,, s.f. Speaking together. 2 Dia- 
logue. 3 Conference. 4(AH) Debate, dispu- 
tation. 

cómhla-bhigein,(DC) sm. Trap set to capture 
small birds, consisting of a riddle resting on 
the ground and with one eud held up by a 
stick; seed isplaced under the riddle anu the 
stick snatched away by a string attached to 
it as soon as the birds begin to eat the seed— 











Uist. 

comh-labhradh, -aidh, s.m. Dialogue, conver- 
sation, speaking together. 

see connlach. 2 (AF) Suckutg- 


TA 
-e ae see còmhlach. 
còmhlachadh, -aidh, s.m. see cómhdhalach- 


còmhlachadh 


adh. 2 Meeting. 3 Opposing, intercepting. 

comhiachdaich, s.f. & pr.pt. of comlilaich. 

eomhiachdaith, AF) at Sucking-pig. 

teodmhlachduichte, a. KReared by the same 
nurse, 

còmhlaich, pr.pt. a’ còmhlachadh & cómhlachd- 
aich, v. a. Meet, intercept, oppose, stop the 
progress of an object. 

coómhiadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. see còmhla, 8. 

eom.ladh, adv, see còmhla, a/v. 

comhia-lüthaidh, sf. Folding-door, 

cómhla-lütaaiun, see combla-lithaidh, 

cowhlamh, prov. for còmhla. 

Conih-làmhaiche, -an, 8m. Helpmate,colleague, 
coaujutor. 

cómhtan, -ain, -an, 8.0. see cóomhlann. 

tomhlann, -à, -an, 8.f, Duel, combat, fray. 2 
Hero. 3 Companion, colleague. 4 Compan- 
ion in arms, 5 Assistant, 6 Procession. 7 
Troop, band, complement of men. SIT. 
9t1Couple. C. grinn, a nice company; c. mor, 
a larye assembly. 

comhlaunach, -aich, sm. Duellist. 2 Comba- 
tant. a 

ac 9 -aiche, 





@. Quarrelsome, tur- 


achd, s. f. ind. Duelling, fighting 
with swords or spears. 
comh-lannanr, pl. -ean, 8.m. Swordsman, sword- 


buient. 











player. 2**Prize-fighter. 

eachd, s.f. Swordsmanship. 2 
Sword or spear exercise,  3**lFighting with 
spears. 


comh-laoch, -&oich, s.m. Fellow-warrior, com- 
panion in arms. 

comh-lasach,** a. Conflagrant. 

cowh-lasadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Lighting to- 
gether, illumination, conflagration, 

comh-lasaich, v.a. Light together. 

còmhlath, see còmhla, adv. 

comh-leabach, -aich, s.m. Bod feliow. 2 Con- 
cubine. 

comh-leabachas, -ais, 8.m. Concubinage. 

comh-leagadh, -aidh, s.m. Parallelism, laying 
together in the same direction. 

ini emu, v.a. Melt together, amalgamate, 
colliquefy. 

comh-ieaghadh, -aidh, s.m. Amalgamation, act 
of melting together, colüiquefication. A’ c—, 
pr.pt. of comh-leagh. 

comh-leaghan, -ain, 8. m. Amalgam, the mix- 
ture of metals produced by amalgamation. 

comh-leagta, a. Parailel. 

co.uh-leau, v.n. Cohere. 

—— ————Ajilt,-e, s.f. Sticking together, coher- 
ence 

ailteach, -eiche, a. Consecutive, con- 

sequent, 

——-—-mhuinn, -e, s.f. Consequence. 

————-mhuiuneach, a. Continuous, 

comh-leapach, -aich, 8.m. see c— -leabach. 

comh-leapachas, -ais, see comh-leabachas. 

comh-leasachadh, -aidh, s.in. Requital, com- 
pensation. A’c—, pr. pt. of c— leasaich. 

coiunh-leasaich, pr.pt. a’ comh-leasachadh, v.a. 
Make up, compensate. 2 Restore, requite. 

coinh-leasaichte, past part. of comh-leasaich. 
Made up, compensated. 

coinh-Jeig,( DC) pr. pt. a’ comh-leigeadh, v.n. 
surive Loge her—Lurra 

tcomb-lin, s. f. Assembly. 

fvomb-linn, see connh-lin. 

coinh-ltunteach,** a. Coeval. 

comh-lion, -iiue, -liuean, s.m. Complement. 2 
Multitude. 

—— —— —, v.a. Fill up, fulfil, accomplish, per- 
form, complete. 2 Absolve, 


215 


comb-mhionn: achadh 


coinh-lionachd, see comb-liontachd. 
———————auh, -aidh. sam. Fuliilling, accomp- 
lament, fultilment. A’ c—, pr.pt. of comh. 
on. 
comh-lionta, a. d past pt. of comh-lion, Per. 
fect, complete, mature, 2 Perfected, com 
leted. 3 fulfilled, accomplished. 4 Atbso- 
ute, 5** Upright. 
comh-livutach, ft} a che, a. Adscititious, 
comh-liontachad, s./.::nd, Completeness, com- 
pletion, periection, tlfilment, accomplish- 
went, consununation. 
comh loma luath, (for co loma luath) As soon 
as. 
comh-lorg, -luirg, 8.f. Consequence, result. 2 
Kifort. An c. sin, in consequence of that. 
comh-losgach, see comh-lasach. 
coinh-lusgadh, -aidh, s.m. Conijagration. 
comt-luadar, -air, 8.m. Company, party. 2 
Communication, couversation, fellowship. 
Truaillidn droch ch , evil communiation cor 
rupts, — [* gives -air as nom. case.) 
fconihluadar, v.n. Converse. 2 Accompany. 
comh-luadrach, -aiche, a. Conversable, talka- 
tive, 
comhluath, adv. Whenever, at the same time, 
2 Abreast of. 3**Together. 
comhluath agus, adv. for cho luath agus. 
comh-luathghair, e, -ean, sJ. Joint congratu- 
lation, repeated shouts of joy. 
comh-luchd, s.pl. Partners, associates, allies. 
C. oibre, fellow-labourers. 
comh-luibeach,** a. Equi-angular. 
coimnn-luidüe, s.m. Lying together. 2 Alliance, 
partnership, association, 
— v.n., Co-habit. 2 Lie together. 
comh-meas, -a,  8.m. Comparison, cc..sideras 
tion. 
comh-meas, @.&v.a. see coimeas. 
comh-measach, a. see coimeas, 
comh-mvasda, a & past pt. see coimeasgta. 
coinh-mieasg, see coimeasg. 
comh-mhaczaus, -uis, 8. 7. 
dallyi: g. 
comh-mhalairt, 8. f. Counterchange, barter. 
Dean c., make an vachange. 
oo each,** a. Cummutable. 
-———eachd,** s.f. Commutuability. 
——— ich,tf v.n. Iuterchange. 
eomh-mharbh, v.a. Massacre, kill together. 
comh-mharbhadh, -aidh, s.m. Massacre, mu: 
vual Kiiing,iuternecion. 2 Battle, A’ c—, 
pr. pt. oi comb-mbharbh. 
comh-iuharbhtuch,{f a. Internecine, 
comh-mharcach, -aich, -aichean, s.m, Fellow: 
rider. 





Sporting together, 














ee d, &.f.ind. Riding in company. 

coinh-inharcaiche, -an, san.  Fellow-rider, 

couib-mhartach,;f -aicue, a. Latrant. 

comh-niheas, see coimheas. 

comh-mheasail,** a. Equally respectable, of 
equal worth. 

comh-mheasair,** s.m. Collator. 

comh-mheasda, a. Of equal worth, equivalent. 
2**Coinparable. 

comh-mheasg, v.a., see coimeasg. 

—— ——-.———Adh, -aidh, s.m. d pr.pt. of comhe 
mheasg, see coimeasgadh, 

comh-mheasgta, past pt. of comh-mheasg, see 
coimeasgta. 

comh-mhe:gzneaenail,$f -e, a. Libratory. 

comh-mhilcadh, -idh, -idhean, s.m. Fellow: 
soldier. 

cou:h-mbilleadh,tt -idh, San, Internecion. 

conih-iihidteach,1f -eiche, a. Iniernecine. 

comh-intionnacaaadh,** -aidn, sm. Cunspiring, 
conspiracy. 


comh-mhionnaich 


comh-mhionnaich, pr.pt. a’ comh-mlionnach- 
alh, v.i Conspire. 

omh-mbhire, 3.f. Mutual flirtation. 

couth-mhi«geachd, s.f.ind. Composition. 

comi,-mhi-gich,2f v. e. Immix. 

eomlh-mhol, v.a,  Pra.se together. 

:onihi-müothachadh, -nidh, s. m. Sympathy, 
commiseration, Colapassion, sympathizing, 
fellow-feeling. 

comb-mhothachail, -e, a. 
passionate, 

somh-inhothaich, v.a. Sympathize. 

somii-mhothuich, see c— -mhotnaich, 

2omu-mhuiteach, a. Commutable. 

tum -inhü. hadh, -aida, s.m. Commutation. 

:0miü-m.utia:c., see e— -mhothaich. 

eo1ni-raortas, -ais, $.m. see comh-ortas. 

comhuaciai:,,* a. Conducibie. 

com inadail.* see con hradh. 

comlinadalach, a. see cómuraiteach. 
coir C., & decent conversuble man, 

comhnadh, -aidh, -aidhean, Sn. 
ance, help, relief. 

comhuaicn, v.a. Favour. 

fcomhnaidh,-e, af. Leisure. 

combhna- gh, see cómhunidh. 

couinb-uaiesg, v.a. IXnio together, tie, connect. 

-—— eudh, sm, XKnicting together. A’ 

c—, pr.pt. of comh-naisg. 

còmhnard, -airde, a. Level, plain, even, equal, 
smooth. Rathad c., a level road; siùil c., 
equal sails. 

————, -aird, -an, 2 Level 
gronnd, field. 

—achd, s.f.ind. Equality. 

—aich,ff v.a. Baliast a ship. 

—aiche, -an, 8.7. Roller, leveller. 

comh-nasgadh, see coimnh-naisgeadh. 

comh-neart, -eirt. -an, s.m. Compound force. 

conih-neartachadh, -aidh, 8. m. Confirmation, 
eonfirining. 2 Strengthening, reinforcing, in- 
crease of force. A' e—, pr. pt. of comh- 
nertaich. 

comh-neartachail, a. Corroborant. 

co uh-neartaich, pr. pt. 2a’ comh-neartachadh, 
v.a. Sirengthen, 2 Confirm, 3 Reinforce. 

cumh-neartaichte, past part. of comh-neart- 
aich. Coutirmed. 2 Strengthened. 

comh-neartmhor, -oire, a. Strong, firm. 

comhnouich, pr. pt. a’ comhnnidh, v.n. Dwell, 
1apabit, reside, abide, continue, stand still. 

combhnu cne, -an, s. m. Dweller, inhabitant, 
resident. 

cowhuutdh, -e, -ean, s.f. Dwelling, habitation, 
house, abode. An c., habitually, always, con- 


Sympathetic, com- 


Duine 


Aid, assist- 


8. m. Plain. 








tinvaliu.  A' c—, pr. pt. ou cómhnuich. 
comhnuidheach, -eiche, @ Steadfast, firm, 
ermanent., 


icomhnuigh, v.n. see comhnuich. 
comh-obair, -oibre, -oibrichean, s.f. Joint work, 
the sume employment. 

comh-ogha, s.f.d m. First cousin. 
comi-ó.lach, -aich, s.m. Fellow-servant(malo.) 
comh-oibreach, -eiche, d. see c— -oibreachail. 
adh, -aidh, s.m. Working toge- 
ther, co-operation, A' c—, pr pt. of comh- 











oibr ch. - " 
———— ail,-e, a. Co-operative, working 
together. 2 Co-efficient. 


comii-oibrich, pr.»t. a’ comh-oibreachadh, v.n. 
Co-operate, work together, assist, 

-——e,-au, 8.74. Fellow-l.bonrer. 2 
Coadjutor, 3 Co-operator, accomplice, 
coni'i-o;züre, -acaan, s.n. Co-heir, co-parcener, 

joint partuer. 
coinh-oighreachas, -ais, s.m. 
conili-0ig hireachd, 8f. ind. 





} Co-heirship, co- 
purceny. 


246 


comh-róc 


comh-oisinneach, a. see comh-oisneach, 

comh-oisieach, a. Equi-angnlar. 

comh-ól, -dil, s.f. Compotation. 

comh-olair, -ean, s.m. Pot-companion, fellow- 
tippler. 

couh-ole,( WC) s.m. Anger. Chuir o c. orm, 
he made me angry, offended me— Poolewe, 

comh-olcas, -ais, s.m. Matice, malignity,sp;een. 

comh-ortas, -ais, s.m. € omparixon, emulation, 

co'mhothachadh, see comh-mhothachadh. 

comh-phairt, s.f. Partnership, share, partici- 
pation, community, 2¢¢League. Lnchd-e., 
partakers. 

comi.-phairteach, -eiche, a. Participating, shar- 
ing. 2**Portionable, divisible, 3**6ummu- 
nicablo, willing to share or communicate. 

ecmh-pl.àirteachiadh, -aidh, s.. Communica. 
ting, sharing, dividing, partaking, 

couth-pha.rteachail,ff -e. a. Atirivutive. 

comh-phairtear, -an, sm. Accessory. 2 Part- 
ner. 

comli-phairtich, pr.pt. a’ comh-phàirteachadh, 
We & n. Communicate, share, divide, par- 
take. 

coniit-phàirtiche, see comh-phairtear. 

teomh-phais, see comh-fhulang. 

e STEE -aidh, sve c— -phàirteach- 
adh. 

comh-phàrtuich, see comh-phairtich. 

comh-phoitear, -an, s.m. Drinking companion. 

"EG achd, 8. f. ind. Drinking toge- 

er. 


comh-phriosanach, -aich,s.m, Fellow-prisoner, 
teomhra, s.m. Companion. z Coffin. 
comhra, see cómhradh. 
comhrachadh, -aidh, see comharrachadh. 
comhra:dh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Conversation, 
diaiogue, 2**Speech, language. 
còmhrag, -aig, -an, s.f. Combat, fight, battle, 
struggle, strife. Dealan na e, the lighta ng 
of battle ; C. a’ Choin Duibh, the Black Doy’s 
Fight—a well-known folk-tale. 
comhragach, a. Warlike. Sluagh garg c., & 
Fierce warlike people. 
comhragair, -ean, s.m. Fighting man, warrior. 
2**Encounterer. 
comhrag, 1f v.a. see cómhraig. 
comhraidhteach, see comhraiteach, 
comhraich, see comharraich. 
comhraig, 8. see cómlirag. 
còmhraig, v.n. Fight, war, combat. 2* Fight, 
a3 black cattle. 
cómhraig, gen.sing. of comhrag. 
còmhraiteach, -eiche,a. Conversable, talkative. 
comhraitiche, -an, s.m. Talkative person. 
combrannaich,** e, Community. 
-— —— — ,** q. Conjoint. 
comh-reatain,** s.m. Coition. 
comh-réidh, e, a. Jor co réidh, or cho réidh. 
feonii-réimnieh, v.a. Assemble, 
coinh-réir, -e, s. f. Construction. 2 Syntax, 
comh-réite, sf. Agreement, reconciliation. 
coinh-réith ri, adv. As plain as. 
comh-reult, -a,-an, s,f. Constellation. 
.Oonmb-reusan,** s,m. Deduction. 
comh-riachdanas, -ais, s. m. Great want, dis- 
tress. 
teomh-riachduin, s.f. Engendering. 
comh-riau, s.m. System. 
cvmh-riarachadh. -aidh, s. m. Sharing awong 
all, equal division or distribution. A’ e—, 
pr. pt. of comh-riara/ch. 
| comh-riaraich, pr, pt. a’ comh-riaracnadh, v.a. 
Share or divide equally among all. 
eoulh-rial ain,** s. QCopulatioit. 
fenuhb-n*h, see comb-rnth. 2$¢Coreur. 
tcuinh-roc, v.. Belch, reteh. | cct. 











comh-roghsainn Pi 


comh-roghainn, sf. Election, choice. 2**Gen- 
eral ewction. 3 Unau:mous eleciion. 
comh-roghasich, v.n. Elect unanimously. 
—— te, &. & past vt. of comh-rogh- 
naich. Elected unanimously. 
ecoraii-rvighuich, see comh-rvghnaich. 
C.im-.-ronun, -e, -ean, $.f. Share, proportion, di- 
viding, contribution. 2**Purticipation, diyi- 
sion, partnership. C. de 'n toradh, a share 
of the íruiià. 
comh-roinn, v.n. Share, divide, distribute. 
2**Participate. 
teach,ft -eiche, a. Participant. 
corah-rol, v.a. Holl together. 
—— — ——adh, -aidh, s.m. Rolling together. A’ 
e—, pr. pt. of comli-rol. 
eomh-ruagach, -aiche, a. Pursuing together. 
comib-raiagte, a. Kqually bare or naked. 
comu-ruith, -e, s. J. Race, running together. 
Ric. timchioll nan raon, running together 
around the ji-lds. 
, v.a. Run together, run at the 
same t me. 2 Concur. 3lfCouverge. 
colnu-rin, -üin, s.m. Conspiracy, joint design. 
—ac tadh, -aidh, s.m. Conspiring, act of 
conspiracy or joint designing. 2**Communi- 
cation, A’ c—, pr.pt. of comh-rünaich, 
comh-runaich, pr.pt. a’ comh-rünaebadh, v. n. 
Conspire. 2 Communicate designs. 3**Con- 
cur. Ch. mi leis, J conspired with him, 
comhsachadh, see connsachadh. 
eo»nihsai-h, see connsaich. 
e wh-samhuil, -e, a. Like, resembling. 
tenwisavach, a. Perpetual, everlasting. 
co-uh-sgoilsar, -eir, -an, sm.  Sehool-fellow. 
cumbh-ayriobh, v. n. Correspond. 
cowh-sgrivcbhidh, s.m. Composition. 
coinh-sgrios,t{ -&, 8. m. Internecion. 
comb-sgriosail tt e, a. Internecine. 
comh-shaighdear, -eir, -an, s.m. Fellow-soldier. 
Mo chomh-shaighdearan ! my fellow-soldiers ! 
combh-shainhlach, a. Comparative. 
coml,-shamhiachadh, -aidh, s.m. Comparing, 
comparison. 
cowh-siamhiaich, v.a. Compare together. 
————— .. — — LAT. A past.pt. of comh-shamh- 
laich. Compared. 
comh-sheanachas, s.m. Conversation. 
comh-shearmonaiche, -an, s. m. Fellow-preach- 
er. 
cowh-sheasamh, -aimh, s. m. Consistency, equi- 
poise, equilibrium. 2\AH) Connection, rela- 
tion. Anns a’ ch. seo, in this connection. 
comh-shea:smhach, -aiche, a. Constant, steady, 
consisteit. 
comh-sheasmhachd, s.f.ind. Constancy, con- 
sistency. 2 Contradiction. 
comb-shéid, v.a. Blow together, conflate. 
--——eadh, -idh, s.m. Conflation, act of 
biowing together. A’ c—, pr.pt. of c— -shéid. 
co'nh-sheiun,tt v.a. Intonate. 
comh-sheinu,** s. f. Chorus. 
comh-sheirbhis, -ean, s.J. Joint service. 
each, -ica, s.m. I'e!low-servant. 
eachd,** sf. Fellow-service. 
comh-sheirm, -e, -ean, &J. Concert. 
mony.  3** Accordance, accord. 4+ttChoir. 
Canaibh comh-sheirm ciùil, sing in concert. 
comi--heirmeach, -eiche, a. Harmonious, in 
councert. 
comih-sheirmich,f{ v.n. Sound in harmony. 
cunih-sheise,** 3. m. & f. Antagonist, opponent. 
2(DC) Match. 
comnh-sheod, -shedid, s.m. Fellow-champion. 2 
**prother hero. Innisidh e'n sgeui d' a 
choimh--hedid, Ae will tell the tale to his bro- 
ti r-'eroes. 





























2 Har-|———-————-—————adh, -aidn, 8.2. 


47 comnh-apáirneachd 


comh-sheodlach, -à db, -axtheann, s. m. Direction. 
2 Conveyance, 3 Sailung in company. 4 
DEoat or ship race. 
conih--haómraiche, -an, s. m. Fellow-lodger, 
room-eoiuipanion, comrade, chum. 
comh-shin, v.a. Stretch in one direction, lay 
parallel, ?(bU) v.n. Coincide. 
comh-shineadh, s.m. Extending, lengthening 
in the same direction. A' e—, pr. pt. of 
comli-shia. 
comh-shinte, a. & past part of comh-shin. Ex- 
tended together in one direction, parallel. 2 
(DU) Co.uciding. 
comh-shinteachan, -ain, 6, m. Parallelogram. 
comh-shion, s.7. Calm weather. 
coinh-shiorruidh, æ. Cu-cternal. 
comh-shiorruidheachi, s. f. Co-eternity. 
comh-shliogte, (DC) a. Drawu out or combed 
in the same direction, hence 2 Agreeiug in 
nature. 
comh-shlisneach, a. Equilateral. 
comh-shnaim, -e, s.f. Knitting together, alli- 
aice, union. 
coun.-shuanih ff a, s.m. Swimming together. 
coul-shuioma, s.n. Convolutiou, 
comh-shniomh, v. 4». Convolve. 
comh-shocair, e, 4. Cumplecely at ease. 
comb-shocrachadh, -aidh, s.m. Sct ling. ar- 
ranging, fixing. A’ c—, pr.pt. of co:nh-shoc- 
raich. 
comli-shoeraich, pr. pt. a’ comh-shocrachadh, 
v.a. Settle, arrange, fix. 
com^-shoillse, -shoillsean, see corah-sholus. 
coma-stolus, -uis, -an, s.m. Con. tellation. 
Tcomnn-shreabh, s.m. Contiuence of streams, 
tides or curreuts. 
comh-shreip, -e, 8. f. Rivalry. 
Comb-shruth, v. n. Stream or flow together, 
converge. 
,-AD, sm. Confluence of streams. 
adh, -aidh, s m. Juucl.on or union 
of two or more streams. 2 Circumstance of 
flowing together. A’ e—, pr. pt. of comh- 
shruth. 
comh-shuain, v.n. Sleep together. 
comh-shuain, s.m. Siveping together. 
pr.pt. of comn-shuain. 
comb-shu,racih, -aidh, s.a. Piayiug, sporting 
together, 2**Piay, pastime. 
cOmb-shigraiche, -an, sm. Play-fellow. 
cowh-shuidhe, s.f.ind. Sitting together, ses- 
sion. 





A’ CG 


achadh, -aidh, s.n. Constitution, 
system, order. 
couth-shuidhbich, pr.pt. a’ comh-shuidheachadh, 
v.a. Settle, constitute, 1ncthodize, compose. 
—————————te, past pt. of c— -shuidhich, 
Settled, organized, composed, constituted. 
comh-shu:rbhe, -an, see comb-shuirdhe. 
coinh-shuirbhiche, -an, see cumh-shuirdhiche. 
coih-shuirdhe, -an, sf. Competition in court- 
ship, rivalry in love. 
comb-shuirdhiche, -an, s.m. Rival in courtship, 
coimih-shuirich, see comh-shuirdhe. 
comh-shusbainteach, a. Consubstantial. 
Consub- 





stantiation, substantial identity. 
comh-shuthainn, a. Co-eternal. 
teoinh-swnug, v.n. Expectorate, vomit. 
comli-spàirn, v.n. Wrestle with. 
8. f. Emulation, rivalry. 2 Wres- 
tle. 3 Mu 


tual strug :le. 
each, @ ljmulous. 2 Wrestling. 
8 Struggling. 
—— — ———eachd, s. f. ind. Emulousness. 2 
Frequert or coutinued eumpertiun. 3 Uon- 
D. uo wrestling. 














EI eonh- paid 

coinhspaid, see connspoid. 

—vach, see couuspoideach. 

comhstach,* a. Obliging, accommodating. 2 
Useful, convenient. 

»* 8.f. Coucubine. 2 Whore. 

cóuih stadh, -aidh, s. am. Accommodation, obli- 
gacion. 2 Loan. 3 Favour. 

——ach, -aiche, a. Oblizing, accommoda- 
ting. 2 Friendly, 

conih-5stà;h, see comh-stadh. 

cou:h-streup, -à, St, see comh-shreip. 

comh-siri, -the, -thean, s. f. Strife, battle. 2 
Broil, quarrel. 3 Contest, struggle, rivalry. 

comh-stri gu, -e, -ean, s.f. see comh-strì. 

coiin-sirih. -e, -ean, see comh-strì. 

———vach, -eichs, a. Contentious, emu- 


lous. 
eachd, s.f.ind. Pugnacity. 

M CC iere -aidh, 8. m. Consubstan- 

iution. 
couth-stuthachd, &/.ind. Consubstantiality, 
eomh-stuvhaicn,** v.n. Consubstantiate. 
comli-stuthail, a. Cousubstantial. 
cumh-thabhartas,f}-ais, -an, s.n. Contribution. 
coinu-thach, -aich, xm. see comh-.hathach. 
comh-thaguirt, -e, s.f. see comh-thagradh. 
comh-thiusradu, -aith, son. Joint pleading. 
comu-tliaigheas, s.m. Co-habitation, living toe 

gether. 


— 


























——— — &ch, a. Co-habiting. 

RK iPgonchadhb, -aidi, s.m. Congratula- 
ion. 

coinh-th vingich, v.a. Congratulate. 

coma-thàirng, v.a. Nail togeusr | 

—le,a. & pust pl. of comh-thàirng. 
Nailed together. 

coinh-cuairnte, see comh-thàirngte. 

comirthaitlite, past part. of comh-thàth. Join- 
ed. 2 Articulated. 3 Soldered. 

comh-thalach, for cóimhdhalach, gen. sing. of 
combhduai, qneetiuz.) Faram bi ua laoicn 
cumil comh-thilach (cOmhihalach), where 
the heroes (huntsmen) will be holding a meet. 
—Beinn Doran. 3 

conihtharrachadb,-aidh, s.m. & pr.pt. see comh- 
arrachadh. 

comhth:rradh, -aidh, -aidhean, 8.m. see comh- 
arradh. 

comhtharraich, v.a. see comharraich. 

comhtharraichte, see comharraichte. 

comh-tharruing, v.a. Contract. 2 Draw to- 
gether, pull at the same time. 

———— each, -eiche, a. Contractive. 2 

Having the power of contraction. 

———  — ——e, a. & past pt. of comh-tharr- 
uing. Contracted, drawn together. 2 Drawn 
at the same time. 

comh-thath, -a, -an, s.m. Seam, joint. 2 En- 
closure, 

-—, v.a. see comh-thathaich. 

—— —--—ach, -aich, s.m. Companion, chum. 

-—Rich, v.a. Join. z Articulate. 3 

Solder, put together, 

-—-Aàich, -ean, $f. Mutual acquaint- 
ance or familiarity. 2 Mutual visiting. 

comh-thàthadh, -widh, san. Articulation, 2** 
Cemeuting. 3 Svuldcring. 4 Joining toge- 
ther. 5** Joint. 6**syntax. 

coluh-thaihte, pust part. of comh-thath. Join- 
eu, 2 Articulated. 5 Soldcred, 

comh-theach, san, House where several fami- 
lies dwell. 

comh-thexvchaiche, -an, s. m. Inhabitant of 
the same house with another., 2 Inmate. 

comli-theachas, -ais, $m. Cohabitation, living 
togetier, 

couh-theagasg, 3. m. Context. 




















248 


compaiste 


comh-theanal, ail, -an see comh-thional. 

Tconiti-thistheach, -ich, see connuticach, 

coinh-thi;heas, see comh-thaipiicas, 

comh-thigheasach, see comb-thaigheasach. 

comb-thiuenioll, -an, sm. Circuit. 2 Act 
of moving round anything, 

comh-thionail, pr. pt. a’ counh-thional, v.a.& n. 
Assemole, gather cogether, congregate. 2 
Convoke. 

comu-thiunal, -ail, -an, s. m. Assembiy, con- 
gregation, gathering. 2,1751) Variety of pipe- 
music for gathering the cians to battle. A’ 
c—, pr. pt. of cumh-thionail, 

conih-thireach,-rich, sen. Countryman, com- 
patriot. 

comi-thog, v.a. Raise. 2 Construct together. 
3 Rear cogether, educate, bring up together. 
Ch. e sinn, he brought us up to, ether. 

—ail, -ean, sn. Raising. 2 Construct- 
ing. 3 Heariug together, bringing up, oF 
educating togetner. 

teomn-thoilicu, v. a. 2 Mutually a- 
gree to. 

comh-thoimhseach, -eiche, a. Commeasureable, 
rie a to a general measure, commenmsur- 
able. 


Please. 





sl, 8.f.ind. Commeasurability, 

commeasurableness, commensurability. 

comh-thoinn,{f v.n. Couvo,.ve. 

comh-thoisgte, adv. As early as. 

comh-thorracud, s.f. Comunerce. 

CumMu-luras, 8M. SWeeb Lnavour. 
siuell, 

conth-throm, a. Equally heavy, equipoised. 2** 
mven, equal. 

, uim,-uiiumichean,s.?n. see cuthrom, 

——ach, -aiche, see coturomaen.  zff 

Rich, 

——_——_——achadh, -aidh, sm. & pr. pt. see 
cothromachadh. 

comh-thruacauta, a Compassionate, merciful, 
teuder 

comh-i hruacantachd,s.7.see comh-thruacantas. 

cumn-thruacautas, -ais, 8. m. Compassion, 
mercy, tenderness, commiseration, picy. 

fcomh-thrnuaighe, 8.7, Compassion, fellow-feel- 
ing, sympathy. 

comnu-uhruas -ais, s.m. Compass.on, sympathy, 

Tcomu-thrus, v.a. & n. Collect together, con- 
tract. 2**[.uss up toge. her. 

comh-.huinicae,** s.m. Couavitant. 

cumh-thulgadhb, -aidh, -aiuhean, s.m. Agitati- 
on, defeat. 

comu-ucadach, a. Having breast to breast. 

—————, -aich, s.m. Co-sine. — Tha’n 
gath-riaghailt 'san inblie mieadhonaich ea- 
dar a’ chumh-ucidaca agus an Syriob-gueart- 
aidh, the radius is @ meun proportional be- 
tween the co-sine aud the secant, 

icomh-uidiche, -an, sn. Attendant. 

comb-uileannach,** a. Kyui-an.ular, 

tcoinhursa, s.m. see coimhearsnach. 

co'inhuthaich, see com^-mhotnaich. 

comith, s.f. see comaidh. x 

comlacndaigh,(AF)s.7. Young pig. 

¢commaithcheas, -eis, 8.f. Nei, ,ubvurhood. 

teomor, v.a. Gather together. . 

feomoradh, s.m. Assemoly, iueeti"g. 

comurtas, ais, s.m. see comh-ortas. 

comyaeli -aich, see companach. 

compailt,** sf. Cum any. " 

compàirt, -e, -ean, SJ, see comh-phairt. 

-— ———each, -eiche, a. see culuh-pha rteach, 

——.——eachd, sf. see comh-oud.rvcachd. 

—— ———ici, v.a. See comn-phartich, — 

iche, -au, s.m. see cumua-phairtichie, 

compaiste,-an,$.m. sec combatsle. 


2** Sweet 











comnan 


compan,** .ain. s.n. see companach. 

companach, -aich, s m. Cumpanion, mate, 
cuum, asscciate. 2 liusbaud. C. nan ama- 
dan, the compunion ef Jools; isc. do neach a 
nàdur, @ m« s nature stiexs to him. 

companaich,t] v.n. Make a partner of. 

companas, -ais, s.an. Cumpamouship, fellow- 
saup, society, intercourse. 

companta, à. Sociable. 

—=s, -ais, ».m. see companas. 

coin,;àrtaich, see cowh-phàiruch. 

cumpartachadh, -aidh, s.m. & pr. pt, see comh- 
phairteachadh. e 

tcompas, -iis, s.n. Compass. 2 Ring. 3 Circle. 

Teompraid, s.f. Comparison, 

tevimpuir sf, The body, chest, trunk. 2 Heart. 

teomrac, s.m. Part, share. 

t- air, 8m. Protector. 

comradh, -aidh,s.m. Alu, assistanee, help. 

comraich, -e,-ean, af. Protection, favour, ob- 
ligation, 2 Sanctuary, asylum. 3 Condition, 
stipulation, 4ffíteverence, faith. Mo ch. 
ort, oir is tu Fioun, 4 ask your protection, as 
you are Fionn. , 

fcoimnraigheas, s.m. Form, fashion. ` 

feumnzuuaaen, s.) Comrade, companion. 

fcounuc, 54. Bodily need. 

comunach, -aich, see comanachadh. 

—4adh, see comauachadh. ` 

comuna, -uiun, sm. Company, society, club. 
2 Feltuwship, intercourse, 3** Confederacy. 
4**Meeing. C. liach nan sean-fhear, the 
grei meeting of ayeu men; càirdeas no c., 
Jrienuship or teiowship; C. G&àidhhg Inbhir- 
nis, Tue Galic Soce:y of [nvernes8; is coma 
leain c. an 0.1, Z distike the Jriendship that is 
formed in Gquor. "uu. 

coimnuaaach,rft-aiche, a. Civil. E 

—-——--—auh, -ath, sm. Associating. 
c—, pr. pt. of comunnaich. 

eomnuuuaica, pr. pt. a’ coinunnachadh, Ga. 
Associate. 2 see comanachadh. 

comus, -Uis, 8n, see comas. 

—-—ach, -aicne, a. see comasach, 

cun-, (wich) see coimh & comb-. 

Con LAF) gan, Squirrel. 2 Wolf, 

con, gen. pl. of cu. Chum nan con, to the dogs; 
nio chuil ca., my dogs. N 

fcon, s.m. Sense, meaning. 2 Appetite, 

tcona, $ f. Tue Scots fir. « 

cona, sm. seecanach. 2 Cat's tail grass, see 
guin-iheur. 4 

con-abaaun, Rm. (comh-abhainn) Confluence. 

Counbiach, -a ch, s.m. Mangled carcase. 2 Any- 
thing mangled. 3'*Carcase. a 

——aun,-aidh, s. m. Mangling, act of 
Maugling, tcariug asunder, distizuring, lacer- 
ating. A’ c—, pr. pt. of copablaich, 

————ail,** a. Cadaveroins. i 

conablaich, v.e. Mangle, lacerate, disfigure. 

-——te, past.pt. Mangled, lacerated. — 

tconach, -aich, s.m. Property, atiluence, 2 Shift, 
smock. 3 Murrain n cattle, 

conach, s. m. L:ax dodder— 
cuscuta epilinum. 

conach, -aiche, a. +Rich. 2 Pros- 
perous, 3 Canine. 

—-~—ag, ‘aige, s.f. see cnomh- 
agail. 1 

covachair,* s. m. Sick person 
wno ets neitner worse nor 
betur. 2 see conz'iir. 

conachlon, -oin, 8. m. Equal, 
companion. 2 Kind of Gaclic 
versc. 

sonachuileag, -eig, s,f. Fly. 2 
Murrain of flies. 











A’ 











156. Conach. 


9419 


” conas 


conadal, tt -ail, s. m. Conversation. 2 (AFF 
Stray sheep. 3 Strangers. 

conadh, -aidh, see comhghnath. 

fteonadh, s.m. see conbhadh. 2**Prosperity 

Toisul, conj. So that. 

conaghair, s.f. see conghair. 

cona-ghiothach, s.m. Raging gale, tempest. 

conagladh, -aidh, 8. m. ‘Leasing. Is miann 
leis a’ chat a ch., the cat loves to be teased. 

tcovaidh, a. Enchanted. 2 Soft, gentle. 3 
Arable. 

couarg,,\CR) -ean, s.f. Knuckle of the first or 
root joiut of the fingers—W. of Ross-shire. 

conaigh, or còmhnuidh. : 

wéi 8 s.f. Plague that once raged in Iree 
and. 

Tconailbhe, see fconall. 

fconailbheach,** a. Friendly. 2 Upholding. 

conair, -e, -ean, &f. Way, course, pitn. 2 Ha- 
ven. 3 Crown. 4(AC) Blessing. 5 (AC) Plant. 
6 (AC) Circle. 7tt Help. &ttSet of beads. 
Iomhaigh is c. Moire, image and rosary of 
Mury; bu cham leò gach c. gus ...., ev 
short cut seemed crooked (round about) to them 
(in their haste) vo.... 

Tconairde, adv. As high as. 

Teonaire, conj. "lhereiore. 

conaiie,3 s f. Loosestrife, see lus-na-siothaimh. 
2(AP) see conairt. 

conai;rt, sf. Hunting with hounds. 2 Pack of 
hounds. 3 Rout of wolves. 4* Barking of 
many dogs. 6 Sculding in a bigh key. 

feonrairt, v.n, Hunt with hounds. 

tconais, va., Dispute. 2 Number. 

+ leach, a. Busy. 

cvnalaci, a. brandisuing. 

conalaich,tt pr.pt. a’ conalachadh, v.a. Brand- 
ish, swing. 

tconall, -aill, s. m. Love, friendship. 2 Fruit. 3 
Fruitfulness. 4 Ear of corn. 5 (AC) The 
Guardian Spirit of childhood. 6 (AC) The | 
Cupid of the Gael. 

conall,(AC) v.n. Endow. Brìghde bhitl. ‘ga 
chonall dhomh, calm Bridget endowing it ta 
me, 

conaltrach, -aiche, a. Social, fond of company, 
conversable. Do chuirm ch,, thy social feast. 

conaltradh, -aidh, s.m. Conversation. 2 Cuin- 
pany. Cum €., keep company; ’na ch., in his 
company. 

eonan,* Ain, s.m. Peevish person. 2$ Crested 
dog's tail, see goinfheur. 3 Quaking grass— 
briza. C. cumanta, briza 
media; c. beag, briza minor. 

conanachd,* er. V enery— Loch, 
aber. C. nàdurra—A rgyl. 

conan-coille, (AE) em, Wood- 
wren, 

conan-conaisg,(AF) s.m. Wil- 
low wreu,see criouag ghiuth- 
ais. 

conan-crion, (AF) s.m. Wren, 
see dreathann-donn. 

conan-mara, (AH) s.m. Sea- 
urchin or hourg., 9 Sea-egg. 

fconaraichs, s.m. Otfersive ob- 
Object, nuisavee, 2 Expiess- 
ion of contempt or execration. C. ort; & 
p ague uyon hee ! (lit. dogs mockery.) 

couartaich,** v.a. Bail with dogs.) 

conas, pr. p’. A conas, v.n. [followed by ads, 
Tease—A rgy&. C'arson tha thu a’ c. v 
why ave you teasing hin? 2 Oppose. 8 uars 
rel, fight. 

cunas, -ais, 8. m. Quarrel, fight. 
wran,jle. 3**War, battle, 
see conasg. 6 Mischief, 











187.Conan (3.} 


2 Tispnte,, 
4**(arcase. & 
A EX pr. 2. of 


conas 


conas. A’c. ri chéile, opposing each other: 
bneireadh tu c. as do leth-.uirg, you would 
quarrel with one of your lejs. 

couasach,* a. Fretful, peevish, short-temper- 
ed, apt to take otfence. 2 Contentious, striv- 
ing, quarrelsome. 3 see «onasgach. 

achd, s. Hastiness of teaper. 21fCon- 
tentiousness. 

conasag,(AF)s.J. Whinchat, see gocan 

conasan, 6$.m. see conasug. 

conas-beach, (AF) see coinnspeach. 

conasg, -aisg, &. m. Furze,whin, gorse—jwez 


europous. Badge of the 

MacLennans. 
———ach, -aiche, a. Abound- NS 

ing in furze; of, or pertain- 

to furze, like furze, NA 
conasgag, see conasag. A Ke 

TU 
- SCH 

C. acrais, raging hunger. 
conbhair, -e,-ean, sf. Dog- 

kennel. 2 The man who 188. Conasg. 

looks after the dogs, dog-boy. 
tcun-bhàiscne, -an, 8 f. Dog berry tree, see 









tconbach, -aich, 8f. Hydro- 
phobia. 

coubhach, -aiche, a. Furious. 

conbhadnh, -aidh, s,m. Rage, 


conasrach, (AF) -aich, & m. 
Flea. 
fury. 2 Ravenous appetite, 
coin-bhile. 


conbbaliach, -aiche, &. Having buttresses, 2 
Of, or belonging to buttresses. 3 Steady, 
well-proportioned. .. 4 Sound, as in health. 
5(WC) Having uniformity and symmetry. 
Slainte ch., sound health. 

tsJ. Firmness. 4 





conbhalladh,** -aidh, s.m, Buttress, 2 Battle-| 


ment. 
conbhallas,ff -ais, see conbhallachd. 2** Prop, 
support, buttress. 
conbuarsaid,** &f. Conversation. 2 Conduct, 
demeanour. 
conbhliochd,** sf. Battle, conflict. 
Qtconbhuidheann, s.f. Guard, 
tconcharra, a. Dog-like. 
conchas, sm. Punishment, torment, torture. 
Tconcoiceartar, v. Be it righted. 
kond, s.m. Keeping, protection, 
tcondaghais, s.f. Gaelic spelling of countess. 
condasach, -aiche, @ Furious, enraged. Gu 
€,, furiously. d 
, &.f.ind. Rage, fury, ire, 
condrachd, see coatta. n 
con-dris, see coin-ras, 


condual, see comh-dualadh. 


coudualadh, 

co-neartaich, see comh-neartaich. 

tconfa, s.m. see confhadh. 

confadh, see confhadh. 

confhadh, -aidh, s.m. Rage, madness, bois- 
terousness, eagerness, fury, ire, 2 Roaring, 
howling. 3 see onfhadh. C. ro dhian, im- 
petuous fury. 

--——ach, -aiche, &. Furious, raging, bois- 
terous, enraged. 

confhliochd, see conbhliochd. 

confuadhach,** gan. Vulture. 

fconga, s.m. Contemporary. 
3**Antlers of a buck. 

congailt, (AF) s.f. Monster. 

tcongain,s.f. Help, aid. 

tcongantach, -aich, s.m. Assistant. 

congart,** .airt, 8.m. Command. 

tcongasach, 8m. Kinsman. 

opera, -@, Bb Keeping house, 

QD. 


211Instrument. 


2 Habita- 


250 


connsachail 


comgbhallach,** a. Tenacious. 
cougbhalias, -ais, san. Stay, help, support. 
feouguaidhe, s. f. He.atiouship. 
conghail, &.f. Galisntry, bravery. 
conghair, -e, 8f. Uproar, clamour, 2 Confu- 
sion, tumult. 3 Shout, outery, couclamation. 
4* Fury. 5**Faction. 6**Acclamacion. 
each,a. Clamorous, tumultuous, fac- 
tious. 
— — —eachd, s.f.ind. Clamorousness, tumulte 
uousness, íaetiousness. 
conghaireadh,t{ adh, s.m. Roaring. 
conghart, san. Rout. 
conghlas CH) -ais, | pron. canalas, n long] s.m. 
Bandage or swathe round the Jaws aud the 
crown of the head, such as is used to keep tne 
jaw from falling down after death, hence the 
unprecation, conghlas ort ! a enonghias air tz- 
a’ mhurbh-phaisg air a’ chonghlas.— West of 
Ross-shire. 
conguachal,** œ. Auxiliary. 
congnadoir,** gm. Auxiliary. 
cónguadh, -aidh, s. m. Aietment, aid. see 
comhnadh. 
ach, -aiche, a. Auxiliary. 
congnain,** v.n. Abet, side with. 
congnamh, see cóngnadh. 
conguath, see congnadh. 
—~ach, see congnadhach. 
congraim, s.f. Cunning. craft. 2 clothing, 
apparel, 
fcongrainh, -ainth, s.m. Activity, agility. 
conlach, -aich, s.f. see counlach. 
conlan,-ain, s.m. Assembly. (comhlan) 
tcoulann, -ainn,s.m. Hero, companion in arms. 
conlapach, -aiche, a. see conulapach. 
conn, cuinn, sm. Reason, sense, meaning. 2 
Prudeuce. 3 Theírame, body. 4 Lease-band 
or water-baud, dividing the cuts in a hank of 
yarn. 5 Thread tying a hundred of yarn for 
weaving, vase-Dands. 6 Principle. 7**Plea- 
santry. S(AC)Control. Dà-chonn, heer-band, 
band for 2 cuta of yarn; duine gun ch., a man 
without principle or sense; òinid gun ch., a 
senseless idiot; tha 'n cridbe fo d ch., their 
hearts are under thy control ; cuiridh aon 
bheairt as gu lòm do dhuine 's gun a ch. fo 
chéill, oue deed may a man undo when his red- 
son ruleth not. . 
connadh, -aidh, s.n. Fuel. 2 Firewood, wood, 
Cual chonnaidh, a faggot of firewood. 
connail, a. Pleasant. 2 Intelligent, reasons 
able, rational. 
tfeounairc, v.n. See, behold. 
connalach, -aich, s.f. Stubble, 
conuan, -ain, sm. Lust, 
—--—achd,tt S.E see conanachd. 
connar, a. See connmbor. 
connlach, -aich, s. 7. Straw, hay. fodder. 
Aliment. Tha c. againn, we have fodder. 
connlain-glacaireachd,** sm. Press-gang, for 
comhian-glacaireachd. 
conlaun, -lainn, s.m. see cómhlann. 
conn-lapach, -aiche, a. Feeble. A 
connmhor, @. Intelligent, reasonable, rational. 
2**Cheerful, pleasant. Gu c., cheerful.y; is 
c. fonnmhor thu, thou art pleasant and 
sprightly. ? 
—achd, s.f.ind. Intelligence, reason- 
ableness. 2**Cheerfulness, pleasantness. 
connrag, $.f. Consonant in gram, 
connsach, see connsachadh.. - > 
-—üdüu,-aidh, s.m. Disputing, arguing. 
2 Quarelling. 3**Dispute, contention, dis- 
sension. A’c—, pr. pt. of counsaich, | 
connsachail, @ Controversial, disputatious, 
quarrelsome, 





2 





connsachair 





connsachair, -ean, s.m. 
quarrelsome person. 

counsaclid.115./. Quarrelsomeness. 

connsaich, v.n. Dispute,wrangle,quarrel,strive. 

connspaid, sf. see connspoid. 

——————eAch. see counspoideach. 

connspair, s.m. Wrangler, contentious person, 
disputant, reasoner, one fond of ar; unient or 
disputation. 

eachd, ep, Disputation. 





cons, airn, s.f. Rivalry, e.nulation, 2 Mutual. 


struggle. 
counspanach, -aiche, a. Contentious. 
connspeach, -an,s.f. Wasp. 2 Hornet. 
connspoid, 8. f. Dispute, strife, controversy, 
row, wrangling. Lee ’s le b-an-iocùd, with 
strife and cruelty. 
, v.n. Dispute, argue, wrangle, quar- 





rel. 





——ench, a. Quarrelsome, contentious, 
litigious, wrangling. 

—eacill, s f.ind. Contentiousness. 
icu,1i oe, Contest. 

iche, aam. Wrangler, contentious per- 











son. 
conuspullach, -aiche, see connspunnach. 
» Sce connspunnachd. 
connspunn, -uinn, sm. Hero. 
—ach, -aiche, a. Heroic, warlike. 
acnd, s.f.ind. Heroism, bravery. 
conntachan,fi -ain, s.m. Puffin, see fachach. 
coun-taod, -aoid, see con-taod. 
conntom, -üim, see con-tom. 
conutraigh, see contraigh, 
Ccou-nnallaich, -e, sf. Barking of dogs. 
eonnuibhe, s.m. see conuibhe. 
tconnuimh, v.a, Keep. 
conphocan, -ain, s.m. The shellfish **buckie." 
feonrach, 8.m. Coflin-maker. 
—,a. Of, or pertaining to, a coffin. 
ftoonradh, -aidh, -ean, s.m. see cùnnradh. 
Tconradoir, -e, -ean, s.m, Bearer at a iuneral, 
consachadh, see connsachadh. 
cousachail, see connsachail. 
cónsaich, see connsaich. 
consbeach, -a, An. s.f. see connspeach. 
con-shathadh, -aidh, s.m. Canine appetite. 
colsmann, -ainn, see connspunn. 
cónsmunn,-uiun, see conuspunn. 
ach, -aiche, see connspunnach, 

conspair, see coanspair. 

eachd, at, see connspaireachd. 
cònspoid, {t see conuspoid. 

each, -ziche, see connspoiderch. 
——iclie, -ean, see connspoidiche. 
conspull, -uill, s.m. see connspunn. 
———ach, d. see connspunnach. 
conspunn, see connspunn., 
constabal, -ail, s.m. Gaelic spelling of consta- 

ble; Vownshiv-baihff, 

CcOnstaballach,** -aicl, see constabal. 
, aicae, 4. Of, or pertaining to, a 














constable. 
coustaileach, -eiche, a. Stiff, opinionative. 
teonstal, -ail, s.m. Advice, counsel. 
tcoutabhairt, s.f. Chance, peril, hazard, ven- 
ture. (cunnart) Gun ch., doubtless. 
——each, see cunnartach. 
contagair, pr. pt. a’ contagairt, v.a. Affirm, 
allege. 
coltayairt, -e, 8,f. Affirmation, allegation, al- 
legiug, atfirming. A’ c—, pr. pt. of contagair. 
con-taod, -aoid, s.m. Dog-thong or -striug. 
tcontar, -air, 8.135. Doubt. 
contarach,** a. Gaelic form of contriry. 
fcontath, s.f. County. 
eon-tom, -tuim, sm. Dog-hillock. 





251 
Disputant, wrangler, | contrachd, s.f.índ. Mischivf, mishap. 2**im. 


edpairerchd 





precation, curse. C. ort ! a form of execration. 

contrachd, a. Evil, wickcd, m «chievous. 
Is e m.ann an duine lochdaich cach ule a 
bhi c., the wicked man wishes ali to ve on a. 
level with himself. 

contraizh, s.f. Neap-tide. 

con-traigneachau,{AF)s.m. Coulterneb, puffin, 
see facnach. 2 Kider-duck, see lach Loche-. 
lannach. 

contraill,** s.f. Opposition. 

t —eaeud,** 3.7. Con:raricty. 

contran, -ain, s.m. Wild angelica. 

coutruagh, a. Lean, poor, slender, emaciated. 

coutuinneach,** a. Fiery. 

conuibhe,-ean, s.m. Hornet. 
uibhean, I will send hornets. 

conuich, -ean, see conuibhe. 

conuidh, -ean, see còmhnnidh. 

conus, -uis, 8.m. Crossness, bad-temper. 

ach, -aiche, a. Bad-tempered. 

an, -ain, -2n, s.m. Bad-tempered person. 

conusg, -uisg, see conasg. 

ach, @ see conasgach. 

co’oibrich, v.n. see comn-oibrich. 

— ——-—e,-An, see comli-oibriche, 

co’oighre, -achan, see couth-oighre. 

-—achd, see comh-oighreachd. 

co-oisinneach, see comh-oisneach. 

co-0lcas, sec comh-olcas. 

cop, v.n. Foam, froth. 

cop, -oip, (cuip) s.m. foam, froth, spume. 2** 
Boss ofa shield. A chraos fo chop, his mouth. 
foaming. 

cop,* s.m. see copan. 

cop,* v.a. Capsize. 2¢fPour out. 3fttFoam. 

copach, -aiche, a. Foamy. ¢ Hollow. 3 Bossy. 
4**Cainpanulated. 5**Bellied. 6**Like a cup. 

copaila,* s.m. Capsizing. A’ c—, pr. pt. of cop. 

copadh, -aidh, s.m. Foaming, frothing. A” 
c—, pr.pt. of cop. 

copag, -aig, -an, S.f. Dock—rumez obtusifolius, 
r. crispus and r. conglomeratus. (Scots, dock- 
en.) 2**Dock-leaf. ©. chamagach, rumes 





Cuiridh mi con- 














crispus : c. leathann, rumex obtusifolius ; c. 
bhagaideach, rumez conglomeratus (ill. 191.) 





189. Copag chamagach. 

copazach, -aiche, a. 
dock-leaves. 

—, -aich, s.f. Dock, sce copag. 
where docks grow. 3**Crop of docks. 

copagach-dhearg,§ s... Blool-staiued dock— 
rumex sanguineus. [Preceded by the art. a 
ch.) ill. 172. 

copaz-shràide,?} s.f. Common sorrel, see samh. 

copag-th iaitheal, s.f. Bur, burdock. 

copaibh, aat. pl. of cop. 

copain, gen.sing. & n.pl. of copan. 

cópiur,* s.m, Fishm nger. 2**Buver, seller or, 
Sedis. especially of horses. 3**Prnckster. 

eachd,** sf. Dealing in horses. 2** Truck- 


190 Copag lec t'ar ne 
Abounding iu docks, or 2 


2 Place 








. ebpaireachd 


252 


corcag 








293. Copan-an-driwchd. 


ng. 
co-phairt, see comh-phairt. 
~————each, see comh-phairteach. 
ich, see comh-phairtich. 
iche, see comh-phairtiche. 
copan, -ain, -an[& -ain] s.m. Boss of a shield. 
2 Cup. 3**Bowl. 4**Flagon. 5 Dimple. 6 
Pan of the head. 7 Anything curved. C 
sréine, the boss of a bridle. 
ach, -aiche, a. Bossy. 2Dimpled. 8 
Of, or pertaining to a cup or ladie. Sgiath 
ch., a bossy shield. 
aichte, a. Bossed. 
copan-a'-ghlnine,( WC) s.m. Knee-cap. patella. 
copan-an-driüchd,? s.m. Common lady's-man- 
tle, (illust. 193.) —alchemilla vulgaris. 
copan-Muire,(JM) s.m. Small limpet, thinner 
pam finer in shell than ordinary limpets— 
ist. 
copar, -uir, 8.. Copper, copperas. 
-dubhaidh,1t Copperas. Sulphate of iron. 
(lit. substance for producing black dye.) 
coparach, a. Cupreous. 
coparran-Muire,(AF) s. m. Kind of limpet— 
riskay. See copan Muire. 
cop-gheal, Ale, a. White-foamed. 
A’ mhuir ch., the foamy sea. 
co-phoiteir, see comh-phoiteir. 
co-phriosanach, see comh-phriosanaeh. 
coprach, see coparach. 
cor, gen. [cor, coir &] cuir, 8. m. Condition, 
state, situation, circumstance. 2 Method, 
manner, 3 Custom. 4 Surety. 5 Term or 
condition of a treaty. 6f{ Progress. 7 (AF) 
Spider. 8łtsee car. 9(APF) see corr. 


wi Copagach-dhearg. 

















2**Foamy. 


Air ch., 80 that; cha dean mi sin air ch. 'sam| t 
bith, I shall not do that on any condition ; air | cor 'ach,? -aich, 


na h-uile c., by all means; air ch. air bith, 
anywise; is truagh mo ch., sad is my condi- 
tion: có a dh’ fhidireas mo chor? who will 
sympathize with my condition ? is e sin mo 
ch., that is my condition; ciod e is c. da? 


D 
RE EEN 


that you come ; air chor 's naeh, sofhat not $ 

air choraibh sgéithe, (see corr) ; na guilibb 

air aon chor, weep not en any aeceunt. 

eor, (for car.) 2 seecorr. 

cor,** coir, sm. Musie. 2 Choir, 

cora, comp. of còir. More or most fitting, &c. 

Bu chora dhuit dol dhachaidh, it were more 

befitting that you should gohome. see cora. 

còrach, gen.sing. ofcdir. 2 see curach. Slighe 

nac., the path of justice; a thuilleadh na e, 

over and above enough. 

eoracha,* see còrach. 

corach-shuil(AF) s. Sole (fish:) 

coradh, see curaidh. 

eoradh, -aidh, -aidhean, s. m. Choir. 9 see 

combradh. 

coradhan,** -ain, s.m. Coral. 

eoradh-uisge,(AF) s.m, Fishing-weir. 

corag, -aig, -an, see corrag. 

eorag, see eomhrag. 

eóragach,** see cobhragach. 

coragach, @ ses corragach. 

corag a’ chroinn, see corrag a’ chroinn. 

eoragadh, -aidh, s.m. Neatness, trimness, 

eora-ghleus, see corra-ghleus. 

eoraich,(AC) v.a. Claim. Gu'ne. an Ti naomh 

mi, may the Holy One claim me. 

eoraiche, [a ch !] voc. pl. of còir. 

an, pl, of coir, 

eoraicheas,** -eis, sm. Surety, protection, 

eoraid, 8./. +Cheese-rennet. 2 s.m. see carai 

tcoraidh, see curaidh. 

eachd,** see curaidheachd. 

eoraig, gen.sing. of corag. 

fcorais, -e, 8.f. Curtain. 

eóraiteach, see còmhraiteach. 

coram,* -aim, s.m. Faction, set. 2 Quorum. 8 

Bad set of people. 

eoran, see corran. 

coranach, s.m. see corranach. 

cora-uisge, see coradh-uisge. 

¢corb, cuirb, -an, s.m. see carbad. 

corb, a. see coirb. 

corb, pr.pt. a’ corbadh, v.a. Consume, waste, 

2ttCorrupt, spoil, ruin. 

——ah, -aidh, s.m. Wasting. 2Cast, throw, 

3 see eoirbeachd. A’ e—, pr.pt. of corb. 

-cuil, sm. Incest. 
teorbaidh, -e, 8.f. The cramp. 
fcorbair, -e, -ean, s.m. Cartwright. 
eer, coachman. 8 Waggoner. 
fcorbhadbh, 8.7. see carbhadh. 
eorbha,(AC)s. pl. Orests. Air c. nan neul, on 
the cresta of the clouds. 

core, -&, -an, s.m. *Fairy-bull, water-bull. 2* 

Gaelic spelling of cork. 

corc, cuirce, dat. cuire, pl. -an, 8. f. Sheath- 

knife, butcher's cleaver, (Scots, whittle.) 

2 rarely Cauldron, pot. 3 Uist & round In- 

verness for coirce. C.an ionad cuinnseir, a 

knife in the place of a whinger. 

corc, see corcach. 

corca, Ullapool, Lewis, &c. for coirce. 

corcach, -aiche, a. Of, belonging to, or like, a 

fairy- or water-bull. Laogh corcach, a calf 

having small ears like the water-bull, (a pre- 
save of evil.) [In Uist laogh corc-chluasach) 
coreach, -aiche, a. Oaten. 

,» 8m. Moor. 2 Marsh. 

8.f. Hemp, carle, see cainb. 
Buill de ’n chaol-chorcach, tackling of hempen 
ropes. 

ima rw 8.m. Oakum. 

coille,j s.m. Red campion, (plant) see 
cìrean-choilich. 2 (bird) see corcan-coille. 





2 Chariot» 





how ish??} c. na talmhuinn, the custom of! corcag, -aig, -an, sf. Little knife. 2 see coirc- 
the land; air chor’s gu'n tig thu, on condition | 


eag. 





ocorcair 
corcair,** og, see corcuir. 
eachd, s.f. Working with a knife. (Sc. 
whittling.) 


corcais, -e, ean, sf. see corc. 
corcan, -ain, -an, s.m. Little cork. 2**Boat. 3** 
kot. 





-coille, s.m. Bullfinch—pyrrhula vulgaris. 
2 see corcach-c:)'! 





144. Curcan-cottle, 
-glas,(AF) s.m. Green bullfinch. 





corcas, -aiss.m. Cork—Harris. 

aie. a. (AC)Purple-eared. 2 Knife- 
eared. 

cor-chopag,§ 8.7. Water-plantain (cor, weir+ 
copag)—adisma pla: tago. 

ach, a. Abounding in water-plantain. 

corcra, G. see corcurach. 

n,** -ain, sm. — Sinall pot. 

corcuir, v. a. Make red, crimson, or purple. 
Is iomadh sleagh a chorcradh leis, many a 
spear was made bloody by him. 

——-—, gen.sing. of corcur. 

»** a. Rad, purpie, 2 Bloody. 

corcur, -uir, s.m. Scarlet, crimson, purple. 2 
The mossy white scurf adhering to large 
stones, from which the Gael make-a pleasing 
crimson dee, It is first well dried in the sun, 
then pulverized and steeped, commonly in 
urine, and th» vessel made air-tight. In this 
state it remains for three weeks, when it is 
fit to be boiled with the yarn it is to colour. 
8 Cudbear—lecanora tartarea, 

corcurach, -aiche, a. Purple, red, crimson. 2 
Of, abounding ia, or belonging to, purple or 
crimson. 

zl, $.f. Purple colour. 

corcuraich,** v.a. Kmourple. 

còrd, -üird, s.m. Cord,rope, string, line. 9** 
Cable. C. sgéinnidh, a string of twine. 

——, V.n., Agree, settle, adjust, arrange. 2** 
Reconcile. 3**Rope, bind, secure with ropes. 

corda, s. The genera scirpus and shemus of 
plants, both being formerly used in making 
ropes. 

cordach, -aiche, a. Corded, of, or belonging to 
A cord. 2 Consistent. 

—— ——4d,** 3.7.  Agreeableness. 

còrdadh, -aidh, s. m. Agreement, agreeing, 
coutract, 2 Good terms, good understanding. 
8 Apposition in gram. 4 Roping, fast. niug 
with ropes. 5 Betrothal, ' 0—, pr. pt. 
of vord. Droch ch., dispute, disagreement; 
c. areubas reachd, concord (or compromise) 
that renda the law [ Scots —law's costly, let’s 
tak’ a pint an’ gree—N.G.P. 

cordaidh,|| s.m. Spasms. [Preceded by art. on," 
2 gen.sinj. of cordadh. 

coríaidh, a. Agreeable. 
ayjreeaule they are ! 

cérlail,** s.f. Lace. 2 Cordage. 
lace. 

co-réir, see comh-réir. 











+ 





'S iad tha c1. how 


Lee, with 


253 


coronaich 


còrd-failbheig, s.m. That part of a cable fastens: 
ed to the ring of an anchor. 

cor-ghleus, s.m. Good condition. 

ach, -aiche, a. Well prepared, 2 In 

extra good condition, 31fFlustered. 

, -àich, s.m. ‘Tongue prepared for 


2 





scolding. 
corlach, -aich, 
**Apotome. 





s.m. Bran, refuse of grain. 
f?**Arrearage. 4**Grit. 


feorm, -a, s.m. Kind of beer or ale. 
cormach, -aich, s.m. Brewer. 
fcorm-nuall, s.m. Noise of drunkards, 


Tt ees 





195. Corn. 196. Còrn. 
corn, -üirn, s. m. Drinking horn or cup. 
Trumpet. 3 Robe. 4 The plantcornus. 5 
Bale of cloth. 6**Flagon. 7**Crnise. 8** 
Convex surface. 9ff Straw or prickle, used 
to provoke sneezing or vomiting. Talla nan 
c., the hall of revelry (cups) ; neart nan c., 
the strength of the drinking-horns (strong 
drink.) Allthe northern nations formerly 
drank out of horns which were conunonly 
thos of the urus or European buffalo. These 
horns were carefully dressed up and their- 
edges lipped all round with silver. One of 
these immense horns, at least, an ox-horn of 
prodiigious size, is still preserved in Dunvegan 
Castle. It was onlyfproduced before guests, 
and the drinker, in using it, twisted his arm 
round its spines, and turning his mouth to- 
wards the right shoulder, was expected to 


drain it off, 

corn, v.a. Plait, curl. 2* Fold cloth. 

eórnach, -aiche, a. Of, or pertaining to drink- 
ing-horns, &c. 2 Festive. 3 Like or of a 
sounding-horn. 4 Curled. 5 Waving, T’ òr- 
a casurlach e., thy waving, curled yellow 
OCKS. 

córnadh, -aidh, s.m. Folding of cloth, rolling, 
jaiting. 2 Corner. 38 Skirt. 4 Curl. & 
‘old. 6 Plait. 

cornair, -ean, s.m. Wrapper, folder. 

cornan, 8.m., dim. of corn. 

cornan-caisil, s.m. Wall-pennywort (plant.). 

córnan-fàil, -ean, 8.3». Hemlock. 

coru-caisil, see cornan-caisil. 

corn-chlar, -chlàir, s.m. Cupboard, buffet, 
dresser, 

córn-eun, -edin, s.m. Royston crow, hooded 
crow. 

corn-sliall,** s.m. Cupboard. , 

cornta, past. pl. of corn. Folded, plaited, curls. 


È 


ed, 
cornuil,| -e, s. f. Retching, vehement coughs 


ing. 

P. -oiu & an, s.m. Crown, coronet. 2 
Chaplet. C. dir, a crown of gold; c. Muire, @ 
rosary of beads (lit. Mary's coronet.) e 

coronaci, -aiche, a. Coronal, of, or belonging 
to a crown or chaplet. 2 Having a crowa 
or chaplet. 

coronaich,]f v:e. Enwreatkhe. 


coronair 


coronair,** sm, Coroner. 

corp, -uirp, s.m. Body, carcase (in distinction 
to soul.) 2 Corpse. C.airin, the main body 
of an army ; c. Curiosd, the Eucharist, Lord's 
supper; c. na h-oidhche, midnight, the mid- 
night watch. 

corpach, -aiche, a. ttCorpulent. 

»** -aich, 8. m. Ground under which 
there is decayed wood. 

-—— ———4,115./. Bodilyness. 

corpag, -aig, -an, s.f. "liptoe. 
-— air a chorpagaibh, he is walking on tip- 
oes. 

corpaich,(CR) v. n. Be disgusted at, revolt 
from. Ch. mi ris, I was disgusted at him. 

——te, a. Corporate. 

corpailear, see coirpileir, 

corpan, -ain, -an, sm. Little body, 2**Miser- 
able body. 3**Corpuseule. 

corpanach,tfa. see eorpanta. 

corpauta, a. Bulky, corpulent, solid. 

—chd, s.f. Bulkiness, corpulence. 

corp-criadhach,(WC) s.m. Clay corpse. When 
a Witch desired to destroy any one to whom 
she had an ill-will, she often made a corpse 
of clay resembling the unfortuuate one, and 
placed it in some out-of-the-way burn under a 
pregi ice, in such a way that the water trick- 
ed slowly on it. As tue clay body wasted so 
the live body of the person it resembled was 








also supposed to waste away. Were the body | 
found, it was carefully preserved, and so the} 


spell of the witch was broken. Sometimes 
pins were stuck in the clay body to make 
the death of the doomed one more painful. 
Several such bodies have been found, even of 
late years. 

corp-eolas, -ais, s.m. Anthropology. 

corp-ghabhail,ff s.m. Incarnation. 

cór-phairteach,** a, Aliquant. 

corp-iàidir,Tf -e, a. Able-bodied. 

corp-léine, -léintean, 8. f. 


shroud, 
see corporra. 


corpordha, a. 
—— — ———chd, 8.f. see corporrachd. 


corporra, a. Bodily, corporeal, material, gross, | 


not spiritual. Gu c., bodily. 
—chd, s f.ind. Materiality, corporeity, 
not spirituality. 
corp-rannsachaar,* &.m. Dissector, anatomist. 
Rame -aidh, 8. m. Despoiling of the 
ead. 





corp-sgian,* 8.f. Scalpel, dissector’s knife. 
—_——-adair,* sm. Dissector, anatomist. 
adaireachd,* 8,f. Anatomy,dissection. 

corp-shnasach, a. Anatomical. 

—d, sf. Anatomy, dissection. 

corp-shnasadair, see corp-shnasair. 

each, see corp-shuasach. 

eachd, see corp-shnasachd., 

corp-shnasadh, -aidh, s.m. Anatomy, dissect- 
ion. 

corp-shnasaiche,** s.m. Anatomist. 

corp-shnasair, -ean, 8.m. Anatomist, dissector. 
2* Body polisher, statuary. 

———each, see corp-shnasach. 

——eachd, see corp-shnasachd. 

còrr, -2, à. Excellent, great, eminent. 2 Ex- 
iraordinary. 3 Odd, not even. 4**Remain- 
ing. 5**Upwards of, more than. 6**State- 
ly. 7**Lofty, vast. 8**Beauteous. 9**Stormy. 
QlO0ffLong. llifDismal. Bliadhna ch., an ex- 
traordiuary year; duine c., a singular man ; 
a’ ghiuthas ch., the stately fir; uimhir ch., an 
odd number; c. is mile fear, upwards of a 
thousand men; fichead fear is c., twenty men 
and upwards ; corr-gaoithe nan speur, the 























254 


Tha e ag im-. 


'coriàen, -aich, s.f. Fetter, shaekle. 
Winding-sheet, | 






corrach-shod, § s. f. 


corrach-shod 


stormy winds of heaven; iasgach amadain, c 
bheotaach mór, a fool’s fishing, an occasional 
big fis—only fools despise littles—NGP. 

corr AF) s.m. Any undersized or diminutive 
animal, 2 Odd or exceptional looking crea- 
_ture. see corra. 

corr, s.m. Odds, excess, surplus, overplus, re» 
mainder, 2snout, bill, 3 Horn. 4ffEnd, 
corner, limit. Thoir dhomhs' an c., give me 
the remainder; air chórraibh an sgiath, on 
ES ema of their wings; air ch., espe- 
cially. 

corra, -n, $.f. Heron, hern, 2**Stork. 37*rare- 
iy Waterpiet. 4(AF) Crane. Cha sua.ch- 
eantas c. air cladach, a. heron on the shore— 
a likely acht, au no sign of anything un- 
usual about to happen. 

corra-beada, see corra-biod. 

corra-beaga, see corra-biod. 


corra-bhaiune,(DU) 8, f. ‘The insect cranefly, 


* daddy long-lozs." 


‘cdrra-bhan,{ &.f. White heron—ardea alba. 29 


White stork—ciconia alva. 3**Crane. 

corra-bheinn,tt s.f. Steep hill. 

corra-bide, see corra-biod, 

corra-v10d, -a, 8.m. Certain posture of stand- 
ing or cowering, wh.ch prepares the person 
assuming it for an iustaut start or sprius. 2 
(with atr—air corra-biod) l'ip-toe. 3 Watch- 
fuiuess. 4 Impatience. 5 Niceness, fas.iui- 
ousness. 6 Anxiety to find fault. [tf gives 
corra-bioda. | i 

corrach, -alcue, 4. Steep, precipitous. 2 Erect. 
3 Abrupt, passionate, angry. 4 Inconsisteute 
5 Wavering. 6**see carach. 7(AH)Unsteady, 
unstable, affording insecure foothold. gë 


Rolling, as the eye. Àite c.,a steep place; 2 

a shakiny place— Lewis ; is c. gob an dubhain, 

Jishing is a precarious livelihood. 

2 Bog, 
marsh. SÉ Goart, 

corrachauh, -aidh, see comharrachadh. 

corra-chayailte, -n-cagaiite, s.f. Salamander. 2 
Fluctuating sulphureous figures, observed 
among hot embers on trosty nights. 3 (WC) 
Person given to constantly sitting by the fire. 
4 Coward, tireside soldier. 


corracha-margailh,(AF) 8. pl. Jailbirds (i.e. 
market herons, birds or people, who haunt 
markets or places where they are likely to 
pick up soinething or find employment.) see 
eorra-inargaidh, 

eorrachan,( AF) s.m. Stilt. 

corrachan,fl s.m. Daw—Iona d£ Mull, see cathag. 

—————, n.pl. of corra. 

corrachan, n.pi. of corr. 

corra-chaoghal, pl. -chan-caoghail, sf Grass- 
hopper. : 

corrachas,ff-ais, s.m. Crankiness. 2 Steep-. 


ness, 

corrachd,(AC) St. Very sacred promise or en- 
treaty, death promise, 

— ———aán,(AF) 8.m. Chicken. 

corra-cheann, -chinn, s.m. Dunderhead. 
Giddy head. 

corra-cheannach, a. Light-headed, giddy, in- 
constant. 

corra-chedsach, 


ore 


see corra-chósag. 


corra-chosach, see corra-chósag. 
corra-chosag, -aig, au, 8.f. Cheslip, small in- 


sect found in chinks, 


corra-chrithich,! s.f. Heron, see corra-ghrith- 


each. 
Marsh-marigold—caltha 
alustris. [Preceded by art. a’ ch—.] see 


Mlust. 197. 


corra-dhufl 





_ 197. A’chorrach-shod. 
corra-dhuil, -e, s.f. First effort of an infant to 
articulate. 
corra-diosag,( AF) s.f. Cheslip. 
corri, -Aig, -an, 8.7. Finger. 2 Fore-finger. 
8 Left-hand stilt of a plouzh, plough-tail. 
Cha dean c, inhilis im, a sweet singer will ne- 
ver make butter. 
ach, -aiche, a. Fingered, having fingers. 
achadh, -aidh, s. m. & (A’ c—,) pr.pt. of 
corragaich. Fingering. 








corragaich, pr.pt. a’ corragachadh, v.a. Finger, |. 


handle. 
eorrag-croinn, &.f. Plough-handle or stilt. 
corra.ghabhan, see corra-ghobhlach. 
corra-ghias,{ ais, s./. Common heron. 2 Stork, 
sea corra-ghritheach.  3* Crane, see corra- 
mnonaidh.  4** Bittern, seo corra-ghrian. 
Em nà corra-glaise, the wings of the 
OPER, 
eorra-ghleus,tt s.m. Good condition, prime, 
-—ach,tt a. Primed. 
corra-ghobhlach,(AF) sr Earwig. 
coura-gbrain, 8.32. Heron, see corra-ghritheach. 
corra-ghrian, pl.-an- & -achan-grian,s f Bittern 
—botawrus gellaris, 2(AF)Swan, 3(AF)Tur- 
tle-dove. 
corra-ghribheach, see corra-ghritheach. 
corra-ghriodhach, see corra-ghritheach. 
corra-ghritheach, s. f. Heron, stork, crane— 
ardea cimerea. [Griathach is from Early 





Irish grith, a scream. |} 





199. Corra-ahrian. 199. Corra-ghritheach. 
sorrag-shacaiche, -an-sacaiche, 8.7. Sort of hur- 


dle, set on the back of a horse to carry grain, | 


C. 
corra-iasg,(AF) s.f. Crane, stork. 
corraichead,f{f -id, et Crankiness. 2 Steep- 
DESS. 
corrail,(DC) a. Fretful, (applied to a child)— 
Uist & Lewis. 
corr: Lach, -aich, &m. Remainder, excess, sur- 
pis, overplus, odds. 
eorralachd,( DC) er Fretfulness— Uist. 
zorra.leisg,* s.f. Sloth. | Precede by art. a’ ch.] 
corra-imaothar,* 8, m. Sea-pike (tish :-—IJslay. 


255 





corra-sgreuchag ~~ 


corra-margaidh, -n- & -chan-margaidh,s.m. Tha. 
rabble. 

corra-meille,* see carra-meille. 

corra-nheagan,( MMcD) s.m. Bilberry, whortle- 
berry —vaccintum myrtillus. 

corri-uihenr,* s.f. Little finger. 2tfOdd finger. 

corra-mhoua, see corra-luhonaidh, 


corra-mbhonaidh, pl, -chiun-nonaidh, sf. Crane 
—fgrus cinerea. 2**Stork. 3**Heron. 


P, 





— 


200. Corra-mhonaidh. 
corran, -ain, s. ^. Reaping-hook, sickle. 2 
Point of land running far into the sea, 3. 
Point of a weapon, 4 Spear. 5 Barbed ar- 
row. 6 Beard. 7(WC) Island which comes. 
in sight at low tide at the mouth of a river. 
—Ponlewe. 8** Prickle. 9** Sharp-edged: 
weapon. (The meanings given in some dict- 
lonaries as ** Narrow passage through which 
the tide runs swiftly," “ semi-circular bag," 
and “bend” are not the equivalents of corra 
which signifies the promontory which con- 
tracts the passage, or which bounds the bay. 
Mu ch. à mhionnaieh, on the bend of his sto- 
mach; gach té le a c. cam every woman with 
her crooked sickle; c. saighde, the point of an 


arrow. 
corranach, -aiche, a. Barbed. 2 Prickly. 3 
Neteh d. 4 Sharp. 5 Destructive. 6 Of, 


like, or pertaining to areaping-hook or sickle. 
7 Hooked, crooked. 8tftCircular. Do shaigh- 
dec, thy barbed arrows. 

“corranach, -aich, s.f. Crying, loud weeping, the. 
funeral cry of the Gael. 2**Mournful ejacue 
lation.  8** Singing at funerals.  |**Gives: 
* Bagpipeamusic when used at funerals or on. 
mournful occasions," but this should be cu- 
mha.] The c. of the Gael is a panegyric on: 
the deceased, with a recital of the bravery or 
worth of his ancestors. 

corra na h-easgann,(AF) s.f. Crane, bittern. 

i corran-bearraidh, -ain-, s.m. Pruning-hook. 

corran-coille, see corcan-coille. 

corran-creige,( DC) s.m. Stickleback— Uist. 

corran-gar!-2! lanaidh, s.m. Weeding-hook,hoe. 

corran-greusaiche,(AF) s.m. Small catfish, an- 
gler.— Argyll. 

corran-lin, s.m. Corn-spurrey, see cluain-lin. 

corran-szathaidh, s.m. Pruning-hook. 2 (M. 
McL)Hook for cutting the lower part off shea- 
ves of coru for thatch. 

corran-shioman, tf s.f. see cor-shiomain. 

corranta, a. see corranach. 

corra-riabhach, -aich, pl. -n-riabhach, s. E 
pecht crane—ardea major, see corra-glirith-- 
eacb. 

corra-sgreuch, see corra-sgreuchag. 

=- -sgreuchag, 8 J. Sereech-owl. 2(AF) 

eron. 


corra-sf itheach 256 cos-chenm 
icorra-sgritheach,(WC) s.f. Heron. [Always | tceorruigheach, a. Moving. 


called thus at Poolewe, from an imitation of 
the bird’s erg ] 

Corra-shYomain, see cor-shiomain. 

corra-shod, see corrach-shod. 

corra-shaghadh, s.m. The backward swell from 
the shore after a wave has spent its strength 
on the beach, 2 ‘Trough of the high waves 
out at sea, A h-uile rud tosdach, 1e1dh, ach 
corra:s! üghadh a bheireadh stuth air na 
boghachan everything calm and quiet, except 
an occasional murmur from the sea-swell on 
the sunken reefs.—Sgeularche-nan-caol, p. 125. 

corra-shigain, s.m. Flickering tigures, caused 
by reflected rays of light on roofs or walls of 
houses. (Scots, glaiks.) 2 see corra-shügan. 

«orra-shügan,* 8. f. Twist-bandle, also cor- 
shiomain. 

corra-spiod, see corra-biod. 

corra-thon-dubh, pl. -n-tón-dubh. s,f. Crane. 

corra-thulchainn,(AH) er In roof of a house 
with sloping gable, the beam extending from 
middle of end wall to the apex of the nearest 
couple. 

corr-bheann, a. Long-sheeted. 

córr-bheinn, -e, pl. -bheanntan, s.f. Steep hill. 

corr-chagailte, see corra-chagailte. 

córr-cheann, -chinn, 8.31, Empty head. 

————— ———Aaách, -aiche, a. Kimpty-headed. 

córr-chlaonadh, -aidh, s.m. Bias, leaning. 

eorr-chopag, s. f. Water- 
plantain — alisma plant- 


ago. 
——ach, a. Abound- 
ing 1n water-plantains. 
corr-fbad,(MMcD)3.m. First 
oroutermost peat cut from 
a peat-bank, 
corr-fhod, -fhoid, s.m. The 
concluding or outermost 
furrow ofa ridge or field. 
corr-ghieus, see cor-ghleus. 
--—ach, -aiche, a. 
see cor-ghleusach. 
--——ach, -aich, s. f. ^ 
see cor-ghleusach. 201. Corr-chopag. 
corr-ghluineach, -eiche, a. Long-kneed. 2 Hav- 
ing sharp-pointed knees. 
corr-5nóbhlach, -aich, s.m. Earwig. 
corr-ghrian, see corra-ghritheach. 
corrghuil, -e, 8.f.Murmur, muttering, chirping. 
corriach, -aich, 8.f. Coarsely ground meal. 2 
Overplus, remainder. 
corr-léine, s.f. Shirt of armour. 
corr-marguidh, see corra-margaidh. 
corr-meille, see carra-ineille. 
corr-inlheille, see carra-ineille. 
córr-mheur, -mheoir, s.m. Odd finger. Cha 
chuir mi mo ch. air, J will not touch it. 
+corr-mhiann, 8.f. Conceit. 
corr-mial,(AF) s. Gnat. 2 Hornet. 3 Horse- 














y. 

corr-phairteach, a. Aliquant. 

corr-riabhach, see corra-riabhach. 

corr-sgreuchag, -aig, see corra-sgreuchag. 

corr-sgriachag, see corra-sgreuchag. 

corr-shügan, see corra-shugan, 

córr-shnidhe, s. Discumbency. 

corr-thulchann, see under taigh. 

Tcorruzhadh, -aidh, see carachadh. 

corruicn, -e, sf. Anger, wrath, ire. 2* Offence. 
Tha c. air, he is offended; na gabh c., do not 
be offended; 'na ch. ghéir, in Ais ferce anger. 

,V.0. See caraich. 

¢corruidhe, see corruighe. 

¢corruigh, v.a. Stir, move. 

$corruighe, &./. Trouble, disorder. 





corruil, -e, see coirivll. 

corr-urraidh, -ean, s.m. Surety. 

còrsa, -n (& -chau), s.m. Coast, shore. 2**Dis- 
trict. 44MMcD) 1hat part of a sail between 
the upper reef-points and yard. Air c. na 
Frainge, on the coast of France ; air ar cor- 
saibh, o» our coasts. 

córsaenadh, -aidh, san. Coasting, cruising. A’ 
c—, pr.pt. of edrsaich. 


COrsachd,11 st od, Sponginess, 


corsudh, see corsa. 

corsaich, v.a d n. Coast, cruise. 

corsair, -ean, 5.54. Coaster, cruiser. 2**Pirate, 
eorsair. 

eaehd, s.f.ind. Cruising, eoasting. 2 
Piracy. 

cor-shiomain, -ain, s.m. Twist-handle, (Scots, 
thraw-crook) for making straw-ropes. 

feortas, -ais, sm. Debt. 

corthachd,** ër Gi, Lassitnde. 

feorughadh, -aidh, s.m. Armament, armour 

cor-urraidh, see corr-urraidh. 

cos, Gul, dat. cuis, pl. Cosan, s.f. see cas. 

cos, -0is,-An, s. m. Hoiiow, crevice, recess. 2 
Cavern, cave, bole. 3* Sponge—4say. C. mo 
shuain, the cavern of my rest; a’ ieum o'n 
cosaibh, bounding fiom their holes. 

cosa, ( for casa) pl. O0) Cds. 

cosach, -aiche, a.Cavernous, abounding in hol- 
luws, recesses, or crevices. 2 Snug. 3 Spun- 
gy, purvus. 4** bBibuious. 

cosich, -aiche, @ see casach. 

cOsuchu, s.f. Sponginess, porousness, 

COsay, AIR, "AN, see casag. 

cosay, -alg, an, S.f. Small crevice, cavern, 
cave, or cell. 

ach, a. Full of holes or crevices, 2 Snug. 
warn, cosy, Sheltered. 3 Spongy. 

cosagaca, see casagach. 

Cusa-gobhiach, see casa-gobhlach. 

cOsalche, 5.7.00. see cosaicuead. 

ad, -cid, sm. Hoilowness. 2 Degree 

of sponginess. 

cosail, -e, @ see cosmhail. 

+vosain,** v.a. Defend, keep off. 2 Preserye. 
3 Avouch, maiutain. 

cosiint,** s.j. Reply. 2 Defence. 8 Averment 

cosair,** s.m. Feast. 2 Bed. 

eosalachd, see cosmhalachd. 

1eosam, v.a. Defend, keep otf, preserve. 

cosainal, see cosmal, 

cò 'sain bith, comp. rel. Whoever, whosoever. 

cosaimhlacenadn, -aidh, s.m. Allusion, act of al- 
luding, comparing, likening. A’ c—, pr.pt. 
of cosainhlaich, 

cosamhiachd, see cosmhalachd. 

cosaiahlaicn, see comh-shainuhiaich. 

—te, &. & pdt pt. of cosamhlaich, 

see comh-shainhlaicate. 

còsan, -ain, -àn, s.n. Little hollow or crevice. 
2**Cell, 3 n.pl. of còs. 

ach, -aiche, a. Full of little hollows. 

cosan,** ain, s.m. Footpath. 

, n. pl, of cos, ( for cas.) 

cosanta, &. Industrious, diligent. 2**Defen- 
ded. 3**Perplexed, entangied. 4(AH)Stur- 
dy, vigorous, weatherproof,sound ot wind and 
limb. 

cosantach, -aiche, à. see cosanta. 

—,** -aich, 8.m. Defender, in a process. 

cosar,** -air, s.m. Coat, mantle. 

cvsarach,** s.pl, Fetters. ` 

tcosbair, -e, -ean, see cuspair, 

cosbueairt, see caisbheart. 

coscach,(MMcL) a. Spougy. 

cos-cheum, A, -an, S€e cas-cheum, 

















cosd 


cosu, pr. pt. a’ cosd, v.u. & a. Spend, waste, 
cost, squander. 2 Wear, tear. 





Co 'ilia. 'cosd 
air seo £ who is paying for this $ qnot equan- 
der)—i.e. leave my attains alone ; na c. v air- 
giod, do not squander your money. 

cos, s.m. Cost, expense, expenuiture, extrava- 
gauce. A'c—,pr. pt. of cosd. 

cosdai, -e, a. Expeusive,extravagant, prodigal, 
profuse. 2 Dear, costly. 

cosdalachd, 8.f.ind.. Expensiveness, costliness. 
2** Preciousuess, Yaluableuess. 

cosdas, -ais, sm. Expense, price, cost, expendi- 
ture, 2 Extravagance. Is wwnann c. gun 
chusnadh agus anshocair gun leigheas, aye 
spending and never earning is like an incur- 
able disease; fear cosdais, an extravayant 
man. 

cosdasach, -aiche, a. Expensive, costly. 2** 
Exiravagant. 3 Precious, valuable. 

—d, same meanings as cusdalachd. 

cos-diollaide, sm. Saddle-pillar of a cycle. 

teosd-Lhaigh, -e, -eau, sm. Inn. 

Cos-dunnD, see cas-dubh. 

tusg, pr.pt. a’ cosg, see cosd. 

cusg, SR. & pr.pl. of coisg, see caisg. 

cusyach,** a. Assuasive, 2 Expensive, waste- 
ful. 

cosgatair, -ean, s.m. Assuager, mollifier. 

cusgadn, -aidh, aam, Quencbing,stoppiuy,curb- 
ing, staunching, appeasing, restraining. 2 
Act of quenching, staunching, ceasing, &c. 
A c—, pr.pt. of coisg. Au fhuil a’ ruitn gun 
luibh ‘ga cosgadh, the blood jlowing and no 
hero to stop it. 

cuxgail, -e (& -ala), a. 

cosgair, s.m. Queller, pacitier, 

Co-gair, V. See casgair, 

Cusgairt, see casgairt. 

Cus,ar, -air, sm. see casgairt. 2**Triumph, 
rejJuicing. 

ach, -aiche, a. see casgrach. 2**Triumph 





see cosdail. 





ant. 

cosyarachd, see casgrachd. 

Cosgaradh, -aidn, s.m. see casgradh, 

Cus -araicde,** see cas,zraicue. 

Cosgalra, see casgracu. 

Cusgarrach, 8. see cuszarrach. 

-—, A. see casgrach. 

cosgas, see cosdas. 

cusy-leighbeas,** s. Antidote. 

Cusgracn, see Casgracn. 

cCusgradh, see cas,ra:lh, 

Cuszraiche, -an, see caszraiche, 

cusyzuirt, see casgairt. 

cosguis, -2, 8J. Periodical allowance to ser- 
vauts sent to their houses. 2, MMcL) Lxpen- 
diture— Lewis. 

Cusgus, -uis, see cosdas.  (cosgas— Uist.) 

coslach,(CH) a. Spongy, as bread, peats, or any 
dry tning.— W. of ftos»-shire, 

cosiach, -aiche, see coltach. 

Coslacud, see cosinhatiacnd. 

costas, -ais, see coltas. Is fhearr e na a 
ch., he is beiter than his appearance. 

Cos-iewthanun, see cas-leatuaun., 

Cos-ion), see cas-lom. 

Ccos-loinnoend, see cas-loin. 

cos-iuath, see cas-Inath. 

cosmail,tt -e, 87. Rubbish, refuse of meal, 
straw, &c. 

—————eaen,tt a. Worthless. 

cosmal,* -ail, sm. Rubbish. also cosmail, 

cosuiDail, -e, a. Like, similar, resembling. 

cosmüal, see cusinnail. 

achd, Stuf, 

2 Probability, 3 Comparison. 

Appeaance. 6 Agrecaoieness, 











4 Parable. 


257 


Likeness, resemblance. 
5 
C. "our n-| 





edla 


-e 





aghaidh, @ proverb against you, 
COsuraalas, -àis, see cosmhdalachd, 
cuxinhiul], see cosinlia.l. 
-—eachd, see cosinhalachid. 
—————— eudh, -idhi,-idliean, see cosamhlachadh. 
cosnmuil, -e, s.f. see cosinal, 
cosmul, -wil, see cosinal. 
cos-uabuidh, see cas-nabmidh. 
| cosnach, -aich, s.m, Labourer, workman, day- 
labourer. 2 Defendant. 3,CR)Wage-earn- 
er, provider (for his own family.) Comharr- 
adh an deagh chosnaich, cadal fada ri gaoith 
mhóir agus a’ ehlanu a chumail a mach o’n 
teine, the mask of the good servant, to sleep 
long when the wind is high and to keep the 
chiluren from the fire—the good s.-rvant has 
everything safeiy secured before niglit cones, 
and (bus, having an easy mivd, he sleeps 
soundly, even throvgh a storm, also, ue 
keeps the house well supplied with fuel, so 
that the tires are big, and the children forced 
to Keep at a sate distance. 

vosnachail,1t -aila, a. Peasant. 

cosnadh, -aidh, san, Gaining, earning, act of 
gaining, gectingor winning. 2 Stateof ser- 
vitude, occupation and state ofamenial. 3 
Service, employment, work. 4* Accomplish- 
ment. 5**etence.  6**Preservation,. A’ 
c—, pr. pt. of coisinn. [see note under cois- 
inn. | Dubli-chosuadh, outdoor or field-labour, 
as plantiny potatoes, spreading peais, de, ; 2 
(WC) working very hard; is bochd am pòsadh 
nach fearr na’n dubh-chosnadh, it is a voor 
marriage that is not vetter than field-work— 
seldom desirable for women, 

cosnaiche, s.n. see cosnach. 

tcosnaimh. -aimh, see cosnadh, 

cos-nucaudte, a. see cas-rùisgte. 

cusoil, -e, a. see cosmhail. 

cosrach, -aich, s.m. Slaughter, havoc. 9 Fet- 
ters. A deanamh cosraich, slaughtering. 

cos-rüisgte, see cas-rüisgte. 

cos-sillighe, -an, see cas-shlighe. 

cós-shruth, -a, -an, 8.m. Stream running partly 
undergrouud, or forming hollows La its 
course. 

cos-stol, -dil, see cas-stól. 

cost, A, &m. see cosd. zt see cosguis, 

cost, v.a. & n. see cosd. 

costach, a. see cosdail. 

costadhach, see cómhstadbach. 

‘costug,§ -aig, 8f. Chervil—enthriscus cerifoli- 

um, a. vulgaris, and a. temulentum. 
costa; a’ bhaile gheamh- 
raidh, see costag. 

costag-fiiadhain, s.f. Wild 
chervil — cherophyllum 
sylvestre. 

costail, -e, a. see cosdail. 

costalachd, s.f. see cosdal- 

achd. 

costas, -ais, see cosdas. 

co’stri, see comli-strì. 

co’strigh, see comh-strì. 

co strigi ach, -eiche, a. see 

comn-stritheach. 
costus, -uis, see cosdas. 

costusach, -aiche, a. 

cosdail. 

cos-nisge,8.f. Sweet cicely, 202.Costaa-fhiadhain 

great chervil—myrrhis odorata. (illust. 202.) 
cosninail, -e, s.f. see cosiwal. 

fcot,-a, -an, s.m. Small boat. 2 Part, share, 

portion. 

cot, -a, -achan, s.m. Gaelic form of cottage. 
cota, -aichean, s.m. Petticoat. 2 Coat. 3**Co- 

vering. 4} Alpine lady’s mantle (plant), see 





rer 
Reet yee 
uU Roa 


ie” 





see 


cota 





trusgan. 

cdia-ban, s.m., Flannel petticoat. 2 Groat (4d. 
piece.) 3 Fourpence-land. Leirtheas, two 
Jourpenny-lands ` ochdamh, four jourpenny- 
(anus; ceathramh, + ge Jourpenny-lands, 

cota-bior,(DU) sem. Flannel or pla.diog petti- 
coat —A rgyi. 

cota bioracii dubh, 8s. m. Black tailed coat, 
“morning coat,” 

còta-bhioran,tt -ain, s.m. Knitted petticoat, 

còta-cathdath, s.m. Tartan coat. 

cotach,t+ a. Of, or pertaining to, a coat or pet- 
ticoat. 2 Coat-wearing. 

cóta-craicinn, sm, Coat of skins. 

còta ''croisidh, 4 MMcL) s.m. Crotchet petti- 


enat. 

còta-fada,(AI) s.m. Frock-coat. 

còta-gearr, (AC) s.m. Short coat or doublet like 
an *"Eton'' jacket with short cut-away tail. 
It was made of tartan or scarlet clovh, whica 
was called cath-dath (war colour) or cath- 
dath 1ioghail (royal war colour.) 

cdta-glas, s.m. Grey coat. Cha tig an c. glas 
cho math do na h-uile fear, the grey coat be- 
comes not every man alike. Mackiutosh says, 
"King James the V's wearing & grey coat 
when in disguise might prooably give rise to 
this saying. 

eota-goirid,** s.m. Jacket. 

e5taich, v.a. Provide with a coat. 2 Cover, en- 
velop. 

cuta.cuean, pl. of còta. 

teutaig, sf. Harmony. 2**Good understanding. 

cota-mor, pl. cótaicbean-móra, 8.5». Surtout, 
top-coat, greatcoat. 

cotan, -am, 8m. Cotton. 2MMcL) Smali fold 
for a calf. 

eótan, -2in, s.m. Little petticoat. 2 Little coat. 
3**Little pile. 4**Part, portion. 

cotanach,tt a. Of, or pertaining to, little-coats. 

cotanach,ii -aiche, a. Cottony. 

cota preasach nighinn an righ, s. f. Lady’s 
raantle—alchemilla vulgaris, see copan-an- 
driùchd., 

còta-uisge, (AH) s.m. Waterproof coat, 

Tooth, suu. Meat, victuals. 

¢cotn,(AF)s.m. Cat. 

còthach CR) a. Spougy, as a decaying turnip, 
or why wet thing—W. of Ross-shire. 

cothacuadh, -aidn, s.. Karning, support. 2 
Dispute, contention. 3 Competition. 4 Ob- 
stinacy, pertinacity. ses cathachadh., 6 
(AH ganter, badinage, sally, repariee, A’ 
€ —, pr.pt. of cottiaich. Is ard t’ iarrtas os 
cionn na tha ’nam chomas a chothachadh, 
your desire is beyond what Lam able to sa- 
tis/y; ainmich na duilgheasan, leig leam an 


cC., nam» the dificiucies, let me overcome them; | 


a’ c. riut, strugyling against you. 
cothadh, -aidh, 
Preservation. 


t 
EET 
Nite a 
VICA UAR 





20L, Cotharach. 


2038, Cos-lsge. 


258 


$. m. Support, protection. 2 








cot'-uachdair 


co'thaghadh, -aidh, s.m. Syntax, proper choice 
and constriction of words. 

cothaich, v.a. Gain, get, earn, win. 2 Contend, 
strive. 3 Try,tempt. 4**Debate. 5**Strug- 
gle, fight. 

cothaiche, ap, 8.m. Earner. 2 Disputant, con- 
tender. 

cothaidh,(CR) a. Soft, spongy--Glenmoriston. 

cothan, -ain, &.m. Cough. 2 Anhelation. 8 Asih- 
ma. 4 Froth. 5(AH) Decayed, corroucd 
timber. Gr Pulp. 7(DC) Shrine, reliquary 
box—A rgyil. 

cothanach, -aiche, a. Frothy. 2 Asthmatic. 3 
(AH) Corroded, decayed. 

——4, sf. Krothiness, anhelation, 

cothannach, $./. Froth, spray, foam. 

cothar, -air, -airean, s.f. Coffer. 

cothar, -air, s.m. see cobhar. 

cotharach, -aich, s.f. Water scorpion-grass, for- 
get-me-not—myosotis palustris, 

co’thional, -ail, s.m. see comh-thional. 

mel pr. pt. a’ cothlamadh, v.a. Mix to- 
gcetner. 

cothlamadh, -aidh, s.m. Things of different 
kinds or colours mixed together. 2 Act of 
mixing together differen’ sorts of wool as 
black and white. 3 Wool-mixture. A’ e—, 
pr.pt. of cothlaim, 

fcothlon, -oin, à.m. Victuals for a journey. 

cothrom, a. see cothromach. 

cothrom,-uim,-an, s.m. Equipoise, equilibrium. 
2 Weight, any certain weight. 3 Justice, 
equal terms, as of combat, fair-play. 4 Com- 
fort. 5 Opportunity. 6 Ability, power. 7 
Advantage. 8**Support. 9**Mcrey. Arn- 
airgiod ’na lau chothrom, our money in fill 
weight; far am bi cail bidhc., where there’s 
a will theres a way; c. na Féinne, the Finga- 
lian fair-play; —i.e. one to one, gaisgeach air 
gaisgeach agus laoch ri laoch—N.G.P.; a’ dol 
a dh'ionnsuidh a’ chothroini, going to seek jus- 
tice;an ceud ch. a gheibh mi, the first op- 
portunity I get; tha e an c. math, he is in 
comfortable circumstances. ; 2 in good health — 
(Lewis); fhuair e a h-uile c. d’ a mbac, he got 
the best education for hissen ; cum c. rium, 
support me; c. agus ceart, justice and equity. 

cothromach, -aiche, a. Just, equitable. 2 Up- 
right, honest, 3 Comtortable, in easy circuin- 
stances. 4 Weighty. 5*Parallel, equal, even 
with, level, 6 Of the same size. 7**Firm, 
firmly situated, 81i Easily accomplished, 
9 Righteous. Athair ch., O righteous father ! 
Duine c., a man in easy circumstances ; 2 in- 
fluential person; 8 religious person ; meidhean 
C., just weights ; cha'n "eil an slighe c., their 
way is not equal; calpa cruinn G brawns, 
well rounded and firm. 

adh, -aidh, 8, m. Weighing, act of 
weighing. 2 Poising, balanciug. 3 Ponder- 
ing. 4 Settling, placing on a firm founda- 
tion. A’ c—, pr.pt. of cothromaich. A’ c. 
nam brog, paring the shoes. 

cothromachd,j{t s.f. wd. Appropriateness, 2 
Equality. 

cothromaich, pr. pt. a’ cothromachadh, v. a. 
Weigh. 2 Poise. 3 Ponder, consider, 4 Es- 
tablish, settle. 5* Make even with. 6*Make 
of thesame size. C. na sgleatan, make the 
slates of one size. 

cothromaiche, -an, 3.m. Weight. 2 Balance. 
8 Weizher. 

cothroinaicate, past pt. of cothromaich. Weigh- 
ed. 2 Poised. 3 Measured. An talamh c., 
the poised earth. 

cot’-iochdair, cOtaichean-, $.0. Undercoat. 2 
Under-petticoat. 

cót'-uachdair, pl. cótaichean-, 











8, m, Upper or 


cót'-uachdair 


outer coat, Overcoat. 

feotun, -uin, sm, Coat, coatgof mail. 

cra (AC) s. Blood; hence 2 Keil. 

cra,(CR)s.m. Cruive fur catching salmon—W. 
of Ross-shire, 

cràbhach, iche, a. Devout, religious, pious, 
austere, hypocritical. 

crabhach, -aich, s.m. see crabhaiche. 

cràbhachd, s.f. see cràbhadh. 

crabhadair,* s.m. 
devotee, puritan. 

erabhiadh, -aidh, s.m. Religion. 


Monk. 2 Austere religious 
2 Devotion. 


8**llypocrisy. 
crühhaiche, -an, s.m. Devout man, devotee. 2 
Worshipper. 3 Hypocrite. 


crabhaichean, s.pl. see crabharsaich. 

cràbhaidh, -e, a. see cràbhach. 

cràbhair, see crabhadair. 

crabharsaich,s.pl. The smaller articles of house- 
hold furniture. 2 Sm:il wares. 

cràbhat, -an, s.f. Gaelic spelling of cravat. 

— -aiche, see crocach. 2(DU) Tousled, 
curly. 

crac, v. & 8. see cnac. 

eracail, -e, sf. see cnacail. 

crucaire, -an, s.m. see cnacair. 

achd, see cnacaireachd. 

cracairiche, s.m. see cnacair. 

cracair-neoil,** for cnacair-neoil, s.m. Balloon, 
(in fireworks.) 

cracan, Ain, s.m. Hill-side. 2 Vexation. 3 
see enacail. 

cracas,t ais, s.f. see cnacaireachd. 

crachann, -ainn, $.». see creachann. 

crachd, see cnac. 

crachdadh, see cnacadh. 

eraci:dail, see enacail. 

erac-dhamh, (AF) s.m. Stag. 

era-chluasach, a. (AC) a. Eed-eared. 

cra-chu, (AC) s.m. (it. red dog) Fox. 

cràdh, v.a. see cràidh. 

cradh, -aidh, s. m. Pain, anguish, torment, 
pang. Cùis mo chràidh, the cause of my an- 
guish ; móran cràidh, much pain ; c. cridhe, 
mental anguish. 

cràdhadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of tormenting, vex- 
ing, harassing. 2**Vexation. A’ c—, pr.pt. 
of cràidh. 

cràdhaich, 

te, 


see cràidh. 

see cràidhte. 
cràdhair,** s.m. Afflicter. 
eràdhar, fut. pass. of craidh, 
crà-ihearg, -dheirge, a. Red-footed. 





2 Blood- 


red 
cráàdh-gheadh,fT -gheoidh, s. 7 Common shel- 
drake—tadorna bellonit. 





CE —ee 
205. Cradheysheadh. 


cradh-lot, an, s.m. Painful wound. 2 Men- 
tal anguish, torment, agony. Cüis mo ch., the 
cause of my distress. 

crádh-lot, v.a. Inflict a grievous wound. 

ach, -aiche, a. Of, or connected with, 





959 


'eragmhor, -oire, a. 


craidhte 


& painful wound. 

eràdh-shlat,* st Sort of pillory or tread-mill, 
used by the Gael of old. 2 see cradh-lot. 
A mo ch., ! alas, my torment ! 

cra-dhubh, (AC) a. & s.m. Dark red. 

cra-fhioileay,(AC) 8.f. Red gull. 2 (AF)Black- 
headed sea-gull. 

crag, -aige, -an, see creag. 

crag, v.a. Knock, see cnac. 

——, gen. pl. of craig. 

crag, -àige,-an. s.f. see cròg. 

——ach, -aiche, a. see crogach. 

cragach, -aiche, a. see creagach. 

cragadh.ff aidh, s.m. Collision, knocking, see 
cnagadh. 

teragair, or.pt. a’ cragairt, v.a. Handle awk- 
wardly or inelegantly. 

cragair, -ean,8.m. Pawer. 2(MMcL) Person 
with Jarrxe clumsy hands, 

eaclid, s find. Act of pawing. 2 Act of 
handling awkwardly. 

cràgairt, s.f. Handling awkwardly or indelica- 
tely. A’ c—, pr.pt. of cragair. 

cravan, n.pl. of crag. 

era: an, -ain, -an, see creagan. 2n. vil. of crag. 
8tt Little pipkin (earthen vessel.) 

ach, -aiche, a. see creaganach. 

craganach, -aich, s.m. In-footed or in-toed 
person. 2**splay-footed person. 

cragan-feannaig,(AF) s.m. Sea-urchin. 2 Large 
periwinkle. 

cragan-traghad,(MMcD) s.m. Sea-urchin. 


me 











crag-chasach, a. In-footed. 2 Splay-footed. 
crà-:headh, see cradh-gheadh. 
crà-zheal,(AC) e. & s.m. Light red. 
See creaganach. 
cragnadh, -aidh, see cragairt. 
craic, -e, -ean, s.f. see cròic, 2(DU)Tousled, 
matted head of hair. 
craiceach, -idh, s.m. see croiceadh, 
craiceann, -inn [& -cne], -cnean, 8m. Skin. C. 
caorach, a sheep-skin; c. coin, dog-skin; c. cait, 
cat-skin; c. bràthan, see under bra. 
——aiche, s.n. Skinner. 
craiceann-fionnaidh,* s.m. Fur. 
craicionn, see craiceann. 
craicionn-fionnaidh, see craiceann-fionnaidh. 
craicne, yen.sing. of craiceann. 
ach, -eiche, a. Of, or belonging to skins. 





.craicnibh, dat.pl. of craiceann. 


cràiteach, see cràidhteach. E 

cràidh, pr.pt. a’ cràdh, v.a. Torment,pain,gall, 
harass, vex. Ré a làithean uile craidhear an 
t-aingidh, the wicked travaileth with pain 
(shall be tortured) all his days. 

craidh, gen. sing. of cradh. 

craidheal, see creadhal. 

craidhleag, -eig, -an, s.f. Basket, creel, egg- 
shaped receptacle for balls of worsted. tt 
Skull. 

craidhneach, -ich, -ichean, s.f. Skull. 2 Skele- 
ton. 3 Collection of bones. 4 Meagre-look- 
ing person, lean, gaunt figure. 5 (MMcL) 
Anything about to fall to pieces. d 

craidhneadh, -idh, s. m. Drying, decaying. 2 
lessening, wearing out. Á 

craidhneag, -eig, -an, s. f. Fragment of dried 
peat. prov. 

— — — - ach, -aiche, a. Full of peat frag- 
ments. a 

craidseach,(DC) s.m. Clumsy person, ungainly 
lout—Perthxhire. . 

cràidseag,(DC) s.f Clumsy woman—Perthshire. 

craigear, -eir, s.m. Cricket (g^me.) 

eraidhnich, pr.pt. a’ craidhneachadh, v.a, & n. 
Make lean. 9 Grow lean. 3 ‘Tire. n 

cràidhte, past pt. of cràidh, Tormented, pain- 


eraichte 


ed, afflicted, galled. 2 Shrunk. 

eràidhtesch, -eiche, a. Tortured, miserable. 
2 Afflicting, grievous, painful. 3 Causing 
affliction, grief or pain. 

—ach,* v.n. Ache. 

achd, s.f.ind. Vexation, misery, grief. 
2 Affliction. 3 Pain. 

eraig, see creag. 

craizeach,(AF) s.m. Black guillemot. 2 Splay- 
footed person. 

craiveach, -eiche, a. see creagach. 

eraigean, s,m. Splay-focted person. 2 Frog. 3 
(AF) Toad. 4(AF) Sea-serpent, 

—achd, s.,f. Splay-footedness, gait of a 
splay-footed person. 

eraigheach, see craganach & cràlgean. 

eraighte. 8 f. soe croit 

—————-ür. 8.m. see croitear. 

craileag, tt -eig. -ean, 3.7. see craidhleag. 

craimb-iasg, ** -éisg, s.m. Crarap- fish, torpedo. 

eraimcean (CR) s.m. Little stont man—Suth’d 

¢.z2imh-chadal, see cràuh-chadal, 

eraimheach, -ich, s.m. see cnà.mheach. 

eraimhinn, -ean, s.m. Cancer. 

craimhseag, see cnaimbsoag. 

craimneach, -eiche, a. Scarred. 2 Rough sur- 
faced. 3 Botched. 

craimpiasg,** see craimb-iasg. 

craimscean, for craimcean. 

cràin, -e, Jean, 3.7. Sow. 2(AF) Litter of pigs. 
SA, Female of any animal. 

craindilh,* a. Cross-eraiued. 

craineag, gt, see graineas. 2 Urchin, 

crainn, gen.aing. & n.pl. of craun. 

crainn,* Af, Th» queen of the hive. . 2 Ugly 
old woman—4siay. 3 see cràin. 

erainngidh, see crainrtidb. 

crainn-ghridh, -e, s.f. Mast-rigging. 

cr^innseas, -eig, -an, see cnaimhseag. 

crainn-seile,** 3.f. Tough phiegm 

erainnteachd, see crainntidheachd. |. 

crainntidh, -e, a. Parching,withering,pinching, 
shrivelling. 2 Piercing. 3 Quick-tempered. 
4(WC) Sour-tempered. Tha e 'na dhuine c., 
he is a sour-tempered fellow. 

crainntidheacht, s.f.ind. Drought. 9 Effect 
of cold winds. 

crainut-sheile, s.m. Tough phlegm. 

crainteach,tt a, Of, or pertaining to, sows or 
pixs. 

crait, St, W. or Ross for croit. 

cràite. a. see craidhte. 

ach, see cràidhte^ch. 

achd, s.f. see cràilhteachd. 

crà'teaz, -eig,-an, s.f. Niggardly woman. 

craitheach, Ach, s.m. One disabled by wounds 
or sores. 

craithleag. see craidhleaz. 

craitneag,(AF) Bat (bird.) 

cialad, -aid, s.m. Woe, torrent. [cradh-lot] 

cràlaidh,* s.m. Crawl, crawling, [from Eng. 
crawl. 

cra-leaba, s.f. Bier, hearse. 

cràlo*, see crach-lot. 

eramag, (AT s... Snail. 

cram:.ist,/CR) s.f. Crease in cloth caused by 
folding—Skye. 

cramasgadh, (CR) s.m.  Creasing. 
chramasgadh, creased —Skye. 

cramh, vor.pt. a^ crambadh, v.a. Squeeze, press. 

cramb, -aimb, s.f. Cram?-iron,holdfast, clinch- 

















Air a 





er, 2 Knot. 3 Quarr*l. ` 
ach, -aiche, a, Griping, clenching. 2 
Quarrelsome. 3ttPertaining to clam»-irons. 





adh, -aidh, s.m. Quarrel. 2 Hold ng fast, 
fixinz, clinching. 8 Stiffness of the joints. 
4** Zant, A8, 


260 


crann 


crambaid, -e, -ean, s.f. Metal on theend of & 
sword-sheath or -sticx, ferrule. 2 Cramn. 
8 Objection. 4** Buckle, hasp. 5 Hook or 
catch, by which anything like a buckle is 
held in place. Gun chrios gun ch., without 
belt or buckle. 

cramh, v.a, see cnàmh. 

cramhag, -aige, An, s.f. 
Dead embers. 

cràmlian, -ain, -an, see cnainhan, 

eramhan,** s.m. Rebuke, scold. ?ttContinued 
grumbling. 

cramharlacn, -aich, ses cnamharlach. 

p^ ien (CE) s. Slumber, dose— West of 
410358. 

cràmhor, -oire, a. see cnàimheach. 

ferampa,ff s.m. Knot, 

crampadh, -a:dh, -aidhean, see crambadh, 

crampag, -aig, -an, 8./. Noose. 

crampaid, -e, -ean, see crambaid, 

cranachan, see cranuachan. 

cranag, see crannag. 

teranaiche, s.m. Decrepit old man, 

crangaid, sf. Crank. 


see cnamhag, 


?H 





. 206. Crann Gàidhealach. 
crann, [-ainn &]-oinn s.m. Plough. 2 


Rar, 
bolt. 8 Tree. 4 Beam. 5 Mast. 6 Shaft. 
7 Lot. 8 Measure for fresh herrings (cran.) 
9* Chance, risk, ballot. 10* Partiality, side, 
interest. 11ff Membrum virile. 12 

Saltire in heraldry—St. Andrew's 
Cross—the National Badge of Scot- 

land. 13 see crann-arain—A stron. 

Cuir na h-eich 'sa chrann, yoke the 

horses in the plou1^: cnir an c. air 

an dorus, bar or bo't the door: c. na 
luinge. the ship's mast: thàinig an c. 

air, he was chosen by ballot: cha'n'eil 207. 
cuid noc. agad 'sa ghnothach seo, Crann 


erann 





ov have asither lot nor part in this affair; 
vha Dia Iehobhah air mo ch., the Lord Jeho- 
vah is on my side; có & bhitheas air do ch. ? 


who shall be your friend ? ; ma bhitheas tusa | Crann-arain, pl. croinn-, 


air mo chrann, if you befriend me; gabh cuid 
do chroinn, take your chance ; ma Tee sin, do 
ch.,if that be vour lot: ris a’ ch.,at the plough, 
ploughing; Lebanon nan c., woody L.; an c. 
meadhonach, the midile bar; còig croinn, five 
bars; tilg croinn, cast lots. 
PARTS OF A PLOUGH :— 
[A more detailed list will be found under 
“erann-nan-gad.”'? 
1 Ceann, head—to which the soc is fixed. 
. Vaidne, gi an, Corrag-a’-chrainn, handle, 
mg (AH) Spag, pl. -an, stilt ; corrag, 


a e 

8 Geh, furrow-board,mould-board.—(AH) 
Sgiath. 

€& Drnide-bórd, earth-board. 

6 Earrghas, mainptece. 

6 Ceidhe, ceighe, ceadha, ceann-suic, skare- 
— part to which the share is fixed.—(AH) 

ruim. 

7 Amhach,(AH) Part extending from upper 
corner of furrow-board to the muzzle- 
holder. 

erann, pr.pt a crannadh, v.a. Bar, bolt, barri- ! 

cade, asa door. 2 Wind about a beam, as a 

web 3* Shrivel, decay, wear off. 4**Plough. 

St+Fit with masts. A’ crannadh, shrivelling, 

dying by inches : c. an dorus, bolt the door. 

cranna-cas, s.pl, Weaver's treadles. 

crannach, -aiche, a. Full of trees or masts, 

D . aich, &.f. Plongh-gear. 2 Dwarfish 
decrepit person. 2 DCH) Rozue— A rgyll. 

erannachan, -ain, -an, s.m. Crane, for raising 
weights, 2 Kind of churn, called also “bite” 
in Lewis. 3 (AF) Beaten milk, a Hallowe’en 
treat, into which a ring &c. is put. 

crannachu, see crann-chu. 

crannadh, -aidh, s.m. Shrivelling, decaying. 

9| Withering. 8 Choosing by lots. 4 

Winding warp about the beam of a loom. 

A’ c—, pr.pt. of crann. A' c. aodaich, wind- 

ing cloth about th» beam. 

erannadhail.( AC) s... Framework of a coracle. 
2 Any skeleton-like. o 1d contrivance. 

crarnadh-aodaich, s.n. Act of winding the 
warp about the beam of a loom. 

crannag, -aig,-an, 3.f. Pulpit. 2 Round top of 
amast, 3 Cross-trees of a ship. 4 Hamper. 

5 Fillet used of old in dressing à woman's 

hair. snood. 6* Churn. 7 Bar, in law. 8tt 

Mi*-clapper. $ttHollow ofa shield.  10:f 

Kiud of wicker or wocden frame suspended 

over the fire, on which fir-roots used for cau- 

dles are set to dry. 11 ATI) Fortified islnud 
inalake partly natural nnd partly artificial. 
An ancient artificial islet on Loch Tollie, 
oolewe, is called A' Chrannag.] 12 Applied 


to many kinds of wooden structures in Gael- |. 


dom. 13 Boat. C. air a stiùradh leis a’ 
gbaoith, a boat steered by the wind, 

crannaich. pr.»t. a’ crannachadh, v.a. Fit with 
masts. 2 Bolt, bar. 

erannaiche.f? am Decrepit old man. 

crannaichte, past pt. of crannaich. Fitted with 
masts. 2 Rolted, barred. 

crann-aimhreidh, s. m. Spindle for twining 
thread (fearsail)— L vingstone’s Poems. 

crannair, s.m., Plougher. 

crann-àirneas,** s.m. Sloe-tree. 

crann-aisil. s.m. Axle-tree. 

crannalach, -aiche, -aichean, s.m. Carpenter. 
2 Wreck, ruins of anything. Chaidh i'na c., 
she went to pieces (as a ship.) 


261 


crann-fhaoileag 


crann-aodaich, s.m. Cloth-beam of loom, see 
under beart-fhigheadaireachd. 

crann-araidh, s.m. Plough. 

s.m. Plough. 9 Ba- 
ker’s bread shovel, thin piece of wood for tur- 
ning bread on a gridiron. 3''The Plough” 
Charles’ wain, or the Baker's bread-shovel, 
—the seven stars in the constellation of the 
Great Bear. 

crann-arbhair, croinn-, 8.14, Plough, see crann» 
arain. 

crann-arcain, s.m. Cork-tree—quercus suber. 

crann-ard, s.m. Top-mast. 

Ccrann-aruir, see crann-arain. 

crannas, -ais, s.m. see crannadh, 

crann-athair,* s.m. Mull for crann-arain. 

crann beag Gaidhealach, see crann-nan-gad, 
crann-bvith,”* s.m.  Birch-tree. 

crann-bhràid, -ean, $m. Hames, 

crann-bocsa, s.m, SBox-tree. 

crann-calltuinn, s.m. Hazel-tree, 

crann-canaich, s.m. Cotton-tree. 

crann-caorainn,s.m. Wild ash-tree, service-tree. 

crann-ceusaidh, croinn-ch—, s. m. Gibbet for 
crucifixion, cross. 2**Crucifix. 

crann-ceusda, croinn-ch—, see crann-censaidh. 

crannchan, -ain, s.m. Old crooked stick—Mae- 
Fadyen. 

crannchar, -air, -airean, 8.7. see crannchur. 

crann-chu,(AF) -choin, s.m. Lap-dog. 

crannchuir, v.a. Cast lots (better tilg croinn.) 
2**Ballot. 

crannchur, -uir, -an, s.m. Casting of lots. 92 
Lot, portion, share. 3 Fortune, whether ool 
orevil. 4* Fate, destiny, pape octane ess 
5** Ballot. Bocsa crannchuir, ballet-boz; paip- 
ear crannchuir, ballot-paper; Ma's e sin mo 
ch., iJ that be my fate; cuir c.. refer to the 
ballot ; gach tuiteamas thig 'n^ ch., every oc- 
currence that may fall to his. lot. 

crann-coirneil, s.m. Cornel-tre: , 

crann-cosgair, gun, Laurel. 

wor s s.m, see crann-cothrom 
aiche. 


crann-cothromaiche, croi.n-ch—, s.m. Bal 
ance-beam. 

crann-crithinn,** s.m. .spen-tree. 2 Poplar. 

crann-cuilce, croinn-chuilce, s.m. Cane. 


crann-cuilinn,** s.m. Holly-tree, ¿see cuilionn. 

crann-cuinuse,** som. Quince-tree, 

crannda, a. Decrepit, frail. 

idh, a. Excessively cold and withering. 

as weather in the spring. ?tfFrail. 8tfDry. 
withered. 

————idheachd, s./. Cold, withering weather. 
2 The withering blast. 

c croinn-dalla, s.m. Bowsprit of è 
ship. 

crann-daraich, $.m. Oak-tree. 

crann-dealbha, see crann-deilbhe, 

crann-deilbhe, croinn-dealbhaidh, s.m. Warp 

ing frame. 

crann-deiridh, croinn-deiridh, 
mast. 

crann-dlà, s.m. Warp-beam—A rgyll maintand 

ferann-doórdain, s.m. Sort of music produced 
by applying the hand to the 1nouth. 

crann-doruis, croinn-, s.m. Door-bolt. 

crann-dromain,** s.m. Bore-tree, elder-tree, 

crann-druididh, croinn-d—-, s.m. Bar, bolt. 

crann-dnbhan,(AF) s.m, Black-headed gull. 

crann-dürdain,** see crann-dórdain, 

crann-ehoin,** san, Ebony-tree. 

crann-faidhbhile,§ s.n. see craobh-fhaidhlbhile 

crann-fiisneachd,ff s.f. Sorcery. 

crann-iéarna, s.m. Alder-tree. 

crann-fhaoileag,f s.m. Little gnll—larus mi 


s.m. Mizzen 


crann-fhaoileag 262 


nutus. 





205. Crann-fige. 


crann-fize, 8.f. Fig-tree—ficus carica. 

crann-fizis, see crann-fige. 

erann-fiodha,(AH) s.m. Wooden plough. 

crann-iiona, croinn-fhiona, s.f. Vine—vitis vi- 
nifera. 

crann-forca, croinn-fhorca, s.m, Prong, fork. 

craun-fuine,croinu-fh-,s.m. Baker's rolling-pin. 

eraun-gafainn,** s.m. Hen!.ane. 

crann-yatha, croinn-gh-, s.m. Spear-shaft. 

erann-zhallehno,** s.m. Walnut-tree. 

Tcrannghail,-e, -ean, s. f. Mast-rigging. 2 
Mortification. 3 Pulpit. 4 Lattices before 
the altur. 5 Bow. 

crann-ghiuthais,** sm. Fir-tree. 2 Pine. see 
giuthas. 

erann-grain-ubhal, s.m. Pomegranate. 

crann-iubhair,** sm. Yew-tree. [Badge of 
the Frasers.) 

craunlach. -aich, s.f. Boughs, branches, brush- 
wood. 2:AH) Large, lank, lean man. 

— (CR) s.m. Tulchan calf, figure of a 

calf made of a skin stretched on a frame of 

wood, used for setting beside cows to induce 

them to yield their milk—W. of Rose. 








209. Crani-lach. 

crann-lach, -aich, -aichean, $8. f. Teal—anus 
crecca. 2(AF) Wild duck. 3(AF) Red-breast- 
ed mergaaser. 

crann-laoibhreil,§ s.m. Laurel. 2**Bay-tree. 
see craobh-laibhreis. 

eraun-laoicionn,tt s.m. Tulchan calf. 

crann-leamhain,** s.m. Elm-tree, see craobh- 
leamhain. 

terann-lcathann, s.m. Ancient Irish silver cvin. 

crann-lioiaain,3 s.m. Lemon-tree—citrus limon- 
um. 

cra in-lithe, ssm. Carpenter. 

craunlochan, -ain, -an, s.m. Churn, prov, 

crann-luch,* s.m. Peewit, see adharcan-lnach- 
rach. 

craun-mhailp, see craobh-mhalpais. 

craun-malpais, see craobh-mhalpais. 

crann-meadaoin, croinn-1nh-, s.m. see crann- 
mor. 2 Pole between two horses in a wag- 
gou or coach. 

crano-meus,** s.m. Fruit-tree, 

crann-imneidil,) s.m. Medlar-tree.—mespilus ger - 
manica. 

crann-mnaol-dheare,$ Common mulberry-tree, 

, morus nigra. 

erann-mór, croinn-mhóra, s.m. Main-mast of a 
ship. 2 Tron or Lowland plough.— Lewis. 

crann-millaich, s.m. Top-mast. 


*pvb-uDUu-UUDLO “OTS 


(420 $029 uu17327928. V) pob-uNU-UUDLD “TTS 







*«-a8-0-o0024 


e begëeeeseeeep ° 






Kase oeeeeeg ees a 


crann-nan-gad 





erann-nan-gad 


used now, though at one time common encuz i, 
especially in the Western Isles. ‘the parish 
of Barvas is the only part of Lewis where it 
isstillused. It is usually drawn by one 
horse, though two ean be used. From its 
construetion it is especially suited to the 
stony ground of the crofts, and its gradual 
disappearance is a cause of great regret, as 
there is no other implement, equally conve- 
nient to take its place. It possesses & great 
advautagze over the common iron plough, in 
that, as the point runs along the ground be- 
bind the horse, it serves the two-fold pur- 
pose of keeping the plough steady, and when 
the sbare comes in coutact ,with & stone, by 
lifting the handle, or lamh-chrann upwards 
like a lever, the share and sock can be lifted 
clearof the ob-truction. The ploughman 
uses only one hand, and walks on the left 
side of the i:nplement, instead of behind, as 
is now usual in ploughing. 
PARTS OF CRANN-NAN-GAD :— (see illst. 
210 & 211. 
Làmh-chrann, handle. 
Mas a’chroinn, rearpiece. 
Sron, point. It is shod with iron, and 
runs along the ground behind the horse. 
Earrghas, body or mainpiece, between mds 
and srón. 
Coltair, sare (of iron.) 
Soc, sock (of iron.) 


Uirthilleach, the piece of hard wood with 
tron sheath on it, om which the mould- 
board rests, held in by ‘‘maide-a’-chroinn- 
sparraidh,’ by passing a thong through 
the mould-board and round the stick ; 
the stick, or ‘‘ maide-a'-chroinn-sparr- 
aidh,” being inserted in the “lùbach” of 
the ‘‘ uirthilleach " and pressed below 
** tarrag-a’-chroinn-sparraidh.” 

Bórd-üireach, mould-board.—Bord (CR.) 
Maide-a'-chrann-sparraidh, the stick for 

holding mould-board in its place, by one 

end being fixed in a loop of iron in the 

**üirthilleach" called “lùbach na h-ùir- 

thilleach,’’ the other end being pressed 

below *''tarrag-a'-chroinn-sparraidh"— 

[sparr cruaidh e, press it hard—hence the 

name.] 

10 Tarrag-a'-chroinn-sparraidh. 

11 Tarrag-mhaide-a'-chroinn-sparraidh, nail 

to which the bi-forked end of the stick ic 
ressed under. 

a goid, banas of tron which bind the màs 
and earrghas together. [These were ori- 
ginally of withes, hence their TY 
18 An druim mor, long part of rope by which 

the plough ts drawn. 

14 An druim beag, short part of rope, which 
steadies the sròn. 

15 Amall, main &wingle-tree. 

16 Na greallagan, swingle-trees next the hor- 
ses to which the ‘‘sliosan’’ are attached 
by means of a “‘lubach” and ‘‘cadhag” 
to each “slios.” 

17 Na cadhagan, iron links in the form of an 
S, between swingle-tree and plough, or 
between two swingle-trees. 2 Swingle- 
tree wedges. 

18 Na lubaichean, loops of iron, one on each 
end and one in the centre of each swingle- 
E in which the ‘‘caithagan” are inser- 
ted. 

19 Na sliosan,na sintean, drag-ropes or traces, 

on each side of horse. and attached to 


VIAN ^ Crom 


oo 


— 


12 


263 
TE, ee 
erann-nan-gad, £. m. Kind of plough, seldom 


erann-rus)aidh 


each end of swingle-trees, —Gearraiseach 
(sing. —CR. 

The following parts are best explained by 
reference to illustrations 212 & 213. 

19a Lùbach na h-üirthilleach, the part where 
the lower end of “ maide-a’-chroinn- 
sparraidh "is inserted, 

20 Meirgeal, the stick or iron which attach- 
es the sock and ‘‘uirthilleach’ to the 
“màs.” by one end being inserted in a 
hole through the lower end of the ‘‘màs” 
anc the other end into ‘ailean aa t-suic" 
along with the “tirthilleach.” 

21 Ailean an t-suic, the space into which the 
** meirgeal" and ** uirthilleach’’ are rot 
in the sock. The illustration shows 
them inserted. 

22 Ordag an t-suic, toe of sock, which is in- 
serted in a small hole in the point of the 


share. 

Iall, thong, which passes through a couple of 
small holes in the mould-board, and is 
tied to '*maide-a'-chroinn-sparraidh" be- 
hind, in order to keep the mould-board 
steady. 

Na géinntean,wedges, which tighten the co - 
tair, share and '* meirzeal.'"' 


Ciasan, fron sole, fixed on the bottom of the 
** màs” or rear-piece, to protect it from 
injury. 





212. Crann-nan-gad bho | 213, A’ sealltainn sioe 
*n taobh-ch ùil. air an t-soc. 


Il. 210 shows the space called ‘‘ailean an 
f-suic," in the under side of sock (shaded.) 
It is drawn looking from top or upper part of 
sock, so that the space inay be seen plainly 
through it, though it would not be seen in 
actual fact as shown in this sketch. 

[We are inderted to Mr. D. Murray, Aber- 
deen, for many of above terms, anil to Mr. M. 
MacDonald, Stornoway for illustrations &nd 
additional information. 

cranu-neochdair,** 8.44. Nectarine-tree. 

crann-ola,tt see crann-olaidh. 

crann-olaidh,$ croinn-, &.f. Olive-tree—olea eu- 
Topo. 

craun-pailm,$ s.m. Date-palm—pheniz dacty- 
lifera. (see ill. 214.) 

fcrann-phiosan, pé. croinn-, s.m Kind of mis- 
sive Weapon. 

crann-pice, pl. croinn-ph-, 8 m. Pick-shaft. 

crann-reultach, see crainn-arain. 

crann-riaghailte, sm. Regulator of a watch. 

crann-riaslaidh, see craun-ruslaidh. 

crann-ristil, see craun-ruslaidh. 

crann-ruslaidh, s.m. Sort of rude plough, used: 
for paring an uneven surface, by means of à 
sharpened share and without a coulter, the 
cominon plough following in its track. The 


crann-rnslaidk 





214. Cranu-pailm. 


SCH 
be A B 
tes 
nS. ey 


m, c 


215. Crann-ruslaidh, 


idea of combining ploughshare and coulter in 
one ituplement does not appear to have occur- 
red to Lhe agricultural mind when this was in 
general use, or tlie roughness of the ground 
may have made the division of labonr neces- 
sary. 
erann-ruü:tlaidh,fI see crann-ruslaidh. 
craun-seilz, s.m. Arrow. 2 Hunting-spear. 
crani-seilich,** s.m. Willow-tree, sallow-tree. 
cranu-seudair, see crann-sheudair. 
crann-selnta, s.m. Sacred wood. 
crann-seoide, pf. croinn-, s.m. Boom. 
cranu-shaor, pl. croinn-shaoir, s.m. Carpenter. 
2 Mast-wright. 3 Plough-wright. 
crann-sheudair,** san, Cedar-tree—cedar. 
crann-shlat, -ait, -an, S.f. Withered wand. 
-————üàg, sf. dim. of crann-shlat. 
crann-shneachia, s.f. Laying on of snow. 2 
Snow-plonugh, 
crann-siris,ft s.m. Cherry-tree. 
crann-sitroin,** s.m. Citron-tree. 
craun-siüil, pl. croinn-sh-, s.m. Mast. 
barr croinn-shitil, on the top of a mast. 
crann-sleagh,** s.m. Pike-staff. 
crann-snàth, s.m. Warp-beam in a loom— Heb- 
rides, see beart-fhigheadaireachd. 
cranu-spreóid, pl. croinn-s-, s. m. Bowsprit. 
crann-tabhuill, pl. croinn-t-, ëm, Sling. 2 
Shaft of a sling. Luchd nan c., the stingers. 
crauntacn,(AF) Curlew, see guilbneach. 
cranutachio, -ain, sm. Churn-stick. 
crann-tachrais, s.m. Winding-wheel (for illust. 
see liaghra.) 2+fReel. 
crinntail, -e, s.pl. Trees. 
crann-tair, see crann-tara. 
crann-tairnean, pl, of crann-tarrang. 
wann-tara, pl. croinn-th-, sm, The gathering 
beam, a signal formerly used on occasions of 





Air 


264 


craopnarnaen 


insult or impending'dlanger,.to summon a clan 
to arms. lt was a piece of wood, half burnt 
and dipped in blood, in teken of the revenge 
by fire and sword awaiting those clansmen 
wao did not immediately answer the sum- 
mons, It was handed from one permanent- 
ly appointed messenger to another, aid in 
this manner the alarn was spread through 
the largest districts in an incredibly short 
time. In 1745 the crann-tara traversed the 
wide district of Breadalbane, upwards of 30 
miles, in three hours. 2 Fiery-cross. 3 Fire 
kindled on an eminence to notify alarm or 
danger, 

crann-táraidh,tf see crann-tàra. 

crann-tarraig, Uist for crann-tarrang. 

crann-tarrang, gen. -tairnge, pl. -tàirnean, SE 
Wooden pin or Volt fastening the couples or 
joists of a house, see uvder taigu. 2 Tree- 
nail, wooden pin used in ship-building. 3 
Choosing by lots. 4 Lynch-pin. 5 Draught- 
tree or shaft, 6**Pey. 

crann-tarsuinn, s.m. Cross-bar. 2 Diameter. 

\ see crann-tarrang. 


craun-tarung, 

crann-taruin, 

cranu-teach, pl. croinn-theacha, s.m. Arbour, 

cranmn-teannta, see crann-teannach idh. 

crann-teaundaidh,** s.m. Calender (for cloth) 

crann-teile, 8.2. Lime-tree. 

crann-teannachaidh, p/.croinn-th-,s.m.Printer’s 
press. 2 Bookbinder’s press. 3 Rack-pin. 

cranu-togalach, s.m. Crane, lever. 

crann-toisich, pl. croinn-th-, s.m. Fore-mast. 

crann-ton, -oin, 8. P, Pink stern, sharp bottom. 

crann-tuilm,** s. m. Holm oak, see craobh- 
thuiln. 

crann-tüise,** s.m. Frankincense-tree. 

crann-nbh:il, pl. croinn-übhail, s.m.Apple-tree. 

crami-uinnsinn,** sm Ash-lree. 

cranr-uisge, pl. croinn-uisze, see crann-spreoid. 

craohh, -aoibne. -An, 8.f. Tree, bush. 2{{Re- 
lation, 3 Ear of oats (craobh coirce.) 4(DC) 
Streaming clonds, rising from the horizon 
and spreading wide as they ascend to the 
zenith.— Uist, This word (or crann) is al- 
ways prefixed to the names of trees in Gaelic 
when speaking of growing timber. Meas 
craoibh», the fruit of a tree. 

craobh, -aoibhe, s.f. Foam or globules (‘‘bell’’) 
on the surface of liquids. Cha chuin e c., it 
will not retain the foam, 2** Richness. 

craobh, v. n. Branch ont, sprout, bud, shoot 
forth, gush out, 2 Propagate. 'Fhuil a’ 
eraobliadh mu thalamh, his blood gushing 
forth and ramifying. 

craobh-abran,} s.f. Labnrnum. 

craobhach, -aiche, a, Woody. wooded, full of 


trees, 2 Of, or belonging to trees. 3 Having 
tall trees. 4 Flowing, branching, spreading, 


rilling, ramifying’in ramifying gushes, as 
blood. 5 Flowing in a branching or forked 
stream. ’Fhuil ch., his streaming blood; 1no 
dhün c., my woody hill ; an t-sleagh ch.. the 
tree-like spear. 

craobhachd, see craobhaidheachd. 

craobhadair,** s.m. Arborist. 

craobhag, -aig, -an, S.f. Small tree, bush 9 
Bunch. 

——ach,ita. Pertaining to small trees. 

craobhaidh, -e, a. Nervous. 2 Tender. 3 Shir- 
ering. 

craobhaidh fuar,(CR) a. Piercingly cold, shiv- 
erinzly cold—W of Ross-shire. 

craobhaidheachd, s. f. ind. Lassitude, infirm. 
ity. 2 Tremor, nervousness. 

craobh.airneag,** s.f. Sloe-bush, 

craobharuach, s. m. Shrubbery. 2 Hedge of 


eraobharnach 


thorns, wliins, &c, 

eracbh-iheithe,** st Birch-tree, 

eraobh-bhroin,§ s. f. Cypress-tree—cupressts 
sempervirens. [Badge of the MacDougalls,] 

craobb-challtuinn,** at Hazel-tree, see call- 
tuinn. 

craobh-chanaich,** s.f. Cotton-tree. 

eraobh-chaora'nu,§ pl. -an-, SE Mountain-ash 
or rowan-tree, see luis. 2** Service-tree, see 
eraobb-cheorais. 

cravbh-cnedrais,} s. f, Serviee-tree—pyrus tor- 
minalis—Perthshire. 





216. Craobh-chedrais. 
craobh-choinneach, s.f. Catling. 
eraobh-choirneil, sr Cornel-tree. 
€raobh-chómhraig, pl. -an-, s. f. Hero, 
branch of war. 

eraobh-chosgair, pl. -an-, 8. f. Laurel-tree, 
Trophy. 

eraobh-chrithinn, 8. f. Aspen-tree, 
eann. 

eracbh-chuilinn, sf. Holly-tree, see cuilionn. 

gemeet s.f. Quinee-tree,—pyrus cy- 

nia. 


(iit. 
2 


see crith- 





Ww 
217. Cruvun-chuinnse. 


eraobh-chuir, pl. -an-c-, s&,f. Planted tree. 

eraobh-dharaich, pl. -an-d-, s.f. Oak-tree— 
quercus robur. 

craobh-dhearg, -eirge, see crò-dhearg. 2łt Red- 
streaming. 

craobh-ealp,* v.a. Ingraft, graft. 

——_—a lr, * -ean, 8.2m. Grafter. 

craobh-eólas,* s.4a. see edlas-cbraobh. 

craobh-fhaidhbhile,§ 8. f. Beech-tree — fagus 
sylvatica, 

craobh-fhearna, s.f. Alder-tree. 

craobh-fhiadhain,$ st, Wayfaring-tree—vibur- 
num lantana. (sse ill. 218.) 

craobh-fhiodhag,} s. f.  Dird.cherry—prun's 
padus. 2 **Hardberry-tree. (see ill. 219.) 

eraobh-fhiona, sr. Vine, see crann-fiona. 


traobh-geaninchno,? s.f. Common chestnut-tree grao 


265 








219. Craobh-fhiodhag. 


—castanen vesca. 

eraobh-geanmchno-fhiadhaich,) s. f. Horse. 
chestnut-tree—«csculus hippocastanum. [Ins 
trodnced into Scotland in 1709.] 

craobh-ghalichno,§ sf. Walnut tree—juglans 
regia. 

craobh-ghinealaiche, pl. -an-g-, s.f. Genealogie 
“eal tree. 

craobh-ghiuthais, s.f. Fir-tree. 2 Pine-tree, see- 
giuthas. 

eraobh-ghrain-ubhal, s.f. Pomegranate. 

eraobh-iubhair,** sf. Yew-tree. 

craobh-laibhreil, see craobh laibhreis, 

craobh-laibhreis, s./. Laurel-tree. 

craobh-leamhain, sf. Elm-tree. 

cravbh-learaiy.s.f. Larch-tree, see learag. 

craobh-liath-ghorm,} 8. f. Lilac-tree—syringa, 
vulyaris. 

craobh-liomain, 8.f, Lemon-tree, see crann-lio- 
main. 

craobh-mhailp,3 see craobh-mhalpais. 

craobli-mnhalpais,3 sj. Cominon maple-tree— 
acer campestris. (see illnst. 220.) 

eraobh-mhaot-dheare,** s. f. Mulberry-tree, 
see crann-inhaol-dheare. 

craobh-inheas, pl. -au-m-, s.f. Fruit-tree. C. a 
bheir measan, a fruct-tree that veareth fruit, 

eraobt;-mheidil, st see erann-nieidil. 

eraobh-ia-geanmmnachd, s.f. Aguus castus, 

craobn-nan-smeur,? s.f. '"Jhe ‘uu verry | ree** 
of “cripture, supposed to be the aspen (crith« 
eaun.) 

craobh-neochdair, s.f. Nectarine-tree. 

bh-ómair, sf. Amber-tree. 


T 


DT d 


we, 


EI T e 


craobh-phailm 266 crasgag-thràghad 
: some. } 
bý eraoim, V.a. & s. see creim. 
À eraois, gen. sing. of craos. 
3 ` —each, see craosach. 
RAT. eraoiseag, s.f. Whortleberry— Lochaber, see 
cnaimhseag (appx.) 
craoisein, -ean, see eraosair, 
eraoit, see croit. 
craun, 8.m. Torture, agony. 
eraonach,** a. Throbbing. 
craos, -aois [& -ach], -an, s.m. Wide mouth. 
2 Ludicrous term for the human mouth. 3 
Month of a beast, particularly & voracious 
beast. 4f Open mouth. 5 Gluttony, appe- 
tite, debauchery, revelry, excess, gross sen- 
suality. Luchd craois, gluttons ` a ch. fo 
choip, his mouth covered with foam; tha ’n 
dorus air clap a’ chraois,the door 18 wide open; 
cha bhi mi to ghearan chraosach, 4 will not 
aiow my appetue to dominate me. 
craosach, -aiche, a. Gluttonous, voracious. 2 
Wide-mouthed. 3**Hibulous. 
,-aich, s.m, Spear, dart. Crath do 
ch., shake thy spear. 
, 8m. See craosair. 
,* 8f. Wide-mouthed female. 
d, 3,7. Gluttony, greediness, voracity. 
2 Sensuality. 
—— — -dhearg, -aich-dheizg,-aichean-dearga, 
s.f. Burning spear. 
craosail,(CR) st Gaping mouth—Skye, 9** 
Gluttony, 
crausair, -ean, s.m, Glutton. 2 Epicure. 8 
Sensualist. 4 Wide-mouthed fellow.  5** 
Gaper, 6**Blubber-lipped fellow. 
eachd, see craosachd. 
craosal,** -ai], s.m. Gluttouy. 2 Drunkenness, 
revelry, exeess in eating or drinking. 3 
Carousal. 
craosan, -ain,-an, 8m. see eraosair. 
eraosan,** n.pl. of craos. 2 dim. of craos. 
craos-ghaire,** s.f. Horse-laugh. 
craos-ghlan, v.a, Gargle, cleanse the mouth, 
craoslach, -aiche, sf. see craosach. 
craosnach, -aich, 8.m. see craosach, 8f. 
craos-ol, Oil, s.m. Drunkenness. , 
craos-shlugadh, -aidh, s.m. Gormandizing. 
craos-shlugair, -ean, s.m. Glutton. 
craos-shluig, v.a. Swallow greedily, gorman- 
dize. 
crap,f{ v.a. Crush. 
crapadh, see cnapadh. 
craparra, @. see cnaparra. - 
crap-luth, -a, s.m. Curl in pipe-musie. 
erapluich, v.n. Fetter, bind. 
erapta,tt past pt. of crap, Crushed. 
cra-rionuach,(AC) s. Red mackerel, tunny fish. 
fcras, -àis, -an, s.m. Body. 
+——ach,** -aiche, a. Corpulent, bulky. 
t—-achd,** s.f. Corpulence, bulkiness. 
crasagan, $.pl. Order of plants known as 
crassulacece. , ] 
¢crasan, sm. dim. of cras. Little body. 
erasg, s.f. Cross. 2 Crutch. 8 Across place. 
4 Club (in cards.) 
crasgach, -aiche, a. Corpulent, bulky. 2 Un- 
combed. 3 Ill-natured, 4 Lying cross-way. 
br Crawling, or walking, as a person feelin 
torturing pain. 6* Branching, as stam 
cloth, 7**A-kimbo. 8jfClumsy. 9fi»low. 
luttThwart, 11(MMcL) Going on crutches. 
12ttContrariwise. 
cl s.f. Crossness. 
crasgadh, -aidh, s.m. Box, coffer. . 
crasgag,(CR) s.f. Star-fish—W. of Ross-shire. 
———— -thraghad,( (JM) sf. Stas-fisis. 



















220. Craobh-mhalpais. 
eraobh-phailui, a €, Palm-tree, see crann-pailm. 
craobh-pheurain-fhiadhain,} s.f. Wild pear-tree, 

pyrus communis. 
craobh-phobuill,? s.f. Poplar-tree—populus alba. 
craobh-pleautrainn, see craobh-shice. 
craobh-sgaoil,* sr, Crawling, sprawling. 2 
Torture. 
craobh-sgaoil, pr. pt. a’ craobh-sgaoileadh, v.a. 
& n. Spread abroad, diffuse, propagate. 2 
Branch, ramify. 3**Sprout. 
craobh-sgaoileadh, -idh, s.m. Propagating, 
publishing, spreading abroad, 2 Brauching. 
3 Sprouting. A’c—, pr. pt. of craobh-sgaoil. 
craobh-sgaoilteach, -eiche, a. Propagative, 
publishing. 2 Branching. 
craobh-sheanchuis, pi. -an-s-, see eraobh-ghin- 
ealaiche. s 
eraobh-sheilich,s.f. Willow-tree. 2 Sallow-tree. 
craobh-sheudair,** er Cedar-tree. 
craobh-shice, 8. f. Sycamore-tree.—acer pseudo 
platanus. [Badge of Clan Oliphant. ] 











221. Cravih-shice. 
craobh-shiris, s.f. Cherry-tree—prunus cerasus. 
craobh-shitroin,} s,f.Citron-tree—citrus medica. 
craobh-shlighe,** s.m. Avenue. 
craobh-theile,$ er, Lime-tree, linden—tilia eu- 


roped. 
craobh-thuilm,3 et, Holm-tree (evergreen oak) 
quercus ilex. 
craobh-thuinidh, pl, -an-t-, 8.f. Tree of descent, 
genealogical tree. 
craobb-thiise,** s.f. Frankincense-tree. 
craobh-uaine-ghiuthais,} s.f. see craobh-bhróin. 
craobh-ubhail,** s.f. Apple-tree. 
-fhiadhain, s.f. Wild apple-tree— 
pyrus malus. (Badge of Clan Lamont.] 
craobh-ubhlan, see craobh-ubhail. 
€raobh-uibhear,** 8.f. see craobh-iubhair. 
craobh-uinnsinn, s,f. Ash-tree, —frazinus ezcel- 
sior. [Badge of Clan Menzies, according to 








crasgan 


creag 





erasgan, -ain, An, sm Any object of a cruci- 


form shape. 


crasvavil.* v.a. & s.m. see craobh-sgaoil. 


cratach,. CR) s.m. Back, of a person— Skye. 2 


Side—Glen Morriston & W. of Ross. 

cratan, see cnatan. 

ach, see cnatanach. 

Grath, v.a. & n. Shake, 2 Tremble. 
4 Ware. 
C. do cheann, shake your 





shake their woods, 
——ach, -aiche, a. Shaking, quivering, bran- 


` dishing. 
— adh, -aidh, s.m. Shake. 2 Brandishing. 3 
Waving. 4 Act of shaking, brandishing or 


waving, as trees. 5**sprinkling. o**Cbhurn- 
ing. <A’ c—, pr. pt. of crath. 
churning. 

crathaidh, fut. aff. a, of crath. 

crathanvach, -aiche, &. see crathach. 


crathar, Jut. pass, of crath. 


crath-ghlan, v.a. Clean by shaking or shifting. 


cràthrach, -aich, -an, s f. Boggy place, marsh. 
crò, s.f.ind. Clay, dust. t2 Creed. t3 Keel of a 
ship. 4 see creubh. Fhuair iuthaidh a ch., 
anarrow found his breast. 
creabaire, (AF) s.m. Gadiy. 
creabail, -aill, sm. Garter. see cnéaball. 
ach, a. Gartered, having or wearing 
garters. 
aich,** v.a. Fasten witb garters, pro- 
vide with garters. 
aicute, past.part. of creabalaich. 
creaban,** -ain, s. m. see cnèapan. 
tereabh, v.a. Dun. 2 Gaelic spelling of crave. 
creabhach, see crenbhach. 
creabhach,** -aich, s.m. Brushwood, dry brush- 


woud. 
Full of brushwood, dry 








,-aiche, a. 
as brushwood. 

creabhag, -aig, ap, sf. The body. 2 Consti- 
tution. 3 Young woman. 4**fwig 

ereabuaichean,* -aln,s.m, Bandy. 

ereabhailh,** a. Frail, not s.ouc. 

crea’ har,(AF) s.m., Woodcock, see coileach- 





Qu1l1e. 

ereabuill,(DM) -ean, s.m. Garter, prov. 

creacar,** s.m. Shrine, vestry. 

creach, creiche, an, s.f. Plunder, booty, pil- 
lage. 2 Ruin, devastation. 3}fIlust, army. 
dt jor creag. 5 rarely Wave. Muoctreach ! 
mo cureach ! my ruin, alas! and alas ! cha 
tuig a’ bnin-Ledidhasach a c. gus an tig i 
chum an douruis, the Lewiswoman never real- 
izes her loss until it comes to her door—which 
shows the stolidity of the Lewiswoman. 
“Creach '" is a stronger word than loss, 
but in this case at any rate, not quite so 
strong as ruin. Tha mo cn.-sa deanta, fam 


done for, as good as deal ; ag éigheach ac.,|t 


shouting that she was ruined; a’ togail na 
creiche, carrying away the plunder. 
ereach, pr. pt. a’ creachadh [s a creach,] v.a. 
Plunder, spoil, pillage, rob, ruin. 2*Harry 
a nest, rob birds of their young. Ch. thu mi, 








8 Quiver. 
5 Brandish. 6 Spriukle. 7**Churn. 
ead ; ch. e 'bhata. 
he flourished his staf: crath uisg’ air, besprin- 
kle it with water ; c. ris, wave to him ; mar aj- 
chrathas na bearntan an cranna, as the hills 






C. bainne,: 
i creachann, -ainn, -an, s.m. Rock. 








an-iochdmhor, merciless robbers. d 
———-eachd, s.f. see creachadh. 
creachadh, -aidh, s. m. Preying, plunder, plum 

dering, spoil. 2 Act of spoiling, plundering 

or pillaging. 38 Freebootiog. 4**Ruining 
ruin. ótt Execution on a musical instru, 
ment. A’ c—, pr.pt. of creach. 'beab e me 
ch., he had almost ruined me. 
creachag, -aig, -an, s f. Cockle, scalloped shell 
?(AF) Mole. 3 Large ribbed shellfish. C. 
aisneach, a ribbed cockle. 
ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in ribbed 
cockles. 
creachag-seisreach. see creachac. 
creachaidh, ~ut. aj. a. of creach. 
creachair, v.a. Stigmatize. 2 Mark, scar. 
Sam eas, -ets, s.m. Sculpture, 
creachan, -ain, -an, s.m. Pudding made of calf's 
entrails. 2**Flask. 3 Ruin on a small scale. 
4** Cup. 


of a rock. 3 Mountain. 
face without foliage. 
a hil. 6**Scallop shell. 7* Large ribbed 
cockle. Shge:chreachainn, scaliep shell used 
as a drinking-cup. 

fereachar, -air, s.m. Vestry. [**gives creacar.} 

f-— ——-, Jut. pass. of creach. 

creach-chelluneach (AC) sm. Arch-deceiver. 

creachd, see creuchd. 

creachlacn-dearg. s.m. Bloody crane’s-bill D, 
the red wouud-bealer—geranium sanguineum. 


4 Hard rocky sur- 
51tfStony decuvity of 





222. Creachlach-dear4. 


creachta, past part. of creach. Spoiled, pluns 
dered, ruined, robbed. An creachta an agh- 
aidh an tréin, the spoiled against the stvoug. 
crèadh, -a, see cré. Uidhe gach aon chread.a, 
the goal of every body—the grave. 
créadh,( AF) s.m. Swan. 
creadha, a. Clayish, of clay. 
tereadhach, a. see cneidheach. 
creadhadair, san, Potter. 
——Peaend,s./. Putter’s trade. 
creadhal, ail, sm. fAusterity. 2 see creith- 
leag. 3 see creathall. 
, -aile, a. Religious, worshipping. 
creadh-chumadair, -ean, s.m. see cré-cuuma« 
dair. 
créadh-ghlaodh, 8.m. Lute. 
tereadhla, s. . see cléir. 
creadhn,tt v.a. Pain, torment. 





see crein. 


you have ried me, creadbonadh, see creaghonadh. — 
t „a. Blind. 2 Grey. creadh-thaois,tt s.f. Ciay for soldering. 
1 ,** creich, s. f. Scallon-shell, large rib- | ¢creadradh, -aidh, s.m. Chariot. 
bed shell-tisn. 2 Cockle. 3 Cup. creafag, -aig, -an, see creubhag. KL. 
creachach. -aiche, a. Plundering, rapacious. | creag, -eige, -an, Sr, Rock, crag. 2 Clif. & 
2 Abonuding in seallop-stells, shellfish or) Precipice. 4 Quarry. 6 Hili. ‘tacbh na. 


3 nps. 
ereach«dair, -ean, am. Plunderer, depredator, 
freebooter, spoiler, robber. Creachadairean 


creige, the side of the precipice ` bhuail e a 
ch., he struck the rock. (but mi lcis a’ chieig, 
1 fell down the rock ; bile na crei a ve edge of 


3 Summit 


creag 


268 








the precipice. 

*reagacli, -aiche, a. 
stony. 3 Lapideous. 
places. à 

-—— ————ÀAÀ3, -ais, 8.m. 

C d Find,” } Craggedness. 

vreagag, -aig, -an. sf. Conger. 2 Perch— 
labrax lupus. 3 Name of a famous rowing- 
song or iorram. [MacAlpine says this never 
means conger. 4 (AF) Grey plover, rock- 
goose, shelldrake, see trilleachan, 5 (DU) 
Little ball of yarn. 

ach,fft a. Pertaining to congers or 


perch. Jf. Fresh " 
e, 8f. Freshwater perc rca 
a Black: 


Rocky, craggy, cliffy, 2** 
Air àitibh c., on stony 





p ssi -ui 


fuviatilia. 9 (AF) Perch, conger. 8 
goby, wrasse, rock-fish. 





224. Creagag-uisge (3.) 

creagair,** s.m. Grapnel, 

creagan, -ain, -an, s.m., dim. of creag. Little 
rock, rocky place. 2 nn. of creag, rocks, dc. 

creaganach, -aich, a. Rocky. 

creaghonadh, -aidh, s.m. Twitching, piercing 
pain. 

creag-shalann,** -ainn, 8. f. Saltpetre, nitre. 
Air ch., on nitre. 

creag-üillidh,** s.m. Petroleum. 

cream, see creim. 

creamadair, see creimeadair. 

——eachd, see creimeadaireachd. 

creamh, -a, 8.7», Gentian, see lus-a'-chrübain. 
2 Hart'stongue fern, see creamh-na-muice- 
fiadhaich. 3 Garlic, see gairgean. 4*Leeks. 
5 Elecampane, see aillean. 6 Beer. An c. 
"pa chathraichibh, gentian in beds or plots. 

ach, a. Abounding in, or belonging to, 
wild garlic or gentian. 

créamhach,tt -aich, s.m. see cnàimheach. 

creamhachd,1if a, -an, sf. Stock, stump. 

—an, -ain, 8 m. Root of a tree, 
stump, block of wood, faggot, clump. 

ae: 8.m. Chives, see feuran. 2 

eek. 

creamh-mac-féidh, (McL) 8. m. Asparagus, 
see creainh-na-muice-fiadhaich, and aspàrag. 
2 Hart’s tongue fern, 3 (CR) Elecampane. 

creamh-na-muice-fiadhaich, sm. Asparagus— 
asparagus oficinalis, (illust. 225.) 2 Hart's 
longue fern—scoropendrium vulgare. (illust. 
26.) 

creamh-nan-creag, 8.m. Rocambole, (lif. rock- 
garlic)—allium scolodoprasum, illust. 227. 

Fcreamh-nuall, -nuaill, sam, Noise of carousers. 

fcrean, v.a. Cousume, remove. 

fcrean,** ein, sun. Purchase. 











2 Market-place. 


om 


"nm pue sere 





226. Creamh-na-muice- 227. Creamh-nan-creag. 
fadAaich. 


crean,* v.a. see crein. 2**Consume. 3°*Re- 
move. 

creanach, s.m. see creineach. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. see criothnachadh. 

creanadh, pr.pt. of crean, see creineadh. 

creanaich, v.a. see criothnaich. 

creanaiche, 8.m. see creineach. J 

creanaichte, past pt. of creanaich. see crioth- 
naichte. 

creanair, sf. Sedition. 2 Tumult. 

*creanait,** -eachan, s.m. Market-place. ` 

creanas,-eis,s.m. Whetting. 2 Hacking of sticks. 

— —— ., a. Handy, ‘‘ neat-handed.”’ 

cré-an-fhicadair, s,f. Fuller’s earth. 

creangan,* -ain, 8m. Deep wound. 

créanluadh, -uaidh, see crunnlüth. 

creanta,* past pt. of erein. Dearly bought 
or suffered for— Isles. 

fereapadh, -aidh, sm. see crupadh. 

tereapail,** v.a. see ereapuill. s 

creapall, -aill, sm. Entangling, stopping, hind- 
ering. 2ttLump, let, hinderance. 

creapan,** ain, s.m. Stool, low stool. Scots, 
creepie, see cnéapan. P 

creaplaichte, past pt. of crenpuill Entangled. 

creapuill, v.a. Stop, hinder, impede. 

ereapull,** -uill, s.m. Garter. 

]erear, s.m. see criathar. 

crearadh, -aidh, s.m. Bending, crooking. 

tcrearal, ail, s.m.  Retaiuing, witholding. 

crea-rionnach, see cnamh-riounach. 

tcreas, s$.m. see crios. 

creas, a. Narrow, strait. 

creasach,** -aich, -aichean, s.m. see craosach, 

creasan, -ain, -iD, 8,7n. see criosan, 2 Penitent. 
9 Faith. 

fereasgoin, v.a. Wound, 

tcreasmhliuir,- mhara,es.f. Strait, arm of the sea. 

creat, see cnead. 

creatach, see cneadach. 

———-,** -aich, sm. Hurdle. 





me 


creatachan 


creatachan,**-ain, ëm. Churning-stick. 
€reath, see creadh. 
ach, -aiche, s.f. Underwood. 2 Brush- 
wood, faggots. 3**Pollenger. [** gives s.m., 
and gen. sing. -aich. 











ail, see creathail. 
air,** -ean, s.m. Extortioner. 2 see 
criathair. 
—— —Al!, -thlach, [1$ -eithle,] pl. -thlaichean, 
tt -eithlean, sf. Cradle. 2 Grate. 3 see 


creithleag. 
creathall, -aill, sf. Lamprey. 





228. Creathal!. : 

ffr A s.n. Woodcock, see coileach- 
coille. 

tereath-fonn, s.f. see crith-iuiun. 

creathlach, gen. sing. of creathall, 

creathlaichean, n.p/. of creathall. 

creathnachadh, -aidh, $.9m. see crith. 
Emotion, 

«reathnaich, v.n. see criothnaich. 

creatrach, -aich, -aichean. s.£. Wilderness. 

creatuir, -e, -ean, s.m. see creutair. 

cré-chutinadair, ean, s.m. Potter. 

creic, pr.pt. a’ creic, v.a. Sell, dispose of, bar- 
ter, exchange. 

creiceadair, s.m. Seller. 

creiceal, s.m. Wheeze, caused by breath being 
impeded by phlegin. 

ereicealach,a. Wheezing. 

creicealaich, v.n. Wheeze, 

—e, 8m, Wheezer. 

ereich, -e, s,f. see creach. 

creiche, (AF) ¢.f. Selling cattle. 

creil, pr. pt. a’ ereidsinn, v.a. Believe, feel 
convinced, 2**Credit. 3**Confide, trust, rely. 
Cha chreid mi nach...., Z rather think.... 

each,-eiche, a. see creidmheach. 

———e4ach, -ich, sm. see creiimbeach. 

creideadh, s.m. see creideamh. 

ereideamh, -einh, 8. m. Faith. 2 Religious 
belief. 3 Tenets of a religious sect or per- 
suasion, creed. 4**Trust, credit, confidence. 
Is iomadh duine laghach a mhill an c., religi- 
on has spoilt many @ nice man—an old hea- 
tkon’s wail. 

creideamh-a' bhata-bhuidhe, s.m. The religion 
of the yellow stick. A Coll priest of former 
times was accustomed to drive recalcitrant 
natives tochurch by a smart application of 
his walking stick, those who yielded were 
thus said to come under *‘ creideanth-a’-bhata- 
bliuidhe." Another version says Hector, son 
of Donald Maclean of Coll, was the one who 
applied the yellow stick. Vector was laird in 
1715, aud as the religion of the yellow stick 
was introduced into Rum in 1726, it is beyond 
dispute that Hector was the author, or pro- 
pagator of it. He was dignified in appear- 
ance and stern in inanners,and could no doubt 
wield the yellow stick gracefully aud with 
efficiency. 

creideamhach, see creidmheach. 

creideamh-galar,| s.m. Religious mania. [had.} 

creideas, -eis, 8.m. Credit, esteem,good repute. 
2**[rust, confidence.  3** Belief. Tharc., 
incredible. 

ach,--aiche, &. Creditable, accredited, 

2 Credited, responsible, respectable, credible, 

reputable. 


gre 











269 


J] creidsinn, s.m. Believing, act of believing. 


creithleag-nan-each 


creideasachd,** s.f. Creditableness, reputable« 
ness. 

creideasaiche,** sm. Creditor. 

creideir,** s.m. Botcher. 

fereidhm, see creim. 

-—each, see creimeach. 

creidhmeadh, -idh, san. & pr.pt. see creimeadh. 

———--—— Chire, tt see creimeadli-chìre. 

creidhm-raineach, sf. Sweet mouutain fern— 
lastrea oreopetris. see crim-raineach. 

creidimh, s.m., gen.sing, of creideainh, 

creidmheach, -aiche, a. Believing, having faith, 
faithful. 

———. —— , -ich, s.m. Believer. C. no ban-ch., 
aman er woman that believes. 

creidsin, see creidsinn, 





2 

Trusting, confiding. A’ c—, pr.pt. of ereid. 

creidte, past pt. of creid. Believed. 2 Confirmed. 

creig, dat.sing. of creag. [Used provincially 
as the nom.] 

creige, gen.sing. of creag. 

creigeag, -eig, see creagag. 

creigeir, -e, -ean, s.a. see creagair, 

crei, pr.pt. a’ creimeg lh [& a’ ereimenrtaich,] 
v.a. Nibble. 2 Crop grass, as cattle. 3 
Pick, gnaw, as a bone. 4 Erode. 5 Become 
scabbed. 6**Chew. 7* Nip. Is lom lere 
air nach c. thu, it is a bare stone from which 
you will pick nothing. 

creim, sj. Nibble. 2 Erosion. 
4 see greim. 5f!Disease. 

each, -eiche, 4. Scabbed, mangy, full of 

sores, 2 Nibbling. 

——eachas,1t -ais, s.m. Mordacity. 

creimeadair, -e, -ean, s. m. Picker. 2 Carper, 
biter, verbal critic. 3 see greimiche. 

— — — ——eachd, sf.ind. Picking, gnawing. 
2 Carping, captious criticism. 

creimeadh, -midh, s. m. QGnawing, chewing, 
picking, nipping, nibbling. 2** Erosion, 
A’ c—, pr.pt. of erem,  A' c. na cire, chewing 
the cud. 

creimeadh-chire, s.m. Chewing of the cud. 

creimeartaich,* sf. Picking. A’ c—, pr. pt. of 
creim, 

creimneach, -niche, a. Knotty surfaced, scar- 
red, blotched, mangy, fnll of sores, itchy, 
rough. 2 Nibbling. 3 Carping. 

erein, pr.pt. à' creineadh [& a’ creineachdainn.] 

^ on. Smart, suifer for. ZAC) Quake, tremble. 
$(AC) Upheave, tear up, excavate. Có a 
chreineas air siu P who shall suffer for that ? 

creineach,* s.m. Sufferer, loser. 

——an, -ain, s.m. Chastisement. 2 Suffers 
ing for past conduct. 

creineadh, -idh, s.n. Act of suffering for, nuna 
dergoing pupishment, A’ c—, pr.pt. of crein, 

créis, -e, sf. Grease, tallow, fat. 2 Narrow 
strait. 3 Narrow defile, cation. 

créis,ft pr.pt. a’ créiseadh, v.a. Grease. 

-——eacn, -iche, a. Greasy, daubed with grease 
or tallow. 2 Squalid. 

om dës -idh, s.m. Greasing, smearing with, 
ap, 

créisean, -ein, -an, s.m. Piece of oatcake dipped 
in fat. 2 see creadhal, 

eréixidh, a. see créiseach. 

ew -e Lë -thiach,] -lichean, $.f.see creath~ 
all. 

tereithir, sf. Cup. 

creituire, see pleithir. 

creithleag, -eig, tn, sf. Gad-fiy, cleg, an in- 
sect that torients cattle, 

—ach, ft a. Pertaining to gad-flies. 

-mhiór, (DM) sf. Ox-idy. 

-nan-each, (DM) et Horse-fly. 


8 Scab, scar. 




















creithleag-nan-each 


horse-cleg. 

€reitiunnch, see criothnaich. 

ereobhar,fl s.n. Woodcock, see coileach-coille. 

creodach, (AU) 8.31. Paralysis of the limbs in 
horses. 

creoithtiche,* s.m. An invalid person getting 
better one day, and worse the next. 

«reon, v.n. Put over or by. 

creon, a. see crion, 

creónadh,fT-aidh, s.m. Paining, torturing. 

tureop, v.a. Seduce. 

tereopach, -aici, s.m. Seducer. 

creotachadh,(At) s.m. Torturing, act of inflict- 
ing much pain or torture. 

creotacnd,(AH) s.f.ind. Pain, torture. 

creoth, v.a. Wound, hurt. Skye. 

creoth,* s.m. Wound hurt. Skye, 

ach, a. Woundinyg, hurting. 1 

«reothar, -air, sm. see coileach-coille.. 

eredthluinn, &.f. Bier. 2 Sickly person—IJslay. 

vrespeis, (AF) sJ. Whale. 

creubh, v.a. Crave. 2 Dun. 

creubh, (**-3]-eibh, -an, s.m. Body, corpse. 2** 
Clay (cré.) 3** Breast. 4** Being, person. 
5 (AF) Animal. 

ach, -aich, 8.f. see ereathach, creubh 

and cré. 

ach, -aich, s.m. Pudding made with 
calf's entrails—prov. 2f \. i.hered wood or 
branches, tirewood, dry sticks. 

——ach, -aiche, a. Intinn—Lewis. Bha e 
*coiseachd c., he was walking unsteadily—as 
one walking with bare feet ou a rough road. 

achan, -ain, -an, see creubbach. 

ereubhag, -aig, -an, s.m. Body, small budy. 2 
Little woman. 3 Twig. 4 Beloved little fe- 
male. 5(AH) Boiled chicken, as distinct trom 
its soup. 
pointment or sudden fright.— Lewis. 

ereubhaidh, -e, 4. Delicate in health. 2 Irrit- 
able. 

creuch, creich, 8.f, see crè, criadh and creubh 
2** Mortar. 

creuchach, see criadhach. 

creuenaidh,** a. Clayey. 

creuchd, -a, -an, s.f. Wound, hurt, sore, scar. 
A’ ch. a bha ’na chliabh, the wound that was 
in his breast. 

, v.a. Wound, hurt. 

ach, -aiche, a. Wounding, hurtful. 2 

Destructive, bloody. 3 Sinful. 4 Full of sores 

or scabs. Còmhrag c., a battle full of wounds; 

an ledghann c., the bloody lion. 
adh, -aidh, s.m. Wounding, act of 
wounding. A’ c., pr. pt. of creuchd. 
air,* -ean, 3.m. Invalid. 
creuchd-lorg,** s.f. Cicatrice. 
¢creuchd-lorgach, a. Full of scars. 
creud ? (for ciod ?—cia [cé] rud ) 

creud, -a, -an, sf. Creed. 2 Belief. Tha 
barrachd agus a’ chreud agus a’ phaidir aige, 
he knows more than his creed and paternoster 
(i.e. has had intercourse with the Devil, or is 
a wizard, or merely, is ‘‘knowing.) 

ereudag,** -aig, -an, sf. see cneutag, 

creufag, -aige, -an, 8f. see creubhag. 

creug, see trag. 

crc gach, see creagach. 

creugan, See creagan. 

creumbhach, -aich, $.m. see cnàimheach. 

tercun,** s.m. Body. 2 Skull. 

creupan,** -ain, s.m. see cneapan. 

creutair, -ean, s.m. (&f.) Creature, being, 
person. 2 Body. An c. truagh, the poor 
body. 

creutair-talmhaidh, (AF) s.m. Creature. 

ercuthach, -aich, 8.f. see creubhach. 


























270 


criaciadn, -aidh, 8.34. 


O mo ch., an exclamation of disap- | 





criathraichte 


creuthachas,(CR) -ais, s.m. Disgust. Chuire 
c. Orin, tt disgusted me, made me shudder—Std. 

cri (poetical for cridhe.) 

criabhar, see ciiathar. 

criabus, (AF) s.m. Pig. 

criabus-mara, (AF) sam, Porpoise. 

criach, -a, -an, &.f. prov. for crìoch. 

criach, pr.pt. a’ eriachadh, v.a. see crìochnaich. 
211 Propose to one’s self. 

see crìochnachadh, ?1t 

Proposing to one's self, iniending. A’ c—, 
pr. pt. of eriach. 

criadh, gen. -a, dat. criadhaidh, s.f. Clay, dust. 
2 Body, being. Clabar c., miry clay. 


a, gen. of criadh. 





ach, -aiche, a. Clayey, earthen, clayish, 

argillaceous. 

ach, 8.f. see criadh. 

achd,** s.f.ind. Crockery. 

adair, -e, -eau, s.m. Potter. 

——-—adaireachd, 8.f. Potter's trade, pottery. 
2 Pottery (place.) 

criadh-an-fhucadair,* see cré-an-fhücadair. 

criadh-aol, -aoil, s.m. Mortar. 

criadh-cheangail, v.a. Cement, lute. 

criadh-chlachair,** s.m. bricklayer. 

criadli-dhuslach, s.m.  Brickdust. 

eriadh-fhear, s.m. see eriadhadair. 

criadh-loisgear,** s.m. Brickimaker. 

criadh-loisgte, 8.f. Brick (lt. burnt clay.) 

criadh-luch, -a [& -aidh, j s.f. Mole. 

——_——-———ag, see criadn-luch. 

eriadh-mhatiiachaidh,ff 8. J. Marl. 
used as manure. 

crialh-reamhar,1fs f. Marl. 

criadh-tiaigh, -e, -ean, s.m, Clay house, earth- 
en house. 2 The Grave. Sith ann ad ch. 
caol, peace in thy narrow dweiling of day= 

rave. 

WË om iili, st Brass-ore. 

crian, see crion. 

erianag, See crionag-ghiuthais. 

criauta, see erionta. 

teriapach, -aiche, a. Rough. 

criair, v.a. See criathair. 

criarach, see criathrach. 

criaradh, -aidh, see criathradh. 

criatach,** see cniatach. 

adh, see cniatachadh. 

criataich, see cniataich. 

criatag, -aig, see cueutag. 

criatair, see cniatair. 

criath, -a, sf. see criadh. 

ach, -aiche, a. see criadhach. 

air, pr.pt. a’ criathradh, v.a. Sift. 2 Ex- 

amine minutely. 3 Filter. 

airte, past pt. of criathair. Sifted, &c. 

criathar, -air, -an [& -thran,] s.m. Sieve, nddle, 

cribble. 

criathar, see criathair. 

criatharadh, -aidh, see criathradh. 

an, -ain, -an, s.m. Little sieve. 
-meala, s.m. Honeycomb. 

criathrach, -aich, -aichean, s.m. Wilderness. 3 
Marshy ground, swamp. ] 

——— ——,-aiche, a. Like, of, or belonging to, 
a sieve or riddle. 

———  ——adh, -aidh, s. m. Sifting, filtering, 
minute examination, A’ c—,pr.pt. of criat 
raich. 











2 Earth 

















—— ail,” a. Marshy. 

criathradh, -aidh, s.m. Sifting, act of sifting. 
A’ c—, pr. pt. of cr1athair. 2* Shrugging. 

criathrag,** 3.f. Filter. i 

criathraich, pr.pt. a’ criathrachadh, v.a. Sift, 
examine. 2 Filter. 

———_—-— te, a. & past pt. Sifted, examined. 


criathran 


criathran,** -ain, &.m., dim. of criathar. 
pl. of criathar. 

tcrib, -e, s.f. Swiftness, speed. 2 Comb. 

crich, dat. sing. of crioch. 

criche, gen. sing. of crìoch, 

cridhe, pl -achan. s.m. Heart. 2**Understand- 
ing. 3° Courage. 41f Centre, 6 t{{Kind of 
buckle. 6 Presumption, courage, cheek, 
nerve. A chiall mo ch. ! my dearest dear ! ; 
a mhic ch. ! my dear sir ! a niccridhe, my dear 
madam !; fhir mo chridhe, man of my heart 
—a common way our forebears had of ex- 

ressing themselves on meeting a friend they 

boa dear ; air c. do dhéarnaidh, on the middle 
(lit. heart) of your palm—W. of Ross-shire ; 
cha dean c. misgeach breug, a o;rwunken soul 
tells no lies; nach aun aige tha 'n cridhe ! how 
hardened he is ! ; bha mi mar mo chridhe air 
son sin, J did my utmost for that; bha e mar a 
€h., he was very keen for it; is aon an c., their 
hearts are one ` dé a’ ch, a bh’ agad ! — (i. e. 
de chridhe a bh’ agad,—a' is not the article, 
but what remains of the prep. de);how dare 
you presume !; cha'n "eil a’ ch. agad, you dare 
wot; chan 'eil a! ch. no adh’anam agad, you 
dare not for your life ; buinidh an gnothach 
sin do d' ch, féin, that is a matter for your own 
consue) ation; gun ch,, without understanding. 

acn,* *-dhich, ge, Hearts, at cards. Aon 

&' chridhich, the ace of hearts. 

ach, -dhiche, a, see cridheil. 

achan, -ain, -an, s.m. Small brooch or 

buckle worn at the breast. 2ttLittle heart. 

ag,** -eig, sf. Mistress, female favourite. 

eridhealachd, see cridhealas. 

cridhealas, -ais, s.m. Cheerfulness, merriness, 
hilarity, state of being touched with drink. 
2* Kind or hearty reception, as by a host. 

cridhean, s.m. Gallant, favourite. [tt cridhein.] 

cridhe-chriovuachd ot. Systole, contraction of 
the heart. 

cridheil, -eile (& -eala,} a. Hearty, cheerful. 
2 Courageous, bold.  3* Kind. ba iad c. 
maille ris,they were merry with him. 

crileag,tt ei, s.f. Small sprinkling, few grains. 

crilein, -e, ean, s.m. Box, small coffer. 2 ff 
Small creel. 3 Smal! quantity. 4(AIÍ)Smal 
quantity of auy granular substance, as meal, 
sugar, or salt. 

crimeaguch,**a. (criomag) Carp‘ng. 

crim-raineach,}s. Sweet mountain fern—aspi- 
dium oreopteris. 


of A ` 
Meel EET, 
NO d 


229. Crim-raineach. 

crin, -e, a. Niggardly. 

crinbhriathrach,* a. Silly, talking foolishly. 

erivceanachd;** sr Hnmonronsness, 

ermdreas,** -dris, s.m Bramble, 

crine, s /.ind, Nigvardliness, meanness. 2 With- 
ering. 3 Hotteuness. 4 Littlenees. 5|| Con- 
seimption, ‘Crihe na crine, a niygard. 

crine, comp. of crìon. 

-—achd, 8.f. see crine. 

crinead. -eid, 8.7. see crine. 

criteam,** em, son. Fall. 

tcrineawh, -einuh, s.f. Fate, destiny. 

t- ;$.m. Fall. 

t- uin, see crineamh, s.f, 

crinean, -ein, -an, s.m. Miser. [ttgives-n. sing. 
crinein and nn, erineinean.) 


2 n. 

















zn 


criomag 


cring:canach,** a. Crabbed. 

——d,** s.f.ind. Crabbedness. 

crinlein, -e, -ean, 8.m. Small writing desk. 

tcrinteach, -tiche, a. Fretful, auxious. 

tcriobh, -a, -an, s.f. Jest. 2 Trifle. 

crìoch, -iche, ap (&-a,] et End, limit. 2 
Boundary, frontier, land-mark,march, border, 
8 Conclusion, 4** Brief. 5**Prefei ment. 
4 Design, intention. 5 Country. 6 Death. 7 
iiCopse. Mu na crìochan, about the (orders 3 
cuir c. air, finish it ; 2 kill him ; tha "n là ai 
tighinn gu crich, the day i8 drawing to a close ; 
€. deas na gréine, the Tropic of Capricorn ; c. 
m’ athar, my father’s boundary; crìochan 
ciana, distant countries. 

adair,-ean, s.m. Borderer. 

8 Gag-tooth, (coin-chriche.) 

ail,ff-e,e. Linitaneous. 

——air, s.m. Border keeper, margrave. 

alachd, see criochnacbacih, 

criochan, -ain, sm. Strife. 2 Querulous tone, 
3 n.pl. of crìoch. Na Garbh-chriochan, the 
tract of country lying between Loch swineart 
inthe South, and Loch Hourn in the N.E. (lit. 
the rough boundaries.) 

criochar** a. Briery. 

crioch-chaithriseach,f? -eiche, a. Limitary. 

crioch-chluiche,** s.f. Epilogue, euu of a play. 

criochdair ** enn, see criochadair. 

cricch-fhradhairc,{f e, e.r, Horizon. 

criechnach, o Come to years of maturity or 
discretion. 2 Desistive. 

crìochnachadh, -aidh, s.m. Finishing, complet- 
ing, concluding. 2 Actof fiuishing or conciu- 
ding, completion. A’ c—, nr. pt. of criocu- 
naich. 

criochnachair ** s.m. Accomplisher. 2 Closer. 

crìochnaich, pr. pt. a’ cijochoachadbh, v.a. Ena, 
finish, conclude. 2 Fuitil, accomplish. 3 bic. 
4 Propose to oneself. Ch. e an raoir, he died 
last night. 

——eé, -an, 6m. Finisher. 

——————te, past part. of criuchnaich. F'ue 
i-hed, completed, fulfilled. 2 Mature,pericev. 
Troine c., a full grown man. 

criovhnaidheach, -eiche, a. Finite. 2 Desistive., 

——— ————4, s.f.:ind. Finitude, finiteness, 
quality of having an end. 

criocnnaigheach, see criochnaidheach. 

~ d, see criochnaidheachd, 

criochnuich, see criochuaich. 

criochnuigheachd, see criochnaidheachd. 

crochrau,(Ak) s.m. Stouechat, see cloichearan, 

crioch-sgeoil, **s./. Epilogue, end of a tale. 

crioch-sinachd, -a, -an, s.m. Government. 

criodaich,* v.a. see cniadaich. 

criodair.** enn, s.m. Fondler. 

criodhail, -e ( & -dhala} see cridheil. 

criodhalachd, s.f.ind. see c; dliealas. 

criotihalas, eais, see criihealas, 

criodhaltas, -ais, see cridhliealas., 

crioahar.(À P s.ni. Woodcock sce coileach-coille, 

fcriodnar, -air, -aàireon, s.m. Leech. 

criodndaich,* see cuiadaich. 

criogag,tt -aig, 8.7. Very slight knock, 

fcriol, -a, s.m. Chest, cuffer, basket. 











2 Finisher, 











f——ach, -aich, s.f. Repository, Graibh chy 
a repository of archives. A 
criom, pr.pt. a’ criomach, v.a. see creim, 


-——achd, sf. see creimeadh. 

criomadan, -ain, -an, s.m, see criomag. 

crionadh, -aidh, s.m. d pr. pt. of criom, 
creimeadh. 

criomag, -aige, -an, &f. Small bit of anythir v, 
fragment, tatter, shiver, shred, morse]  -** 
Tit-bit. 3**Mouthful. A’ dol ‘aa chrioniüz- 
an, falling to pieces. 


S00, 


criomagach 


‘xtiomagach,tt a. In small bits. 

achadh, -aidh, s.m. Reducing to bits or 

crumbs, 2 Act of pounding or crumbling. 

A’ c—, pr. pt. of criomagaich. 

aich, pr. pt. a’ criomagachadh, v. a. 
Crumble, pound. 2 Divide into bits or frag- 
ments. 28 Nibble. 4* Tease, gall. 

eriomayaichte, past pt. of eriomagaich. Redu- 
ced to fragments, pounded, crumbied, torn 
into pieces. 

*criomair, -ean, 8m. Nibbler, picker, nipper. 

+crioimairt, -e, sf. Second milk, cream. 

erioman, -ain, -un, 8. ?n^. Bit, morsel, small 
piece of anything. 2**Crust. 3**sSplinter, 
4** Mouthful. QC. arain, a piece of bread; c. 
crìon, a little bit. 

ach, It -aicne, a. Piecemeal. 

criomb,* v.a. see creim. 

air,* -ean, s.m. Miser, churl. 

anta,* a. Niggardly, mean. 

antachd,* sr, Niggardliness, meanness, 
want of spirit. 

criomchag,** s.f. Fault. 2 Invective. 

criomnan,,AF) s.m. Fox. 2 Wolf. 

criomthann, see criomhan. 

crion,**-a, 6.m.Sp.it ın wood produced by heat. 

crìon, crine, a. Little, mean, trifling,diminutive. 
2 Niggardiy. 3 Dry, withered, parched,sbruuk. 
4**Decayed. Balach e, a little boy; duilleag 
ch., a withered leaf ; sior fhas fuilt, crion fhas 
cuirp, overgrowing of the hair means the under- 
growing of the body—these are some of the 
signs noted of the progress made in other 
things as well as in the human body. 

crìon, pr. pt. a’ crìonadh, v.a. & n. Wither, 
fade, decay. 2 Blast. 3 Repress growth by 
oppression. 4**Depress. DAC) see crein. 

——ach,** -aiche, a. Withered, rotten, as brush- 
wood. 

-—ach, -aiche, s.f. Withered tree. 2 Wither- 
ed leaves. 3 Brushwood, firewood. 4 Decay. 
b Withering. 6 Term of extreme, personal 
contempt. 7 Withered branches, firewood. 
8**Littleness of mind. 9**Pusillanomous per- 
son. Litt Botten tree. A chrionaich nam 
Fiann ! thou disgrace of the Féinne; cual 
chrìonaich, a faggot of firewood. 

crionachadh, -aidh, s.m. Withering, decaying, 
fading. 2 Circumstance of withering, decay- 
ing or fading. 3**Blasting or scorching with 
heat. A’ c—, pr. pt. of crìonaich. 

crìonad, -aid, s.m. Littleness, 

crìonadh, see crionachadh. Air c., withered. 

, 9rd. sing. & pl. imper. of crìon. C. e, 

let it wither. 























crionag-bhuidhe,1 s. fe. Golden-crested wren, 
—Treguius cristatus. 





230. Crionag-bhuidhe. 231. Crionag-ghiuthais- 
crionag-ceann-bhuidhe,(AF) s. f. Wren, mite- 
bird, yellow-headed mite. . 
crionag-ghiuthais,1 s. f. Willow-wren—sylvie 

trochilus. x 
crìonaich, pr.pt. a’ crionachadh, Wither, 
decay, fade. 2 Scorch. 
crìonaidh, fut. af. a. of crìonaich, 2 gen.sing. 

of crìonadh. 


VN. 


272 


crios 

crìonaidh, a. Withered, decayed. 2 Scorched. 
3 Little, pusillanimous. 

crion-allt, -uillt, 8m. Small gl, 2 Exhausted 
rill, stren nearly dried up by the sun’s heat, 
streain that dries in suminer. 

crionan,( Ail) -ain, s.m. Matter ejected by cows 
when in heat and before calving. 

tcrioncain, v.n. Strive, contend. 

terioncan, -ain, s.m. Strife, tumult. 2 Murmur. 

crioncanach,** a. Quarrelsome, relating toa 








quarrel, 
-——adh, see crioncanachd. 
-——d, s.f.ind. Striving. 2 Quarrel- 


someness, wrangling, 

crion-chaith,ff v.a. Absume, consume. 

crion-chiur, -uir, -e, 6m. Laying on of snow or 
smali hail. 

erionda, a. Drog, Tor crionna. 

criou-dliutlleach,-ich,s.m.& € Withered foliage, 

crion-dnuilleag, -eige, -an, sf. Faded or wither- 
ed leaf. ‘Lhuite mar ch., he fell like a wither- 
ed leaf. 

erion-dris, -e, -ean, s.f. Bramble. 

criou-fhaoileag,@ sr Little gull, see erann- 
fhaoileag. 

crion-fhiodh, -a, s.m, Decayed wood. 

crivdglach,(AH)s.m. Culprit. 2 One made to 
pay a penalty, see creineach, 

erionlach, -aich, s.f. Brushwood, firewood. 

eriou-lach, -laich, s.f. Teal, see cranuu-lach. 

crion-lus, -uis, -an, s.m. Withered herb. 

crion-mhial, -a, -an, s.f. Wood-louse. wall-louse. 

— ach, a. Abounding in wooid-liee. 

crìonna, à. Cautious, wise, prudent. 2 Penurie 
ous, parsinionious, uiggardly. 3 Old, ancient. 
4 Advisable. 5 Advised, 6* Attentive to the 
miuutest articles of gain. 7**Discreet. Gu 
€. glic, cautious and wise. 

crìonnachd, s.f.ind, Caution, wisdom, prudence, 
sagacity. 2 Wit. 3 Penuriousness, sordid- 
ness, 4* Minuteness 5**Antiquatedness. 6 
**Adyisableness. Coimhead c., regard disere- 
tion. 

crionuta, @ see crionna. 

chd, s,f. see crionnachd. 

crionntay,tt -aig, s.f. see criontag. 

CO ELE Cf, see criou-shearg. 

crion-sgamnanach,** a. Asthmatical, 

crion-sgolt, see crion-sgultadh. 

crion-szoltach, -aiche, a. Splitting, causing fis- 
sures and cracks as in wood. 

criou-sgoltadh, -aidh,s.m. Fissure in wood cause 
ed by heat or age. 2 Crack in any surface 
caused by heat. 

crion-shearg,v.n. Wither,decay, fade. 2**Scorch. 

criontach,** -aiche, a. Saving, parsimonious, 
niggardly. H 

criontachd,** s.f. Parsimony, saving spirit. 
Cinnidh a’ ch., ach théid a’ ro-chriontachd a 
dholaidh, the saving will increase his store, the 
too 81v. will destroy it. i 

criontag, -aige, -an, s, J. Sorry or parsimoni- 
ous female, 

criontaireachd, see criontachd. , y 

criopag, -aige, -an, s&.f. Wrinkle, as in the skin, 
2 Clew of yarn. 

aich, v.a. & n. Wrinkle, rimple 

crioplach, see cripleach. 

h, see cripleachadh. 

—— d, see Dee Sé, 

crioplaich, see criplich. 

—— —-—Lke, see cripleachta. 

criopus,(AF) s.m. Stag. . 

trio’, Ce -an [& -achan,] s.m. Belt, girdle. 2 
Strap. 3 Zone, band. 4 The waist. 5 Sun, 
C.-claidheimh, sword-belt; c.-guailne, shoulder- 
belt; c.-muiueil, neck-band ; c.-spéillidb, swad- 





——y 





crios 


dling-band; tha tlachd fuaighte ri crios na h- 


ore, itis very interes'ing «f done thoroughly; 
léme chines, body guard, circle of. manettate 
followers; cha'n 'eil mo thrangs fod’ chrios, 
my tongue is not under your girdle, 

.——, v.a. Gird, belt, border. 2**hnvelop. 
Benl round. 

-—— ael, -Aiche, a. Girdled, belted. 2 Succinct. 

3 Like, of, or belonging to, a belt or girdle, 
4**]ght. 5**striped. 

——4aáchadh, aidh, see crioslachadh. 

€riosadair,, -can, s. m. Belt-muaker. 
that belts. : 

—vcachd, s.f. Belt-making, occupation 
of a belt-maker. 

criosaich, see crioslaich. 

.—————te, see crioslaichte. 

criosan, -2i0, -an, s.m. Small belt. 9 Slender 
waist. 3* Apron. 

E ach,tt a. Pertaining to a small belt. 

crios-ceangail, s.m. Belt, swaddling band. 

crios-chomhchuluinn, see crios-Chuchulainn. 


EA * 


2tt One 











232. Crios-Chuchulainn. 


crios-Chuchulainn, s.m. Meadow-sweet, queen 
of the meadow, * my lady's belt, "—spiraa 


ulmaria. 
crios-claidheimh, s m. Sword-belt. 
Criosd, -a, s.m. Christ, Our Saviour. 


teriosda, a. Swift, quick, nimble, active,smart. 
Criosdachd, s.f. Christianity. 2 Christendom, 


3* Benignity. A’ Ch., Christendom. 
Crìosdaidh, e, -ean, s.m. Christian. 
-—eachd, see Crìosdachd. 
mma -e |& -ala,] o Christian, Christian- 
ike. 
fcriosdal, -ail, 8.m. Ring of thong or withe. 





Criosdalachd, s.f.ind. Christian disposition and 
God- 


behaviour. 
Criosd-athair, -atbar, -thraichean, s.m. 
father. 
Criosduidh, see Crìosdaidh. 
--——eachd, see Criosdaidheachd. 
crios-féile, (AC) s.m. Kilt-girdle. 
crios-puaille, see crios-gnailne. 





yo -—— pl. -àn-guailne, s.m. Shoulder. 
It. 


crios-gualann, -ainn, see crios-guailne. 

crioslach, -aich, -aichean, s.f. Girding of the 
loins. 2 Bosom-belt, girdle. 3**Border. 4tt 
Apron. - 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Girding, belting, tight- 





ening. 2 Act of girding, belting or tighten- 
A 8**Bordering. A’ c—, pr.pt. of crios- 
aich. 





an, -ain, (AC) s.m. Bag suspended from 
the “ crios” or girdle. 
nuts. 


273 


ed, begirt, bordered. 
criostuich, see ecrosia.ch. 





C. chnò, a girdleful of 


crith-chreidmheach 


——te, see criosiaichte. 

crios-meadhon-an-t-saoguail, s.m. The Equator 
or eyuinoctial line (4t. the middle bc tt of the 
world.) 

crius-mhuir, -mhara, &.f. Strait, arin of the sea, 

crios-inuineil, &.3n. Necklace, 2 Neck-baud. 

criOs-na-gréine, see griun-cenrios. 

crios-néinuhe, s.m. The zodiac. 


criosolit, s.f. Gaelic spelling of chrysolite, 


crios-pasgaidh, s 34. Swadd.ing-baund. 

crios-pheilear, sam. Bandolier. 

criosrachadh, -aidh, see erioslachadh. 
criosraich, see crioslaich. 

———te, see crioslaichte. 2 a. Siccinct. 

crios-roinn, s.m. Shield divided bv b ‘a 
or band, party per beni in heraldry. 

erios-spéillidh, s.m. Swaddling-Land, 

crios-tarsainn, s.m. Shoulder-belt. 

criosta, see criosaichte. 

criostal ail, -an, s.m. Gaelic spelling 
of crystal. Sruthan criostail, crys- 233 Crios- 
tal streamlets. roinn. 

————— ach, -aiche, a. Transparent, translucent 
2 Crystalline. 

criot, -a, -achan, s.f. Earthen vessel, prov. 

criotach, prov. for cniadach. 

criotaich, prov. for cniadaich. 

teriotaii, a. Earthen, made of clay. 

criothach, see critheann. 

tcrioth-chumadair, -e, -ean, 
(cré-chumadair.) 

eriothnach, -aiche, a. see critheach. 

adh, -aidh, see crith. 

———-.—8il, a. see critheach. 

criothnaich, v. a. d m. see crith. Shake. 3 
Tremble. 

terioth-stabhair, -ean, 8.m. Potter. 

crioth-thalmhuinn, pl. -anna-t-, see crith-thal- 
mhuinn. 

criottiunn, -ninn, s.m. see critheann. 

cripleach, Ach, s.m. Cripple. 

-—adh, -aidh, s.m. Laming, act of laming 
or crippling. 2 Craziness. A’ c—, pr. pt. of 
criplich. 

—— — — d, s,f.ind. Lameness, decrepitude. 

-—— ——— ta, past pt. of criplich. Crippled. 

criplich,tt pr.pt. a’ cripleachadh, v.a. Make 
lame, cripple. 

criplich, s.m. see cripleach. 

crislean, s.pl. Sinews. 

tcrislion, -in, see crislean. 

crisgein-craisgein, tt s.m. Starfish. 

crit, -e, -ean, see croit. 

tcriteagan, -aiu, s.m. Dwarf. 

crith, -e, -ean, s. f. Trembling. 2 Tremor— 
paralysis agicans. 8 Fit of ague. [Preceded 
by the art.cic a’ ch—] 4(DU) Shivering, 6 
(DU )Disease of sheep. Air chritb, trembling. 

crith, pr.pt. a’ crith, v.n. Tremble,shake,quiver, 
An talamh air ch., the earth trembling ; geilt 
ch., tremuling from terror; cuir air ch., shake, 
cause to shake. , 

crith, -e, s. /. Trembling, act of trembling or 
shaking. A’ c—, pr. pt. of crith. 
crith-chath, -e-, s.m. Battle-panic. 
crith-cheann, -chinn, s.m. Shaking head. 
-——ach, a. Shaking in the *,head, nod. 
ding, paralytic. 

crith-cheal, -ch'üil, s.m. Warbling. 
ing. 3 Musical trills. 

crith-chosg.** a. Antiparalytic. 


see creadhadair, 








2 Quaver. 


crioslaich, pr. pt. a’ crioslachadh, v.a. Gird the Í crith-chreideach, dich, s.m. see crith-chreid. 


joins. 2 Belt, bind. 
devermine. 5 Border. 
te, past pt. of crioslaich, Girded, belt- 


3 Tighten. 4 Limit, 








mieach. 


crith-chremleamh, s.m. Quakerism. 


crith-chreidmheach, Ach, 6m, Quaker. 


crith-cthealbnair 


perith-dhealbhair, see criadhadair. 

srith-dhealrach, -aiche, a. Radiant. 

sxith-dhealradh,-aidh,s.m. Tremulous radiance. 

crithe, gen. of crith, 

——~—ach, -aiche, a. Shaking, quaking, quiver- 
ing, aguish. 

ach, -ich, 8.m. see critheann. 

achadh,** -aidh, s.m. Trembling, terror. 
A' c—, pr. pt. of crithich. 

critheachan,fl s.m. Wheatear, see brü-gheal. 

xitheadn,1f -idh, s.m. Quaver 

zrith-e2 gal,-ail, s.m. Astonishment accompanied 
by extreme terror. 2 Consternation, trem- 
bliug. 

srith-eaglach, -aiche, a. 
ing. 2 Territied, trembling, quaking. 
Causing extreme terror. 

zritbheanach, -aiche, a. Causing or inducing 
tremors. 2 Aguish. 3(DU) Shaky, insecure. 
Aw fiabhrus c., ague; c. air a chasan, shaky 
an his feel. 

—d, sf. Aguishness, 

tritheanaich,tt s.f. Trembling, paralysis. 

critheaun,$ -inn,s.m. Aspeu-tree—populus trem- 
ula. 2 Poplar. (With art. an.) Badge of 
Clan Fergusson accord.ng to some, Mar ch. 
'san t-siue, like an aspen in the blast. 

-—,@. Aspen. 

—ach,tt -aiche, a, Aspen. 

— -chladaich, s.n. Erigo (plant.) 

erithear, Ar, s.m. Spark of fire. 2 Drinking-cup. 

urithein,(Al) s. m. Common sandpiper, see 
willeachan-tràighe. — . 

crith-fheur,$ s.m. Quaking grass, see conan. 

crith-fhuachd,** s.f. Chilliness, 

crith-fuinn, &.f. Earthquake. : 

erith-ghalar, air, sm. Palsy. ?2lParalysis. t8 
JAgue. 

erithiich, pr.pt. a’ critheachadh v.n. see crith. 

crithidh, foi, af. a. oi crith, 

crithioun, Ann, see critheann. 

erith-làinh, -laimh, an, sJ. Trembling hand 

—Bacb, aiche, a. Having trembling 

hands. 











Astonishing, dismay- 
gtt 




















achd, s.f.ind, Trembling of the hauds. 

crith-mhosgladh, -aidh, $m. Awaking in terror. 

crithneachan,(AF) s.m. Wheatear, see cloich- 
earan. 

crith-neul, -edil, s.», Shower. 

—— — —ach, -aiche, 4. Showery. 

crithuich, pr.pt. A crineachdainn,v.n. see crith, 

crib-olt,** sj. Shudder. ] 

teriture, spl. Small sparks from the collision 
ol arms. 2 Small particles of anything. 

erith-reodhadh, -aidh, s.m. Hoar-frost. 2 Mil- 
dew. 3 Blasting mist. 4 Weak ice, frost. 
Mar dhuilieach Zeg ch., like (caves in hoar- 
frost; ma biitheas c. aun, 1f there be mildew, 

critb-reothath, -aith, see crit h-reodhadh., 

critb-shüileach, -eiche, @ lLiaviug tremulous 
eyes. 2 Dim-sighted. 3 Biear-eyed. 4 Pur- 
blind. 

crith-snágadain,(DU) s. f. Rattling of teeth 
against each other through cold or fear. 

c íth-snàzadan,l s. m. ‘I'he pins aud needles.” 
(Preceded by the articie an.) 

critb-thalmhuinn, crithe-t-, pl. crithean-t-, 8f. 
Earthquake. 

crith theas, s.m. Mirage, the tremnlous exhal- 
atiou observed near the surface of the ground 
on a hot day. 

ciatithinneas, 

Tiudarnach, -aich, s.m. 

riun,(À F) see criomhan. 

TO,(AF) s. Pig. à 

rd, otha, -dithean [& -ditean,] s.m. Circle. 2 
Sheep-cot, pen or told, wattled fold. 3 Stall. 


see crith-ghalar. 
The hiccough. 


€) 


2/4 








Laf aug 
stable. 4 Hut, hovel, cottage. 5 Witch- 
craft. 6 Eve of a needle. 7 rarely Gronp of 


children, 8 High wattled cart rim. 9 see cnò., 
10 see crodh. 11$ Saffron, see cró-choreur. 
12(AC) tHeart,  13tDeath. 14 see crà. 1:11 
Iron bar. 16**Crop. C. na mòine, the peat- 
cart; cro crodh-bainne, a fold ofsmilch cows ; a 
Chriosda Chrd-naoimhe, O Christ cf the Holy 
Blood; crò chaorach, a sheep-fold; cho fad "aa 
bh;theas monadh an Ceaun-tail, cha bhi Mac- 
Coinnich gun al 'sa chro, as (ong as there are 
moors in Kintail, MacKenzie will not want cat- 
tle in the pen—c. has a double meaning here, 
being also the name of a place in Kintail. girt 
with hills, and from which the river Cro is 
named. 

cro, v.a. Fold, enclose ina fold. 2 Hem in to- 
gether. 

cro, crotha, 2 Close. 3 
see cròdha. 

cro'an, aiu, -an, 8.m, see crodhan. 

crobh, -a, s.m. Hand. 2** Claw, paw. 3**Hoof. 
Ge b'e air bith tha thu ag itheadh no ag òl, is 
léir a binlath air t' ayhaidh eum bheil agh- 
aidh do chrobhan ri d' chraos, whatever your 
meat and drink be, itis very clear from your 
Jace that your hands and your mouth are good, 
friends—said by a master to a servant, who 
i that she ate nothing but bread and 
MILK. 

cru. vagan,} s.m. Handful. 

cró-buutàta,(AH) s.m. Small enclosure for po 


tatoes. 
terobhall, -uill, s.m. Genitalia, 
crobhan, see crodhan. 
———ach, see crodhanach. 
crobh-priachain, s.f. The herb Crane’s bil, 
crebüsag. (CR) 8. f. Variation of groiseia—W. 
or Ross-shire. e 
crobhtach, a. Tender-soled, 
croc, v.a, Beat, pound, prov. 
croc, -dic, -bicean [&-ócan], s.m. Deer's antler, 
y Given by ** in error for crog. 
croc, see cnoc. 
crocach, see cnocach. 
ciocach, -aiche, @ Branched, antlered, 
Horny, haviug large horns, 
crocachft, s.m. Spiked instrument to keep cale 
ves froin sucking. 
tcrocad, -aid, s.m.  Barley-broth, pottage. 
crocadul,tt -nil, s.e. Crocodile. 
crocaz,(DU) s.f. Crook handle ofa stick, 21$ 
Pothanger. 
| erocaid,** -ean, s.f. Cockernony. 

i croeaireachd see cnocaireachd. 
crocan, -ain, an, 8.14, Crook, hook, 
D) see mac-an-óg. 

crocanach,* -aiche, a. Crooked. 

crocan-cairt,(MMcD) s.m. Implement made of 
iron with wooden handle, ased for digging or 
dragging the roots of the ‘‘cairt-lair’’ from 
the ground— Lewis. 

crocas, -ais, s.m. Cork—Gairloch. 

eróc-cheannach, -aiche, a. Antlered, horned. 
z Having branching horus. 

cróc-duearg, -dheirge, a. see crà-dhearg. 

cròch, -oich, $.m. Saffron, see cro-chorcut, 2 
Red-colour. Léine c., ancient Highland man- 


a. Strait, narrow. 


2(MMe 


Lë, 

cróch, a. Saffron-coloured, red, crocus. 

croch, pr.pt a’ crochadh, v.a. d. n. Hang pg: 
vend. z Pnnish by hanging. 3 Depe d. 4 
inger, hover. Ch. iad e, they hanged hins, C. 
an cota, Lany the coat. 

crochach, -aiche, a. Saffron-coloured, corniges 
T»:03, 

crochadach,11 -aiche, a, Pensile. 


crochadair 


crochadair, -ean, $. ilangman. 

crochiulaireachd, sten, business of a hang- 
man, 2 Hovering or lonuging about. 

crochadan, -ain, ëm, Pendulum. 2 Pendant. 
3 Tassel. 

crochadas,** -ais, s.m. Appendage. 

crechadh, aidh, san, Hanging. 2 Act of hang- 
ing or suspending. 3**suftocation. 4**Hover- 
ing. 5**Grief. A’c-—, pr. pt. of croch. 
An c. ris, depending on it; c. poite, a meal, one 
pot fd. 

crochag, -aig, -an, 2**Pen- 
dniuin. 

crochaid,** -ean, sf, Frontlet, particular form 
of dressing a young woman's hair. 

crochaire, -an, s.m. Villain, (one deserving to 












s.f. Ear-pendant. 


be hanged.) z**ldle fellow. 3**Hangman. 
- achd, sJ. Villany. 2 ldleness. 3 
Lonnging. 
cruchan, 2310, -an, s.m, Pothook, 
Gpach-adäch, -aich, em. Hangings. 
cro-chaorach, s... Sheep-fold. 
crochar, -air, -airean, $.m. Bier. 2 Horse- 
litter. 3 Body. 


tero-charb, -airb, -airbean, s.m. Dier, 
cro-charbad,** -aid, s.m. Hearse. 
ferocharsach, -aich, sm. Sheep-fold. 


croch-bhrat, -ait, -an, s.m. Hanging tapestry. 2 


**Curtain. 3**Screen.  4**Blind. 5 Drop- 
seve, 
crvehd, -dichde, -ochdan, s.f. see croc, 8.m. 
erochd, see cnoc. 


crochdach, -xiche, a. see cròcach. 

crechadach, see cnocach. 

Cioctdaid, Aide, -aidean, see crochaid. 

cro-chorcur,} s.m. Saffron crocus, meadow- 
saliron—crocus sativus or colchicum autumnale, 





234. Cré-choreur. 

crochta. past pt. of croch. Hung up, suspended. 
9 Hanged. 

cro-chnile,(AF) 8s. Recessed pen, pen in the hol- 
low between two or more hills. 2 Place-name. 

crodal], see crotal 4. 

ciodan, see cnòdan. 

crodh, crnidh, a.m. Cattle, especially black cat- 
2 pl. Herds. 3 Dowry, portion. 4 The fine 
imposed by the ancient Scots on one who was | 
gnilty of murder. It differed for every nan 
murdered according to his rank. The c. of à 
king was 1,000 cows, of an earl 140, of a thane 
(earl’s son) 100, of a villain or plebeian 16, 

crodh, v. see cro. 

cro:ih,** fee crodhan. 

crouh,} 8.7. Saffron crocus, meadow saffron, see 
cro-chorenr. 

cródha, gen.crodhaidh[& croidhe,] pl. croidhean, 
(DU) s.f.Gairloch & W, of Rossxhire for crudha. 


erodha, -oidhe, a. Valiant, heroic, brave. 2** 
Powerfnl. 3**Jardy  4**Active. 5**Clever. 
6°*Effective. 7ttStont, valorous. 





chd, $.f.i/, Valour, bravery, prowess. 
2 Hardihood, 3**''Cleverness," activity. 


cròdhadh, -aidh, s.m. 


crogan 
Contraction, act of con- 
tractiug. 2 Gathering m or corn. 3 Gather- 
ing into a fold. 4 Rebuke. 
crodhaich, (C R) s. Something that aduiter- 
ates the milk, said locaily tu be a disease of 
the shaws of potatoes, when black spots or 
lumps form aud the top falls down—suih’d. 
+crodhaicne, -an, 8m. lieir. 
crodhal,(AC) a. Valiant. Micheal c., valiant M. 
--———achd, sf. see crodhaend. 
crodhall, see croghall. 
crodhan, -ain, -ani & -ain,] s.m. 
vided hoof, as of slccp or cows. 
**Claw. 4 Clumsy hand. 5 (AF) biees of 
wood fixed in or tied to the mouth of a cef 
like a bit and round the back of the head, to 
revent 1t sucking its mother When following. 
eubaidh e an crodhain, he will tear their 
claws ; an c. mo laimhe, in the paim oj myhand. 
ach, -aiche, a. Having parted hoofs, 
cloven-footed. 2 Having ciaws or paws. 3 
Like a claw or boot, Tarbh c., a bull thet has 
hoojs. 
crodn-bainne, s.m. Milch-cattle, 
crodh-caoch,(AF) s.m. Hornless cows. 
crodh-chorcur, see cró-chorcur. 
cró-dhearg,** -dheirg, s.m. Saffron. 2 Crimson. 
-——, -dheirge, a. see crà-dhearg. 
cró-dhion,(AC) gan, Sanctnary. 
crodh-fhionn, see croidh-fhioun. 
crodh-gamhnach, s.m. Farrow cattle (giving 
milk, but not with yonng.) 
crodhlainu,tt -e, -ean, sf Decrepit old woman. 
crodh-mara,(AC) spi. Sea cows. 
crodh-reic,,AF) s.m. Selling stock. 
crodh-seasg, s.m. Barren cattle. 
crodh-sith,(AF) s.m. Fairy cattle, said to have 
been of a dun colour in Harris, and speckled 
red in Skye. Their calves had short ears, +3 
if the upper part had been cut off with à 
knife and a slit made in the top—corz-chluas- 
ach. 
crog, -a, pl. -achan & -aichean, s.f. Aged or 
ettete ewe, sheep past bearing. 2 Three-win- 
terewe. 3 Dratt ewe, draft gimmer. 
cròg, -dige, Ab, s.m. La pe or clumsy hand. 2 
Ciutch. 3 Palm of tue hand. 4 Paw. 6** 
Claw. 6** Fist. Lan mo chróige de 'n or 
bhuidhe, my jist full of the yellow gold. 
crog, -a, -achan, s.m. Earthen vessel,crock, jar. 
crogach, -aiche, a. Having large clumsy hands. 
2 Having paws. 3 Like à paw. 4[fCiutched. 
crogach, -aiche, a. Of, connected with, or full 
of, earthen vessels or crocks. 
crogach, s.f. Female with large hands. 
crogaichean, pl. of crog.. 
crogaid,* s. Beast having small horns. 
crogair,* v.a. Handle awkwardly, bungie. 
crogaire, -an, s.m. One who searches or handles 
awkwardly, bungler. 2* Man having large 
hands. 
achd, s.f.ind. Act of searching or hand- 
ling awkwardly, or with foul hands or fingers, 
2** Pawing. 
crogairneach, -nich, 8.m. Rocky ascent. ; 
crogairsich,* s.f. Rough handling. 2 Bungling, 
spoiling. A 
crogairt, s.f. see crògaireachd. 
crogais, -e, -ean, s.f. Barren winter ewe, thee- 
shear ewe—Lewis. Ë 
crogan, -ain, pl. -ain & an, s.n. Pitcher litt e 
earthen dish. 2 Lean, little person. 3* Little 
born. 4 Muck-fork, (graba-crum., 5 A^; seo 
cragan-feannaig. 6ftbwisted an | shrivelled 
branch. C. caillich, a shrivelied old wonun; c. 
traghad, sea-urchin. 


Parted or di- 
gtt Piw. 3 








croganach 


*roganach, -aiche, 
lean, shrunk. 2ffPertainipg to jars or pitch- 
ers. 

trogarsaich, sf. see crògaireachd. 

troghadh, :aidh, see cròdhadh. 

crogball, -aill, s.m. Crocodile, 2 Alligator. 

crogball mór,** sn, Alhgator. 

cròglach, -aich,s.m. Handful. 

erópnachadh, -aidh, s. Pawing, handling 
awkwardly or indelicately. 2 Act of pawing 
or handling inaeüicately. <A’ c—, pr.pt. of 
crógnaich. 

crognaich, pr.pt. a’ crognachadh, v.a. Handle 
indelicately or clumsily. 

crog-ri-fraigh, -e, s.f. The shadow of a band 
npon the wall to frighten children. 

cruibbeal, -eil, s.m. see coireal, 

cròic, -e,-ean, 8f. beer'suuntler. 2 Rage. 3 
Foam on the surface of spirituous liqnors, 4 
Skin, hide. b 1Cust sea-weed. 6 Difficulty, 
hardship, hard task. 7** Venison feast. 8 
Sometimes used as the nom, case in place of 
croc, instead of as its gen. Cha ch. sin air, 
or cha ch. air sin, (hat is no task to him, 

Croic, gen. sing. & n. pl. of croc. 

-cheaunach, -aiclie, @ see erdiceach. 

-—€ach, e. Kising into foam. 2 Abounding 
in cast seaweed. ó**Meadowy. 4 see cròcach. 

—  eadhi, -idh, sm. Act of branching out, like 
horns or antlers, 

croich, "€, -ean, s. Gallows, gibbet. 2**Cross. 

eroich, (CE) s. Jf. Difficulty of breathing, as 
from asthma or from cold. 2 Wheezing—W. 
or Ross-shire. 

croicheil,i} -e, d. 
gibbet or gallows. 

eroicionn,-inn [ & ene, } pl.-cnean,see craiceann. 

ach, see craicneach. 

croicne, (for craicne) gen.siny. of craiceann, 

eroicneach, -iche, see craieneach. 

eroicneag, 8J. Integument. 

croienean, see cralceann. 

croicnibh, see craicnibh. ` 

croid, -e, -ean, #.f. see cnoid, 

eróidh, v.a, Coop, contract, house. 2 House 
corn, A’ cróidheadh an arbhair, housing the 
corn {in Harris—a’ dlüitheadh an arbhair* ;] 
a’ croidheadh nan caorach, penning the sheep. 

croidhbheal, s.m. see cvireal. 

croidh-chasach, @, Crump-footed. 

fcroidhe, -achan (& -an,] see cridhe. 

ach, Ach, s.7. Portion, dowry. 

achd, s.f.ind. see croidheach. 

cróidheachd, s.f.ind. Bravery. 

croidheag,** -eig, sf. Sweetheart, mistress. 

croidhean,** -ein, s.m. Gallant, lover. 

croidh-fhionn, -à, a. White-hoofed. 
croidhle,** see craidhleag. 

croidhleag, -eig, -an, s.f. see craidhleag. 

croidhlean, s.m. see cròilean. 

croidhlear,** s.m. Basket-maker. 

eroig, dat.sing. of cròg. l 

cròileagan, -ain, s.m. Ring, orjcircle of people, 
generally usedof children. C. tuatha, an as- 
semblage of tenantry. 

eróilean,--iu,-an, s.m. Little fold. 2 Group,little 
cir-le or riug of children. 2**Cage. 3**Cluster. 
4*(iame of touch. [ttgives croilein as n,sing., 
& croileinean as n.pl.] 

fcroilige, sJ. Blood-letting. 

croili»h,** s. Pain, infirmity. 

tcroi'igheach, -eiche, a. sickly. 

croimheagz, -eige, -an, see cruimheag. 

ecroinheal, see coireal. 

croin-fhionn, a. Crey-headed or -haired. 2 

White-headed or -haired. 





Patibulary, pertaining toa 











276 
a, Slrivelled up, scraggy, | feroinic, &.f. Chronicle, annal. 


croit 


croinic,** v.a. Paint. 

——eachd,** sf. Painting. 

croinn, gen. sing. & n.pl. of erann, 

croinn-chas, s.pl. Pedals of a loom. 

croinn-chiuiche, s.m. Lottery. 

croinn-chluithe, see croinn-ch'uiche. 

croinneach,* sf. Old worn-out animal. 

croinn-grith, s. Mast rigging of a ship. 

croiunscag,** sf. Crackling, see cnàimhseag. 

crois, -e, -ean, At Cross. 2 Any object in the 
form of a cross. 3 Misfortune, mishap. 4 
Obstacle, obstruction. 6 Hank-reel, yarn- 
windlass. 6 Obelisk in writing (f.) 7**Mar- 
ke.-place. 8 Fork, see glac, p. 76. 

tcrois,y sJ. Gluttony. 

crois, pr.pt. A croiseadh, v.a. Form across. 2 
Forbid, cross, thwart. 3 Wind or reel yarn. 
Croiseam ort ; the Cross be between us ! crois- 
pu ae ! the Cross between me and mis- 
Lap 

crois-Aindrea, 
crann. 

crois-bhogha, s.f. Cross-bow. 

———-dair,** s.m. Cross-bowman, 

-—— air, see crois-bhogh:dair. 

erois-Chriosda, s. The cross of Christ. 

crois-Di;eórsa, see crois-Sheorais. 

eroiseadh, -idh, 8. m. Crossing. 2 Hindering, 
thwarting. 3 Forbidding. 4 Difficulty, ob- 
structiou. 5 Act of crossipg, hindering or 
obstructing. 6 Reeling (hank 800 yards.) A’ 
c—, pr. pt. of crois. Air a chroiseadh, for- 
bidden, set round. 

croiseag, -eig, s.f. Little cross, crosslet. 

eroiseid,** enn, s.f. Rail. 2 Barrier. 

crois-fhiacaill, -fhiaclan, s.f. Gag-tooth. 

feroisg, v.a. Cross, go across. % Cut across. 

crois-ghéarr,v.a@. Cross-cut, 

croisgileid, e, -ean, 8.7. Cross cloth or triangu- 
lar piece of linen, tied about au infant’s fore 
head, child’s head-dress. 

crois-iarna, -n, 8f. Hank-reel. A rudiment- 
ary form of the ciud-siorraig. It consists of a 
stick of a certain length, with a cros--piece 
at each end, set at right angles to each o 
ther. ‘the yarn is coiled on the cross pieces off 
the spool of the spinnivg-wheel, so man 
threads or turns round the cross-pieces, whic 
threads are counted, make an old yard of 
cloth, i. e. 46 in. of a constant width such as 
the loom in use suffices to weave— Vist (DC.) 

croislin, -e, -ean, sf. Diameter (distance across 
& circle.) ; 

each, -niche, a. Diametrical, pertain- 
ing to a diameter. 

crois:na-tràgha,(AF) s.f. Starfish. 

crois-riagtilaidh, pl -ean-, 8.7. Regulating cross. 
2 Criterion. 

croisrich, v.a. Envelop. 2 Involve. 

crois-Sheórais, s.f. Cross in heraldry. 
i.e. St. George's cross [the National 
badge of Engiand.] 

crois-sheunaidh, 5. f. Crucifix. 2 Act 
of crossing oneself as a charin azaiust 
hari. 

crois-shlighe, -an, s. f. By-path, cross- 
road. 





8. f. St. Andrew’s cross, see 








crois-tara, see crann-tàra, , 
crois-Làraidh, see crann-tàra, 2* 225. Crois- 
signal of defiance b.fore com- Sheòrais. 


mencing a battle. 

erois-thachrais, s. f. Winding-reel,worsted-wind- 
er. 2 Yarn windlass. 

croit, -e, -ean, s.f. Hump on the back. 2 Ludi- 
crous term for the back. 3* Cringing attitude. 


croit 


277 


crom-leac 


4 Hunch-back. 6 Little emine: ce, hillock. 6 | Cromag-ghuaille,** sf. Clavicle. 


Crott, small pr ce of arable lana 7 (AH 


Crook-backed attitude assumed y man and | crom-aisinn, 


beast when ex osed to a cold pieroing wiud. 
eroit-fhearainn,(CR) s.f. Croft—W. ef Ross. 

-——ench,** a. Gibbous. 

cròiteach, a. Hnmpbacked. 

Croiteag,-eipe,-an, s fim of croit. 2see crotag. 

—ean,** sm. Hump-backed person. 2 (AF) 
Gnrnet (fish.) 

——eur,-eir,-an, s. m. Croiter, one holding a 
croft of land, — 2**Peasant. (Ihe modern 
crofters or mall tenants appear very little in 
evidence before the beginning of the 18th. 
century. They wer tenants at will under 
the tacksinan and wadsetters, but practically 
their tenure was secure enough. The first 
evidence we can find of small tenants holding 
directly of the proprietor is in a reiital of the 
estates of Sir D. MacDonald in Skye and N. 
Vist in 1715—C/an Donald, iii.) tt gives 
croiteir as n. sing. 

——eireuch:l, $../nd. Occupation of a crofter. 

croithean.tt n». 74. of cro. 

croit-ministeir,** sf. Glebe. 

crò-laogh, (4U) s.m. Calves cot. 

crò-leaba, (DC) s.f. Bier. Used in Skye, Uist, 
&c., where it is still the custom to ‘carry a 
coftin to the graye without the use of horse or 
conveyance. 2* Bier to carry a wounded per- 
son. 

eró-léine,( AC) s.m, Shroud. 

fcroloc,** am. Place where malefactors were 
executed, 

cro-lot, v.a. Wound dangerously. 

fcrom, s.m. Nose. 2 Slongh. 

crom, -: ime, @. Crooked, bent, curved, not 
straight. z**Bending, winding. 3**Eddving. 
4ttHaving crooked horns, as sheep. 5**Con- 
care. 6* Sloping. An tacan a bhitheadh a 
cheann-san €., while his head was bent down 
(to feed); croit ch., a crooked back. 

-———, -uim, s. m. Circle. 2**Bending, cnrva- 
ture. 3**Bend, curve.  4ttRidge of hills. 6 
**Concavity. C. nan speur, the concavity of the 
heavens. 

~——, pr.pt. a’ cromadh, v.a. & n. 
cline. 2 Stoop, bow. 3 Descend. 4 Make 
crooked, C. do cheann, bow your head. C. 
airan abair, set to work, “wire in;" crom le, 
descend, asa hill. 

cromachas,tt -ais, s./. Bandy-leg. 

K -—ach,tt -eiche, a. Pertaining to a ban- 

y-leg. 

Cromadh, -aidb, s.m. Bending, making crooked. 
2 Stoopiug, bowing. 3 Drooping. 4 Inclin- 
ation, inclining. 5 Act of bending, stooping, 
or bowing. 6 Measure, the middle finger's 
length. 7**Kneeling. 8** Bend, curvature, 
curye, turn, winding. 9**Concavity. A’ c—, 
pr. pt. of crom. ‘Tha a’ ghrian a’ cromadh, 
the sun descends; fo ch. an taighe, under the 
roof of the house; c. gun ghainne 'sa chaol, 
a full finger-length to the small—part of a 
rhyine called ‘Cumadh an triubhais ; c. a’ 
chuain, the bending of the sea, a boy, headland; 
deanar c. leinn, let us kneel. 

cromag, -aige, -an, s.f. Any little crooked thing. 
2 Hook. 3 Clasp. 4 Crook. 6 Catch. 6 Gal- 
lows, 7Tache. 8$ Skirret (plant.) 9 Clip, 
see No 13 p. 76. 10* Pez. C. dir, a tache of 
gold; cromagan na briogais, breeching-hooks 
of a cart, 

ach, -aiche, a. Hooked, crooked. 2 Of, 

or belonging to, anything hooked or crooked. 

8 Full of skirrets. 4ttPertainiug to clasps, 

an, s.pl. Crotchets in grammar [ ]. 

cromag-an-aithreachais, sf. Crozier, 


Bend, in- 











-tharruing, 8.f. Drnugiht-hook. 

see crom-aisno. 

crum-aisne, -an,& -aisnichean,s.m.The little rib, 

croma-.0in, -@, -anan-, s.m. see ciomanm-lóin. 

eroman,-ain, 8.m. Kite. 2 Large hawk. 3 
Crooked, hump-backed man. 4 ‘the hip-bone. 
5 The hip. 6 Hoe. 7 Crooked graip, au im- 
plement used in digging dung-heaps. 8 The 
& ot a plough, 

———— beag, T s.m. Jack-snipe, see gobhrag- 


bheag. 
corman-coillteach,** s.m. Woodcock—scolopaz 
rusticola. 
crom-an-donais, s.m. Bungler. 2 Iinpotent, 
unfortunate or nusuccessful person, 3*Dolt. 
ee see clamhan-gobhlach. 
slachdunn,g -ain-, s.m. Kite, see clamh 
an-ghobhlach. 2 Small water-fowl. ` 
-lochaidh, s.m. Kite—/alco miivus. 














$37. Croman-cocs. 
croman-ldin, -ain-, s.m. Snipe—scolopaz galli- 
nag :. 2 AF) Marsh-harrier, see clamhan-lòin 
8(AF) Woodcock, see coileach-coille. 





—-iuatha, s. m. Wooden ash-rake, 2*1 
Wooden tire-shovel. 
— -uch, -ain, 


Kite, kestrel, see 
clamhan-rnadh, 


— -Juchaidh, 4 s. m. Kite, see clamhan 
gobhlach. 

cromartaich, s. Shield. 

crom-bhileach, -iche, a. Anything with curveé 
borders or skirts. 

-—— -chas, -choise, -an, $.f. Bandy-leg, crook 
ed leg. 

-—— -chasach, -aiche, a. Bandy-legged. 

-—— -cheaunach, -aiche,@  Bent-headed. 

-—— -chomhidach,** s.m. Canopy. 

-— — -phlaineach, -niche, a. see cluth-ghliin 
each, 

-—— -ghobach, -aiche, a. Curve-billed. 

-— -ghobach,** -aich, s.m. Bird with a crook 
ed bill. 

-—— -leac, -lic. -an, s.f. Flat stone in an in 
clined position. supported by three stones pla 
ced perje dicnlarly, commonly supposed tc 
be driudic.i re'nains. One in Alsace mea 
sures soit, round, 12ft, broad, and more than 


8. m. 








crom-leac 


978 


erotag 





4ft. in thickness, is raised ou other stones sev- | cronana‘ch, -e, 8.f. Comiuned humuiny, purr- 


eral feet from the ground; sioiuer in Pem- 
brokeshire is 28ft. high, ana zQit. in circum- 
ference, and one in Poitiers is 60ft. rounu 
anıl is placea on tive large stones. 

crow-ivaciid, see crom-leac. 

ere -lus, -uis, -an, s.m. Poppy 

———— -Lau-czare,(AF) 8, m. saen-harrier, 
bi éia-airótn. 

-nun-dnideag,-an- $8. m. 
cviles ci.-co.lie. 

——— ISL ze fe (e See erann-nan-z:ad 

-oduar, Cruim-oubalr.s.m,. Menibrum virile 

»=—— uaig, -e, -ean, 8.f. Chase through a crook- 
ed pata. 

-——.-sziuth, -sgéithe, -an, sf. Sort of crooked 
shield, 

ez -sluiabh, -éibh, -shléibhtean, s.f. Druidi- 
cal cuupel. 

—— -siliuneineach, -niche, a. Bent-stiouldered 
round-süouidered, 2**Hunip-buackeu, 

-shoe, -shuie, -an, $m. GO snout, 

-shocach, a. Curve-suouted. 

—- -shronach, -aiche, a. benv-nosed. 2 Hook- 
nosed, aquiline, 

——— -snronacn, -aich, s.m. Person witb a hook- 
ed or aquiliue nose, 

—— -ghüileach, -liche, a. Bent-eyed. 

tcron, -óiu, s.m. Time. 2 Explanation. 

+——, a. Ready. 2 Brown, swarthy. 

cron, -oin, s.m. Fault, detect. 2 hann, mis: 
chief, 8 blame, mmputatien of wrong. 4 
**uüurt. 5 vare Sign, mark. Pha à («ot a’) 
chron sin ort, the diame of tnat (es on you. 

tcron, v.g, Kxpluiu. 2 Bewitch. 3 blush, 

cron, see croudicn. 

cronach, see corranach. 

ceronach,** a. Aching. 

cronachadh, -aidh, s.n. Rebuking, reproving, 
nuding fault witb. 2 Checsiug, check. 3 
l..prou!, blame, 4**Harm, burt. 6**Chast- 
emng. A c—, pr. pt. of cronaich. C., soill- 
eir, u pubiic rebuke. 

cronacaail,ff-e, a. Corrective. 

eronachir,** sm, Carper. 

cronacuan, -ain, -an, s.m. see cronachadh. 2 
(ALL; Lucantacion, exoreism. bolas a’ cnron- 
aCe, Counter- n. 

cronaiair, -ean, s.m. Keprover, critic, one who 
nnus lault. La fniearr an eunictair ua 'n eron- 
adair, the maker is vetter tunun che critic. 

cronag, -aige,-an, 8. f. Hun, noise ot many 
voices. % Circle. 8 Fortress. 

cronaich, pr. pt. a’ cronachadu, v.a. Rebuke, 
reprove, blame. 2* Hurt with an evil eye. 8 
Cuide, check, reprimand. Ch. e mi, Ae re- 
prunaundaea hte. 

te, past pt. of cronaich, 

cronail, -e, a. tiurtful, harmíul, mischievous, 
peru.gious, 2 Diseased. 3*Uffensive. 

cronalachd, s.f.ind. Harmfuiness, hurtfulness, 
jeriuciousness, harm. 2*Otensiveuess. 

cronan, -ain, s,m. Dull note. 2 Mourntul tune. 
8 Any low murmuring sound. 4 The buzzing 
ofa uy. 6 The humwing otf à bee. 6 ‘The 
puniing ofa cat. 7 Furiing sound of a brouk. 
8 bassin music. 9 Dirge. 10 Pathetic ode. 
(Scurs, croon.) ll**souud of a bagpipe drone. 
12 bellowing of a deer. 13 Luluug voice. J4 
(A11) Wheezing in the throat, as in asthma 
or bronchitis, C. an uillt, the murmur of the 
mountain streams; seillean le c., the vee with u 
humming sound. 

acu, -aiche, a. Humming, buzzing, puri- 

ing, pursing, murmuring. % Lnlhug. ö Gur- 

goug. tt brown. Dama c. dearg, a vellowiny 

rea-deer. 


see 





Woodcock, see 











3 Head. 








ing, murmuving, gurgiiag or buzzing svat. 
2 Bellowiug oi deer. 3* Dirge. 4 Dias in 
MUSIC. 

Cru-naomh.(AC) s.m. The Sacred Heart. Cha 
tugiinn do Tu Gn. thu, 4 woila nut give thee 
to the Sacred Heart. 

cronnach, -aiche, a. Mournful, melancholy, ta- 
mentable. 

cronnag, -aige, -an, see crannag, 4. 

fcronnt, a. Green. 2 Grey. 

t aich, v.a, Loathe, abhor, detest. 

cron-seanchais, -e, Gil, $m, Anachronisin, 2 
Error in words. 

cron-sgrivbhaidh, -ean, 8.17. Mistake in writing, 

crounich, see cronaich, 

-——————e, see cronaiche. 

cropan, -ain, s.m. Deformed person. 

Tcros, s.m. & v.a. see Cruls. 

crosach, -aiche, œ. Crossing, thwarting, hinder- 
ing. 2 Streaked, striped. 

crosadh. -aidh, s.m. & pr.pt. see croiseadh. 

crosag, alge, -an, 8.f. see croiseag. 2 Frais 
of a fishing-hne. 3** Small cross, 4** Small 
cup. 6**Perversepess. 

crosan, -ain, -an, s.?4. Peevish man. 2**Qross- 
gralued persotu., 

crosau, (Ait) s.m. Puffin, see fachach. 

ach, -aicne, a. Cross, perverse, obstinate, 

peevish, frettul, froward. Gu C., pervererly. 

achd, sJand. Perverseness, obstinacy. 
2 Fretiulness, crossness, 3 Adversity, iuis- 
fortuue. 4 Kickermg, picking A quarrel as 
children, 6 Certain mode of vorxitieatiou, 

crosaula, -ainte, @. Troublesome, vexatious, 
perverse, cross-grained, obstinate. 

-—chd, see crosanachil. 

crosda, a. Cross, perverse, fretful. 2 Obstinate, 
froward. 3 Peevish, ill-natured, 4 Prouibi- 
teu. b ‘Trvuublesome, vexalious. Té ch., @ 
cross femute. 

chd, s.f.ind. Perverseness, fretfulness. 2 
Ill-nature. % Peevishness. 

crosday,,(AH) 8.7. Cross, peevish female. 

crosda-traghad,(AF’) s. see crois-na-lragha. 

crosdan, -ain, -àu, s.m. Cross or peevish person, 
cros-dhan,** s. Acrostic. 

Crosyz, (0180, See Crasg. 

crosgach, -aiche, @ see crasgach. 

crosgag, see crois-na-trágüa. 

crosgag -thraghad,( DC) Uist for crois-na-tràgha. 

crosgau-crasgan, (AF) s.m Starfish, 

crosg-chaiunl,** s.f. Aut:thesis. 
crosg-cheasnachadh,see cruaidh-cheasnachadh. 
crosg-cheasnaich, see crualidh-cheasvaich. 
crosg-lin,** see crois-lin. 

tcrosra, s.m. Cross road, by-path. 

cro-sheilg,(AC) s.m. Hiding-piace for hunters. 

cros-shuileach, -liche, a. Squint-eyed, 

crosta, see crosda, 

crostachd, see crosdachd. 

crostal, -ail, see crotal. 

crostan, see crosan, 

crot, see cnot. 

crotach,(AF) s.m. Curlew, see guilbneach. 

crotach, -aiche, a. Hump-backed. 2** Bandy- 
legged. 8**Crooked-backed, gibbous. Duma 
c., & hump-backed Mun. 

crotach, a. for cuotach, deriv. of cnot. 

d, Stau, Prominence, protuberance. 2 
Unevenness. 8 Hump-backedness, gibbosity. 

crotach-mara, -aichean-mara, 8.f. Curlew, sce 
gnilbneach. 

crotag, -aige, -an, s. f. Crooked litt?» womin. 
2 sort oi plover. 3 Slang term for a sixpenvy- 

iece. 4 Mortar for maxing bariey reaay ior 
roth—eorn’-chrotag, 18 inches in height, i5 








. 














crotag 279 


inches in diameter, ~ith round opening in 
centre about 1 ft. deep, and 7 or 8 inches wide. 
The barley is mixed with water, pounded 
with hammer-shaped mallet,stirred occasion- 
ally, and then dried and winnowed. 

crotaiche, s.f.ind. Gibbosity, hump-backedness, 
2 Prominence, protuberance, 

crotainn, see cnotainn. 

crotair, -ean, s.$1. Crooked, hump-backed man. 

eachd,** s.f.ind, Infirmity of a hump- 
back. Agimeachd 'sa ch., walking like a 
hump-backed person. 

crotal -ail s.m. Awn, husk, pod. 2 Rind of a 
kernel. 8 Cymbal. 4 Geucral name for the 
varieties of lichen used tor producing dyes of 
various shades ot red and brown. ‘he colour 
plouuccd irom these 1s not so line as that ob- 
tained irum the corcur. 5 ‘tne lichen, stone-, 
or beath-parmelia— partietid, saxatilis aud 
om pkatodes, 

ach,** a. Dyed filemot. 2 Like tiiemot. 3 

Like, pertaining to, or aboundieg in, auy of 

the lichens used 1n dyeing. 

-culile,s.m Lung urt—stricta puimonacea. 

-Dauni-niaudauüh-ruadh,S s. m. Club-moss— 
lycopudiiwn wavatum. (badge ot Clan Munro.) 

Crotan, -ain, 8.m. See Gul, 
croitean, & ciddam, 2 box 
of au var. 

fern, bh, s.m. 
See CHO, 

croth, pr.pt.a’ cróthadh, v.a. 
Coulne 1n à Coup, house, 
fola or pen. 

crotuauh, -aidh, s.m. Enclos 
lug. 2i] see crathadi. A’ 
€—, pr. pt. ot cròn. A' c. 
uau, enclosing Lanos ; a’ e 
arbhair, encosing corn, ùn- 
gather corn. 

Ccrotnaid,"* sf. Gravel. 

cruthau, for c«uóthan., 


crònan, -ain, s.m. Cribbage (game at cards.) 














see cruth. 2 s.f. 





£38. Crotal-nam- 
madadh-ruadh. 





fviucbas, ar, $94. Bier. 2 Vehicle. 
teru, s.u. Gore, see cra, 
feruabair, v.a. Chew. 
cruabair,** s.m. Cruucher 2 
mmm "AR One who chews 
eachd,** at Crunching. 2 Chewing. 


cruac, -4lCe, -àiCean, see cuuachd. 
cruacach, -aiche, see cnuachdach. z 
cruac-cùasach, -aiche, see cnuacnd-chasach. 
tcruach, a. Red. 
cruach, -aiche, -an, s.f. Pile, 
of corn or hay. 3 Rounded hill standing a- 
part. 4** Mountain, pinnacle. 5* Stack of 
peats. 6* Heap above the brim of a vessel. 
Gu cruaich faichead tomhais, to a heap of 
twenty measures, c. agus carn air gach taobh, 
hill an: rock on every side ; ithear c. 'na 
breacagan, a stack may be eaten in cakes; air 
cruaich nam beann, on the pinnacle of the 
motniauns, 
€ruaca, pr.pt. a’ cruachadh, v.a. Heap, stack, 
build Iuto ricks or stacks, 2 Accumulate, 
gather into a heap, pile. 
——uch, -aicue, a. Of, or belonging to mount- 
alps, heaps, stacks or ricks. 2**} ull of heaps 
or hilis, hilly. 3 Lofty. 4**Accumulative. 
—adh, -aidh, sm. Heapiug up, accumu- 
lating. 2 Stacking. 3 Heaping above the 
brim of a vessel. 4 Act of neaping or accu- 
mnlating. A’ ace of cruach. "Ga ch., 
okt Vt into stacks, 
—ag, -aige, -an,s.f. Little rick or stack. 
crilachaihy, en. siig. of Cruacuann, 
~—each,** a. Having large thighs or 


heap. 2 High stack 














cruadhmhor 


hips. 2 Of, or partaining to, a thigh or hip. 

cruachan, -ain, -an, s.m. (dim. of eruich) Coni- 
cal hill or mountain-top, &c. 2 see cruachann- 
8 n.pl. of cruach 

cruachann, -ainn, -uaichnean, sf. The haunch, 
thigh, hip. Os cionn na cruchainn, above the 
hip; tharruing e "Lann o 'ehruachainn, he drew 
his sword from his side. 

eruachas, -ais, -an, s.m. see cruaidh-chàs, 

cruachd, -aichd, see cnuachd., 

— ———Ach, -aiche, a. Knobby, brawny. 

alach, -aiche, a. Coarse. 

eruach-luachair,$ see ciob-cheaun-dubh. 
cruach-Phadruig,} Greater plantain, see cuach- 
Phacdruig. 

teruau, -uaid, s.m. see cruaidh. 211Stcne. 

cruadail, gen. 54g. of cruadal. 

cruadal,-ail, s.m. Ditticulty, distress, adver- 
sity, hatuship, danger, trial. z Courage, bra- 
very, Valeur. 3 Virtue. 4 Firmness, haidi- 
hood. 6**Stinginess. GAH) Privauon. Kos 
a's tarr cruadai, « rose (youih) of the gieut- 
est haraihood ; r1 ucha cruadail, on an occa- 
ston of danger, ov when actualy fucony danger. 
(* says it never nieaus Virtue. | 

ach, -aiche, a. Daugeious, hazardous. 
2 Distressiag, gr.evous, uisinal, trying. 8 
Puzzling. 4 Courageous. 6 tardy, euerge- 
tic. 6 Patieut of hardship or pain. 7 Inhu- 
man, barbarous, untecling, ruthivss, bard- 
hearted. 5 Nigyardly. 9 Desperate. 10 Ad- 
verse, 11 Calamitous. Duine e, a naray, en- 
ergetic man; is c. an nie, wis a calamitous 
cer cums: ace. 

————achd, s.f.ind. Hardship, danger. 2 Har- 
dihood, endurance. är bravery. 4ff Firm- 
ness. 

—aich,** 
Inure, harden, habituate. 

——— as, f} -ais, s.m. Courageousness. 

cruadhach, gen. of cruaidb. De sior na c., of 
the best steel. 

cruadhach,** a. Of, or pertainirg to steel, 

-—— — — dh, -aidh, s.m. Enduratiou. 2 Hard- 
ening, drying. 8 Act or stateoi hardening. 4 
Drying, as of grain in a kilu. A’ c—, pr. pt. 
of cruadhaich. —Ath-cb.uadhachaidh, a dry- 
ing-kihn; chan e cruadhachadh ma h-atha 
sealivaiun foipe, looking under the kiln dues 
not dry the corn. 

cruadhachair,** sm. Hardener. 

crundhachas, -ais, s.m. Rigour, hardness, hard- 
ship, trial. y 

cruaunag,-aig, -an, s.f. Distress, difficulty, af- 
Lietion. Au t-aufpaun 'na chruadhag, the weak 
in his distress. 

eruadhaich, pr.pt.a’ cruadhachadh, v.a. Hard- 
en. 2 Dry, parch. 3**Make hardy. 4**Make 
insensible or unfeeling. 

cruadhaichte, past part. of cruadhaich. Hard- 
ened. 2 Parcned. 8**Baked. 4**Made in. 
sensible. 5**Madehardy. 6 Dried. Gran 
c., dried corn. 

ernadhail,** sf. Danger. 2 Hardship. 3 Inhu- 
mauity. 

cruadhbalach, -aiche, a. 
hard, unfeeling. 2 Niggardly. 3**Poor. 
bitficult. 








pr.pt. a’ cruadalachadh, v.a. 
2ttDry. 


Inhuman, barbarous, 
4*® 





—_—_—_——d,** s/f. Hardness, rigour. 2 Nig- 
gardliness. 

cruachalta, a. see cruadalach, 

cruadnas, -ais, 8.m. see cruas. 

cruadlichradh, -aidh, s.m. Austerity. 

cruadhlach, -aidh, 8. m. Rocky acclivity. 2 
Hard stony ground. 3*Hurd bottom, (oglach 
is a soft bottom.) 


cruadhinhor, -oire, @ Corpulent. 


N cruagalach 


criigalach, -aiche, a. Hard, rigid, severe. 

feruaghadh, -aidh, s.m. see cruadhachadh. 

cruaic, see cuuachd. 

eruaich, gen. sing. of cruach. 

cruaidh, -e, «. Hard, firm. 2 Difficvlt. 3 Pain- 
ful, distressing. 4 Scarce, not plentiful. 5 
Narrow-minded. 6 Niggardly, parsimonious. 
7 Severe. 8 Stuff, stubborn. 9 Vexations, an- 
poy:ng. 10 Calamitons. 11 Energetic. 12 
Forcivle. 13 Unreasonable, unjust. 14 Irk- 
some. 15**Made of metal (especially steel.) 
Aite c., a hard place; ni c., a distressing thing ; 
bliadhna ch., @ scarce year ; duine c., a nig- 
gardly narrow-minded man; is eruaidh na dh’ 
fheumar, what’s needed is hard. 

cruaidh, cruadhach, cruadbaichean, sf. Steel. 
2**spear, sword, arms,  8**Metal.  4**Ar- 
mour. 5 Declivity of a hill, hill-side. 6 Stone 
used in place oi an anchor for a small boat. 

used then with the articie, a ehruaidh.] 
J. agus dearg, steel and fire, used to indie 
a fishing-torch at night. prov. Le tarum nan 
cruaidh, with the clangour of arms. 

eruaidh-bheum, -éim, -bheuman [w -bheuiman- 
nan) s.m. Hard or severe stroke. 2 Disaster. 

—nach,-aiche, a. Giving tard or 








heavy blows. 2 Wounding. 3 Satirical. 4 
**Folling. 

cruaidh-chàs, -àis,-an, Sam. Peril, danger. 2 
Hard case, 3 Emergency. 4 Difficulty, dis- 


tress, hardship, adversity. Là mo chruaidh- 
chais the day of my adversity. 

ernaidr -chasach, -aiche, a. Perilous, dangerous. 
2 1rying. distressing. 3 Difficult, perplexiug. 
3**Cx lainitous. 

cruaidb-cheangail, pr.pt. a’ c— cheangal, v. a. 
Bird o tie firmly. 

eruzidl-ch: angal, -ail, sm. Hard bond. 2 Ty- 
ing or binding firmly. A’ c—, pr. pt. of 
eruaidl -cneangail. 

cruaidh-cheasnachadh,** s.m. Cross-examina- 
tion. 

eruaidh-cheasnaich,** v.a. Cross-examine. 

cruaidr-cheisd, -e, -ean [& -eachan,] sf. Hard 
questiou. 2**Riddle. 

cruaidh-chomhrag,** -aig, sf. Hard contest. 2 
Hottest part of the bactle. 

ernaidh-chrabhach,** a. Ascetic. 

crnaidh-chmdheach, a. Hard-hearted. unfeel- 
ing. 2**Niggardly. 

cruaidh-chuing,** s.f. Hard slavery. 2 Rigor- 
ous service. 3 Heavy or oppressive yoke, 

cruaidh-chùis, -e, -ean, see cruaidh-caas. 

——— each, siche, see cruaidh-chàsach. 

cruaidb-fhortan, -ain, -an, 8.m. Misfortune, 





2 
**liard fortune. 
———— ach,-aiche, a. Unfortunate. 
eruaidh-fhuachd,1] sf. Ixeeuness of cold. 
cruaidli-ghleachd, -a, s.m. Hard conflict. 2 


AgoLy. 

cruaidi -ghlaodh,(AH) s.m. Loud shout. 2 Cry 
of pain or distress, 

crualdh-ghreimeach, a, Brawny. 

cruaidi-làmhach, -aiche, a. Hard-handed. 

cruaidh-leum, s. Bound, as when a deer runs 
litiinig all four feet at once. Dh’ fhalbh e’na 
ehruaidh-leum, he bounded away. 

eruudhlinn, see crnailiun, 

cruaidir-1osgadh, -aidb, -aidhean,s.m. Searing, 
branding, burning with a red-hot iron. 

cruaidh-ius, -uis, -an, s.m. Sneez.w »o—achillea 
plarmicu. (Mel D gives white neiiebore.) 

cruaidh-mbuineal, -eil, -an, s.m. Hard neck. 
Stiti, stubborn neck. ^ 

—— ———--———aàch, a. Hard-necked. 2 Stitt- 

necked, stubborn. - 

achd, sJf.ind, Stubbornness. | 


2 





— 








280 


crübag 


2 Inflexibility. 3ttHardihoo '. 

cruaidh-mhnincalaiche, see c- 
nmhuinealaend., 

cruaidh-nai-gte, a. Entangled. 

cruaidh-rithad, -aid,s.m. Hard 
road. 2 U.useway. 

cruaidh-reodhadh, -aidh, s. m. 
Hard frost. 

eruaidh-ruith, v.a. Run hari 
run at iull speed. 2 Pursu 
at full speed. Gadhair ‘gan 
C., hounds pursuing them at 
full speed. 

eruaidh-ruithe, s.m. Swift run- 
ning. 2 Running at fuli 
speed. 3 Race. Each 'na c., e 


a horse at full speed. Zos Cruaidh-luea, 
cruaidh-sorüd**, v.a. Cross-examive. 
cruaidh-serüdadh,** s.m. Cross-examination. 
cruaidh-shìon, shine, [s.m. 4 f.) Dry wind or 
weather. 
cruatdü--hnaim, -e, -ean, s.f. Hard knot, i.e. not 
a rnnumg knot. 2 Deuvie knot. 
cruainnte, see eruadliaichte, 
cruaidn-thbeinn, -e, s.f. Severe affliction or trial. 
2 Straits, distress. 
cruaidh-theud, -an, sf. Wire. 
crnaidh-throd,1f -oid.s f. Daggers’ drawing. 
cruailinn, sf. Mouutainousi10cky ground, hard 
ground. 
cruaihnu,f o Hard, rocky. 
cme -aich, s.f. see cruailinn s. & cruadh- 
ach. 

feruan, -a, a. Of a blood-red colour. 

cruas, -ais, s.m, Hardness, rigour. 2 Trial,hard- 
ship, distress, difticulty. 3 Hardihood, dura- 
bility. 4 Strength. 5 Crisis. 6 Nigyardliness. 

Thug e mach a b-uile ni le a ch. fén, or le 

c. nan doru, he accumplished everything by his 

own eneryy ; €. do curidhe, the hardness of 

thy heart. 
cruas, v. see cnuas, 2 see cruasb, 
cruasachd, see cnuasachd. 
cruasb,** on, Crunch. 
cruaspail,**sf. Muinching. 
cruathas, see cris, 
crùb, pr.pt. a crùbadh. v.n. Sit, squat. 2 Creep. 

3 Stoop, crouch. 4 Coutract, shrink. 5 Crin- 

kle. o*Cringe. Ch. e mar ieógnaun, Ae crouch- 

ed like a lion. 

crub,(AC -a, pl. -annan [& -achan,) s. Bed re- 
cess in the thickness of the wall, with en- 
trance a lictle above the flocr, not to be seeu 
now except iu old St. Kilda houses and shicil- 
ing bothies in Lewis. 2(AH) In old iiighland 
houses, an upright beam. mean? as a support 
to each couple-leg, strongly nailed thereto, 
and extending therefrom to within a foot or 
two of the ground. It was partly or wholly 
imbedded in the masonry. 

crub, -uibe, Gan, s.f. Part of a mill. 
crubh.  3** Contraction.  4**Wrinkle. 

Croup. 6* Lame foot. 7* Halt. 
erüba, gen. sing. of crùb 
crùbach, -aiche, a. Lame, halt, 





2 see 
hé 


cripple. 2 


Awkward. 3** rarely Difficult. - 
crùbach, -aiche, a. Restringent, contracting, 
shrivelling. 


crùbach, -aich, sm, Cripple, lame persoa, 

crùbadh, -aidh, s.m. Bending, act of bending. 
2 Contraction, contracting, sbrinking. 3 
Crouch. 4 Crinkle. A’ c—, pr. pt. of crib. 

ciübadn-féith, -aidh-fh—, -aidheau-f—, Se nt. 
Spasm. 

crùbag, -aig, -an, 8f. Thrum, knot ina theid 
m weaving. 2 Crooked wom . 3tfi.auie 
woman. 4 Hook. 5 Wooden frae placed oa 


crubag 


thing butky, as hay, corn, «c. 


tun is black, and 2 or 4 in. long by 20r à in. 
broad, and quicker in motion than el 

crubagach, a. Cancerons 

crüuag-ghuaii,* st Chaflng-dish. 

crübi che, conp. of crùbach. 

erui aiche, s find. Lameness. 

cru: aidh, fut. aj. a. of crùb. 

crùban, pr. pt. a’ crülan & 2’ cribanadh, v. n. 
Creep, crouch. 2 Cringe. 3 Shrug the shoul- 
ders, as with old. 

erüban, -ain, Sa. Crouching or cringing atti- 
tnde. 2 sitting squat. 3 Creeping. 4 Crab. 
5 Disease in the legs of animals. 6 Any crook- 
edcreature, A’ c—, pr.pt. of crübain. Anns 
&' ch., ina crouching attitude * dean c., crouch 
down. 

erübanach, -aiche, a. Of, 
crouching, creeping, &c. 

erubanachd, s.f. Crouching, creeping, 

erubanadh,** -aidh, s.m. Act of creeping,cring- 
ivg, crouching, or couching. 

cruvan-cait,(Al) s.m. Wild melitot (plant.) 

erüban-coiile,1T s.m. ‘Tortoise. 

€rüban-na-saona, sf. $ loudberry, 
reag. 2 Dwarf wountaiu-bramble. 

crubh, -a, -an, s. m. Horse’s hoof. 2 Claw, 
fanz. 3 Nave of a wheel. [**gives gen. sing. 
eruibh 

«rub^sch, -aiche, a. Having hoofs, &c. 

¢crul-h-an-leoghainn,§ san, Common lady's man- 
tle, see copan-an-drigchd. [McL & D gives 
vervaiu for '*erubi-Ieomnainn.''] 

fernbhas, ais, s.m. Crimson colour, 

ernbhasg,** ez, Crimson colour. 

erubha-ciit, AH) s.m. The tips of the thnmb 
and of allthe fingers, set together in the form 
of a cat’s paw. 

eruhbha-sithne, s.m. 

€i "-coin,$ s.  Fenugreek, see deanntag- 
f" reugach, 2**Birdsfoot (herb ) 

€rubh-leoghaion,$ s.m. Common lady's mantle, 
see copan-an-driüchd. 2**Vervain. 

crubog, see crùbag. 

crubta,** a. Diminutive. 

fcruca, s. Hook. 

€rucach,** ach, s.m. Heap. 

crüdan, see cnòdan. 

crudh, see crudha. 

crùdh, pr.pt. a’ crùidheadh, v.a. Shoe, as a 
horse. 2ttHoop a cart-wheel. 

crudha, cruidhe, cruidhean, s. m. Horse-shoe. 
2tflron heel. 3f*Hoop of a cart-wheel. 

crudhach, a. Shed, as à horse. 2**Well-shod. 
Each c., a well-shad horse. 

erudhan, san. see crubh. 

crugh, see gruth, 

ferugha!ac5,** see cruadhalach. 

cruith,AF) s. Cat. 

criibte, past pt. of crib. Cramped, con- 
tracted, crippled, shrunk, shrivelled, 

erüide.n, s.m. Kingfisher, see biorra-crüidein. 

ernith, et Vaccine. 

cruidh, gen.sing. of crodh. 

erüidh, v.a. see crüdh. 

eriidheach. a. tt see crüidhte. 

crüidhean, -dheinean, s.n. Paw. 2 Small tri. 
fling hand. 3 As much as can be lifted by 
the five fingers of any pulverised substance, 

c üi-lhearg, see crà-dhearg. 

ernidhleag, s.t Rick. 

eruidhte, a. & past pt. Shod. 

erùidse, s.m. see crüisle, O’na dh’fhazadh 
*s a’ chrüids! thu, since you were left in the 
church vauli—Duanaire, p. & 


or belonging to, 


see foigh- 


Haunch of venison. 


2ttShod. 


est 


a horse's back for the purpose of carrying any- | crnimy, s,f. 
6 Crab of a) 
brown colonr, 10 or 12 in. by 5 or6 in. (Pa, -, 


cruinneag 


Berd, curvature. 2 Crovkodness, 

, comp, Gi Crom. 

teruiimeacnda, e. Crow. 2(AF) Sow. 

criumead, -eid, sf. «ee cruime. 

ferunimeadannach, -aiche, o. Whole, entire. 

cruimeal,-ul, sm. "Lal bent person. 

cruinh,j-e,-«eun, sf. Wurm, magot. 2 ln- 
sect, 3**Pain, sutfering. Ghin e cru.mhean, 
it bred worms; bithidh a’ cn. di circounici 
cràidhteach, the lust pain shall be yrvvous. 

cruinnit-chail, sf. Caterpillar. 

-——— cacu, -eicue, a, Wormy, maggoty, full of 
worms. 

cruimneach,(AF) -eich, Rook. 2 Crow, 
see cuaimbheach. 

cruimheag, -eige, -an, sf. Worm, little worm, 








8. fn. 


maggot. 2(APN) Insect, woth, 3" Niggzaraty 
female, 

cruimbeagach, -aiche, a. Wormy, full of mag- 
gots. 


cruimheagan, pl. of cruimheag. 

cruimbean, n pi. of cruimh. 

cruimh-fhiacala, i s. f. ‘looth-ache. 
cnoidh-fiiacali, gu m-boil. 

cruimn-gheal AF sJ. Glow-worm, 

cruunh-guile, sf. Maw-worin. 

eruimh-itieach, -eiche, a. Insectiverous, 

tferunuu-ieiceh.a, Al) s. Sow. 

eruimh-lo.hta, (AE) s.f. Palmer-worm, canker. 
worm, Crunip. 

crutmme-sidodia, sf. Silkworin. 

cruin-shlinnean,s.m. Procuberance on the back, 
roundness of shoulders. 

cruiui-shlinnem, see cruim-shlinnean. 

-——-—each, eiche, a. see crom-sh—. 

feruimthear,-ir, sm. biles, 

crùin, gen. sing. & n.pl of crùn. 

cruineachd, see cruithneachd. 

cruinn, -e, à. Round,circuiar, globular. 2 Well- 
rounded. 3 Succinet, neat. 4 Gathered, as- 
seumbied, collected. 5 Scaut. 6**5ound, sane. 
Ttf Compact, neat. ‘Crainn, cothrum’ ig 
said of a thrcugh train in MacTudla ; cearta, 
cruinn, còmhla, all the whole (ct iojsether; ni 
an t-each mìle a dh'astar 'na chruinn-leum, 
the horse will do a mile galloping ; maide c., 
around stick; tha ’n saoghal c., the world is 
round ;tha ’m pobull c., the peuple are assem- 
bled ; tha 'm barr gu math c., the crop is some- 
what small in bulk; tha ’mbarrc., the crop ts 
&ecurea ` gu C., succinctly. 

eruiune, s.ind., m. in n. sing., f.in gen, Round- 
ness, rotundity, circularity. 2 The world, the 
globe. 3**Circumference,circle. Gu crìch na 
C., to the ends of the earth; cha’n 'eil do leitbid 
Tea ch., your match is not on the face of the 
earth; an C., the world. 

cruinne, comp. of cruiun. 

cruinneacan,** -ain, s.m. Coronal, coronet. 

cruinneach,** -nich, s.f. Dew, mist, fog. 

cruinneachadh, -aidh, s.m. Gathering, assem- 
bling. 2 Assembly, act of gathering or as- 
sembling. 3 Collecting, addiug. A’ c—, pr. 
pt. of crninnich, 

cruinneachail,** a. Accumulative. 

eruinneachau, -ain, s.m. Any round heap. 

cruinneachd,tf s.f. Convexity. 2 see cruith- 
neachd. 

cruinnead, -eid, s.m. Circularity, roundness, 
A’ dol ane, increasing tn roundness. 

cruinneadach,** a. Accumulative. 

cruinueadair, s.m. Geoinetrician, 

cruinneadaireachd, sf. Geometry, spherics, 2 
Geography. 

cruluneadh, -idh, s.m. see cruinne. 

eru'nuesg -eise, -an, sf. Neat, tidy girl. 2°% 
Little pluwp yurng fumale.  3** Kam Wo 


2 {* gives 








erumneag 





man.  Mac-samhuil na cruinneige, the maid- 


H 
en's equal. | 


crumneagach, a. Of, or relating to, young wo- 
men. 2**Pond of young women. 
cruinneagan, -ain, em Mass, heap. 
eruiunea:as,* -ais, s.m. Tidiness, ceouomy. 
cruiunean,* s. m. Ail the fingers put together. 


2 The quantity the fingers can hold. 3**fuft.! erniteanach,** a. 


cruinne-cé, &., m. in n. Sing., f. in gen. 


Gaeb ni 'sa ch., everything in the world, 
criinue-ghrabhair,** san. Geographer. 
eruunnel* -e, a. Tidy, economic. 
cruinneineach, Ach, 8.25. Stout boy, 2 Anything 

roud, $jiisizeable person or thing. 
crninn-edlach, -aiche, a. “killed in spheries. 

2**]iaviug a knowledge of geography. 
cru'nn-eólaiche, -an, s.m. Master of spherics. 
eruinn-edlas, -ais, sam. Address, 2 Knowledge 

of spherics, 3**Geograpny. 4 Geology. 
cruinne-sheoladair,** san Cireumnavigator. 
cruinne-thomhas, -ais, s.n. Geometry. 
cruinne-thomhasach, a. Geometrical. 
cruinne-thoinhasair, s.m. Geometrician. 
erninn-fhad,1i-aid, gan, Oblongness. 
eruinn-fhada, a. Oblong. 2iiCyliudrieal. 
cruinu-ghinasad, ** -aid, s.m. Circulation. [not 

a good word. | | 
cruinnich, pr. pt. a’ cruinneachadh, Col- 

lect, accumulate. 

vene. 3 Make round. 4 Draw close, 
together. 
cruinniche, -an, s.m, Gatherer, collector. 
cruinnichte, past pt. of crninnich. Gathered, 
assembled. 2 Coilected, accumulated. 
cruinnire, -an, s.m. Turner. ' 
cruinn-leum, -lé.m, -an (& -annan,} s.m. Leap 

without a run, standing jump. 2 Bound. 3 

Horse's gullop. 
cruinpseag, -aig, -an, see cnaimhseag, 
cruinn’-thomhas, see cruinne-thomhas, 
crüinte, see crünta. 
crüiitean, n. vl. of crùn. 
ernipean,** ein, s.m. Crupper. 
crùisgean, -einean, s.m. Oil-lamp. 2 Cruse. 211 

"mall jug, pitcher. 41fPotsherd. 

Oladh aa c., oil in a ceruse. 
crùisgeim, see cruisgean, 
ciuisgein-craisgein, see 

crisgein-cràisgein., 
eruüisgeineach,tt a. Of,or per- 

taining to, cruses, &c. 
erüisle, -an [& -ichean,] s.m. 

The hollow vault of a 

church, mausoleum. 
erüisleach, -lieh, -lichean, 

s.m. Reciuse. 2 Sluggard. 

34 {nhabitant of a church 

vault. 4 (AH)Big, slow, 

unwieldy fellow. 
ernislean, see crùisgean. 
erüistean,** ein, s.m. Little 
tawip or cruse, 
cruit, -e, -ean, s.f. Crowd. 2 

Violin. 3 Cymbal. 4 Lute. 

5 see cro:t. [Phe c, was 

& six-stringed instrument, 

used of oid in Scotland 


KÉ 


5 Sweep 





240.Criisgean. 
and Ireland, but now confined tu the mount- 
ains of N. Wales.] C. an aonaich, the ridge 
of the hill; meò'r a’ sguabadh na cruite, fin- 
gers sweeping along tke crowd. 


Qrü.t-chiüil, -ear-c:uil, s.f. Musical instrument, | terunnach, -aich, 8. m. GR: \ 
especialy crowd. 2 Violin. l Dwari. \ Kaes 2 $ AR 

cruiteacnan.** -ain, sm. Dwarf. 2 Hunchback, | erununn, -ain, -an, &.m, see — A 

CTuUieacUADNArA, See erotranepbara. | grunnan. 241.Crùn-easbuig. 


eruitcag, -eice, -an, sfe Litue eruwd or violin. | 


269 





2 Gather, assemble, con-! 


crunn-'uth 


2°*Female performer on the crowd or violin, 
o**iiuinp-backed female. 


ernit ai,** a. Lively, pleasant, sprigltly.. 
cruitealachd, &.f.1nd.  Pieasantuess, liveliness, 
criitean, ein, s.m. Kingtisher, see biorra-crui- 


dein. 


2** Hump-backed person. 5**xuittle 
huuip, 


4** Little ridge. 
Humpbacked. 


Ihe | crnitear,-vir,-an, 8.m. Crowder. 24¢Fiddler. 8% 
world, the earth, the univev-e. [Witn art. an] | 


Musician. 4 see cruitein. 
crniteil, -e, a. see cruiteal. 
crui'ein, 8.5, see cruitean. 
ceruiteineach, -eiche, a. see crotach. 
eiuiteireachd, sf. Performance on the crowd. 2 

Uccupation of a crowd.r. zii Minstrelsy. 
eruil-cun, sf. see biurra-cruideiu. 
crui-fiilidh,** s.m. Lyric poer. 
crüith,** a. Lively. 2 lngeniuus, expert. 8 

Prudent, 
crüithe,** ef, Prudence, liveliness. 
cruitheach, -eiche, a. see crùidheach. 
cruitneachd, s.f.ind. Form, complexion, con. 

formation. 2 The exact figure, identity of a 

crson, 8 Creation. 4 Jhe universe, 
cruitheachd,** s.f.ind. Prudence. 2 Liveliness. 

3 Expertuess. 
crnitneamh,(AF) s.m. Insect. 
cruithear, see cruith-fhear. 
cruith-fhear, -fhir, s.. Creator. 
teruithin-tnath,tt s. l'he Pictish nation. 
cruithneachd, s.n. ind. Wheat—§irisieum Œs- 

tivum. | Smior c., the best part of wheat. 
cruithneackd-buidhe, s.m. bueckwoeat, 
eruithnichd,f} -e, a. Wheaten. 
crülaist,-e,-ean, s.n. Rocky hill. 
erullach,tt see eruthlach. 
crum, v. see crom. 
cruimag, -aig, -an, s.f. Skirret, see cromag. 
crumian, -ain, 8 m. Hip-bone. 2 lustrument 

used by surgeons. 
crumanaiche, -an, s.m. Turner. 
cruin-dubh, a. Black and crooked. Didomhnuich 

c., ;Jaoisgidh mi 'n t-ubh, on Crookeu bak 

Suncay I'll shell ihe eng. This saving is ope 

Secure, Crum-dubh apparently for eruii-dub, 

is known in Ireland as the naine of the iirst 

Sunday in August, buc in Lochaber 1t is ap- 

plied to Easter.—N.G.P. [Crum-dubh was a 

Celtic god, see Voyage of bran, dI. p. 159, 

where the dinnshenchas of Mag Slecht is quo- 

ted as men ioning the Crom Croich, or ki: 

idol of Kaum, Tins Crom Croich is, on pp. 2183, 

214, identitied with Crum-Dubh.) 
crimh, -a, -an, prov. for cruimh. 
ferumhor, a. Bloody, gory. 
crum-shüileach, a, Frowning. 
eruni-shüileachd, s.f.ind. Sourness of look. 
crün, -üin, -üintean, s.m. Crown. 2 Gariand 

of flowers. 3 Boss of a shield. 4 Five-shilting 

piece. 5 Crown of the head. — C. na h-airte, 
ornament in the description of a shield; gu seir- 
bhis a’ chrùin, to the service of the crown ; 
bonn crùin, a Jive-shitling piece. 

crùn, pr. pt. a’ crùnadh v.a. Crown. 

crunadh, -aidh, s.m. Coronation, act of crown 
ing. A’c—, pr. pt. of crun, C. an righ, the 
coronation of the king. 

cerünair,]I -e, -ean, 8. M. 

Coroner. 
crünan, see enódan. 


crin-easbuig, s.m. Bishop's 
mitre. 





cruunüth, -üith, s. m. Quick measure iD 


crunn-lath 


283 


cur 


a RE mmer 
bagpipe-music and formerly in harp-music. 2) cruth-atharraichte, a. d wn pt. of cruth-ath- 
( , 


* Seal. 

erin na h-airte, sf. Ornament in the descrip- 
tion of a shield, 

erün-sagairt,** ëm, Sacerdotal cap. 

crùn-spéithe, s.m. Shield-buss. 

erüuta, a. & pest pt. of cràn. Crowned. 2 Fin- 
ished. 















crap, s.?1, Partof a house, see under taigh. 

erup, see crub. 

wrQp, see crab. 

erüpach, see crühacb. 

erupach, see crubach. 

crüpadh, -aidh, sm. The eroup. 2 see crùbadh. 
A' c—, pr.pt. of crüp. 

cripadh-féitne, -aidh-fh-, -aidhean-, 
adh-féithe, 

crüpag, see crùbag. 

erupag, -aige, -an, sf. Wrinkle, fold, plait, ga- 
ther 


see crüb- 


erupagach, -aiche, a. Wrinkled, plaited. 2 
Causing wrinkles. 3 Like a wrinkle. 

crüpaich, v.g. see crùb. 

crup-phutaz,** -aig, -an, &.f. Blood-pudding. 

crupta, past pl. of crip, see crüibte. 

crusaidh,** sf. Cruse (crüisgean.) 

crusbal, aam, Gaelic spelling of crucible. 

eruscladh, -aidh, -ean, s.m, Wrinkling. 

crusgadh, -aidh, s.m. Box, sinall cofter. 

teru-syaoileadh, -aidh, gan. Bloody flux, dysen- 
tery. 

terut,t} s.m. Hand. 

crutach, see crotach. 

crutair, see cruitear. 

erutaireachd, see cruiteireachd. 

cruth, -a, -an [& -aunan], s. 1n. Form, figure, 
shape. 2 Conntenance. 3 Personal appear- 
ance, 4 Expression of countenance. 5**Per- 
son, 6**Phantom. 7(AC) Pedal harp. Có 
thug dhi ac. ? who gave her her shape ? 

ach, -aiche, a. Real,resembling,identical. 

2**Having shape or figure. 3ttEFuil of shapes 

or forms. Cho c., so identical ; gu C., really, 

actually. 

ach,(AC) sm. Placenta of a mare. 

achadh, -aidh, 8. m. Creation, created 
being, creature. 2 Forming, inventing. 3 
The universe. 4 Creating. 5 Asserting, as- 
sertion. 6 Proof, A’ c—, pr. pt. of cruthaich. 
Anc. féin, the creature himself. 

eruthachail, a. Plastic. 2ttCreative, 

cruthachd, see cruitheachd. 

cruthadair, -e, -ean, see cruith-fhear. 

cruthaich, pr. pt. a cruthachadh, v.a. Create, 
make, form. 2**Figure. 3**Assert. 

cruthaichte, past pt. of cruthaich, Created, &c. 

cruthaidheachd, see cruitheachd, 

crathaidb-fhear, see cruithear. 

crütbaig,(CR) s. f. Distress, strait, necessity. 
ls e an caraid caraid na cruthaig, a friend 
(to one) in need is a friend indeed— W., of Ross. 

eruthaighear, -ir, see cruith-fhear. 

eruthail, -e (&-ala,] a. Snapely, well-formed, 
comely. 

eruthalachd, s.f.ind. Shapeliness, comeliness. 

cruthaun,(AH ) s.m. Form, shape, person. 

eruth-arraichte, see cruth-atharraichte. 

eruth-atharrachadh, -aidh,s,m.Transtizuration,. 
transformation, changing of shape or appear- 
ance, inetamorphosis. 2 Act of transform. 
ing or changing. A’ c—, pr. pt. of cruth-ath- 
arraich. 

cruth-atharrachail, a. Transformative, transfig- 
urative. 

eruth-atbarraich, pr. pt. a’ cruth-atharrachadh, 
po, Trausfigure, transform, metamorphose, 
chauge shape or appearauce 











eruth-chaochlaideach, 


ctuth-lichil, st, 
cruth-shnidhich, ft va. 
fcu, s.f.&m. Champion, hero. 
cu, trreg.s.m. Dog. 


fcua, 


arraich. Metamorphosed, transfigured, trans- 
formed, changed in forin or appearance. 


eruth-ehaochail, pr.pt. a’ cruth-chaochladh, v.e. 


Same meanings as cruth-atharraich. 


cruth-chaochladh, -aidh, -aidhean, Sam. & pr, 


Same Ineanings as cruth-atharrachadn. 
-liche, a. Changing 
forins, causing change of forms or appear- 
ance, of, or pertaining to, transformatiou. 


pt. 


cruth-inntinneach tf -eiche, a. imaginable. 
cruthlach,* s.m. Tall, bent person. 


211 Large, 
8 Ghost. 4 Fairy. 

Belt. 2 Sword-girdle. 
Organize. 


clunisy person. 


2(AF) Moth, (i.e. clothes- 

dog or gnawer.) 3( DU) Dog-fish. 4(WC Tim- 

ber-dog, used in saw-inills, scaffolding, &c. 
Declined thus -— 


Singular. Plural. 
Nom. ci, coin, 
Gen. coin, chon, 
Dat. ct, coin, 
Voc. &choin! a chona ! 


For kinds of dogs and compounds of cà, see 
alphabetical order below. 

C. cuthach, a mad dog ` mial-chü, a grey- 
hound; mo ghaol air do dhà shùil, ged bhiodh 
do bbrù aig “na coin," J like your tuo eyes, 
though ‘the dogs” should have the rest of you; 
mo chuideachd fhéin, '*coin"' Throtairnis, 
my own company, the ** dogs " of Trotternish, 
"the dogs” being a nickname for the people 
of Trotterni-h; dà chaol-chü, two gaunt dogs ; 
taigh-chon, a k2 nel; taigh nan con, the ken- 
nel; c. dubh Eadailteach, sleuth-howund; coin 
dubha Ghriogarach, kind of blood-hcund, used 
of old for tracking deer; also used by their ene 
mies for tracking fugitives of the Clan Gregor; 
coin-fhodair, Jleas—* Mult ; is thea.rrde h-uile 
ca à dhìon a chinn a dhranndan, a doit 


snarl defends his head ; cho sgìth ric, as tired 
as a dog; ise duine a ni, is ecu adh’ innseas, 
he is a man who acts, but a cur who tells. 
Flesh, 


6. Nba 





242, Cuachan Gaidhealach. 
U2 


p os = 


o Medhar E LL QUEMA EE -bhacan 98 


Elesh-hook. 
Fleshy. 
7 TOR 


¢cua-bhacan, -ain, sn. 

+cuabhach, -aiche, a. 

teua- -bhreid, 8f. Itech. 

cuacair, s.m, Slouch. 

cuach, -aich, -an, s.f. Drinking cup, bowl, gob- 
let. 9 Coil, fold, plait, 3 Curl, curl of hair. 
4 Hollow or bosom of a hill. 5 Hollow part 
of à bird's nest. 6A r)Coekle (tisu.) 7tf ail. 
8ttCap. Ma dhiültasiad a’ ch., if they refuse 
the cup. [llis. of cuach on p. 283.] 

Guach, f s.f. Cuckoo, see cubhag. 

cuach, pr.pt. a’ euacltadh, v.a, Fold, plait, curl. 

cuacnach, -aiche, a. Abounding in, of, or beloug- 
ing to, plaits, folds, cups, hollows, pails, &c. 2 
Plaited, folded, curied. 3 Crisp. 4**F rizzied. 
5 Concave. 6"* Like, of, or belonging to, af 
cuckou. Ismath tuig breacan c. orc ! how well 
the folded plaid becumes you / ; an cìrean G., 
their curleu crests. 

cuachath.** -ailh, s.m. Crispation. 

cuachag, -aige, an, sf. Little cup. 2 Little 


curl, 3 Neat young girl. 4 Female with 
curled hair. 5 Spir: al snell. 6 Cuckoo, see 
cubhag. 7tfLittle plait. 


ach,-a'che, see cnachach, 
FNEGE 5 &.f. ind. Crispness. 
cuachaicu, see cuaichnich, 
cuachan, -aln, -An, see cuacnag. 2**Bird's nest. 
Sunn -aiche, see cuacuach. 
euach-bhieoghainn, pl. -an-b —, sf. Milking-pail 
or cog, à v “ssel that super seded the cno-baunne, 
aud is iuself now replaced by the tin pail. 
cuach-chiabh, -an, s.f. Curled lock, ringlet. 
Cuach-chiar, see corn-chiir. 
cuucu-fhalt, -uilt, s.m. Curled hair. 2 Waving 
locks. buch fan, thy fair waving hair. 
curch-zhorm, sf. Remedy for chest complaints, 
male by melumg butter and adding the jurees 
ot certain heros, 
cuaci-mhullach,** s.f. Dome, 


guach-Phadru.g, 8./. Greater 
piantain — péaatago major, 
2 Banana tree. [In SC 
pluces, cruach-Pha.iruig ] 
be -Alz, an, sf. M 
"losh-nhook X A 
2uaca-saraun,** -aian, 8. tn. X Y $ 
Violent snoring. Cd * 
cuu lan,** san. Complaint. 
[cuauh, v.a. Tell, reiate. 


y 


d 






tcuadhaire, -an, Sin. News- 
monger. 
cu ag, aig, -an, see cubhag. da 


quay, -aig, -an, s.f. Awkward 
curve or be: iding. 2 EX- 243. Cuach-Phad- 
crescence on the heel. 3 ruig. 
(AF) Pine grosbcak, see cnag. 4**Kink. 

Ba ae. - -Mche, a. Awkwardly bent or curved. 
having unshapely curves. D Having excres- 
eences or tumours on the heel. 3 Crump- 
footed. 4 Limping or halüng— Lewis. 5(J M) 
Lame— Uist. Is c. ccartas an eucoirich, the 
justice of the unjust is twisted. 

cuagair, ean, s.m. Awkward slovenly man. 2 
Crump-footed man. 3 Lame person—Lewis. 

eachd, &J.ind. Awkwardness, clumsi- 

ness, slovenliness. 

cuagan,**-ain, s.m. Hind part of the heel. 12 
tiHind- -head. 

cuagas, -ais, s.m. Crippleness. 

cuag-chas, -choise, -chasan, s.f. Foot with the 
heel swollen. 2 Crump- foot. 

euag-chasach, a. Very deformed in the legs, 

c€uaicuean, -ean, s.m. Curl. 2 Seam. 3ttNest. 

—ach, -aich, a. Plaited. 

Compact. 4 Curly-headed, 

nests. 








2 Tight. $8 
offAboundinrg in 


cnairt. 


ue» Hemwr ce th, -aidn, s.m. Curling, ptaiting 
act of curling or plaiting, A’c—, pr. pt. uf 
cnaichnich. 

cnaichnich, pr. pt. a’ cuaichneachadh, 
Piait, 2 Frizzle. 3 Crisp. 4 Curl, 

cuaichuic'ite, past pt. of euaichnich. Plaited. 
2 Curled. 3 Frizzled. 

cuaigean, -ein, -an, s.m. Splay-footed man. 2 
(ATL) Small, "squat, sturdy inan. 3A H Term 
of endearment, frequentiy used in addr essing 
a little boy. 

cuall,** s.f. impediment to marriage. (col.) 

email, gen. sing. of eual. 

cuailean, -cin, -an, s.m. The hair. 2 Lock, curl, 
3 Wreath. 4 Sinail st GK, nsed by Hienland 
women for adjusting the breid or head-dress. 
5* Cue, plaited hair. C. amlach, curled Loczs, 

ach, -a:che, @ Ln curis or ringtets. 2 
Of, or beion, sing to, the uair, curls or 2 ing lets. 

'euailem, see cuailean. 

cach, see cuaileanach, 

euaiile, -an [& "àcnan,] s.. Urub, baton, blud- 


v. a 


geon, 2 JPonderous stat or cudgel, pole, 
stake, post, 3 vol. 4 Rafter. adar Ci. 
agus chlacn, both rafier and stone; c. bata, @ 


cowl-staff ; sireadh caimein an coulaich (coun: 
laeh) sanas à thoirt do Che searchin for @ 
mote in straw, hinting to à Jool ; c. maun dar- 
aich, o stuwt oa% sick , is treasa slut Là Ge 
a rod. is more effectuad than a club—meaning 
that moderate punishment is best. 

cuain, -e, sf. Litter of whelpsor pigs. 2 (AF) 
Pup. 3 Corner. t4 Angle. gea. sing. of 

euan. 

te, see cnanta. 

cuair, s. Gaelic spelliug of quire (of paper.) 

cuairealta, ** a. Curious. 2 Exquisite. 

cuairean, s. pl. for cu: rain, n.pl.of cuaran.  ? 

cuairsg, pr. pt. a’ cuairsgeadh, v. a. Koll "p, 
wreathe, twist, wrap, Coil. 

——each, -piche, a. Coiled, rolled, wrapped 





up. 2 Tressy. 3 Circuituus. 4 ‘t'wisted. 5 
Wreathed. ST rolls or volumes, 
each, s.m. Wrapper. 





cuairsgeaith, -gidh, s.m. Volume. 2 Rolling, 
act of rolling, wrapping or coil.ng. 3 Wreatu. 
4 Circuit. A’ e—, pr.pt. of ceuairsz. 

cuairsgeag, s.f. Tress. 

-—ach, see cuairsgeach. 

cuairsgean, -ein, an, s.m. Wrapper, envelope. 
2 Felloe of a wheel. 3 Heart or core of à 
fruit. 49 Roller (bird, )—caracius yarrula. 

cuair-sgiath, -syéith, St. crook target. 

cuairsgte, past ‘pt. uf cuairsg. Rolled, “wrapped 
u 

cuairt, -e, -ean, 8,f. Circle, circuit, cycle, zone, 


circumference. 2 Circulatiun. 3 Round. 4 


Expedition, excursion, tour, journey, walk. 
pilgrimage. 5 Visit, sojourning. 6 Ge 
petition, 7 Circumlocution. 8 Tier of 


pu in shipbuilding. 9 Pummel. 10 Round 
ali or knob in architecture, 11 Whirl, eddy, 
12 Set of tunes on the pipes. 13 Com pass. 14 
**General gathering of sheep. ID Anus. C. 
na gaoithe, the eddy of the wind ; vri chuairt, 
thrice ; luchd-faire air cuairtibh, ‘watchmen on 
their rounds; a’ cheud ch., the Jirst round ; 
cha'n 'eil annainn ach luchd-cuairt air an 
talamh, we are only travellers on the earth ; 
chaidh sinn air ch. do n Ghalltachd, we went 
on @ tour to the Lowlands ; cainnt gun 
ch., langvage without circumlocution ; cC. na 
fola, the circulation of the blood; theirig mu 'n 
cuairt, get round about; mu 'n cuairt de 
dheich bliadhna. about ten years ; air ch., Su- 
journing ; thuir c. air a’ puiob, air an thidnill, 
take a turn at the pipes, at the violin ; car 
wu’n cuairt aca, they taking iurie at it, luke 


cuairt 





ing it alternately, 

euairt, (wau 'n) adv. Round, around. 2 About, 
Chaidh an t-slige mu 'n cuairt, the shell 
went round 

-beoil, sf. Saxboard, see under bàta, E8, 

p.73. 2 Top-stroke, p. 76. 

-heag, sf, Brace-stick of à boat, see 
under bata, G2, p. 73. 

snairt-chaiunt,ff e 3.7. Circumlocution. 

—— each, {ft -viche, a. Circumlocutory. 

mairt char $f Aur, eut, Meander. 

gua rt-cladaich. (AC) sf. Shore circuit, a prac- 
ttc? prevaleul iu the Westeru isles of going 
daily round the sea-shore on the chance | 











nicking uy Hots, 
suairt-claidh, (AC) s./. Circuit of the burial- 
ground, 
fuairt-«dhurrag.f[ sf. Ringworm. 
by the article a’ ch—.] 
atairt duine AC) s.f. Man's time. 
sunirteach, -tiche, a. Circular, ronnd. 
euitous, citeinuanmbi:ut. 3 Ambient. 
of circles  5**Mazy. 
—,i-tich, -tichean, sf, Epidemic dis- 
order. |Precedeu by tlie ariicle a ch—.) A’ 
€1. s.arluid, scarlet fever—Guirloch & W. of 
Russ-shere. 
adh, -aidh, s.m. Surrounding. 2 Act 
of snrronnding, encircling, encompassing, or 
euclosiuy. 3 Whirling. 4 Circulation. 6 
Compass, compassing. 6 Visiting. 7 'l'our. 
s Circuit. 9 Cirenmiocution. 10 Investing. 
11 Euclosure. 12 Siege, besieging. 13(AC) 
Sanctuary, A’ c—, pr.pt. of cuairtich. C. 
gne a general gathering of sheep into a 


{Preceded ` 


2 Cir- 
4 Full 











Jold. e 

suairteachadh-teaghiaich, (AC) s. m. Tamily 
worship.— Ross, Sutherland d Caithness. 

suairteachas, -ais, s.f. Juurncying, tour, round 
of visiting, gossiping. 

suairteag, -eire, -an, s.f. Little circle, 2 Pound 
holiow. 3 Little wairlpool, 4 Bird's nest. 5 
Fillet in architecture, 6 Wheel, 7 Eddy. 8 
Gulf, Eun an fhraoich "oa ch., the heath-fowl 
in its nest. 

suairteagach, -aiche, a. Circular, round, 2 
Eddying. 3 Globular. 4 Circling. 5 Gulfy. 
Aitreabh c., a circular dwelling, a nest. 

sairteagin, s.pl. Fruit of tho apple-tree. 

mairteag-shluganach,** s.f. Litwie whirlpool. 

:uairt-ealaiu,f; e, pt, Cyclopedia, 

suairtean, -ein, s.m. Little circle. 2 Little cir- 
emt. 8 Maze, labyrinth. 4**Whirlwind, 5 
**iiddy. 6 Period in writing (.) 7 n. pl. of 
cuairt. 8 Strakes in boat, see bata, G12, p.73. | 

sua:rteanach,** a. sce cuairteaclt. | 

suairtear, -eiv, -eireau, s.m. Tourist, visitant, ; 
so journer, pilgrim. 

suairt-ediais.tt of. Cyclops lia. 

euairt-zhaoth, -ghavithes, -an, s.f. 
eddying wind. ’Sa chath mar ch., in Leite 
like a whirlwind, 

enairtich, pr. pf. à' curirteachath, v. a. Sur- 
Found, enclose, encompass on all sides, euvi- 
ron, make a circuit. 2 Gather in, collect, as 


Whirlwind, ; 


gae, perrorin, We) Rattl- Letz C. do 
dhleasdanas, do your duty (very unperative? ; 
bituidh sinn a’ cuairteachadh an aoraidh- 
th :'azhia ch, we shall empaye in Junvty wor- 
shin; cha bhi mi fada 'ya chuairteachadh, Z 
shall not be cong in finding tt. 
musirtichean,(AC 3.7, Circuiters, men from each 
of two fami.i:s taken in rotation, chosen to 
patrol the tuwuland at ight to keep deer 
an‘l other vermin from the crofters’ eropa, be- 


fore the sccur.ty of tenure recently obtained : 


285 





( 1 ; cualan,** -nin, s m. 
catlle, $31fVillet, in architecture. Au WO)En- | 


euallach 


hy them enahled them to erect fences roud 
their holdings. 


euaírtiche-searlaid,& et Scarlet fever. — [Pre- 
ceded by the article a’ ch—.] 
cuairtichte, past pt. of crairtich. Surrounded, 


enclosed, eucompassed on all sides. 2 Collect- 
ed. 3 Filleted, in architecture. 

euairt-imneachd,** a, Cirentativa. 

enairt-iwl, 8f. Cyclope ha. 

cua:rt-labhairt.Tt s.m. Circuinlocution. 

cuairtlabhracn, it -aiche, o.  Periplirastic. 

euaivt-liu,** s. Circumference. 

euairt-linn, -linutean, +f. Whirlpool. 

euairt-lüb, s.m. Cireunliex acceut iu writing (&.) 
CH Mound, r. 

enmurt-vihicheil (AC) sf. Circuit made round 
burial-:rounds on St. Michael's day. 

euairt-ràdh, am. Cireumlocution. 

euairt-shàbh,tf-aibh,-an, s.m. Compass-saw. 

cuairt-shcol,** v.a. Circumuavizatoe. 

ceuairt-shiübnlach tf -aicho, a. Cireumrotary. 

cüairt-shlugan, -ain, -au, s.m. Whirlpool, eddy, 
vortex. 

cusirt-shluganach, -aiche, 
witirlpools. 

cnairt-shrutn, -shrnithean, s. f. Whirlpool or 
eddy in a stream. 2 Stream abouuding in 
whirlpools or eddies. 

cunirt-shuilheachadh,** s.m. Circunposition, 

cnairt-thoisich, sf. Brace-stick of a boat, seo 
under bata, G2, p. 73. 

euairt-time.(AC) s.f. Tim»-circuit. 

tcuaith, -e, s,f. The country. 

cual, -uail,-uailteau, s. f. Faggot. 2 Durden 
ofstieks. 3 Dack-load. 4(ATDjlferds, cattle. 
f5 see gual, C. chonnaidlt, a faggot of fire 
wood ` cleas gille nau e, cual bheag is tigli- 
inn tric, the carriers’ motto—littl ab a time 
and coming offent: a’ ch. chro, æ door of heath- 
er, always nsed in the shcep-folds and iu the 
airidhs and in old houses in. Gaeldom—cuir 
ai ch. (or a' ghuai) sn dorus, skut the door 
—(WO.) [**gives “an c. chrò, the sheep fold,” 
which appears to be incorrect both iu gender 
aul meaning.} C. fhraoich, bundle of heather 
of certain dimensions, tied up with rupes 
made of birch switches (a! bharrach.) The 
roves were exactly six feet long with loops ab 
end for tying—(WC.) 

cuala, past interr. of cluinn. Nach cuala mi? 
have I not heard ? ; is fada bho 'n @ chuala 
mi.. ., I have always heard...., (generally 
said of a proverb); tha mi far nach enala mi 
riamh e, well, well, L never heard of such o 
thing ! 

cualach,tf -aieh, -aichean, s.m. Great burden 
of sticks. 2 Act of gathering ;isticks. 3 see 
cnallach. 

, siche, a. Having many faggots, bur- 
dened. 

cuslig, -aige,-an, s.f. Little burden, bundle. 
2 Hard task. Cha ch. sin air, fhat ts no task 
to him. 2 that were no iudignity to him, he 
took it quite as an ordinary affair. 

Little burden. 
3 W. of Koss tor cuaileau. 

cualas. pas! pass. of cluinn. Was beard, Gus an 
c. wu bhuaidh, du we have heard of his 
victory, 

cual chnamh (ATT) 8,7. Anything shattered to 
very small pieces. Bhuail e a’ phoit leia an 
ord agus riun e c. dhi, he struck the pot with 
the hammer and smashed it to atoms. 

cnallach, -aich, s.n. Herding, tending of cattle 
2 Keeper of cattlo. 2(AT )Cattle, stock cattle, 
4 see cuainch. Aeusea'c. na spréidhe, and 
he lending the cattle. — A' 0—, pr.pt. of cuall- 


a. Abounding in 





— 


2 Faggot. 


e 


Ze 


euallach 


aich. 

cuallach, -aich, s. f. Corporation, society, fra- 
ternity, company. 2 Family. 

-——— —-à&dh, -aidh, s. m. Tending of cattle, 
herding. A’ c—, pr.pt. of cuallaich. 

t , Sf. ind. Dependauts, 2 Herding. 
3 rarely Colony. 

cuallaich, pr. pt. af cuallach & a’ cuallachadh, 
*.a. Tend or herd cattle, prov. 

—e,**s.m. Keeper of cattle. 2 Society. 

13 Companion 

cü-allaidh,(A F) s.m. Wolf. 

cuallaidheachd, sg, Society. 

feuallas, -ais, sm. Assembly. 

fcua-mhargadh, -aidh, s.m. 
Flesh-market. 

f¢cuainhor, a. Fat, corpulent. 

cuan, -ain, cuantan [-uaintean & -uanta,] s.m. 
Sea, ocean, the deep. — 2** Large lake.  3** 
rarely Harbour, haven, bay. 4**Deceit. 5** 
Multitude. 6(AFK) Pack of hounds or wolves. 
An t-ard-chuan, the high sea; air ard a’ ehuain, 
on the hiyh seas. 

caauairt, s.f. Pack of hounds. 

cuanal, -ail, -an, s.m. Company. 
singers, choir, 3* Group of children living on 
the best of terms. 4(AC) Flocks, cattle, hor- 
ses, sheep, goats. 

cuanar, -aire, @. Soit, ealm. 2}++Handsome, 
fine, trim. 

cuan-ard, -aird, -an, sf. Stormy, tempestuous 
sea. / 

geren pl. -choireachan, s.m. Gulf, whirl- 
pool. 





Shambles.  2** 


cnanda, see cuanta, l 

enan-mara, (AF Zem, Sea-urchin. 

cuanmhor,?} see cuannar. 

cnanna, see cuannar. 

euanna, s.m. Hill. 

cnannal, see cuanal. 

cuannar. @ llandsome, peat, fine, showy, en- 
gaging, elegant. 2 Snug, comfortable. Bean 
bu eh. càil, a woman of the most engaging tem- 


er. 

eitan-vtiitch GG) sm. Mongrel dog. 

cuanta, a. Able. 2 Robust.:3 Handsome, ele- 
gant, trim. tig! t, tidy 4**Fine, showy, enga- 
ging. 511Prolific. 

euanta, n.pl. of cuan, 

euantach, -aich, s.m. Seafaring man. 
habitant of the sea-coast. 

, aiche, a. Sea-bred. 

d, sfe Daintiness 2**Handsomeness, 
fineness, neatness, tidiness, showiness, 

cuantaibh, dat. pl. of cuan 

euantaiche, s.n. Rover. 

cuantal, -ail, s.m. Group. 2 Rapid torrent of 
langnage, prov. 

cuantan, n. pl. of cuan, 

$cuar, a. Crooked, perverse. ?(AC)Venomous. 

(AC) -air, -airean, s.m. Distress. t2Worm, 
screw, 3tFlesh. Gach c agus cunnart, every 
distress and danger. 

euar,tt pr.pt. a’ cuaradh, v.a. & n. Torment, 2 
Feel sorely. 

fcuara, s.m. Vessel. 

cuaradh, -aidh, s.m. prov, for ciùrradh. 

cuarag, -aige,-an, sf. Knapsack. 2ttSock. 3 
**sShoe made of untanned leather with hair on. 

cuaran, ain, s.m. Sock. 2 Brogue of untan- 
ned skin, commonly worn with the hairy side 
outwards. 3 Sandal. 4 Buskin. 5 Bandage 
on a wounded finger or toe, finger-stall.  6** 
Any part of a shoe. 7 Slipper. Feumaidh fear 
nan cuaran éirigh uair roimh fhear nam bróp, 
the snam cf the sock must rise an hour before 
ike wearer Of shoes—the lacing of the cuaran 


2ttIn- 











2 Band of | 


85 cubhag 


was a tedions a'fair- N.G.P. 
ach, -2iche, a. N.cred, of, or belonging 
to, a sock, brogue or saudal. 2 Wearing hairy 
brognes. 3 Buskined. 
ta, a. Hardy. 
cuaras,-ais, sm Lover. Stocainnean do m’ ch., 
stockings lo my lover.— Lewis. 





cuarsgien, -aiche, a. Wrapped, enveloped. 2 
Crooked, bent. 8 Round, e.reular. 4 I'wist- 


ed, twirled, enrled. 

cuarsgidh, -aidi, s.m. Rolling, aet of roliing. 
A’ e—, pr. pt. of cuairsz. 

cuarsgag,tt -aig, sf. Curve, circo. 2*Eddy. 
g^" Curi. 

ach,ft e. 
euart, see cnairt, 

-——ach, sin. lever. 2 Current. 

-—achadh, see eairteachaiü. 

cuartachitil,** a. Ambulatory. 

cuartag, -aige,-an, see euairteag. 

ach, -aiche, see euairteagach., 
cuartaich, see cuairtich. 

,** sa. Farm servant in the Hebrides, 
whose sole business is to preserve the grass 
and eorn of his employer. His wo zes are, 
grass for four eows, and as much arabie land 
as oue horse ean plough à d harrow. 

euartalan, -ain, -an, 6. Turning -o nd, act 
of turning rouud circularly, cireuit, circuit. 
ous ronie, 

cuartan, -ain, -an, 3%, Maze, labyrinth, 

tcuartughadh, see cuairteachadb. 

cuas, -als, an, 8.2. Cave. 2 Any hollow or 
cavity. 3**i!ollow of a tree. Bu eh. e, it was 
a cave. see cds. 

—ach,** a. Cavernous. 2 Full of hollows or 
holes. 3 Concave. 

——~achd,** sf. Hollowness. 2 Subterraneous- 
ness. 3 Concavity. 

fenasag, -aige,-an, 8.7. Bees’ nest. 2 Honey- 
com) in hollow trees. 3 Apple. 4 Egg. 5** 
Little cave. 

cuasan,** -ain, s.» Hole, cavity. 2 n. pl. of 
cuas. 

cuat, (AC) s.m. Lover, sweetheart, bosom friend. 

cùb, -ùib -an & -a, s.f. Sledge, 2 Pannicr. 3 Box- 

& cart. 4 Coup-cart. 5 Tumbril. 6 Gaelic spell 
ing of coop. Fasan ùr aun am measg nam 
muillear, briseadh nan cüban, e n«w fashion 
among the millers, breaking their car.9, bar- 
rels, &c.—Duanaire, p. 38. 

cùb, -àib, sm. see cùbadh. 

, pr. pt. a’ cübadh, v.n. Croueh,stoop,bend, 
2**Yield. 3**Lie down. 4 Shrink from fear. 
5 Feel the ntinosttorment of mind. 

—a,-n, sm. Bel, 

cüba-chüil, -n-cuii, s.f. Bed-chamber. 

——ch, -aiche, a. Bent. 9 Hollowed. 2 Be 
longing to sledges or panniers. 

——dh, -aidh, sin. Bending. 2 Shrinking for 
fear. 2**Stooping. 3**Yielding. A’ c—, pr. 
pt. of cùb. 

eubadh, -aidh, s.m. Spelling. 

cübae, -aige, -an, s.f. Small pannier. 

cùbaid, -e, -ean, s.f. Pulpit. 2 Precentor's desk, 

h, æ, -ean, S.E Ross & Suth'd for cùbaid. 

cùbainn, Lewis for cùbaid. 

cùbair, -ean, s.m, Cooper. 21jBlack.cock. 8 
Shabby, sneaking fellow. 

each, s. f. ind. Occupation of a cooper. 
Ris a’ ch., working as a cooper, 

cubail,** en, sf. Gaelic spelling of cuhit. 

cubhag, -aige, -an, Cuckoo. 2 Snipe. 3 Wag. 
tail. 4**in derisiun, Person affected with itch. 
5(DU) Silly woman. Guir air rnith ra cubh- 
aige, send on a fool's errand on Ist. April, 
make an April fool of ; greim cubhaize, u pices 


see cuairsgeach. 

















enbhag 





244. Cubhag. 


of food ta be vai-n early, in order not to hear 
the cuckoo' s cuil onan empty stomach ` chuala 
mia’ ch. gun bhiadh muu brout, I heard 
the cuckoo bfore tasting .ood—considered a 
sigu of an unlucky year to follow. 
————ach,** «. Like a cuckoo, abounding in 


cuckoos. The saying ‘‘cho 

ciombach risa’ chubhaig," which meaus, as 

ful! of itch as the cuckoo, should doubtless be 

“echo clowuheach ris a’ chubhaig,” as downy 

as the cuckoo, 

-chiuiüse, sf. Tell-tale. Ge hinn leinn 
2’ cuubnag cha vhinn leinn cubiag-chluaise, 
we like the cuckoo but not the ** ear-cuckoo.” 

cubhay-ghliozarach,** a.f. Snipe 

cu^haidh, -e, a. Decent, fit, becoming, seemly. 
2* Wereditary, having a just claim to. 3 
**Ccmpatib'e Cha bu ch. dhuit, you had no 
fumiy right to it; tha thumar bu ch. dhuit, 
pou ure just as one would expect (from such 
parenis); zar hu ch. do mhnathan pòsda, as 
boli ne) married women, 

tcbhuidlt st Honour. 

cubhaidiieacud, sf. Sevanliness, decentness, fit- 
nes, decency. 2** Compatibility. 3**Just- 


Dess. 

fcuchasil, s.m. Religions habit. 

enbuaing, -ean, 8.7. € a. see cumhang. 

tou. hairs. 6,f. Oati. 2 Conscience, 

teubnal, -ail, san, Religious habit. 

cubhaaon, -aiune, @ Drog, for cumhang. 

cnbhar,** -air, $34. Coruer. 2 see cobhar. 8 
(AF) IZawk, see cabhar. 

cubua-~,** -ais, san. Word, promise. 2 Tree, 
block. 

teubhuachail, see cüba-chnil. 

cubhrag,tt -aig, -an, sf. Luant's flannel shawl. 

cuyhraicu,** v.a. Aromatize. 

——te, past pt. Aromatized. 

cùbhraidh, e, a. fragrant, balmy, perfumed. 2 
Having a pleasant flavour, Fàile ch. de d’ 
anail, a frayrant smell off thy breath ; 'sa 
bheithe ch., in the fragrant birch ; rinn mi mo 
wo leabadáh c., Z have perfumed my bed. 

eachd, s.f.i4d. Frayrauce, perfume. 

chburaig,t -e, -ean, see cuibhrig. 

ouulraiun, -e, -eau, Sf. sae curainn. 

-—-— ich, see eürainnich, 

cuchailte, s.m. Seat, residence. 

eucnair, £.. Hunter. 

cu-chaorach,(AH) s.m. Sheep-dog, 
colhe. 

cù-choiHe, (AC) coin-ch—, s.m. Wolf, 

eu-chullain,.$.4n. Yellow bed-straw. 

cu-cuamna,( AF) am. Louse. 

cudag, see cudainn, 

cudai, -e, -ean, see cudainn. 

cudaiun,-e, -ean, s,m. Cuddy, coal-fish till 
the New Year, saithe, lythe, Ze, 

cùdainn, -ean, sj. Tub or dish of large size. 
vti Lowi. 3 Tumbler with round or pointed 
bottom, to prevent its being set down till) 
quite empty, Clach na cùdainn, the rocking- 
stone of Inverness. 


2 Crump-footed. 


?9 














Shepherd's 





287 


eà.h,it a. Pertaining to large tubs or|cuibueas, -eis, 8, mM. 


euibhea« 





| dishes, 

| teudal, a. Dad, wicked. 

cudal, s.m. see cuiteal, 

tcud:m,** -aim, s. m. Scar on the head. 
Fault in tlie hairof the head. 3 Daudriff. 
C. an t-sléibhe, the mouniain eruption. 

jeudamach, -aiche, a. Frail, corrupt:ble. 
Liable to ervor, fallibie. 

cudamachd,** sJ.ind. Frailty, fallibility, cor- 
ruptibleness. 

cudainaiseacti,** a. 

cudan, see cudainn. 

fcudarman, -ain, s.m. The vulgar. 

cu-donn, pl. coin-donna, s.m. Otter, prov. 

cudrom, see cudthrom. 

cudthrom, -uiln, sn. 
Burden, load. 3**Importance. 
orm, lee 04 me. 

——ach, -aiche, a. Heavy, ponderons, 

weighty, burdensoine. 2 Important, moinent- 

ous. 8**Grave, sedate. 4**Just. °S anu a 

tha"n gnothach sain e, that is a momentous 

affair. 

—achd, s.f.ind. Weightiness. burden- 
someness, 2 lmportance,gravity. 3 Weighing. 
—aich tf v.a. Poise. 

—— -siüdain, s.m. Pendulum, 

— -socrachaidh,(AH) s.m. Ballast. 

cù-dubh (CR) s.m. Blood-hound—W., of Ross-sh. 

ceu-dur,(AH) s.m. Otter. 

cü-eunaidh,(AF) s.m. Pointer, 2 Spaniel. 3 
Setter, 4 Retriever. 

cu-fada,(AF) s.m. Greyhound. 

eü-lioun,(AF) A, 8.2. Greyhound, 

cü-fionn,/AF) e.m. Moth. 

cù-faoi AC) sm. Wolf. 

cu-fàsacti, ; 

Dr mem iar sm. Wolf. 

euü-feoladair, (AF) s.m. Bull-dog. (lit. flesher's 


2 


2 


Epileptic. 


Weight, heaviness. 2 


Leig do ch. 














dog.) e 
cn-f iud, see cu-fionn. 
cugainn, see eugann. 


euzallach,(AC) a. Precarious, unstable, uncer- 
tain. Is c. an t-sealg, hunting is precarious. 

cuzalaidh,(MMcL) a. Liable to accidents. 

cugaun, -aiun, san. Rich milk. 2 Milk set for 
cream. 3 Delicacy, kitchen. 

cugar,(AC) s. m. Male cat, tame or wild. 2 
Hero, gallant, champion. 

cugarbhad, see cugar, 
chief of the cats. 

cù-gèarr, AC) s.m. Wolf. 

cu-ghearraidh,(WC) s.m. Critic, backbiter. 
Nach b'e sin na coin-ghearraidh ! what bock, 
biters they were! s 

cugbaiuneaci,** Ach, s.m. Mixing together, as 
ot wool. 

cuzhainnaich,** v.a. Mix together,as wool. 2 
lighten, circumseribe. 

cü-s0rin (AF) s m. Greyhound. 

cü-gortach, (AF) s.m. Greyhound. 

cughann, d, see cumbang, 

————,** gun. Bay. 

achadh,** s.m. Circumscription. 
¢engull, -uil), see cochull, 


C. mór nan cat, the 


cüà-ian, sce cù-eunaidh., 

cuib, s. (AF) Dog. 2Greyhound. 3**Phial. 
fcvibeanacn, a. lll-favoured. 

cuibh, ar *Muzzle-bar, splinter. C. mhor, 


one jor four harses; gearra cu., one for two 
horses— 4siagy, Lochaber, Cowal & mainland of 
A rgyZl. 2 (AF) Dog, greyhound. 4 see cuidh. 
fenibue, -àn, 8.35. sue cuithe, 
cuibhe,ta. see cubhaidh. 
achd, see enbiiaidheachd. 
cuibhnall, see cuidhea!l. 
Luough, sufficiency. 





ge 





sloderatiou. Cha'u ei siu ‘va ch., thut is De, 
yond all moderation ; Genau eil thu "nad ch., 
you are not easily deult with, (Scots, ye'r nae 
eanuy) ; tha e. air a h'uile rul, gu ruig òl a’ 
bhrochain, there is reason in everything, even 
in supping porridge. 

cuibheasach, -aiche, a. Snfficient. 2 Tolerable, 
unddling, average. 3* Lasily dealt with. 
ach, -aicli, sm, Moderate person. 

—achd, sf. Average. zff3sce coibheasachd. 

cuibhill, v. see cuid.cal. 

cuibhioll,cuibhle, cuibhhehean & cuibhleachan, 
$.f. see curiheal:. 

cuibhle, pd. -achan & -ichean, see cuidbeall, 

„U. see eunlheall. 

adh, -leidh, s.m. & pr.pt. see enidhleadh. 

en:bhleag,. DC) -an, s.f. Beam of a kilu— Uist. 

euibulean, see cuidiiican. 

cuibile-nihbór,, AF) Moth—Arran. 2(CR)Night- 
jar— Jura. (Preceded by the article e eh, 

i hlieli, v.a. see cui iheall. 

cuibhlig, prov. for cübhriag. 

cuibhne, pl. an & -uicheun, $& f. Antler of a 
deer, Z Dart. 

cuibhreach, -rich, -richean, 8. m. Bond. 2 
Chain. 3 Trammell. 4*iarness of a plough- 
horse. ó**Cover, 6** as æ co lective s., Slay- 
ery. Ane. cruaidh, in hard chains, in slavery; 
c. righrean. the bond of kinys. 

ii, aidh, s m. Binding, fettering, 
act of binding or fetteriug, bondage. 2 En- 
tangling, 3** Clothing. A’ c—, pr. pt. of 
cviblirich. 

cu:blirich, pr.pt. a’ cuibhreachadh, v.a. Bina, 
fetter, chain, put in bonds or ii ons. 2 rn- 
tangle. 3**Cover. 

-— —— —te, past pt. of cuibhrich, Chained, fet- 
tered, bound. 2 Entangled. 3 Covered. 

cuibhrig, -e, -ean, s.m. Coverlet, plaiden, 
eourse homeanale flannel, quilt. ZEIL), 
Cover. C. poite, a wooden pot-lid ; c, bolla, the 
wooden covering lid af a buoy; c. na poite bige 
am beul na poite móire, the lid of the little 
yot in the morth of the large pot-—said of auy- 
thing very uusnitable. 

caibhr ir, gr.?t. a’ euibhrigeadh, v.a. Cover, con- 
ceal, hide, coat. 

vach tt a. Pertaining to a lid, cover or 





ve 











quilt. 
eadh, -vidh, -gidhean, s.m. Cover, cov- 
eriag, act of covering. 2 (DC) Bed-cover— 
Uist, 





te, past pt. of cuibhrig. Covered, con- 

cealed, hidden. 2 Restricted. 

cuibhrinn, -ean, & f. see cuibhrionn, 2 see 
curainn, 

—eachadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Welt, 
cover. 2 Binding, act of binding. 3 Welting. 

cuibhrionn, -inn, pl. -ean &-an, s.n. Part, por- 
tion. 2 Lotofland. 38 Allotment. 4**Allow- 
&nce. 

cuibhseach, -ich, see euibheasach. 

-——d,tt s.f.ind. Average, mean, 

touibht:, a. see cubhaidh. 

teuice, adv. see chuice. 

cuichean,(AH) -ein, s. m. Private confidential 
interview, téte-à-téte. 

cuicheanachd, s. f. Gentle banter, teasing of 
lovers, hob-nobbing. 

cuid, irreg. 8. f. Declined thus:— 








Sing. Piur. 
Nom. Mie d codaichean, 
Gen. colach, chodaichean, 
Dat. cuid, coda&ichean, 
Voc. a chuid! a cuodaiche ! 


Share, part, some. 2 Victuals, food. 3 Pro- 
perty, effects, means, substanee. 4tt Lodg- 


cuibheas PA 


Ki 


8 end 


LA —— BE 
ing, quarters. 6 ** ibe privy parts. €(AU) 
Clothes of deceased persons, which bec me 
the perquisite uf the clergy. Ise seo mo cn.. 
sa, (his ts mine; a’ chuid a’s wó, the greater 
pert, cud do chroinu, your chance, your lot; 
wo elt. sa dhetn, my part of it; e odi eh, @ 
night's entertainment or louguig ; e. an nath, 
what serves for a meal of qat; wo cu. de ‘ute 
sacghal, my all; air sou mo chodach-sa dheth, 
[better air mo chuid-sa aheth] for my purt of 
it; e duiue chloinne, the shure of one of w 
family, cha toir muir no monadh a ch bho 
dhuine sona, dangers by sea or (ami cannot 
deprive à foriwnate man of his lot; a en. a; hae, 
[in Poolewe they say, a chuid mac] his sons; 
4 €. rave, her sons; €. de na daoine, sume of 
the men ; a’ eh. eile, the other part or the rest; 
am bbeil do lamhan-sa glan’ths wo eli.-sa 
Salach, are your hands chan? my own are 
dirty; b'e a bni 'buairealh an Fhreasdail cuid 
a’ chunnart a ghabhail d a leithid sin a «xr 
aite, it were tempting Providence to run such @ 
tremendous rise by going to such a place ; a 
pàigheadh eui fiach na mua agam, such is my 
(ot, to pay my wife's aevts. (Lue pecuilar use 
of cucd in the last two examples shouid be 
noted, as it is not, as is usual im such a cons 
text, associated with possession.] A e a.aicu, 
her litter , a’ gharbh ch., the greater purt; an 
dà chuid......agus..... , oth... a and. EE 

Aou chuid...... NO....., eher... EN 
[when associated with a negative verb —nei- 
ther... nor....] Dara would be impossible 
in the following examples: 'nuair a chaidh 
an sgeulachd mu 'n euairt, cha robh aon ch. 
aige sgeulachd no oran, when tie tale went 
round, he had neither tale nor song (to give) + 
nach labhair thu ri Iacob aon chuid math no 
ole, that you speak not to Jacob either good or 
bad ; gwn d’ nnn e aoradh dhaibh, aon ch. 
do ^n ghréin, no do 'n ghealaich, no do..,tiut 
he worshipped them, eituer the sun or the moon, 
or....; ni 's oillteile na bba i aon ch. do 
Tholamsan nodo Bhreae-ghlun, more repni- 
sine than she was either to T. or £5. , cha d’ 
fhoghlum e eólas, air an aon chuid no air a” 
ch. eile, he got no learning, either the one uay 
or the other. [* Aona chuid” which is owt 
met with, is simply the product of a draw hug 


pronunciation. j 
An dara cuid....no..... e either ......07F 
"— € ; an dara c, bithidh fuath sige do 


neach aca agus gràdh do 'n fhear eile, no.., 
either he wili hate the one and love the other, or 
...., andara c. deanaibh a’ ehraobh wath 
agus a toradh math, no dcanaibh ...., either 
make the tree good and its fruit good, or make 
....; nuair a tha mian am bruadair, tha mi 
an dara c. ri camanachd air an raou, no ri 
luingearachd air a’ chaol, no ri...., when 4 
dream, 1 am either playing shinty on the plain, 
or boating on the narrows, or ....; éighibh le 
guth ard, oiris dia e tan dara c. tha e 'beaetd- 
smuainteachach, no tha e air toir, no ..., cy 
aloud, for he is. à god! either he is talking, or 
heis pursuing, or.... [Dara does not asso- 
ciate with a negative verb.] 

cuid, s. indef. Some, certain number. 

——enachadh, -aidh, s.m. Help, relief, assist- 
ance, aid, act of assisting or helpiug. A’c—, 
pr. pt. of cuidich. 

——eachaidh,** a. Auxiliary. 

——eachail, e, a. Assisting, helping, auxili 
ary, supporting. 2 Prone to help. 

——eachair,** sm, Auxiliary, helper. 

—eachd, Op, Also, likewise. z Together, in 
company. 8 In contacta "Lhàinrig esau a, As 





cuid 





com» too; c. rnuul, diong with me; theann ian 
Jemaire c., she syueezed the fleece together. 

Cuideachd, an, s find, Troop, company, throng. 
2 Society, interconrse, 38 Friends, relations. 
4**Private company, "Nam Ch., in my com- 
pony; c. shaighdearan, a company of s ldtere ; 
ach. a’ chridhe, my dear people ` bheir e e féu 
as pach c. le ecol 's le conaltradh, Ae wouid 
acquil himself well in any company in music or 
conversation ; y «d a tha e math ’ga thoirt ién 
á c. tha e motha 's math 'ga chuir ién ann, 
though he can acquit honself well in company, 
he is better at getting himsey invited—he is tue 
forward or cheeky ; cha’n aun de ’m cb. tha, 
you are not of my fluck—an imitation of the 
coomy of a pigeon. 

—aich, Gë, Accompany. 

—all,-e, d. Socal, entertaining, socia- 

ble. 2 Assistant, lielpíul. 

€u'ucag,-eig,-an, 85. mall portion. 2tt 
Stull effects. 3 Spider. 4,AC, see cuiteag. 
€uiueàl, -eil, 5.24. see cuidealas. 

ach, a. Proud, hanghty. 

aciid,** sf. 1 ride. 

as, -dis, san. Pride, conceit,forwardness. 

cuideam, pruv. tur cudthrom, 

ach, -d.cue, piov. for cudthromach. 
eu:dear rium, piov. ler cuide rium, 

Cu.deil,-deaia, d. Proud,cunccited,forward,vain, 

rim, 

"n ri, prep. With, along with, C. rium, along 
with me; c. riut, along wilh thee ; c. ris, ony 
wth Am. e ithe, conj with her; e. mun, 
Qiu wil us; c. ribh aluny u iih you ; C. riu, 
G@ony with them ` cri cheile, with cach other, 

cuich f-e,-ein, sf. Enuvusure, 2 Cattle-fold, 

sch -— Ae fu, 3 bNciwsed fticld— Erg. RLC) 
lrench, huliow arabcially furmed à» a shel- 
tered piace vo nik cows 1n on tue grazing 
grouud, anid sie tbe troibie of driving t hein 
tu and irom tne byre. “h word euters large- 
ly nuo pisce-namies— Lest. 

fcuidhbrcacu, -eiche, @. see cubhaidh, 

émluuc, see cuie. 

















fcuidaeachd, sJ.  Decency. 


WË Nt] ZE 





x 


$45. Cuidheall-shniomha, (MJMoD) 


289 








cuidheall- shriomha 


cuigheall, -dhill [& cuidhte], -dileachan, 8. f. 
Wheel. 2 Coil. 285 Spinning-wheel, see 
cuidheall-shiioniha. 4**Keel, varn-windlass. 
5**W hirl, whirling, reeling. 6** Cock of hay. 
7 Cele. $& Circular motion. — Saor-chuidh- 
leasachan, @ wheelwrisht. 

——, pr. pt. à! cnidhleadh, v.a, Wheel. 2 

Roll 3 **Whirl, twirl. 4 Hurl. 5 Coil. 6 

Gather into cocks, as hay. 

—aireachd, s.f.ind. Wheeling. 2 Roll- 

3 Spinning. 

—— — — -iarva, s.f. Hank-reel. 

WE ES gen. cuidhle-, s.f. Spinning- 
wheel, 

PARIS OF A SPINNING-WHERL :— (ill. 245.) 

1 Teic, seic,tt flyer. Séicle— Uist, 

2 Maighdeanan, gàirdeanan. siny. maigh- 

8 lucnair na cicns, nare. [deag « maice ig. 

4 Rolan, wheel which turis the flyer, Rath- 
an— Poolewe (WO.) 

5 Piorna, Drone, 1 pirn, reel. 

6 Bann beag, little band. LAT bhann bheag, 
(s.f.) in Poolewe (WC.)) 

7 Dealgau..spindle. 

8 Cluas ra cuidhle, ears, rests of leather 
fixed to maighdeanan, and throngh which 
dealgan-an-t-seic  revolve. [A’ chluasag— 
Poolewe (WC) 

9 Iuchair, key. 

Beairt mheadhon, bar. 

Stoc, main body. 

12 Com, body. 

13 Aisnean, aisnichean, ribs or spokes of 
large wheel. 

14 lnchair, pin for tightening bann beag, 





ing. 


10 
11 





(3 MeD) 


216. Cuidheall-shniomha. 


Parts as shown in illnst. 246 : 

1 Bann mór, driving-belt or band of large 
wheel. [A’ bhann mhér (s.f.)in Poolewe (WC.)] 

2 Réim, rim of large wheel. 

3 Na h-eich, supports of large wheel. 

4 Maide-sinbhail, claidheamh, connecting- 
rod, one end of which is attacked to the crank 
of the large wheel, and the other to the foot- 
board. An t-amadan -(WC.) 

6 Deil. crank, Deil is aisil, crankzand azle 
of large wheel. 

6 Aiseil an-t-seic axle of flyer. 

7 Bann beaz, title band, regulatine string 
to prevent piru from revolving. [5.f.— Poolewe." 


cuidheall-shuiomha 

s Roileinean, rollers, 

9 Teic, seic, flyer. 

1) Maighdeanan, gàirdeanan, supporters of 
Auer, resting on beairt-rnvewthon, 

iit Suilna cuilhie, eye, hole in the axle, 
throush waich the unspnn wool passes. 

iv Ctoimh, wool. 

13 sSuath, thread wound on pirn. 

14 Beairt mheadhon, bar on which the maigh- 
dean rests. 

15 Stoc, com na enidhle, maide-buinn, body. 

16 huchar na ciche, Fey m form of a bandle 
projectiug from end of body. 

17 Stoi-cois, sedl-cois, looht, foot-board. Siol- 
C4i«e,(J M) ; cleasachan. 

13 Casan, legs. 

19 Cioch, round piece of wood, that attaches 
the thread-making part to the body. 

20 Roth na cuidhle, fywhees. 

£1 Dann-ranm-maighdeanan, cord tying the 
tops of the supports (waizhdeanan,) and to 
which the bann beag is attached. 

22 Glas, lock. 

23 Dealgan na teic, spindle of flyer. 

24 Bior na banna bige, the lension-key, stor 
regaüliting the fineness of the thread (WC.) 
25 Fiaclan na teic, the teeta of the flyer. 
[We are indebted to Mr.D. Murray, Aberdeen, 
tor many of above terms, and to Mr. M. Mac- 
Donald, Stornoway, for terius and diagrams. ] 

cuidhil, see cuidheall. 

cüidhle, gen.sing. of cuidheall. A’ biadhadh na 
c, Feeding the wheel. 

cnidlileachan, n.p. of cuidheall. 

endbleulh, -lidn, s.n. Wheeling, coiling. 
e--, pr.gt. or cuidheall. 

2uidhileag,** -eig, -an, s.f. Cock of hay. 

stidhlean,** -ewa, s.. Little wheel. 

enidhieurachd,** sf. Wheeling, rolling. 2 
Harling. 3 Spinniug on à wheel, 

shidhle-inhér, (AF) s.f. see cuibhle-nmhór. 

cuidl;iidh, fut.aff.a. of cuidhil. 

*urdhte, a & past pt. of cuidhtich, Quit, freed, 
rid of; tha mi cuiteas e (cuidht' agus e) J 
liter done with him, om free from it. 

sninhteach, -tiche, e. That quits, frees, leaves, 
abandons, or 2 recompenses. 

aveintesehadh, -aidh, San, Qnitting, parting 
with, abandoniug, leaving. 2 Act of quitiing, 
conlpensating, repaynig. 3 Compensation, re- 
compense. A’ c—, pr. pt. of cindhtich. 

mudhteag,(CR) sf. W. of Koss for cuiteag. 

minhteas, s.m. Quitt&nce, receipt, 

2uidhtich, pr.pt. &/ cuidliteaehadh, v.a. Recom- 
peuse, restore, repay, reqnite. 2** Consign. 
3 Quit, abandon. 4**Avoid. 

—eas, fut, puss. of cuidhtich. 

—te, past pt. of cuidutich. Left, aban- 
doned, forsaken. 2 Quit of. 

suidich, pr.pt. a’ cuideachadh, v. a. Help, as- 
sist, relieve. 2 Counteuance, fayour. C. has 
often the preg. le, simple or compounded, put 
after it, as, c. le Seumas, help James; c. leam, 
help me. 

e, -An, s.m. Helper, assistant. 

idh, fet. aff. a. of cuidich. 

te, past pt. of cuidich, Helped, assist- 

ed, aided, 

cu?dreach, -riche, a. Forcible, powerful, 2 In 
partnership. 3¢tCorroborative. 

cuidreamach, -aiche, a. see cudthromach. 

cuit ri, see enide ri, 

c .ilriln, a. Common. 

eaii-roinge, sf. Portion, share, lot. 

teuife, -an, s f, Pit. 22 Deu. 

calle. (CH) s.m. Ninny, Scots, coof. 

an, ob. sec cuile, 


A’ 








— 








-— 








290 





cuilceach 





cuifean, -ein, &.3n. Wad o? asum. 

Tcuig, s.f. Counsel, advice. 2 secret, mystery. 

cùig, a. see còig. 

cuig-hhile, see coig-hhi'eich. 

chiy-bhileach, see coig-bhi.cach. 

chig-deng, a. see còig-deug. 

cüigeadh, o. see còigeamh. 

c'uige, see chuige. 

tcuiyead, adv. ‘Therefore. 

chigeadh, see coigeaunh. 

cuigeal, -eil & -alach, pl. -an & -aichean, 8. f. 
Distaff, hand-rock. 2**f'ax put on a dista, 
Greim de ’n chuigeil, hold of the distag ; c. is 
fearsaid, distaff and spindle ; cinneag, spindle 
— Sutherland. 

ach, -aich, s.f. Wool or flax prepared for 

the distatf. 2 Task in spinning. 3 gen, sing. 

of cnigeal. 

—ach, -niche, a. Of, or belonging to, & 

distaff. 2 Having distaffs or rocis. 

— -an-losgainn, s. f. Kary orchis, see 
maoth-ürach. 

—— —— -va-ban-sithe,$ s.f. Great reed-mace, 
see bodan-dnbh. 

—nan-lo gann,S s. f. 
see bodan-dubh, 
an-losgainn.] 

chigeainh, see còigeamh. 

cüizcar, see còignear. 

cuigeil, gen sing. of cuigeal. 

euigh,(AF) sm. Bird. 2 Cock. 

tenign, sf. Ded chanber. 

cu'gnear, see coiguear. 

cuizse, sf. Whig. Na bha dh’ armailt air a 
ehuigse. what there was of an army turned 
whiguyisi—Donnachadh ban. 

enigseaeh, a. Whigyish. 

A, SP, Whiggism. 

cuil, s./. Fly, (for euileay.) : 

cùil, -e, pl. -tean (& -ean,] s.f. Corner. 2 Niche, 
nook. 8 Couch. 4 Closet, any retired, ob- 
scure or private place. 5** Angle.  Mheall 
thu le d^ bhrìodal cùil, thou didst deceive with 
thy secret flattery ; cüil-uhóna, peat-ceruer 5 
c. a’ chadha, a corner in the kitchen ; seomar 
cC., @ Lack room, an inner chamber. 

enilbh, s.f. Capital. 

ean,(DC) s. m. Cup-shaped whirl in & 
stream or edly, 

cnilbhear, -eir, -an, 














Great reed-mace, 
[Not the same as cuigeal- 








s.m. Gun, fowling-piece, 

musket. 2**Calibre or bore ofa gun. 3 CR) 

Anything big—W. of Ross-shire, C. mór 

bhoirionnaich, a very big woman ; c. sgéine, & 

carving knife, cleaver ; le’ cuilbhearan gleus- 

ta’nan taimn, with their cocked guns in their 

hands. 

eart, -eirt, -eartan [& -eirtean,] s.f. Wile, 

trick, deceit, ennniug, craft. 

E eartach, -aiche, a. Deccitful, fraudulent, 

wily. 

T 8. f. ind. Craftiness, wiliness, 

trickiness, deeeitfulness, cuuniug. "Nau Q 

féin, in their own craf'iness. 

eartaich, $i v.a, Juggle. 

eartair,** s.m. Artificer. 

cuilbheireach, -riche, a. Having guns, armed 
with guns. 

cuile, -e, -ean, &.f. Reed, b»lrush, cane. 2 Cane 
to bottom chairs with, cut from the? govhal- 
luachair. 3(MMeD) Bamboo. ` Is 1uór toirm 
cuilce gun dol troimhpe, the storm of re^ds ig 
loud till you go through thew—nmore formida- 
ble in sound than iu realiuy ° cobnau cuilce, 
an ark of bulrushes. 

-—— -clirann,$ -chroinn, 8.m. 
see cuilc-mhilis. 

-——each, -ciche, 

















Sweet flag cane, 


a. Reedy, abounding in 


LI 


enilceach 


reeds or bulrushes. 

leesch, -e:ch, s.m. Reedy fen. 2 Any place 
where reeds grow. 3**Crop of reeds, 
Veil. 5°*HMoul. 6**steeple. 

eag (AF) sf, Reed-warbler. 

—— eau, s.m. see cuilceay. 

earnach, -aich, s.f. Place where reeds 
grow. 

builc-fheur,$ s.f. Wood small reed—calamagros- 
tis epiyezos. 

Icuilcheaunag, -aig, sf. Bribe. 











247 .Cvilc-fAeur. 


euilc-lorg,** s.f. Cane. 

eui:c-inhitis, -ean-milis, sf, Sweet flag cane— 
acorus calamus. 

ceü.ldich,ff v.a. Absent, conceal. 

cuile, -an [tf-ich & -ichean,] sf. The part ofa 
cottage in which the stores are kept, cel- 
lir, see cuiliuh. 2 Rocky corrie. 3 Meadow 
or morass with rocky boundaries. 4(WC) 
The *''but" or the “ben” of a house, Dorus 
na cuile, the door of the tben.” 

cuileabannach,' CR) Suth’d for guilbneach. 

culleabhar, AF) s.m. Dog, greyhound. 

cüileach,**g. Angular, 

cuileachan, -ain, san. Deep wicker basket, 

càileichd,** 8f. Angularity. 

cuileag, -eige, -an, s.f. Common fly. 2 Artifi- 
cial tishing.fly. — 3**Gnat. Sgaoth ch., a 


swarm of ries. 
ach, -aiche, a. Full of flies. 2 Of, or 

belonging to, flies. 3**Like a fly. 4**Lively, 
frisky. 

cüileagan, -ain, s.m. Private feast, secret treat. 

euileag-an-Frangach, s.pl. Cantharides. 

—— —— -dhubh,(AF) sf. Beetle. 

-ìn AF) er, Karwig.—Arran, 

-shionnachain,** s.f. Glow-worm. 

-zhnìomhain, -an-s—, 8.f. Glow-worm. 

-Spainndeach,** st, Spanish fly, can- 
tharides. 

—— —- -theallaich, s.f. Cricket, beetle. 

cuilean, -ein, -an, s. m. Whelp. 2 Puppy. 3 
Cub. 4 Leveret. 5 Frequently used for a dog 
oi full growth, or of any age. 6 Darling, term 
ofífamiiar endearment. 7 Skinílint—SutA'd. 
8212taple in a wooden lock. XAF) Young 
seal. 10(WC) Small bone in ankle or wrist. 
11 see cuilfhionn. Cuileanan na coise, the 
small bones in the ankle ; cluich a’ chuilein 
ris a’ mhial-chi, the puppy's play with the 
greyhound; c. na muice-mara,the whale' s whelp; 
c. bioraiche. a young dog-fish. 

-coin, 8m, Puppy, any young dog. 

-leoghainn, $.m.  Lion's whelp. 

-malghich, s.m. Leveret. 

-math-ghamhuinn, s.m. Bear's cub. 

-uuice, sm. Young sow— Lewis. 


248. Cuilc-mAilis. 

















?91 


cuillenag 


see cuilionun. 
see cuiliounach. 


cuileann, -linn, 
ach, 


4** | cuilean-roin, s.m. Young seal— Lewis. 


cuileasg,** -eisz, s.m. Jade. 2 Horse. 
cuilein, see cuilean. 
cuilflinn, -e, a. Handsome, lovely. 
cüil-fnionn,** a. Fair-haired. 
cuilfhionn, s. Term of endearment. ’Se 'chuil- 
fhionn, yes, dear ; 'ne ’chuilfhionn,indeed ! ie 
that so ? ; and an exclamation, O chuilfhionn } 
O dear! 
cuilfhionn, -inn, see cuilionn. 
———-ach, see cuilionnach. 
-tragha, see cuilionn-tràgha. 
——-inara, see cuilionn-tràsha. 
cuilg, gen.sing. & n.pl. of calg. An aghaidh 
chuilg, against inclination. 
-——eau1, ean, 8.m. Small beard or awn, as of 
barley. 2t+Prickle. 3łł5small bristle. 
cuilgearra,** a. Sharp-pointed. 2 Prickly. 8 
Keen. 4 Spirited. 
cuilgein, see cuilgean. 
—each, -iche, a. Bristly, prickly, full of 
awns. 
cuilg-sruth-eich,$ s.pl. Horse's water- 
or stream-bristles — equisetum fiu- 
viatile, e. palustre, e. ramosum, & 
e. arvense,  [Illust. is e. arvense. ]} 
teuiliasca, s.f. Hazel rods. 
cuilidh, -ean, s.f. Cellar. 2 Hollow. 
3 Lockfast place, press. 4(AC)Re- 
treat, sanctuary. 6 Treasury. 6 
Treasure. Cha bhie an aird uo an 
ìosal nach faic sùil an Ilich, cha 
bhie an cüil no an cuilidh nach 
faic sùil a’ Mhuilich, there is 
noughtin height or hollow but the 
Islayman’s eye will see, there is 
nought in nook or store but the Mull- 
man's eye will see. (Cüilidh, as 
given by McL & D., may be due to 
a supposed connection with chil, 249.Cuilg. 
whereas the connection in fact sruth-eicA. 
is with cuil-.] 
cuilidh, (a chuilidh ! ) tat. Call to a dog when 
its name is not known. 
cüilidh-rath,(AC) s.f. The sea. (lit. the treasury 
of prosperiiy.) 
cuilidh-Moire,(AC) s.f. The sea (Pt. the trea- 
sury of Mary.) e 
cuilidh-sitvhaireachd,(CR) s.f. Doing things im 
a corner, sly work. 
cniliobhair, see cuilbhear. 
cuilionn,$ -ian, s.m. Holly 
—ilex aquifolium. agg 
Elm. Fo chranvaibh chuil- 
inn, under elms. 39Name 
given in Bible to the Teile 
or turpentine-tree. [Holly 
is the badge of the Mac- 
Millans. 
ach, -aich, &.f. Place 
where holly grows. 2 Ma- 
vis, thrush. 
ach, -aiche, @. A- 
bounding in hollies, of, or 
belonging to hollies. 2** 
Abounding in elms. 3** 














: $ 250.Cuilionn. 
Of, like, or belonging to an elm. 


-mara, see cuilicnn-trazha. 

——-trdgha,$_s. m.  sSea-holly—eryngium 

maritimnuin. [illust. on p. 292.] 
*teuiliosal, a. Vile, worthless, useless. 
cuille,** s./. Calamus. 2 Quill, 3 Black oloth. 
cuillean. CDU) see cuinnean, 
fcuillear, s.m. Quarry. 
gtilleaeg,** s. pl. Hazel rods or twiga. 


cuillidh 999 cultmsich 


OS 

! athriall, the memory of d-parted heroes ; cuir 

al Ge remind , ieabhar G & nut--vook , ig 

Ólhearr iuconihair tuchd an t&;raidü pa c. 

luchd nam tiach, the emo. y of creditors a 

better thun that o uevors. 

ach, -viche, a. see cunmhneachail, 
achadh, -a.dit, 3.14. ierne mberg, res 

evilecting. 2 Act 01 remembering, keeping in l 

remembrance, 3**Cowmmwmewourativn. A’ se 

prot. vi cunuunich. l 

acnail, -¢ |& -ala,ja. Keeping in mind, 
mindfu., not jo, Blut, Code anaune, gud 
bitheadh thusa € air ? what is man, that vot 
showldst be mindful of him ! ga C, monufuly, 
achair, see Culm che, 

—achan, -ain, s.m. Memorial 2 Medal 
9* Token oi respect or gtautude. 4** heepe 
sake. o**Remembrance.  C**Meinoraudani, 
Mar ch. orm-sa, in remembrance of me. 

Gd, tt st, Mindiuiness. 
-feidh,** sf. Attire, 

cuimhnich, pr.pt. a cuiimlineachadh, v.a. & n. 
Remember, bear 1n wind, recollect, recall wo 
memory. 

——e, -an, sm, Recorder, chronicler, 

remembrancer. 

——var, Jut.pass. of cuimhnich. 

"boat, see cuimhuiche. 

tcuimide, sf. Appointed. time. 

Tcuiinil, v.a. Touch, rub. 

cuinin, $71, see cuimean. 2 Little coffer or 
chest, TS Suburb, 

cuimir,-e, d. Suort, brief, concise, 2 W 
proportioned, — 3 ‘irnn, m at, exact, tidy, 4 
Haudsoue, elegant. 5 Equaliy tiling, of ex- 
actly the same size. 

eacad, s.f.ind. Neatness. 2 Handsome- 
ness. 3 Symmetry, 4 Same size ur propor- 
tion. 6**Precision. 

feuimleadh, -lidh, s.m. Intermeddling. 2 Per- 
formance, fultilliug. 

cuimreach,** rich, s.m. Assistant. 

—d,if s.f.ind. Aim. 
cuimrich,* v.a. size, as Slates. 2 Pare, as she 
cuimrig, v.a. see coimrig. 

——-,-e, -ean, 8f. see colmrig, 
each, see coimrigeach. 
eadh, -gida, see coimrigeadh. 

—ich, v.a. See coimrig. 
te, see coiinrigte. 

cuimse, -an, SE Aim, mark, hit. 2 Modera- 
tion, sufficiency, mediocrity, moderate por- 
tion. 3 Any measuring instrument. dv. 
Measure, as fora suit of clothes. Nigum 
ch., a thing without moderation, dean c, air 
siod, aim at that; tha c. againsa, L have suf- 
ficiency; cha'n'eil c. agad, you have no mod- 
eration ` guabhe mo ch., he took my — 

cuimseach, -siche, a. Moderate, in a State 0 
mediocrity. 9 sure of aim, unerring, 3 Ine g 
different, 4 Mean, little. 5* Befitting, suit- 
able to one’s case. 6**Adjusted. Bogha bu 
ch. beachd, a bow of sure dim; sealgair Ga @ 
good hunter, a good shot; rinn iad c. muth, 
they did fairly well (at fishing or anything) ; 
th» e c. gu leòir, he is mod-rate enongh; 2 he á 
is but tudijerent ; i3. c. dhuit sin, tt ts but pro 
per that wou should be so. a d 

——adh,-aida, s.m. Aiming, hitting. 2 

Adapting. 3 Measnring. 4 Act of aiming. 

hitting or measuring. A’ c—, pr. pt. ot cnini- 

sich. A’ c. air comharradh, aiming or shoot- 
iny at mark. 

-——(], s.f. see cuimse. ' 

cuimsich, pr.pt. a’ cuimseachadh, v. a. Aim. 2 
Hit, asa mark. 3 Fit, atapt. 4ttPuint. 51f 

DLound. C. ris e., aim it at him; ch. na tir 






























251. Cuicionn-trà3ha. 
cuillidh, s.m. Horse. Cuir an c. 'san fheun, 
put the horse in the cart.—S5t. athtay. 
cuillsean,** s,m. Quill. 2 Quilt or tick of a 
bed. 
cuilin, -e, -ean, prov. for cuirm. 














ean, s.m. Atom. 

cüil-mhionuachadh,** -aidh, see cül-mhionnach- 
adh. 

cüil-mhionnaich, v æ. Abjure. 

————te, past pt. Abjured. 
cùil-mhiounan,** see cùl-mhionnan. 
cüilinhütairs, ssm. Smugeler. « 
cuil-sheomar, -air, -raichean,s.m. Bed-chamber. 

2**Back room. - 

tcailt, -e, -ean, sf. Gaelic spelling of quilt. 

cuilteach, -liche, a. Retired, set apart, obscure, 
private. 2 Having corners or niches, angular. 
8 Dark, dismal. 4**skulking. 

, stich, -tichean, s.f. Bedroom. 2 Bed. 
3 Place having corners, recesses or niches. 4 
*Skulker. 5 rarely Kakehouse. 6ffCellar. 7 
ttBackbone, 8* Skulking female. 

cu'lteag, -eige, -an, s.f. Co-ceahnent. 2 Small 
corner. 3 Whiting, for cuiteag—W. of Ross. 

cùiltean, n.pl. of cüil. 

cù aa -eir, -eireau, 8.m. Skulker. 2 Smug- 
x ler. 

cü:lteireachd, s.f.ind. Sknlking. 2 Low cunning. 
3* Smuggling. [** gives cuiltearachd.] 

cuilthinn, a. see cuitflinn. 

tenim, s.f. Shirt. 2 Feast. 3 Mercy. 4 Pro- 
tection. 

cu'm, gen. sing, of com, s. 2(AC)see guim. 

tcuim-dhealbha‘lh, -aidh, s.m. Feigning. 

e'nime ? ad». (for via & co uime P) For what? of 
what P about whom ? of whom ? why ? where- 
fore? C’ uim' am b’ fhiach leat ? why should 
vou condscend ? ; c' uim’ a thréig thu mo 
chluas P why hast thou left mine ear ? 
cniinear,** a. Brief. 

eui'neir, see cuimir. 

culmean, -ein, s... Cummin (plant.) 

cuuneis, see cnimse. 

ceiimhéalta,** a. Bruising, 

cuimlheas,** see cniinse, 

ach, see cnimseach. 

cuimhne, s.f.ind. Memory, remembrance, re- 
emniection, 2** Record, memorial. An c. 
leat ? do you remember ? is c. leam, I re- 
member ; cha ch. leam, Z do not remember ; 
mrt 7s. €. ieat, if you recollect ` ma 's math 
1u0 ch., if L recollect aright ; a rér c. dhowh- 
sa, to the bert c.f my recoll-ction ` enm "nad 
ch., keep in rememurance; c. nan gaisgeach | 


























enimsich 





baogha e, the arches ha him. 
Cuisine, -an,s.m. Aimer 2 Guesser. 
culusicute, u. d pas! pt. of cunnsich, 


&uneu, 2 Hiv ater being aimed at. 3 Pro- 
por.ioned, truly guessed. 

euitnibte, sec Cumin. 

euin ? avv. When ? at what time? Cuin à 


when shall he 
T aiam cuine 
el. | 


d.ü.sjeàs esau o 'shuxiu ? 
uwake from his slumber 1 
wiecu not fuliowcd by a vow 

Cùin, v.a. see chini. 

—eadh, see cu aneadii. 

Ca4ineag, *eige Ant, gf. see cuinneag, 

cuineal, AR: sm Pig. 

-— -Mhuire,** əm. see cuingeal-Muire. 

feü' neas, see c uineas. 

Cu.nz, -v, -vau,of. Yoke. 2 Bond, obligation. 
3 Restraint, uinderauce, 4 Stoppage. u Can- 
tivity. 6 Strait, d Hiculiy. 7 Y -ke ofa rud- 
dur. see rudder 1, p. 73. SÉ Asthnta, Fo ch. 
Agud-sa, Unuer your tyrannical sway ; fo ch. 
UAL Cvimhsaca, tide) the yoke of stranyers— 
sted ui à person ia tue emmpluyment of siran- 
rors, 

do. -e, -ean, s.f. Asthma, [Preceded by 
tie art. a ch— j] 

cuing-aiualach, sf. Shortness of breath, asthma. 
Tha € iào C.. Ae so tute asthmatic. 

-cicauguil, v.a. Yuke together. 

-Cueingzal, -ail, -glaicheau, s. m. Bond 
used Lo fasten a yoke to the neck of an ani- 
mul, 2 Servitude, bondage. 

Cuiuge, s iid. Nurrowiiess. 2 Narrow strait or 
passage. 8 BPustress, difficulty.  4**rarey 
Sulicitation, entreaty. C. garbhiaich, a 
sluny narrow channel, 

-——,, comp, of cumhang. 

1 ,8.f. wolicitatiun, entreaty. 

T ach, -icn, ef, Parr, conple. 

cuingeaen, -z.clie, a. Asthmatical. 

—-ad.,-widh, s. Ac. of abridgment, 

lessening or strastenming. 2 abridgment. 

—air,** san. Abridger. 

cuingead, -y.d, of. sce cange. 

euiuge:xach, -aich, sf. Yoke. 2 Straitness, nar- 
rowtüess, A'ch.chicibh, asthma, 

cumgealaci 1 U o Restricting, restraining. 

cui peul-Siu're, sj. Mullein, 
hog’s taper, cow's lung- 
wort, Aaron's rod, Ad«in'3 
flannel, biinket ieaf, Ja- 
cob’s safi, she; -herd’s club, 
torches, or lady's fuxglove, 
—verbuscuim thapsus. 

cuing il, u. 1 yranuical, arbi- 
brary. 

Cuingcis, -e, sf. see Caingis. 

eaing-fhuail, s.f. Strangury. $> 

euiugieh, pr. part. a’ euing- 
ea hadh. v.a. Yoke, snbju- 
gate. 2 Abridge, lessen, 
stiaiten, 28 '"yraunize. 4 
ttHamper. 

—te, past pt. of cuing- 
ich. Yoked,  abridzed, 
straitened. 

euingid, s.7. see cuinge. 

¢cningir, s.f. Couple. 

cuingiseacn.}f -eicue, @ Pentecostal. 
cuingleachadh, see caimhleachadh. 
teuingreach, -ricn, 3.7. Cart, waggon. 
cü:n:dear, -eir, -an, s.m. see cùinneadair. 
cuinuu, gen.sng. d n.24. of coun. 

cui, -e, -tean,s.f. Coin, C, dir, a gold coin. 

, pr.pt. a’ cùinneadh, v.a, Coin. 21tForge. 

3ttShape, forin. 

quinn, -e,6,f. see cuinnean. 


2**Copy. 





























252. Cuingeal-Muire. 





2^ 


tcuinne, s.f. Corner, angle. 2 Meeting. 
A Cùàinneach, -niche, a. Of, or abounding in coin. 
Well- cù nncadair, s.m. 


3 


cuir 








Minter. 

cùinneadh, -nidh, s.m. Coining, act of coining. 
2 Coinage. 3 Coin. A’ c—, pr. pt. of cùinn. 

cuinneag, -eige, -an, s.f. Smallpail. 2 Milk- 
pail. 3 Bucket to carry water iu. (Scots, stoup.) 
4 Churn. 5 **Barrel, cask. Min ann an 
cuinneig, meal ina varrel. 

ach, -aiche, a. Abonudingin, or per- 
taining to, pails, buckets or churns. 

an, n. pl. oi cuinneag. 

———— -bh'eoghainn,(A EF) s. Milking-pail. 

-bi:uirn, s.f. Water-pail. 

— -mhighe,** sy. Wild angelica—angeli- 

ca sylvestris. 

-thuaitheal, pl, -an-t—, sf. Whirlpool, 
yortex. 

cuiunean, -ein, -ean, s. m. Nostril. Annan 
cuiuncinibh a shròine, in his nostrils. 

cuinneineael, -niche, a. Having nostrils, 2 
having wide nostrils, 8.AH) Huffy, touchy, 
susceptible, ‘* thin-skinned.” 

chiunich,tt v.a. Stamp, coin. 

cniunleiu, -ein, see coinnlein & cuinnean. 

——each, -niche, a. see coinnleineach & 
cuinneineach. 

cuiuuse, -au, SJ. Quince. 

—ach,tt a. Pertaining to quinces. 

cuinnsear, -eir, -an,s.?n. Dagger, sword,poniard. 
2 Hanger. A'chorc 'an ionad a’ chninnseir, 
the knife in place of the,sword—a sigu of peace. 

ach, -raicue, @ Armed with swords 
or daggers. 

Cuinnseas, see coinnseas. 

cuinnseir, -ean, see cuiunsear. 

-————— each, see cuinnseaiach. 

cüinnte, past pt. of cuinn. Coined, 
Breug ch., a false tale. 

cuinseal,** s.m. Face. 

cüinte, see cuinnte. 

cuip, -e, pl. -ean & -eachan, SP, Whip. 2 Stra- 
tagem, deceit. 3**Foam, froth. [** gives 
cuipe as nom.) 

cuip, gen. sing. of ccp. 

cuip, pr.2pt. a’ cuipesdh, v.a. Whip, flog, lash. 

cuipeach,tf a. Pertaining to a whip. 

-—an, n. pl. of cuip. 

cuipeadh, -pidh, s.m. Whipping, flogging. 
Act of whipping or flogging. 

cuip-gheal, Aug, o, Fuamy, white with foam. 
Muir ch., @ foaming sea. 

cuipinn, Gaelic spelling of whipping. 

— ——-, v. Whip, lash. Derivative of whipping. 

—————te, past part. of clupinn. 

cuir, pr. pt. a’ cur[& a’ curadh,**] v. a. Put, 























forged. 


2 Remembrance. 





a 


place. 2 Lay. 3 Send. 4Inyite. 5 Sow. 
6 Act upon. 7 Produce anetfect. 8 Indu- 
ence. 9 Tire—Lewis. 10* Snow. 


Cuir enters into such a number of idiom- 
atic phrases in Gaelic that it has been found 
necessary to annex a somewhat lengthy list 
for begiuners. 
cuir à ohàn, put down. 

c. a’ bhuntàta, plant the potatoes. 

c.a dh’ iarraidh, senl for. 

c. a dholaidh, spoil, abuse. 

c.a ghul, set a-crying. 

c. air, prevail. 2 molest. 3 beach, as a boat, 

Cha chuir e air, it will not annou him; c. air 

laidhe chuige, make the ship lie-to; is beag 

tha "eur orm, J am quit’ weil, aid right; c. au 

t-eathar air, beach the voat, 

c. (an sgeul) air a bhallaibh, tell, relate ade 
quately. 

c. air adharr, forward, »romote. 

c. air aimhreidh, put wrong. 


cuir 294 


c. air ath là, delay. 

c. air bonnaibh, describe. Is deacair domhsa 
& cur air a bonnaibh, it is very dificut for 
me to describe her adequately. 

©. air chois, institute. 2 set on foot. 
b rouse out of bed. 

€. air chrith, cause to shake. 

c. air chuimhue, put in remembrance, remind. 

c. air cul, avroyate,put behind, abandon, forget, 
disca: d. 

€. ard (air,) prepare CL) 

c. ar dioghladh, see c. pho 'n deoghal. 

c. air falbu, put or send away, discharge. 

c. air guothach, send on @ message. 

c. air lagh, prepare, aujust as a vow, cock as a 
gun. 

c. air leth, separate, appropriate, set apart. 

c. air mhire, transport with joy. 

c. air mhisg, make drunk. 

c. air riadh, put tousury. 

c. air shcól, put in good tune. 

c. (air) teicheadh, put (him) to flight, 

c. air 'thapadh (e,) encourage (him.) 

c. air thioramachadh, put out to dry, as wash- 
ing. 

c. aithne air, get acquainted with, renew ac- 
qua«ntance with. 

c. alladh (air,) libel him. 

c. a mach, publish as a book. 2 extinguish, 
put out. 3 vomit. 

c. a mach (air,) set (him) at variance, quarrel 
with (him.) 2 disagree. Chuir iad a macu 
air a chéile, they disagreed. 

c. am farsuingeachd, enlarge, extend. 

c. am fiachaibh, bind one to act in a given man- 
ner. 

c. am mearachd, misdirect, misadvise, deceive, 

c. am inugha, render useless. 

c. an aghaidh, oppose. Cuir ’na aghaidb, op- 
pose him. 

c. an àirde, put up, exalt. 

c. an amharus, doubt. 

c. an céill, declure, describe, confess. 

c, an clódh, print, set up in type. 

c. an geall, bet, mortgage. 

c. an gnìomh, put into action. 

c. an ire, cause to believe. 2 (ay on, as a duty, 
compel. 

c. anu, further, promote, 2 reinstate. Chuir 
e anu dhomh, be promoted my interest ; c. 
ann do "pn mhatb, promote good. 

c. an neo-bhrigh, make of none effect. 

c. an neo-phris, despise. 

c, an omhail, treat as nothing. 

c. an suarachas, slight, make light of. 

e. an suiln, execute, 

c. au seilbh, instal. 

c. an umhail, suspect. 

c. as à ghabhail (e,) disappoint (him. ) 

c. as a phoine (e,) disappoint (him.) 2 con- 
wince (of error of his opinion.) 

c. as (da,) extinguish (tt.) 2 devour or destroy 
Wim.) Cuir as do 'n ole, prevent evil. 

c. a shean, spend extravayuntly. 

c. a staigh (air,) make friends with him. 2 
vueriake him (WC.) 

c. as (mo) leth, accuse (me.) 

c. athchuinge suas, pray, supplicate. 

c. beannachdan, send compliments. 

c. bio n deoghal, wean, l 

c. vhLUait, put away from yov. 

t. campar (airy, rule o vez (him.) 

c. car dhiut, bestir yourself. Gu de an ath 
char a chuir thu diot? what was your 
Ate zb move f 

c. cach, JigAt. 

€, Ccart, put to rights, 


8 erect. 


Cuir-sa ceart na chi 


cuir 


thu tuaitheal, put right what you see wrong, 

c. crìoch (air,) finish (it) ; kill ( him.) 

c. chuige, urge, exert ; prosecute. Cuir chuige 
am bàta, make the boat lie-to. 

c. comhairle ri, confer, consult. 

c. cuidheall dhiot, wheel about. 

c. cùl ri, Jorsake, abandon. 

c. dail (ann,) delay, forsake (it.) 

c. deagh chath, sight a good battle, 

c. deatach, emt smoke. 

c. deuchainn air, put to trial. 

c. (dhiot,) put of, as an article of clothing. 
2 descant, deliver, as a speech. Bha e'cur 
dheti, ke was taiking away, or talking to 
himself ; cuir dhiot do chòta, take of your 
cout. 

c. dòchas ann, hope, confid+, trust in. 

c. doilgheas (air,, grieve (hun,) cause (him) to 
mourn. 

€. dragh (air,) trouble him. 

c. druigheachd (air), bewiteh (him.) 

C. (eatorra,) separate (them.) 2 (DU) cause a 
quarrel between Leg, 

c. fàilt’ (air,) salute (him.) 

C. faire, place a watch, observe. 

c. fas, lay waste. 

c. fa sgaoil, release, let go. Bidh gun is gùn 
'gan cur fa sgaoil chnm aodaich do na caile- 
agau, dress after dress will taken to pieces for 
frocks Jor the little girls. 

c. feadh a chéile, miz, disarrange. 

c. fios air, or c. fios air chugad, send for 
(him.) Cuir fios air an leabbar, send for 
the Look; c. fios Dim air, send word for 
him to come up. 

c. tios d a ionusuidh, or c. fios chuige, send 
word tohim (not desiring his presence.) 

c. fodba, sink. 

c. foduad, put under thee ; weather, as a boat. 
c. fodhad an rudha sin, weather or get past 
that cape. 

c. fo mhionnaibh, adjure by oath, 

c. geall, bet, wager. Cuiridh mi geall riut 
nach robn, 4 '/l bet you it was not 80. 

€. glan a dholaidh, spoil cornpletely, 

c, gu bas, kill. 

c. gu buil, occupy, employ to some purpose ; $ 
give effect. to. 

c. gii fulang, put to trial or suffering. 

c. gu taic, trim, mrnage, give a dressing to. 

c. gu taobb, put by. Cuir adh’ aon taobh, 
put all on one side ; cuir an dara taobh, dis 
pose of coinpleleiy, set in the proper direction, 

c. impidh (air,) constrain «hün.) 

e, (leam,) favour qme,) support (me.) 

c. inar fhiachaibh (air,) pretend, make (him) 
believe ; make incumbent upon (him.) 

c. mu seach, lay by, accumulate. 

c. na liontan, shoot the nets. : 

c. (ort,) put on you. Cuir ort do bhrògan, put 
on your shoes, 

C. 1éls, run a race, 

c. ri, add to. 8 ànportune. 3 hasten, apply. A 
be active, be diligent. 5 study. 6 exayyerate. 
7 worry. 8 masier. 9 bale. Cuir riut, eat 
somewhat, get on with your Jood. 

c. ris na raiuth, take to the oars. 

c. romhad, resolve, propose. ` 

c (roimhe,) prompt (him,) dictate to (him.) 

e saradh, arrest (in law.) 

C. Neh, see e. seachad. 

c. seachad, hoard, lay by. ? avoid. C. seach- 
ad gach spàirn ’bheireacdh ort, parry with 
ease every stroke aimed at you. 

c. sìol, sow seed. 

c. sìos air, abuse. 

c. sinugaid (air,) spit on LE) 


out 


c. smùid, emi? Smoke. 
c. sneachd, snow. Tha e ’cur an t- sneachd, it 





is snowing ` tna e 'cur is 'cathadh, or tha 
eur is cathada aun, it is snowing and drift- 


ing. 

€. stad (air,) stp (him.) 

c. starach, despise. 

€. suas, set up, establish, constitute, 
c. suas ale, praise—(VDU.) 

c. suas atnichninge, pray, supplicate. 
c. suas (leis) bear with (it or Aim.) 
2. sùrd air, prepare. ; 

3. tercneadh air, put to flight. 

c, thairis, put over, overjluw ; pass as time. 

c. broid, Jiyht oppose. 

c. (umad, ) put on, about, (you,) drees(your)self, 
c. übila (air,) Jine (Aim. ) 

Au ni a enuir iad ri an sùil, the thing that 
they had definitely concluded to do; c. ris an 
lasya:ca, ennpioy yourself as hard as you can 
at fishing; a’ mheud mhór gun ch. leatha, 
the great boastiny without anything to support 
it ; ch. sinn ian, we invited thein ; cd tha ‘cur 
ort P who moles s you? cuiridh mise rint, 4 
will master or miunuge you, co 'tha eur dragh’ 
Ort P who molesis you # c. e, invite him; tha 
mi air mo chiir, Z am tired Ge 'snaà casan, 
take to your hevis; c. 'sna raimh, row hard ; 
C. t òrdag fo in’ Gratin, steoinet, yield ; tha 
caochiadn cuir air clo Coaluinn, Malcolm's 
Cloth is of a different set; b’ olc an t-eolas a 
chuir e orra, 1c was rather a bad thingifor him 
to have ever become acquainted with them ; ch. 
m: eolach air a cliéilo iad, 4 introduced them 
to each other ; c. air laidhe chuige, make him 
heave-to ; chuir e cluas air féin rinm, he turn- 
ed an ditentive ear tome ; 'se 'chuir na cluasan 
air, it great/y surprised him; chuir e dà chluais 
air, he was yreully astonished (on hearing 
someth:ig wouwierful.) 

cuir, gen.8inj. © noi. pl. of car. 
chuir e diieth, the tumbles he got. 

feuirb, -e, a. Cursed. 

f-— sire,-an, s.m. Brewer. 

enire, g»a.sinj. d: n.pl. of corc. 

tenire, s.f. Mult:tude. 2 Head, crest, comb, 
top-knot. 

cnirceay, -eig, -an, s.f. Hive. 

feuirckle, s.f. soreery. 

cuirciun, -e, -ean, s. a. Kind of female head- 
dress, (Scots, courche.) 

cùird, gen.siug. & n. pl. of cord, 2 see céaird. 

cuir-dtris,$ -e, -ean, 8.7. Sweet-briar, see dris- 
chübhraidh. 

2 Throng. 


Na cuir a 


tcuiro, s.m. Caldron. 

cuireadachn,** a. Sly, wily, cunning, 2 Inviting. 
Gu c., slyly. (cuireideach.) 

cuireaih, -via, -van, s.m. invitation. 2**Invi- 
ting. 3*'*Placing, laying. 4 **Sending. 5** 
Deputation. Thig gun ch., intrude; tnoir c. 
dh uibh, invite them ` là chuiridh, the day on 
whch a bride and bridegroom take their 
rounds, inviting their acquaintances to the 
wedding ; c. cul na coise, back-leg invitation— 
that of a person who gives a faiut invitation, 
aud escorts one ont ot the house saying, '*1 
am sorry you could uot stay ” ; c. MhicPhilip, 
—gabh no fag, Mack illop’s iuvitation — take or 
leave ; is duine dona gun fheum a chuireadh 
cuireadh orm fhéin is caitheamh, he is a piti- 
fut fellow who would invite me and leave me to 
pay : c. pìobaire, late invitation toa marriage, 
or any invitation at the last moment WC.) 

euirea,l, ill, aam, Kind of pack-saddle. 

ach, -aiche,a.Resembling a pack-saddle, 

abounding in paca-saddles. 

Cuirvan, sce cuireid. 





295 


! cuireid, -e, -ean, s.f. ''urn,wile,trick, strategem 
| 2 Coquettish conduct. 


enirte 








each, -diche, a. Tricky, cunning, full of 

wiles. 2 Kull of turns or twists. 5**Irisly. 

4(AH) Forward, conceited. 

each,* sf. Coquette, flirt, wily girl. 

——-—eachd,* s.f. Flirtation, 2**lL riskiness, 
nimbleness, playfulness. 3**Craftiness. 

cuirean, -ein, -einean, s.m. Little turn or trick. 

cuireineach, -iche, a. Full of little turns. 

cuiridh, -ean, see curaidh. 

, fut. aff. a. of cuir. 
of cuireadh, 

cuiridin,$ s.f. Dutch rushes or share-grass, see 
a' bhiorag. 

cuiriunein, -e, -ean, 8.m., White water-lily, see 
duilleag bhàite bhau. 

cuirlidh-siücaireachd, Strathtay for cuilidh, s. 

cuirm, -e, -ean | ¢ -eannan.]s J. Feast, bauquet, 
2** Entertainment.  3**iHind oi beer or ale 
once used by the Gael, a powerful intoxica- 
ting liquor made from barley, and being of 
course used at all feasts, the word c. caine 
ultimately to mean afeast. It is supposed 
by sume to have been the same as whisky, but 
the:process of brewing being so much easier 
and cheaper than distil:ing, it Was more pru- 
bably a strong kind of beer, 

-bhliadlinai!, sf. Anniversary-feast. 

-chiüil, 6.7. Concert. 

-chnuic, s.f. Picnic. 

eaci,** s.n. see cormach, 

each,[f a. see cuirmeil. 

eachd,** st, Festivity. 

eay.** s.f. Cu]pr-gossip. 

———eil,11 -e, a. Convivial. 

cuirmear, -eir, -ean, san. Lust, entertainer, ona 
who gives a feast. 

cuirmire, see cuirmear. 

cü:rn, gen.sing. « nom.pl. of carn. 

-——-eachadh, see cürainneachadh. 

-—eag,** s.f. Dew. 

- ——eàh, -eln, -an, 
stones. 92 Particle. 








2 gen. sing. & n. pl. 























s.m. Small heap, as of 

d Spangle. 4*Dew-drop. 
5 Small curl, riuglet. 6 Head of a pin— Zs/ay. 
7**Brooch. 8**1&nol. Mar cli; daoimein, like 
a diamond brooch; tha cuirnean falluis air, he 
has drops of sweat on nis face. 

cüirneineach, -iche, 4. Abounding in small 


heaps. 2 Fullofriuglets, 3 Covered with 
dew-drops. 4 Like a brooch. 6**Wearing 


a brooch. 6**Hnolly. 

cüirnich, pr.pt. a’ cuirveachadh, see curainnich, 

cuirp, gen.sing. d nom.pl. of corp. : 

¢—eachd, S.E, Wickedness, corruption. 

cuirpean, -ein, sm. Crupper. 

cuirpear,** Git, s.m. Carper. 

ceuirpidh, -e, a. see coiripidh. 

cuir-sa, ( for cuir thusa) Send thou. 

cuirreadh, s.m. Woof—Lewis. Gheibh dlùth 
c., warp wilt gel woof. 

teuirt,** s.f. Apple-tree, 2 Wilding. 

cùirt, -e, -ean, s.f. Court. 2 Palace. 3 Priti- 
lege, honour. 4 Area, yard. 6** Circus, 
G& DU) used contempluousiy, D' e sin a’ chuirt, 
means '* I don’t care," * what does it mat- 
ter?” *that's a heat." 7 (AH) Frame of a 
sieve or riddle. Lhuairec. air, he has gained 
court or savour; c. mu choinuemih an taighe, 
an area or yard opposite the house; puit na 
cùirte, the pillars of tne court; c. Du Mor- 
airean Dearg, circuit court. 

.—— -cheartuis, s.f. Court of justice. 

—— «lighe, 8.f. Assizes. 

cuirte, a. £ past pt. of cuir. Put, placed. 2 
Sent. 3Laid. 4 Planied, suwu. A see etrr- 
tha. 























cuirteag 298 


enirteag,** -eig, sf. Phial. $2 Wild apple-tree. | in'the operation was called cuiseadair. 
cuir.ealachd, 8. ind. Courtliness, courteons- | cuiseag, -eige, -an, s.f. Species of grass having 
ness, urbanity, politeness, affability. a slim straight stem. 7 sta k. 3 Plant stem, 
fcüirteamhuil, a. see cùirteil. 4**Reed. 5** Tush, bullrush, 6 (CR) Stick, 
cùirtean, 2.pl, of cùirt. switch—W. of Ross, "DW pock. 5 iu Guir- 
cùirtean, -ein, -einean, s.m. Curtain. Chirtein-| loch applied to the stem of the dock. 9 CR) 
ean ciatach nan speur, the beauteous curtains tagwort—WMerthshire d Gairluci. Le cnisenge. 
of the skies. aibu an lin, with the stalks of fax. 
cùirtear, -eir, -an, sm. Courtier. 2 Plaiding. 3|- ‘ach, -aiche, a. Full of sender stalk 
Same meaning as English customer, feliow,| stems. 2**4A bounding iv reeds or rushes. 
chap, person, beggar, ''bloke," &c. Like a reed or ru-h. Gleannan c. mo gtrài 
chirteas,-eis, s.f. Courtesy, nrbauity, politeness, | my beloved little ylen, where reeds do so abound, 
gallantry, 2*Currying favour, 3 Ceremony. | ——— -bhuidhe,%..f. Kagwort, see buaghalan- 
ach, -aiche, 4. Ceremonions. 2 Polite,| burdhe, 
eourtly, courteous. Gu e, courteously. cuiseal,, WC) a. "Thiifty. 2 Well-off. Nach e 
achd, s.f.ind. Courtesy, practice of court-|. "tha c. P i2n't he well-off, or con. .ortable? — 
esy. 2 Ceremony. 3 Couriliness. tcuisean, -eiu, s.m. Crime. 2 WC) see cuise 
ciirceil, -e[& -ala] a. Courtly, polite, court-| lean. 
eous, complaisant, affable, petted. 2 llon-|cuisear, s.m. Subject of a sentence in gram. 
ourable, worthy of esteem. cuisil, see caiseal, caisil & cmisle, 
cuirteiunich,fi v.a. Curtain. cuisilin, dim. of cnisle. 
cuirteir, sm. Serge cloth. feuision, Gaeiic spelling of cushion. 
eüirteir, see cùirtear. cuisire, -àu, Sint, Castint, client. 2* One who 
-— ———eachd, see cüirtealachd. employs à lawyer. 
cairteiseacl, see ettirteasach. cuisle, -can, 8.7. Vein, b!ood-vesse]. 2 Art 
——d, see en rteasaend. 8 Pipe. 4 Stream of water. ó*Layer of 
6 Narrow passage of the 


cuithe l 





cuirtfhear, -ir, see cüiricar. As in a mine. 

cdirtin, -eau, see cü.rtean. 

euis, -e, -ean, &.f. Matier, affair, cirenmstance. 
2 Cause, reason, 3 Subject. 4* The side one 


thronzh which the tide runs swittly. 7 Ts 
oí endvarmenc. $8 Pulse, Troimh ctia 
eini-iibh blad-chraun, through the crouk 
veins Of tufted trees. 


takes in a guine, parıieulariy shiuty or er:ck- 
et, 5*fate. Cha’nue sina’ eh, tharis not ti- 
case or point of disedssion ; miliidh tu a’ cit, 
you will spoil the business; bithidh e air ch. 
na corach, he well support the cause of right; 
c. a h-aisling, the subject of her-dreum; bu en. 
dhonh anart is naizh, 345 tate wouid, be a 


cnisisach, aiche, a. 


(ths form, which a 








generally nsed as nom, eiu, is really t 
yen. the correct form ot the rom. being cua 
Full of veins. veir.ons, u 
ternak 2 Veined, having veins or arterit 
3**Like à vein urartery, 4**biusicring. 
Freezing. 


winding-sheet and à grave ; ia ch., because of, | cuisleach, * s.f. Lancet. 2 Lance. 
c.-airtneil, cause of depression or weariness. - ail, a. see cuisleach. 
c.-bhroin,ff subject of sorrow. cuisleag, -i ne, -an, S.E. Lancet. 2 Little vein 
c.-burosuachaidh, provocation. Or àrvcry. » 
c.-hüvta, danyhing-stock, buffoon, aen, d. Fnllof, or pertaining to, littl 
e.-chusaid, ground of accusation. veins or arteries, 
e.-chleith, private ayuir. cuisle-aibieacü, -eich, s.f. Liver-wort. 
c.-e:ruaidh, hurd cause, cuislean,** -eiu, s. m. Little vein or artery. 
c.-dhitidh, cause of condemnation. Chautcr. 3 Little pipe. 4 rarely Cattle. 
v, leisinu, an object of disgust. Pulse. 6 ». pl. of cuisle. 
c.-cagail, caus? J fear, terrible object, bugbear. | cni*leanach, -aich, a.n. Piper, one who plays on 
c.-fharmaid, cause of envy. & reed. 
c.-zneurain, cause of complaint. cui-leaunan, pl. of cnisle. 
c.-.hràin, see eulaidh-güràin. cuisle-ehiun,** sf Aorta. 
e.-ilrath, @ horrible sight —(W C) cuisle-chiùil, -aunan-c—, sf. Musical vein. 2 
c.-lagha, action-at-law, process. Mn:ical wind-instrnaent. [better form, cus- 
c.-mhagaidh, -fhochaid, or -fhanoid,laughing-|  ail-chiuil.] 

stock, cause of derision. cnislu-mmhor, -dir, s.f. Artery, great artery. 
e. mhaslaidh, cause of reproach. feuislin, s. Pole. 2 Flnte. 3 Hautboy. 
c.-mhiosguinu, a blameable affair. cüis-mhagaidh, s.n. see under cùis. 
c.-sgreat, d nuisance. teuisne, s.f. ice, frost. 










c.-tliogail, appeal. cuisueach, -eiche, a. Freezing, congealing, 
c.-thogair, s.m. appellant. frosty. 


c.-truais, an object of pity. 
c.-uamhais, cause of terror, horror dread, or 
wonter. 
cuis,tt -ean, s.f. Narrow sea-stream, 
cuisle. 3 Jet from a vein or artery, 
cùis-bhùirt, see cüis-bhürta (under cùis.) 
cuisdeag, -aige, -an, sf. ‘The little finger. 
cuisdeog, -oige, see cuisdeag. 
cniseach, -eiche, &. Discreet, staid— Lewis. 
Zi WC) Comfortable, careful, thrifty. Tha e 
cho c. ri cnoc, be is as staid asa hill— 


cuisnich, v.a. Freeze, congeal. 

te, past pt. of cuisnich, 
cuist,(MMcD) sf. Arithmetical qnestion. 
cuist ! inter. You don't sayso! 2 Hush! 3 

(AH) Shut up ! 

cüiste, -AD, s.f. Couch. 
[cuite, s.f. The head. 
cnite, a. & past pt. of cuitich, see cuidhte. 
-——ach, a. see cuidhteach, 
-——achadh, -aidh, see cuidhteachadh. 
cniteag, -eige, -an, sf. Whiting (fish.) Tha dà 


2 see 


generally said of youngsters, 

S san, Darnel or rye-grass, see breoill- 
ean, 2 see cniseag. 

cuiseadair,(WC) s.m. In olden times blood.let- 
ting of a certain vein in the arm was very 
common for nearly all troubles. An expert 





cuiteal,( AF) s.m, 
cuith, see cuidh and cuithe. P 
cuithe, -achan, s,f. Trench, pit. 2 Deep mois 


bhall dubh air an adaig is earball fad’ air 
chuiteig, there are two black spo's on the kad- 
dock, and the whiting has a long tait. 
Cuttle-fish. 





cnithe 


place 3 Wreath of snow, 
sence usnre. 5 AC) Strongnold. 6,AC 
quantity. TAC) Drizzle. S*Pit. C. bùirn, a 
mass of water; c. sneachd, a wreath of snow, c. 
c o,a bank of fog; an c., the world, the mass. 
ach, “liga, sia. see cuthach. LS? ong. 
ach, -viche, @. Abounding in suow- 
Wreaths, 
adh. -eidh, s.m. 
——-—iunh, -eimlh, ean, 
echt, see Gell ien, 
——-—ear, see chidhtichear. 
- te, see cuidütichte. 
cat, -üil,-üilteau,s.?n . Back of anything. 2 Hind- 
er part, not the front. 3 Hair of the head. 4 
Aftertime, 5(AF) see cull-bhoc. ottuuard. 
7 Cus.ody. &DU) Matter for thought, food 
for reflection, ACR) Care, anxiety, Chuir 
e c. orm, it made me anxious, it troubled me ; 
chaidii esan 'bha treun air cb., he who was 
strony has perished ; is buaine c. na aghaidh, 
back lasts conger than front—a cheese, stack 
of peats, &c. would be more freely used at 
first thau at last—the moral is that feuds last 
louger than friendship; c. gaoithe agus agh- 
aidh gréine, buck to wind and face to sun—a 
put retreat; air mo ch., behind ane ; c. na 
cinne, the back of the mountain; c. a’ chinn, 
the back part of tke head ` cuir c. ri, forsake; 
€. buidhe dualaen, yellow curled hair; bithidh 
mis’ air do ch., 4 will be behind you, reauy to 
support you ` gu c., thoroughly, completely ; is 
tu an cù g’ ad ch., vou are a dog every inch 
oy you; cul ri cit, vack to back; gu c. Caliuinn, 
tu after the New Year; air c. do naigheachd ! 
teil uway ! ; cum c., support, countenance ; air 
c. lainn, handling a weapon ; c. an dom, the 
Lack of thefist; c, ri d charaid no rid’ Làmh- 
aid, c. riut fhéin, toturn your back on friend 
or foe is tn unman yourself ; tha thu air ch. do 
£hnotnaich, yow are manajing your ajfairs 
well; gabh mu ch. do chruidh, get to the rear 
thy catlle—coie to business, come to the 
point, do not wander ` leon e mi o thaobh mo 
chùil, he wounded me froin behind—trcaciier- 











Hedging, enclosing. 
see cuithe, 





ously. 
cü (gu) adv. Completely, perfectly, to the 
back. Chunnaic mi 'anain gu cul, J suw his 


soul perfectly ; stàillinn gu cC., steel evevy inch 
of it, 

culach, -aiche, a. In good condition, fat, plump. 
2 Well-dressed. Thaec., he is fat. 

cùlachadh, -aidh, s.m. Forsaking, renouncing, 
abandonment. 

cuiachair, s.m.  Refuser, 

eula-cheann. see cullacun-cheann, 

ceü'achrach, DU) a. Heticent, secret, dour. 

ouiadn, -aida, -aidhean, s.m. Good condition 
of body, tatness, plumpness, used cnieny of 
cattle. 2** sce culaidh. 

culay, -aige, af. Back tooth. 2 Turf vlaced at 
the back of a peat-fire, large flat peat cut 


with a common spade, wh.ch dries much 
quicker than an ordinary peat. 3 Une who 


rides behind another on horseback, general- 
ly a woman sitting sideways beliud a man. 
4 Back stroke from the horn of a ram, in- 
Steal of a fronting box or Lud.e—Lewis. 5 
Stroke with the back of the hand, back 
stroke, slap. 6 (‘’Iionn’’) Iseck-stroke with 
a shinty. "l'ioisich e leis ua cülagan, he bey 
with the back strokes —indicatiug that the ram 
was to comu off second best. 

enlag,**-aig. s.f. Collop. 2 Piece of flesh. 3 
DC) see cola. 

cülagach, -aicüe, d. 


belonging to turf, er ZttBack teeth. 


297 


cà'-blieam 


d Cat.le-ieid or; cülageti, mpl. of cülag, Grinders, back teeth, 
Mass, | eula:on,tt s.m. 


Back, buck parts. 
Cü:aibh an taighe, behind tie house, or the 
bacs part of the house ; cülaibh is beuiaibb, 
tack and Jront ; ag aomadh air craoibh o 
*onulaibu, leuning on d tree from benind ; c. 
air beulaibn, vice versa, any garment put on. 
back to front. 
cuiaich, pr. pt. a’ cülachadn, v.a. Forsake, re- 
EI 2 Turu the back upon. 3**2Put be- 
ind. 
culaidh, -e, -ean,s f. Garment, 2 Suit of clothes, 
dress apparel. 3 Accouirenrents, 4 Armour, 
5 Protec:ion, support. 6 Instrument, tool or 
tool 7 Boat, coble. 8 Subject. 9 Objcet. 
10**Kept miss, — 1Mffseecuiadh. 1 fyAny 
convenient oruseful thing. 13* Matelinas. C, 
is the word for a fishing boat in Sutlieriand, 
the word d@a being seidom heard there; 
na'm bitheadu a’ ch. again, had 1 the materi 
als; a c. bantraich, her widow's garments; 
gabhaidh c. miath a chur aic a’ buoin roimh 
Nollaig fhathasd, the cow can be fatiened up 
weil yet before Christmas comes. 
c.-abnachuais, object of mirth. 
ec a dhüsgaduüunan deamhan, a means to 
rouse the uevils. 
c.-Aodaich, suit of clothes, 
Gë ts, Wedding ott. 
c.-bhrosnacnaidn, incentive, provocation. 
c.-bhüird, or c. Lhürta, buit, langking-stock. 
c.-cmuüil, musical instrument. 
c.-eazail, object of fear. 
c.-fhanoid, saocking-stock. 
c.-fharmaid, object of envy. 
c.-gliàohaiaiut, engraving tool, 
c.-ghràin, eyesore. 
Gussen medicine, antidote. 
c.-thayaidu, see c,-inanoid. 2 object of mer, 
riment. 
c.-inhaitheis, business. 9 level best. Ni mi mo 
c.-mh., Z will do my level best. 
c.-inhealiaidn, dune. 
c.-mhi-thlach 1, odject of disgust. 
c.-shiü.l, canvas, uacerials for making sails, Jie. 
c.-thataidh, decuy. 
c -thruais, object of pity. 
culaig, -e, -ean, ej. Hinderanee, burden, draw- 
back, impedimnent to one's prosperity or com- 
fort in life, 
enlair,** sf. Throat. 2 Palate. 3 Chops. 
cul-air-thoin, adv. Inverted. 
cùlaist, s./. (AC) Back place, 2 Back wing toa 
dweLiug. GSfrftH^cess, wail-press, ACH) In- 
ner apartment of old cottages in Gaeldom, 
best room, parlour’ —Skye d W. of Ross, Te, 
m. in Poolewe- (WC)] 
cüt-àit', see cùlaist. 
culan, -ain, s.m. Hair, tresses. 2 Of two waves 
on the sea, this is the second one, 3ftCrust. 
ach, -aiche, a. Behind the back. 2 ie- 
longing to tne back or background. 3ttCom- 
ing boniud. 
Sun, aich, ssm. Backing, security. 2 The 
second son of a family. 3ffUack wave. 
-Caise, 3,m, NIMAL crust of cheese—(T'ionn) 
cül-an-é:sg.( W U) s.n. Corner of tne bag-net in 
Which salmon are cauzhe, 
CO amas, as, sf. basurulness, backwardness. 
cà adba, see cü'aibh. 











trasar, -aAlr,-alcenn, sm. Flag, banner. Gaal- 
ie svethug of colevr. 

cularai'.h, vat.pl. of cular. 

euliran, sain, -an, 8. a, Cucumber—cuctmis 


sativus. 


Abounding in turf, of orf chl-anusehd.it «f. Raekpiece (of armour.) 


cu-bheum, -enn, -àu, s. m, suck stroke. 2 
W 


eül-bhenm 


Calumny. 3 Act of slandering. 
cül-bhoc,** -bhuic, see cull-bhoc. 
cül-chabag, (WC) s. f. Shell-tish, similar to 

cockle but much larger. 
cül-caise(WC) s.m. Rind of a cheese, Cha do 

thachair a leithid bho là a’ chül-caise, the like 
did not happen since the day of the cheese-rind— 
said of any rare occurrence. 
cül-chagnaidh,(WC) s.m. Object of backbiting 
or contempt. Nach bu mhi an c. ? was I noi 
an object of contempt ? 

cül-chàin, v.a. Backbite, slander, calumniate, 

- each,ft -eiche, a. Detractive. 

.——— eadh, -nidh, s.m. Backbiting, detract- 
ion, slander, calumny. 2 Act of backbiting, 
slandering or traducing. A’ c—, pr.pt. of cùl- 
chàin. 

cül-chainnt, -e, s.f. Calumny, slander. 

—-each, -tiche, a. Traducing, calum- 

nious, slanderous.  z**Tattling. Cailleach 
chabach ch., o toothless tattling old woman. 

ear, -eir,-ean, 3.2. Backbiter, cal- 
umniator. 2 Tattler. 

eul-cheum,** -cheim, s.m. Back step. 

—nachadh, -aidh, s.n. Tergiversation. 

A’ c—, pr.pt. of cül-cheumnaich. 
eul-cheumnaich, pr. pt. a’ cul-cheumnachadh, 

v.n. Go backwards, retrograde. 
cül-choinihead, -hid, s.m. Rearguard. 2 Retro- 

spection, looking behind. 
cul-chuideachd, s./. Rearguard. 2 Reserve, 

company to assist. 
cül-chur,1f -uir, aam, Abandonment. 
cül-cinn,(DC) s.m. Outrim, common grazing 
round of a township— Uist. 2 (AH) Oats or 
arley of the Grat or best quality. 
cüldaich, see cuilteach. i 
cùl-earalais,** s.m. Body of reserve. 
cùl-earbsa, s.m. Reservation. 
eül-fhiach,1f-a, -an, s.f. Arrear. 
edl-fhradhare, see cül-radharc. 

—————-&aách, see cil-radharcach. 
cùl-ghairm, -e, S.f. Recalling, revoking. 2 €all- 
ing from behind. 

—, v.a. Recall call back, revoke. 2 
Call from behind. 
cul-ithe, s.f. Backbiting, slander. 
fenlla, see culladh. 
eullach, -aich, sm. Boar. 2 YearlingcaM. 3 
lmpotent man, eunuch. 4 Pole-cat— Mull. 5 
(AF) Fat heifer. 6(AF) Male cat. 7T(AF)Bat. 
S(AF) Stallion. 9(AF) Conger-eel. Greim 
cullaich ’na thaic, a piece ef bacon along with 
it—Sgeul.-nan-caol. 
— —— —4À5, “Ais, s.m. Impotence. 
cullach-cheann,(AF) s.m. Boar (leader) 
eullach-cuain,(AF) s.m. Male seal. 
cullach-roin,((DMy) s.m. Male seal. 
teulladh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Hood, cowl. 
eullag, see culag. 
cullaich,* v.a. Line, as a boar. 
eullaid,** s.f. Noise, tumult, uproar, brawl. 2 
(WC) Noisy party. 3(WC) Gossiping untidy 
female. Nach b'ea'ch. i P isn't she a gossip ? 
——-—each,** -d.che, @. Noisy, tumultuous, 
quarrelsome. 

cuilaidh, see cuillidh. 

eull-bhoe, -bhuic, s.m. Wether-voat. 

culm,(CR) san, Energy, push, liveliness (about 
bnsiness) —Perthshire. 2 Gloom, haze, dark- 
ness of atmosphere—W. of Ross-shire. Tha 

c. air a’ ghréin, the sun is hazy. (gulm) 
.——,(MMcD) v. a. Break into small pieces— 

Lewis. 
oulmach,(DU) a. Hazy, applied to a heavy sky. 

2 WOH Surly, gloomy. Duine c, o surly 

Allow. . 

















298 


cü-luirge 


cül-mbionnachadh, -aidh,s.m. Abjuration, oath 

cül-mhionnuaich, v.a. Abjure, deny. 

—- te, a. & past part. Abjured, de. 
nied, 


cül-inhionnan, s.m. Oath of abjuration. Thug 
ea ch., Ae gave his oath of abjuration. 
cil-mhitaire, An, s.m. Mutineer, plotter. 8 











Backbiter. 38**Smuggler. 

———-———achd, s.f.ind. Mutiny, plotting in 
private, conferring. 2 Backbiting. 3 Smug- 
gling. 


culinor,(CR) o WVigorous. active—Perthsh, 

cü-lomna,(AF) sn. Tied dog. 

cü-lorgaidh,(AT; sm. Beagle. 

cil-rarthare,** sm. Retrospection, looking-be- 
hind. 2**Circuimspection. 

ach, -aiche, o Cireumspect, retro- 
speetive, looking behind. 

cul-raoinidh, s.m. Gual-keeper—Suth’d. 

cul-sgriobh, v.a. Superseribe, eudorse, 
rect, ad lress, as a letter. 

-—adh,-aidh, s.m. Direction, as ona 

letter. 








2* Di- 


———+a,* past pt. Directed. 
cül.shleamhnach, a. see cul-sleamhnach. 
——— —-—adh, see cül-sleumhnachadh. 
cul-shleamhnaich, see cul-sleamhnaicen. 

—— —— see cil-sleamhnaiche. 
cül-sleamhnach, -aiche, a. Backsliding. 2 Prone 


to baekslide. 

— adh, s.m. Baeksliding, act of 
backsliding, falling back. 2 Apostatizing. A’ 
c—, pr.pt. of cal-sleamhnaich. 

— ——— ——air,** -ean, see c.-sleamhnaiche, 

cül-sleamhnaich, prapt. a’ c.-sleamhnachadh, v. 
n. Backslide, fall back,fall off, become worse, 
2 Apostatize. 

———— —— ———e, -a8m, $.m. Backslider. 

eül-spor, uir, -ean, s.m. Spur. 

cül-staidhir, -dhre, -dhrichean, s.m. Back-staizs., 

cül-taghail WC) s.m. Full-back at shinty or 
football, goal-keeper. 

cül-taie, -e, s.m. Support, 
3 Patronage. 4**Defence, 
Abettor. 7**Authority. 

fculthaideaeh, a. Preposterous. 

cül.thaobh, see culaibh. 

cül-tharruing, -e, sf Drawing back, retracting. 

2* Sly msinuation—ZJs/ay. 

O—————,** v.a. Retract. 
cü-luirge, s.m. Beagle, bloodhound, gaze-hound, 


ed má. 





backing. 2 Patron. 
5**supporter. § 





254. Culuran., 


253. Culurain. 


ealurain 


enlurain,$ s.m. Birthwurt—aristolochia c.ema 

titis. — [ill.on p. 298.) 

«uluran, -ain, -an, 4.9. Swinebread, sowbread, 

cyclamen—cyclamen hedercefolia. [ill. p. 298] 

c'um, see Cuime. 

cum, see chum. ( 

Quin, pr. pt. A cumail, v.a. Keep, hold, with. 
hold, retain. 2 Restrain. 38 Observe, cele- 

brate, as a holiday. 4 Contain, as a dish, &c. 

5 Detain,ob-truct—IJsles. | 6^*Couiprise. 7** 

Preserve. 5**UphoM, maintain. Cum seo, 

hold this; cumaidh an soitheach seo e, this 

dish will kold it ;«. oirre, crowd all sail on her 

(the boat). 2 keepthe boat going in the same 

way as she is going. 

©. agad, hold, refrain (use, 2 avast, avast 
heaving, de, 

€. air t' aghaidh, keep on, go forward. 

c. air t’ ais, keep back, hold back. 

c. air do laimh, restrain thy hand. 

c. air faluh, keep off. 

c. a mach, hold forth, maintain. 

c. còdhail, keep an appointinent. 

c. do theanga, keep quiet. 

€. fodha, back water unth (he oars. 

c. greim air, keep hold of hin. 

€. ort, forbear. 2 restrain. 

€. ris, keep up to him, vo not yield to him. 

c. roimh, prop, hola against. 

6. suas, keep up. 2 support, maintain. 

c. uaith à thuarasdal, withhold his wages. 

c. 0 'u Ol, refrain from drinking. 

&' cumail ià na féille, keeprny the holiday; am 
fear aig am bheil, cumadh e, Ae that has, let 
him keep, 

cnin, pr. pi. a’ cumadh, 
form, 2$;Coimpose. 

feu, -uim, see cou. 

icum, -&, s.m. Battle, fight, duel, 

cuna, a. see coma. 

cuma, see cumadli. 

cuwach,** -aich, sm. Breach, derout. 

cumachd, 3.f.ind. see cuinadh. 

tcumachda, see cumhachd. 

cumachdail,*-dala, u. Well-shaped, well-pro- 
portioned. Garbh c., thick and shapely. 

cumadail, a. Plastic. z**Nhapely, well-formed, 
or proportioned. 3** Equal (in parts.) Do 
chalpannan c., thy shapely calves ` sgiath ch., | 

a well-formed shield. 

cumadair, ean, s.m. Shaper, former, fashion- 
er. 2 Frame. 3(AII) Fam pattern for lady's 
or gentleman's article of dress. 

——-——eachd, s.f.d. Framing, forming. 2 
Act of framing or forming.  3** Device, in- 
vention. 

cumadalachd, grad. Shapeliness, elegance of 
form. 2 Syinuietry, proportion. 

cumadh, -aidh, s. m. Shape, figure, form, pro- 

ruon, pattern, 2 Shaping. 3 Act of shap- 

ing, framing or fashioniug. 4 Contriving. $5 

Act of contriving. 6 ‘Trunk of the body. 7 

tt Degree. A' c—, pr.pt, of cum. C. do 

mnin-chalpanna, the shape of thy smooth calves; 
kun ch., sAapeless. 
cumaidh, fut. aff. a. of cnm. 
cumaitheachd,Suth'd & W. of Rose for cumachd. 
cumail, cumalac^, sf. Holding, witholding, res- 
training, refraining. @ Act of ob-erving or 

celebrating. 3 Coutaining, comprising. 4 

betaining, detention, 5 Maiutaining, sup- 


v.e. Frame, shape, 


porting. 6 Keeping. 7ttLease. A’ c—, pr. 
pt.of cum. o ch. suas, my support or sus- 
tenance; ciod a tha 'gad chnmail? what is 


keeping you ? ; 'gam ch. suas, supporting me ; 
a c. laiub rithe, paying his addre»s s to her 
SÉ, keeping near her), is math a tha thu a’ 


299 


cumhachdach 


c., you war well, [These examples from 
other dic ionaries all appear to be mere trans- 
lations of English idioms, } 
cumail,** v.a, Touch, wipe, rub off. 
cumailt,** s./. Touching, wipiug. 
each, -tiche, a. "lenacious, adhesive, 
eachd, «.f. Ten. eiousness,adhesiveness. 


cumaint, prov. for cumanta, 


(an), adv. for an cumanta. 
cumair, @. see cuimir., 
eachd, see cuinadalachd. 
tcoumaisy, wa. see coimeasg., 
————te, see coimeasgta. 
cumait,** a. Neat, well made, handsome. 
eal,(WC) a. Neat, tidy. 








tcumal, -ail, s.m. Price of three cows. 2 Three 
cows. 

cumalas, -ais, s.m. Support, stay. 

cumaltachd,ff see cumailiteachd. 

cuman, -ain, 5.2*. Milking-pail. 2 Circular 


wooden dish without à handle, Scots, cogue. 
13 Shrine. 4**skinnner. 6(AF) Angler (tish) 
— Caithness. A c. eadar a dà ghlüu, her pail 
between her knees. 
cumanda, see cumanta. 
cumanta, @ Connunon, general, customary, or- 
dinary, plebeian. Gu c.. an c., commonly; aon 
de ’n phobull ch., one of the common people. 
chd, sf. Same meanings as cumantas. 
S, ais, sm. Commonness, usualness. 
An C., generally, usually. 
tcumar, -air, -alrean, see tcomar. 
cü-inara, pl. coin-mhara, s.in. Sea-dog, dog-fish, 
angler, ranger. 2 Slow- orsleuth-hound. 3 
(AF)Seal. 
tcumaraich, spl. Inhabitants of a country s- 
bounding in valleys and hills. 
cumas, see comas. 








ach, see comasach. 
g,* -aisg, er, Tumult. 2 Brose. 3 Mix- 
ture, amalgam, medley. 4**Battle. Cumasg 


sluaigh, a misture of people. +5 Contention. 

6 Melée. 7**Confusion 

gach, -aiche, a. Tumultuous. 2**Confused, 

mixed, disordered. 3 Causing confusion or 

disorder. Is tric a dhearbh an cruaidh- 
chuis 's na buan ruagaibh cumasgach, whe 
oft proved their hardihood in the long confused 

pursuits— F'lidh, p. 66. 

gadh,-aidh, see coimeasgadh. 

cumassta,**a. Mixed, confused, in a medley. 

Tcumica,l s. Constriction. 

culmha, pl. chan, s.m. Mourning, lamentation, 
sorrow. 2 Elegy, noem in praise of the dead, 
eulogy.  3* Epic poem. d4frDirgc. 5**Dole- 
ful voice. Cumha Mhic MhicAlasdair, Glen- 
gerry's tement—a noted pipe-tune; c, ro gheur, 
very bitter lamentation. 

,-Cchan, sj. Condition, stipulation, cove- 
nant. 2 Reward, bribe. Cha d thug Fionn 
riamh blàr gun ciu., F. never fought a battle 
without offering terms ; air a’ ch. seo, on this 
covenant, 

fcnmhac, see cumhang. 

cumhach, -aiche, a. Sorrowful, mournful, sad, 
disconsolate. 2**Wailing. 3**Bribing. 

—-adh, see cumhachd. 

————üág, see combachag. 

———d,-an, sm. Power, authority, might, 
strength, ability. 2 Virtue,medicinal virtue, 
8* Permission. 4* Inflnence. Toil nan c. 
air neamh, the will of the powers in heaven. 

—dach, -aich, s.m. Mighty man. 

—dach, -aiche, a. Powerful, mighty, 

strong. 2 Having great authority or influ- 

ence, Duinec., a mighty man; gu c., power- 

July. 

w2 

















eumhachlaiche 


cumhachdaiche, comp. of cumhachdaeh. 
dair, -ean, s.m. Comunissinuer, person 
high ia authority, 2 Delegate, agen. 
cumhadair,** s.m.,  Beinoauer, 

cumhaidh, -aidh, see cninha,. 

cumhag-vhogitth-toine,, Aw )s.f. Water-wagtail. 

cumhaing, pr.p:. a’ cunlaugaenadu, see cumli- 
angaich, 

-————, see cuingo, 

-—ich, see cuuibaugaich. 

cumhainn, see erombhain. 

Gm iis, s.f. Selvaze as of cloth. 

Tcuinbial (A 8) sin, Price of three cows, 2 Sub. 
jection, slavery. 3**Muidservant, bundmaid. 
4** Obedience. 

eumhanach AC) see eamhanack, 

eumhang, Dat, comp, cuinge, 2ud. comp. cuing- 
eid. 3rd, euingead j gt, Narrow, strait, con- 
tracted. 2 Narrow-mmded. $5**l'izht, close. 
4**Powerful, Ls gorrt ’s is cumhang a baual- 
adh, sore and powerful is its blow. 

——-—, Aing, sm. Strait, detile. 
strength. 

——-—rchadh, pr.pt. of comhangaich. 

-—@ acid, 8. f. Narrowness, straituess. 2 
Tightuess, closeness. 3** Difficulty. Aun an 
C., straitened. 

——-— aich, pr. pt. a’ ennhangachadh, v. a. 
Make narrow, straiten, z Tighten. 

——-—aiciite, pust pt. Straitened. 2 Tight- 
enel. 

cumhann, a. do see cumhang, 

cumlhinnaich, see enuinhargaich, 

————— ————te, see eumhanjzaichte. 

cmnhasag, sf. Barn-owl, see eonihachag. 

«uiihdach, see comhdach. i 

cumhdaich, see comhb'laich, 

cunhlach AF) sim. Sucking-pig. 

fcüinhlaich, v.a. Fultil, perforin. 

eünhlaichean, & pl. Stipulations, bonds— Déi 
1. Ghohha. 

fcümhlaichte, past pt. of cùmhlaich. Fulfilled, 
performed, 

cunmhlaid, sf. Gift. Gheibh thu uam mar 
chumhiaid, yon shall get as a gift from me— 
Duanaire, p. 121. 

cùmhnadh, -aidh, see còmhnadh & caomhnadh. 

euumlhnant, -aint, pl. -a &-an, s.m. Covenant, 
contract,compact, article,agreement, bargain, 








2** Power, 


engagement, 2* League.  3** Stipulation, 
condition. 4 Marriage contract. A réir 


ceannaibh a’ chanihuaint, agreeable to the 


terms of the agiee.nzat ; anc. a riun e riu, the 

covenant he made with them; air a’ ch. seo, 

on this condition. 

-—ach, -aiche, a. Federal. 2 Of, or be- 
longing to, contracts, bargains, leagues or 
covenants.  3* Stingy, unaceommoidating, 
Duine cruaidh c., a niggardly, stingy fellow. 

———--—ach, -aich, s.m. Covena'ıter. 

eumhnantaich, v.a. Bargain, eovenaut, article, 
**articulate. 

cumhnantaiche,** s.m. 

cumhnantaichte, past pt. 

cümhnantail, -tala, see cùmhnantach. 
felunhra, see cùbhraidh. 

eumbrachadh, -aidh, sam, Encnmbrance, 

cümhrachd, see cùbhraidheachd. 

cümhradh, -aidh, -aidhean, see cümhnant and 
cünnradh. 

eumhrag, see cubhrag. 

teumhtha, s.n. Proffer. 

feninhul, -uil, s.f. Handmaid. 

Gumlach, see cnmhlach. 

fcumoradh, -aidh, s.m. Emulation, 

eunpaich, a. Well-shaped. 
fouinpluchd, -an, s.m. Crew, gang. 





Bargainer, 
Afüied. 


2**Sweet apple-tree. 


300 


cuuglait, (AC) sf. Narrow. 


cunnartachail 


cumraich, v.a. Cumber, encumber, impede, 
1Iucomiuode, 

emnraidu, see enbhraidh. 

eumrag, see cumraich. 2 Suth’d for coimrig, 

fcumsanad, s.m. Rest. 

fcumsgadh, -aidh, s.m. Ringing. 

cumta, a. & past pt. of cum, Well-shaped,suit. 
ed, {alapte d, proportioned. 2 Artiticial. 5** 
Set, as a task. Bhur n-obair ch., your set 
tasks. 

cum! adh, past subj. & pass. of cum. 

cumusgz, uisg, -an, see coimeasg. 

en, son. Body. 2 Time. 3 liour, 

cuiablach, -aich, see conablach. 

cunadh,(AF) -aidh, s.m. Sivca, cattle, 

euubhaidli, see cumaidh, 

cunbhail, s.f. see cumail, 2tfSense, wib.. 

~—teach, -tiche, see eunehalach, 

-—teachd, sce cunbhalachd. 

cunbhalach, -aiche, a Coustant, steady, firm, 
durabie. 2¢tseusible, witty. 3 Even— Lewis, 
4(DU ) Regular, uniform. 5(AIT) Frim,tidy,suug. 
Gu c, firmly; tha "n siol air a cnur gn C, 
the sved is.sown evenly; tha e 'tighinn gu e 
he is comiug regula. Ly. 

cunbhalachd, sf. Constanev, steadiness, fl:mr 
ness, durableness. ztfSense, Judgment. A 
Eveuross 4 ALL) Tidiness. 

cunh las, -ais, s.m. see cunbhalachd. 

cunbhas, for a chumas, see cum. 

cung, Alte AN, 67. Medicine, drug. Drooh 
chungan, bad medicines. 

cungaidin, -ean, s. f. Tool, instrument, im- 
plement. 2 Materials, ingredients. 3 Bag- 
gaze. 4t¢Medicine. 5 Stud, t xture, as of 
coh 6 Renict. 7**Privy parts, 8** As- 
sortinent. Tha "n deagh ch. aun, it is good 
stu ; “nam bitheadh a’ cn. agam had 1 the 
materials; c.-leighis, medicine, sudve. 

cungai sich, pr.pt. a’ cnnzaiseavhadh, v.a. Help, 
cu-operate, assist. 2* Subdue, overcome. à 
ilProvide wich tools. 

feunganta, sJ. Help, assistance. 
assistant.. 

tcunganta,** a. Ready to help. 
Taitwife. 

teungantach, -aiche, a Helpful. 

cungantair,** s.m. Helper, assistant, 

cungarach,** a. Exigent. 

EE sf. Exigence. 

cunglach, -aich, -aichean, snm. Narrow defile, 
2**Cleit. 

cunglaichean, n.pl. of cunglach. 

Anns a’ ch,, in 











2 Keeper, 


Bean cha a 


the narrows 

cuninhalach, see cunbhalach. 

cunn,* v.a. see cum & cunnt. C. an cota, shape 
the coat. 

cunna,* Isles for cumadh. 

cunuabhallach,* see cunbhalach. 

cunuabhallachd,* see cumadalachd, 

cunna.ih, see connadh. 

cunnail, s.7. see cunnuil. 

feuunaire, see chunnaic. 

cunnarach,** a. Cheap. 

—, -aich, s ?n. Bargain. 2 Bad bargain. 
8**Purchase. 4**Pennyworlh. 51jMembniun 
virile. Is geal gache. a thig am fad, swe-t is 
the penryworth that comes ufar. [N.G.P. 
gives cunradh. ] 

cunnart, -airt, -an, s.m, Danger, risk. 2 Jeo- 





pardy. 3**rarely doubt. Cuir an c., take risk, 
endanger. 
cunnartach, -aiche, a. Dangerous.  2**IIaz- 


8**rarely Donbiful. 4(DU) rarely 
Duine c., a lively fellow. 
Challengablew 


ardous. 
Lively, wild. 
ounnariachail, tt -e, a. 


cunnartachd be 201 curadh 


eunnartachil,** at, Hazardousness. 

eunnarcGuen,[f v.a. linperil. Chuunartaich- 
eadit dol "nau ordngh, thoirt do Curatu macu 
a dh’ aindeoin, agus bó Mhorag! 

tcuunahail, v.e. Grasp hard, Keepa tirin hold of. 

tcunbunalaco, a. Firm, strong, sturdy, having 
à firm grasp. tir ch., Sti uny men 

*cunul4, a. Modest, baslifu.. 

cunuiuhalas, -ais, see cuubaalas. 

€uauradü,-anulai, sm. Good bargain. 2 Cove- 
naal, Agreement, compact. 3 Condition, 
stipulation. 

cünuradbach, -aiche, a. Federal, of, or belong-: 
ing Lo, agreements, compacus, Or covenants. 

fcunnsan, -ain, s.m. Noble person. 

Cunt, pr.pt. a’ cunntadh, v.a. Count, number, 
recon, veil, calculate, culupute. Ain fear 
Baci c, riui, cba chüuntainn ris, he who keeps 
nu account of his guod actions to me, L will re- 
pay without measure ` is gann an t-earrach 
auns an cuuntar ua faochagan, tl ts a scarce 
spring when even ihe wheiks are counted, 

fcunntabha:rt, see cunuart. 

cunnt«en, -aich, sn, Numeral, 2(WC)Thrifty 
person. 

cuuntadh, -aidh, -ean, s.m. Counting, number- 
ing, act of counting, numbering, reckoniag, 
teihing. A’ c—, pr.pt. oi cunut. 

eunntadhach,( WC) a. Careful, reckoning. Tha 
e gió cuair a’ ghnothach, Ae is very careful in 
reckoning the affair. 

cunntair, -ean, s.m. Accountant. 2 Arithmetic- 
ian. 3**Heckouer, 

p zx sf. Counting, reckoning, num- 

ring. 

cunntart, -airt, -airtean, see cunnart. 

cunntas, -ais, -an, 8.1. Counting, act of count- 
ing, reckoning, calculating, telling or num- 
bering. 2 Arithmetic, art of counting. 3 
Account. 4 Setting or adjustment of ac- 
count, 5**Numoer. 6** Detail, narration, 7 
Abureviated cuns. for a/c. s(DU) Explana- 
tion. — '"hoirc. ort fhéin, give an account of 
yourself ; ris a’ ch., at arithmetic; triath 
gun ch., chiefs beyond number ; pàidh do cn., 
pay your account; gu "mb ole gu c. fearainn i, 
she (the buat) coasted very slowly.— Uist Bards. 

cunntasach, -aiche, e. Keen, sharp, exact, pre- 
cise. Z Narrow. 3**Calculating, 4( DU) Res- 
ponsible. 

cunntasan, n.pl. of cunntas. 

cunntas-eag, s.m. Tally. 

cunntas-fearainn, s.m. Progress of a boat as 
it passes along the coast. 

cunnuil,-e,-ean, &J. Objection, check. 2** 
Exception. 

guunuileach,** -eich,s.m. Exceptor. 2 Objector. 

cunnuileach, -eiche, a. Oujectionabie, 2**Ob- 
jecting, inclined to obieer, 3**Wrangling. 

eunnuilich, v.a. Object. 2 Dispute. 3 Wraugle. 

———— —--e,** s.m., see cunnuileach. 

cunradh, -aidh, -aidhean, see cüunradh. 

cunradhach,-aiche, see cuunradhach. 
eunraicn,** «s. Coveuanc, 

cunraiche, s.m. Coveuanter. 

cuuthart, see cuinart. 

cu-odhar,(AC) s.m. Otier. 2 Beaver. 

up, cùpa, see cùba. 2 see cupa. 

cupa, pl. chan, -paichean, s.m. Cup. 2 Vial. 

cupach, -aiche, see copanaca, 

cupaichean, n pl. ot cupa, 

fcupaid, s.m. Cupid. 

cupair, -ean, s.m, Cup-bearer. 

cupaireachd,tf sf. Cup-b:aring. 

eupall, see cupult. 

xupan, -ain, ean, s.m. Cup, little cup, 

.cupanach,tt a. Pertaluing to little cups, 





fcupar, s.m. Conception. 

cupuair,§ sm, Cypress tree, 

cupla, see cunull. 

{i cuplach, see cupullach. 

cupla.h idi, -aidh, s. d* pr. pt. of cuplaich. 
Coupiuy. 

eüpla.ch, pr. pt. a’ enplachadh. Couple, join. 

cuplaich, s. Suronud. 

cupuill, s. pl. Süirouds, 

cupul!, -uill, -nill &-phtichean, s.m. Conple,pair. 
% Coupie, the aich d standing tinber thas 
supports the roof of a house. 3 Dog-chain. 4 
pl. Shrouds of a ship (p. 76) 

cupull, v.a. Couple, pair. 

cupullich, -aiche, a. Abounding in pairs, roof- 
couples, or dog-chains. 

ear, outh’d. for cüboraidh. 

cur, -Uir, san. Placing, setting, sending, sow- 
ing. 9**Laying, pouring. 3 Falling of snow, 
raining. 4 Throwing. Am a’ chuir, seed-time; 
aun c. &' choirce, o4i-suwiny season; C. is cathe 
adh, & fall of snow and drift, A' c—, pr. pt. of 
cuir. 

cur, -uir, 8.2. Power, virility, 2 Weariness, 
8 Defeat. 4 (AF)Horse. 

fenr, a. Diffienlt. 

tcur, s.m. Present time. 2 Surety, pledge. 

Jeura, Gig, Guardian, protector. 2 Protector. 
ship. Bithidh e "ua ch, orra, he will be a pre- 
tector to them. 

cura,(AF) s. Sheep. 

carabh, see cüradh. 

curacag,** s.f. Lapwing, see adharcan-luach- 
rach. 

cura-h, -aich, -ean, s.f. Boat made of wicker, 

aud covered with skins or hides, coracle. 2 

Canoe, skiff. 3**Marsh, fen, bog. The e. 

or boat of leather and wicker, nay seem to 

nioderus a very uisafe vehicle to trust to in 

tempestuous seas, yet our forefathers fear- 

lexsly cominitted themselves in these slight 

pinnaces to the mercy of the most violent 

weather. ‘They were once much in use in the 

Western Isles, ani are stili found in Wales, 

The framework is calied crannaghal, a word 

now used iu Uist to signify a frail boat. 

(tf gives s.m.) 





















255. Curach, 

curach-aile, s.f. Balloon. 

curachan,-ain,-an, s. m. Little coracle, little 
wicker bout, 2**skilf, canoe. 

curachan-na-mna-sith, (AC) s.m. Shell of the 
blue valilla. 

curachd, s.f. Sowing. act of sowing. 2 *Quan- 
tity tobe sown. 3 Seminary, 4 see currac. 
A réir a churachd, according to ifs seing. 

cnrach-na-cu*'haige, see currac-cnbhaige. 

curadair,* s.m. Cnrator. 

cüridh, -aidh, s.m. Obstacle, im ediment,hin- 
derance, d'flleulty. 2 Severe distress. $ 
Agony. 4**Auxiety. 

enridh,**-aidh, s. m. Act of sowing, see cur, 
A'c—, pr. 7t. of enir. 


enragb 302 curradh 


feuragh, -aigh, $n. Durial-place. built in little cocks on the rigs or ground, S$ 

curaicici,** v.a. Cap. Tufted dun bird, pochard—/uliyuca cristata. 

curaich,** v.n. Agonize. 4.JM) Lapwing, so called on aecount of the 

cüraichean, s.pl. Kights— Dain I. Ghobha, tuft of feathers at back of head resembling 

ouraid,** s.m. Gaelic speliiug of curate. the 'eurraieean" worn by women in olden 

curaideach, -diche, see cuireideacii. tines, see adkbarcan-luaeunrach. — 6**,Sand- 

euraideachd, see euireiueachd. iper. An uair à bhios e air Cruachan, cha 

curaidh, -nean, & -chean, s.m. Champion, hero, hi pathadh air Urchaidh, when there is @ 
warrior, 2**Giant. Caraidunean na Craoibhe| cap (of clouds) on Ben Cruachan, the River Or- 
Ruaidhe, the warriors of the Red Branch. chy will not suffer from thirst, 

curaidh, s.f. (AH)Whery. 2** see curraidh. | curracagach,tt a Pertaining to hay-cocks, buly 

cüraidh, see cùbhraidh. bles, du, 

curaidheachd,** sr, Heroism. 2 Recognizance. 

tcuraigheachd, see curachd, 

fcuraighir,s.m. Muy. 

curaing, see curainn, 

curainn, -e, -ean, s. f. Counterpane, coverlet, 
quilt. 2 Coarse woollen cloth or tiannel. 3 
Serge, felt, plaiding. 4 Support, prop. 

curainn-chueas, SP, Flannel. 

cürainneachadh, -aidh, s.m. Covering, asa ta- 
ble. A’ c—, pr. pt. of curainnich. 

etrainnich, pr.pt. a’ curainucachadn, v.a.Cover. 

cürainniente, past pt. Covered. 

¢curaist, Gaeiic spelling of courage, 2 (DU) 
Presence of mind, sense. 

icuraisteach, @ Courageous. 2 Strong, capa- 
ble—Suth'd 

curaisteacid,** et, Courageousness, boldness, 
bravery. 12 Curacy. 

eurair,(A[') s.m. turse. 

cùram, -aln, -an, 38.4 Care, anxiety, solici- 
tude 2 Charge, trust, command. 38 Office, 
employment. 4 Responsibility. 5 Prize. 61i 
Prey. 7 Family. Air mo cti.-sa, under my 
charge ; na biodh c. ort, never mind; is beag 
mo ch. air à shon sin, / feel no uneasiness on 
that score ; bithidh iad fo ch., they will feel 
anxiety, or be anxious ` gabh c., tuke care ; 
&amar tha 'L e ? hov is the family ? ; air an} 
€.-sa, under their charge ; tha e fo ch., or tha 
€. air, he isa converted inan— Lewis. 
ach, -aichs, o Careful, solicitous, anxi- 
ous, attentive. Gu e, carefully ; be siod an 
t-slàinte c., yon was the responsible toast. 

achil, 8,f.ind. see cùram. 

as, see curam. 

euran,** -ain, sin. Brave man 

cüranaich, see curainnich. 

—te. see curainnichte. 

curanta, @ Heroic, valorous, brave, courage- 
ous, 2 Powerful. 

curantach, see curanta, 

—d, sf.ind. Bravery, eourage, bold. 
ness, intrepidity. 

eurasan,**-ain, sm. Milk-pail. 2 Firkin for 
butter. Cuach is eurasan, à cupand a milk- 
pail, 

curata, see curanta. 

curcag, see curracag. 

curcais, s.f. Hair. 2 Bulrush. 3 Genus of 
plants called scirpus. 4 see gobhal-luachair, 

eur-ghalan,"* s.m. Bucket. 

cürnaich, see cürainnich. 

eurpur,(CR) Lewis for corcur. 

cùrr, -a,-achan, 8.f. Corner. 98 End. 3 Pit. 
4 Fountain, well. 5 Situation, site. 6 Back. 

cürra, see corra. s 

feurra, &.m. Sowing. 2 Little farm. 

curra, 5.5. Woof. [pron. cuire in Lewis.) An 
dlùth 's an c., the warp and woof. 

currac, -aic, -aicean, 8.m, Cap, woman's head-| grow. 2**Burying-place. 
dress, 2 Servaut’s cap. currachag, see curracag. 

ag, -aige, -aigean, s. f.  Peatheap.  2|currachd, see currac. 
Rick. 3 Hood, woman's cap. .— ———ag,* $.f. Peat-heap. 

—— ag, -aige, -an, s.f. Bubble on the surface | curradh, -aidh, s.m. Crowding together, cake 
ef liquids. 2 Cock of hay or. barley, when | lecting into one place.. 










M esa s.m, Little mutch. It does not 

have the frilling and laces forming the burder 
of the mutch proper, but is am ‘ undress ” 
head covering. 

currac-an-easbuig,§ 5. m. Field gentiam, see 
lus-a'-chrübaiu. 

-an-righ, s.m. Caul. 2 Kingshood in an, 

animal’s stomach, ! 

-bhain tighearna,$ s.m. Great tit-mouse, 

(bird )—parus major. 

-cubhaige,} s." Ragged robin—lychnis 

floscuculi, 2 Biluevottle, see gorman, — 9** 

Smallleaved beli-ower. Ar Harebell, 





























257. Currac-cubhaige: 


«lubh,(AH) s.m. Judge's black cap. T 

Witch's wishing cap. 

-manaich, Monkshood, see fuath-mhad- 
sidh. 

—— -na-cubhaige, see currac-cubhaige. 











-sagairt, (AC) Monkshood, see fuathe 

mhadaidh. 

-shide,(AF) s.m. Blue-bonnet (bird.) 

-oidhche, s.m. Night-cap. 

-rath, (lit. lucky cap, lucky cowl.) The 
caul or membrane occasionally covering the 
head of a child at birth, and frequently used 
as a talisman. 

Icurrach, -aich, -an, s.m. Bog, fen where shrubs 














eurrag 
currag, -aige, "An, 3./, see Currac. 

curra-,haian,** 5.34. 
ivwi.) 

curiialeeach, -ciche, a. Wearing à cap or caps. 
2 Uf, belonging to, or fult of caps. — 3**i1ood- 
ed, buunetcd 4°*Line a buou or buunel. bi 
gu c., mind you &re well protected with heau- 
year. 

cuira.chdeach, see curraiceach. 

Curraidh, -e, €. Exhausted, weary. 2 Diffi- 
cult, stiff, ‘tha seo C. r'a dhireadh, this is 
aigicutt to climo. 

(Cit) v.n. Sit on the heels as sailors 
and colners do, called in tbe S. of Scotland 
tne rr colliers curry," (pron. coorie, e.g. coorie 
doun--cower down.) 

S——— — , s.m. Cower, '*curry." Dean c.,squat. 

curraighin, -e, -ean, s.m. Can, taukard. 

tuiran,G. Muniiesi, piain, evident, 

Curral, «ail, see curran. 

Cuir&n,$ -ain, -an, san. Carrot—daucus carota. 
Z Pauuler siUug On nOrses Iur Carrying Dulk) 
luads, a» hay, curn, dc, 3** Fiuuhei. 4** 
baut ul the Carrot or radish kiuu-—uaucus. 

acu, aicut, @ Ul, or beiougiug Lo, Car- 
rots, panniers or radisues. 

curran-buidue,** san, Carrot. 

-Ccruaxdn, (AC) & m. (lit. hard carrot) 

Hemloca— Uist. 

-dearg,** s.m, Radish. 

-eurra.ch,§ s. m. Silverweed—potentilla 

GQuserina. [ite tluwer is caleu bàrra-burisg- 

ein, Which see for Must.) 

-rangach AL Acel: sm. Carrot. 

— -gual,g s. M, Yarsnip, see wmeacan-an- 

righ. 























-petris,$ Harris for meacan-an-righ. 

Curranta, U. see curanta. 

curiasan,tf-ain, -an, 38.27. 
pail. 

tcurr,ualan, -ain, s.m. Bucket, 2 Didapper. 

currtua, G4. Wearied, fatigued. 

Ccurrucadh, -aidh, s. m. Cvoiug of:pigeons. 2 
(M MCL) Maning coru-ricks, 

currucag -aiy, -an, sf. Lapwing, see adharcan- 
iuacurach. 

currusan, -ain, *an, 8.. 8.7%, See curasan., 

fcurs, -a, -al, smn. Horse. 

cursa, Gaelic spelling of course, 

cursa,** 8.2m. Course, directiun. 2 Order,rank, 
row. 3 Manner. 4 Coursing, race.  Oirleach 
u’ a cheart ch., an inch of his straight course. 

cùrsacu, aicho, @ Winding, meanueriug, 2 
Folding. 3 in courses, ranks Or rows. 

, Bä. see cursair & cùrsan. 

auh,-aidh, s. m. see cursadh. 

Curse. A’ c—, pr. pt. of cirsaicn. 

d, 8f. ‘1raversing, scalupering, cours- 
jug. 2 Travelling. 3 Meandering. 

enisadh,** -aidu, sm. Coursing, traversing. 2 
Meuudering, 3 Lirecuon, course. 4 Order, 
lualhuer. v UW, rank. 

eursa.ch, pr. pt. a’ cursachadh, v.a. Course, tra- 
Verse. 2 Arrauge iu ranks or ruws. 

eursair,- e, -eati, èm. slurse, courser. 2 Courier, 
messenger. [McL & D gives 2 as cùrsarre.) 

—— ———«acn,tf u. U1, or pertaining to a cours- 
er. 





Large deep vessel, 





Ore 











eachd, s.f. ind. Coursing. 2 Traversing, 
Cürsan, -alu, 8m. Kace. Z sec Cütsalr, 

ach, SG, 8.m., sve Cursan, 

ach, €. sce Cursaireach, 

-srann,(Ar)s.pi. Snorting steeds, 











eurt,** a. see curta. 
curta, @. bad, ımamouns, shocking. 2 Rank. 
4$ ibxCessl¥¢c. 4 Wearled, oVercomc. Is c.am 


Daach LD, you are & ved {curseu) feliow. 


303 





LDidap per, diver (water-. 


cutag 

Sp a eee 

curtag-nmiór-a' -chuan (AF) s.f. Sea-serpent. 

fcuru, sec Cora. 

jcuruiun, &,J. Objection. 

jcurunn, -uina, 32. ‘thunder, 

curusal, Ali 8.72. sce curasan, 

cus, culs, 3.4. Luough, suthcieucy. 2 Subsidy, 
tax, tribute. oO Superuuicy, Loo much. é 
(DU) Used asa terii. of iucredulity, eqilivae 
lent to **no fear." 6** Quantity. 

cus, @ Many. 

tcusauh, -a.du, s.m. 





Bending, inclining. 





cusag, alg, 8. Je Wild mustard, see marag- 
bhuidhe, 
acn, -aiche, @. Abounding in wild mus- 
tard. 


cusail, This is the correct form ofn. sing., its 
place geueralty veing takeu by cuisle, wnicl 
Is the gen. sing. Veiu, artery, pulse. 

-cuiüil, cuisle-, sJ. Musicaa wind-instru- 
ment. 

teusal, gen, Courage, buldness, 

T--——aca, à. Courageuus. 

cusb, -a, see cusp. 

——-üch, see cuspuch, 

cusbair, -ean, S.M. sce cuspair. 

eachd, see cuspaireachd. 

ch-seilge (AK, s.me Hunting uog. 

Cu-sithu,( AU) SA, bary dog. 

cusmuun, "UNN, see Cuspuui, 

cusp, pe. -àn, [& -aicnean] s.f. Kibe, ulcerated 
cullvlain ou the beel. An t-ainm a's uaisle 
air a’ chusp—milieadh bròige, the potitest 
name for achilbiain—a voot-sore. [Meant to 
apply to people who try to minimize a disas- 
ter by giving it the miluest pussible name, 
e.g." untoward iucident."] tf gives cuspa. 

——ach, s.m. see cusp. 

cuspacu, -aiche, a. Kibed, having kibes. 

cuspaich, see cusp. 

cUspulr, -ean, s.m. Mark to aim at. 2 Subject, 
Guioch, 3 Lover. 4 see cuspairiche. of 
Customer. Mo cb., or c. mo ghràidh, my 
lover — Lewis ; c. mo suiuaintean, the subject of 
my thoughts; seauh a cn. ! welt sir! 

each, E -e1icne, aq. Objective. 

eachu, 8find. Archery. 2 Aiming or 

shooting at a mark. 3 Objection. 4 Argue 

ment. 5 Officiousuess. Ri c., firing or throw- 

ing at a mark, 

-deuchaann, pl. -ean-d—, s.m. Criterion. 

2**Subject of experiment. 

ich, V.a. Alm, suoot or throw ata mark. 
2 Meddle witi. 

iche, -an, 8. m. Opponent, adversary. 

2 Marksman. SffArcher, 

cusparach, @. Objective (case in grammar.) 

cuspunn, -uiun, s4. Custom, tribute, impost, 
tax. 

tcust, s.m. Skin. 

t——uir, -ean, s.m. "Tanner. 

cut, pr.pt. à' cutadh, v.u, Gut, as a fish, 2tf 


Docs, shorten. 

cut,-a, -achau, s.m,  Dob-tail. 2 Piece, g 
Tt3hort log. 4 5kein of yarn [here are four 
cuts e seins in a hauk, and sixty threads ig 
& cut. 

cutacn, -aiche, d. Short, diminutive. 2 Dock. 
ed, suurvened, 3 bob-tailed. 4 Curtailed 
concise. 6 Pertanung to a short log or skein 
of yaru. 

cutacu,* -aiche, s.f. Little woman. 

adh, -aidn, s. m. kision. 9 Curtailing 

curtamment. A’ c—, pr.pt. of cutaich. e 

cutadh, -aiuh, s.m. Gulting, disenibowelling 
as ui fish. A’ c—, pr. pi. of cut. A’ c. an 
spadaim, g«liu tre herria. 

cutag, -aige, “au, SÉ Litiie dumpy female. 2 




















da 
pose baaz it was the MacKays wh» fouzbt at 
the North Inch of Perch, whereas a iilt 
kn.wledze of Gaelic would have snown tuat 


cutag ^01 


Short tricky female. 4((MMoeL) Gutticg-xu fe. | 
4 Short spoon or tobaeco pipe. ` o**Shorv hora 














spoon. 6 Circular Kiln. 7, A P) Coot, p:over. } : i t 
cutaich,** pr. pi. a’ cutachadü, v.a. Suvorven, it was the Davidsons. As a final, broad. da 
curtail, dock. usually gets its full. value iu pronuacation, 
ead,** s.m. Shortness, thus, Ox tas practically the force of 0 only, 


as in Loen Odha, the best English representa 
tion of which is Loehuw. Odha, e yraadson, 
is well known in Low and Scots asve. Bodüar, 


Teutaidh, s.n. Wake-robin. 
teutalaiche, s.m. ee EES partner. 
teuth, sm, ‘Phe head. 


eutha, seecuthach, deaf ; o.lhar, dunvoloured ; modh, politeness ; 
cuthach, -sict, s. m. Madness, insanity. — 2| erodh, cattle, are practically prononne ut bonr, 
Aiydrophobia. 3 foam, froh, Air ch., air] ofr, mow and eov. In Sk J^, however, m some 
a eh., insana, mud ; ehaiin eair a cli, he words, as, flodiiol, folha, tie odh getsits mull 


value. Adon when medial, asin adeare, a 
horn; cladhach, diguiay ; sounds as though 
the speaker eliecsed or interrnpted his «veata 
ing, besides which, the tirst a is sounds 1 like 
ao. (5) Dh, when narrow, sounds like Znazlisis 
y, as, dheth, of him; dhi, of her, (pron yea, 
ye.) When final, as, in bu.ulith, sald strikes 
fàidh, a prophet ; aghaidh, Juce ; it has the 
same 7 sound, except in Skye, Mull, and some 
other parts, where a final idh is pronoauced 
almost às if written ich, Dh tollowed by 4, 


went wild, he was very anryry ; ise’nt-cudc, 
jea.ousy is raje. 
cuthach, -aicie, o. Infuriated. 
— ———4Aul, -a, (€ -ala,] @ Outrageous. 
cuthadh, -aidn, S.M. & pr.pt. sco curad 
ecutuayg, -&ige, -àn, see Cilonas. 
ach, see cuvhagaca. : 
-bhogaidu,ffs.. Water-wagtail, 
cuthaich, gen.sing. of cuthach. 
, Gà. Mad, frantic, sane, 














i 3e uad 
Sch Ull, Í t Mlat e : à : 
te, @ Raging, mad, fnrious, insane. or r, has no sunilar sound to them in Eng 


lish. ‘he nearest approach to explaiuing it 
is to say that it is much softer than the sott 
est English g, as in, a Ghlighe, his right ; 
dhiüidb. did penetrate, did impress. 

In Old Gaelic the article sometimes ended 
ind. In Skye that d of the article has some- 
times been retained before fh, as, an d 
fhaidhe, of the prophet ; and soiuetiines the d 
is absent, as, an fur, ef the man. "his d 
appears with great ivregularity in connection 
with feminine nouns, as, an d-rhois, the rest, 
an d-fhsirge, the sea. Traces of d before in- 
itial vowels asin the old language, also occur. 
as, ceann an d-aigh, the heifer's heal ; sgothen 
air an d-athar, clouds on the sky. Véile, kilt, 
in Skye has nom. sing. an t-éiie. gen. & dat. 
an d-fheile. “ Dobhran donn and sruth” is 
another example. We do not know the pre 
eise circunistanees under whicn this d of the 
article appears. 

The n of cha’n frequently beeomes d before 
verbs beginning with t, especially irregular 
ones, thus, cha d'thoir, cha d'thig, cha d'ceid, 
which are usnally thus spelt, should be che 
dtoir, cha dtig, cha dteid. This is called the 
eclipsis of t. D can also suffer eclipsis, as, a 
dh’ aindeoin, in spite of, (pron. a ganyon.) 
Nan damh is pronouneed nan amà in many 
parts of the North, is endar dlionuh, Z must, 
is also sometimes contracted is eudar ’omh. 

'd, (for iad) They, them. Ni'd gàirdeachas, 
they shall rejoice. 

"d, contr. (for ciod 2) 'd é? (i.e. ciod e ?) what 2 
what is it? 

d’, contr. for do. 1pron. Thy. [Used before 
words beginning with a vowel or f aspirated. 
Dr. Stewart does not approve of the custom, 
of writing t' where in other circumstances d’ 
is used fer thy, but ¢ is correct, both on ace 
count of pronunciation and derivation.] 9 
prep. To. 3 Not the sign of the past tense of 
verbs, as mentione:t in some dictionaries. It 
precedes verbs in the past tense. The real 
past tense sign is preserved in robh, spoken by 
some air an d'robh. 

da, prep.pron. (for do e) To him, to it. Bu 
phailliun dha, Ais pavilion was (lit. ib was a 


cuthaidh,§ s. Wahke-robiu, sce ciuas-ehaoia. 

feuthaileaeh, œ. Bashtur, modest, arid. 

euthaileachd, s.fiind. Dushfuluess, modesty, 
timidity. 

cuthann, see cumhanz. 

feu bar, see cobuar. 

cubnarian, -ain, van, 
see braonau-Dhuachuill. 
ean. 

—-—————üQàch, -aiche, a, 
earth-uuts or ouions. 

feuch-buarr, -airr, s.m. Hehnet, head-piece. 

cuth bharran, -ain, s. m. Sort of cap, "Mon- 
month”? cap. 

cuth-durun, -uin, 

fcutt,** @ iuro. 

cu-uisge, s.m. Spaniel, water-dog. 2 Newfound- 
land dog. 


sm. Earth-nut, pig-nut, 
2 Onion, see uinu- 


Of, or belonging to, 


see cuth-bharran. 





D a 


air (darach, oak) the fourth letter of the Gael- 
ic alphabet now in use. The letters d and s 
at the commencement of a word often give it 
opposite meanings, as, daor, dear; saor, 
cheap. 

D has various sounds : (1) Broad—more 
dental, e.g. more explosive than in English, 
aud with the tip of the tongue right up to the 
teeth, as in dàn, a song ; duine, a man; diagh, 
a handful, (2) Small like g in genius, when 
flanked by a small vowel (e, or i,) that is when 
small vowels are the nearest to it, as, faide, 
length; céaird, u trade, (3) D after ch sounds 
like k in English, thus lochd is pronounced 
loch t, the combination chd is thus the exact 
equivalent of final or medial e. (Boc, a buck, 
and bochd, poor, sound exactly the same.) 
(1) Dh, when broad, is very soit aud resembles 


a soft Enyiisit g. Thns, MacDhonnachaidh, 


‘a sonof Duncan, usually Euglished as Rubert- 


son, has also cropt into English as MacCon- 
achy. MacDhaibhidh, o Davidson, has also 


heen Englished as MucKay, so that some SUp- d: a, (for do a) To his or its. 


pavilionto him.) Though generally written 
(da) without the ace nt to distinguish it from 
the numeral dà (two,) it sometimes requires 


it in metre, 
Chaidh 6 d 


a cuois, he went on fou’; d'a shaorad! to 
deliver him. [D-, of his or its, is written 
de’ wheu tua possessive pron. is uuderstood.] 

d a,\fordoa) "Toner. D'a h-ingheiu, to Aer 
daunkter. (Dr, of her, is wrilten de’ (À-) 
When the possessive pron. 1s uncderstood.] 

fla, adv. If, whence. 

tus, a. Good (164 411.) 

da. a. Two, lincounting in Gaelic, for 1, 2, 3, 
&c., itis usual to say, à h-aon, a cha, a tri, 
ae. (Da aspirates a noun 10llowing, as, dà 
dhuine, twu men ; dà thaigh, two houses ; da 
suaizgudear, two soldiers. Dà governs & noun 
folhuwing 16 in the dat. seny. and the adjec- 
tive qualifying that noun m the n. sing. Jem. 
Yue dative su-cailed is really the accusative 
of the old dual numberin such an express- 
ion as, chunnaic mi vo chloich, 2 saw two 
Sones, Rud uà properly speaking lias no go- 
veruing intinence, ‘he nom, dual fem. was 
like the dative singular, und the genitive dual 
was like the gemtiye singular. For all 
practical niodern purposes, however, it will 
be easiest lor beginners to follow the rnle as 
usually expressed, and put & noun following 
Gà iu the uat. Staat, and its qualifying adjce- 
tive in tne nom, sing. fom. bà uilinaot (betrer 
dithis bhan, two women ; dà sheachdain, two 
weeks ; ua chaol-enu, two yaunt hounds ; có 
an dà luundaaire mhór seo? who are these to 
great loons ? da thear dheug is pivbaire, twelve 
ien anda piper (nere deuy is au ad). to sear); 
au Cà mnhuaoi nar, the two big women. This 
€uriuus yoverbinent gives Way upon occasion, 
When other iuduences are too poweriul, as, 
buun nio dha bliróige,tAe soles of any two shoes; 
ruitu coin an dà fnénih, the running of the doy 
of the two deer—said of people with divided 
&ins;rudha nau dà ghleaun deug, tue pro- 
montory of the feig, giens ; ls e coslas dà 
buean-uasal a th' aun, it seems to be two 
ladies ; is Quine còir tear dà bno, the mun who 
bas two cows is u decent man. Wien used 
&osuiüutely, e.g. without à noun, dà becomes 
@ dha, as, tha a dhà ayam, I have two ; a nuas 
a duà dhiuba, bring down two of them. When 
cou burn with deug, ten, aud no noun being 
expressed, it is both aspirated and aspirating, 
as, aon vaoa bhriseas au garadhd, agus a dua 
dneug a ieu:na3, one cow breaxs the dyke, and 
a dozen leap it. Wien used to express muiti- 
pliety, a dhà niread agus ...., twice as much 
as, i» sail; (here the a, and the aspirate in 
dha are the sign of the old possessive mascu- 
line or neuter, used proleptically. The literal 
meaning, therefore, is, tts twice as much aa. ,) 

da, prov. form of verbal particie do, used in 
Suth'd. “An t-àit an da throg (thog) e," the 
place where he built, 

da However. prov. “Is d'a olc gu'm bi an 
grunud," and however bad be the soil. 

da-adharcacn, a. "I'wo-horned, bi-cornous, 

da-ainueach,tt a. Binoniuous. 

da-aodannacu, Alf) a. Double-faced, hypocriti- 
cal, talse. 

dabh, pop, for doibh (to them.) 

dabn, AF) san. Cow. 

dabhach, -aich, pl. dabucha & -aichean, s.f. Vat, | 
meshing vac. 2 Large tub. 3 District of a 
Got, lot portion of land or farm to carry 
60 cows or nead of cattle, davoch. MacBain 
gives * either oue or four ploughgates, ac- 
corliig to iocality aod má]. " [A plough- 

gate contains 100 Scots acres. ] Watson in 

The Place Names of Ross & Cromarty, says 


se EE 


ee  €—— € RI AA EE OE 


“usually four plouzagaces," Skene in Cette: 


335 





dà-chrannach 
is à unifurin system of land denomination con- 
sisting of daLhachs, ploughnates und oxgangs, 
euch dabhlacu consisting of four ploughyates, 
and each pluughgate containing eight oxzangs. 
AS soon as We Cross the great chain of mounes 
tains separating the tastern irom the weste 
ern Waters, we tind ad fferent system equally 
unifurm. ‘Lhe ploughgates and oxgangs dis- 
appear, and in their piace we tind dabnachs, 
aud pennylands. ‘The portion of land terin- 
cud a daohach, is here also cailed à tiit, or 
onnce-1and, and each dabhach contains 20 
penuylauds." Prof. MacKinnonin Place and 
Personal Names of Argyll, says ** 1n Pictland 
tne unit of lund measure was the dabhach, a 
word which properiy denotes a liquid meas 
sure. An olu 1armer in Western Gaeldom fre- 
quently speaks of his fields, not as containing 
so many acres of land, bnt as ** the sowing of 
so mary bolisot oats," "the bed of so many 
barrels of potatoes," &c. Accordingly, from 
à nieasure of capacity, dabhach came early 
to be used as a measure of land surface. In 
Gaeldom, Whore the arable land is scant and 
scattered, the variations 1n the acreage of par- 
ticular dabhachs or ounces must have been 
Very great, stili the extent of land represented 
by these terms seems to have been, as a rule, 
about 104 Scots acres, or 120 Kuyiish acres. 
4* Huge woman. A legend says that ‘‘an 
Dabhach" was the name of Ossian's wite. 
She was big, burly, and fat (mór, masach, 
agus móith.) When he was old and blind 
they fell out, he threw a deer's shin-bone at 
her and missed her, hence the saying, urchar 
an doiil mu ’n dabhaich, @ throw or blow at 
a venture ; d. fiona, a wine-press. 

dabhan,-ain, s.m. Pitcher, bucket. 

dauhan-aliuidh, -ain-, } s.m. see damhan-all- 

di bliai-eallaich, » ; uidh. 

dabaar,-air,-an, see dabhan. 

‘lavhasg, aisg, an, see dathas, 

dabud, s.m. Sauntering. 

»pr.pt. a’ dabhdail, v. n. Prowl, saunter, 

loiter. 

ag, -aige, -an, sf. Fragment. 

ail, sn. Prowling, sauntering, loitering. 
A’ d—, pr.pt. of dabhd. (dawdle.] 

dà-bheatuacn, a.. Amphibious, 

, 8m. Amphibious animal. 

> as,** -nis, sm. Amphibiousness, 

da-bheum, s.m. Kind of ear-mark on sheep, see 
uuder comharradh-cluais, 

dà-bhileach, see dà-dhuilleach. 

da-bul:adnnach, -aicn, s.m. also dó-bhliadhnach. 

dabuoch, -oich, sm. see dabhbacL. 

uacha, see dòcha. 

Tu -aidh, s.m. Opinion, conjecture, like- 
liniooid. 

dachadh,** a. see dàchail. 

dachaidh, -ean, sf. Home, dwelling-place, 
residence, domicile. G' a dhachaidh tein, to 
his own home, 

, auv., Home, homeward. A’ dol 

dhacliaidh, going home. | Generally aspirated. ] 

dacuall,** a. Provable. 

eachd,** 8.f.ind. Probability. 

da-chasach, a. Two-fvoted. 

-—,-aich, s.m. Biped. Gach d. ath’ 
again, every biped 4 have. 

da-cnvanuach, u. Having two heads, bicipitous. 
2 Two-topped. Beannan d., a two-topped hill. 

da-cuvushiach, @ Bivalyular. 

da-cnorpacn, a. Haying two bodies, bicorpor- 
al. 

dà-chosach, 
































see da-chasach, 


Scotland, suys, * lu the eastern district there | ca-curannaeh, a, biaxial, 2 Two-masted. 


dà. chruthach 


806 


aaich nich 





là-chruthach, a. Doubly formed, compouuded | dag. daige, pl. ap, -achan, & -aichean, $. mM. 


of two forins, biformed, 

da-chumachd, s.f.ind. Biforinity. 

lad, sa. Aught, anything. 2 Whit, trifle, jot. 
Cha'n "el dad wath air, it is not worth a iy- 
thing; "doen th’ ort ? what is wrong with you? 
chan 'eil d., nothing (is wrong with me, ; d 
&'s leat-sa, anything of yours ; cha’n abair mi 
d., I will say nothing ; fear gun d., a poor 
man; cha robh e d. na bu mhiosa, he was none 
the worse. Always used arter an interroga- 
tive or negative clause. ] 

dadam, ` see dadum. 

—-——unn, see dadinunn. 

—-—-unnach, see dadmunnach. 

dadan, Ain, s.m., dim. of dad. 

dadhas, -ais, see dathas. 

da-(lhathach, -aiche, a. 
coloured. 

dà-dhealbhta, a. Biformed. 

d'a dheoiu, adv. Spontaneously. 

dà-dhuilleach, a, Bifoliated. 2 Two-folded, 
as a door. 


Parti-coloured, bi- 








—,$ sm. Tway-blade—orchis or lis- 
2**Any bifoliated herb. 


tera ovata. 





258. Da-thuilleach.s 
dadmunn, -uinn, s.m. Mote, atom, jot.  9** 
Anything. 3** Some little thing. 4 (AF) 
Mité, very small insect. 





Our 75 a. Atomical. 92 Corpuscu- 
ar. 

. ach, -aich, s.m. Atomist. 

-— ——8iche, see dadmunach, 8. 2 comp. of 


dadmunach. 
daduin, uim, 8. m. Mote, atom, whit, jot. 2 
Anything. 3 Some little thing. 4 Gloom. 
sch,1f a. Pertaining to motes, &c. 
da-fhaobhair, a. Two-edged. 
dà-fhaobhrach, see da-fhaobhair. 
dà-fhiaelach, a. Having two teeth, bidental. 
dà-fhichead, a. Forty. 
dà-fhillte, a. Double, two-fold. 
dà-fhoghair, 8.2. Diphthong. 








259. Dagaichean Gàidhealach, 


daighnich, 


Pistol. D. dio laide, a holster-nistol, blunder 
buss ; paidhir dhag, a parr of pistols, {Lhe 
change of meaning from dayyer to pistol is 
one which occurs in the hDistery of pistol ite 
self, which originally meant a aagger.) 

daga, see dag. 

dagach, -aiche, a. Having a pistol or pistols, 
2 Of, or belonging to, p'stols, Gu gunnach d., 
bet with guns and pistols, 

dagachan, 

dazaichean, } n.pl. of dag. 

dagar dü'^ailt,s.m. Double dagger in writing (1.) 

dag-dtalta, see dag-diollaid. 

dag-diollaid, -acian-d-, San, Holster-pistol. 

dagh, d. see deagh. va. tDye 

-——aidh, -aidh, s.m. see dathadh, 

dagh. ag, see dabhdag. 

da-ghuth, 8m, Inphtaong. 2**Empyreuma. 

-——— —&ách,** s,m, Diphthong. 

daibh, see doibh. 

daibhear.-eire, e. see daibhir. 

-,*-eir, sn. Baukrnpt. 

daibheid,* eum. Self-command, circumspection. 

—— ——each,* a. Self denying. 

tdaibhlea, -eig, -an, s.m. Place of worship. 

daibhreach, -reiche, a. see daibhir. 

—————--—4d, sf.ind, Poverty, necessity, want. 

daibhreas, -eis, s.n. Poverty, want. (o, posite 
of saibhreas.) 

daibhir, a. Poor, needy, destitute, 2 Uncomfor- 
table. 3* Adverse. D. no saibhir ge 'n robb 
mo chor, let my lot be prosperous or adverse. 

— ——, sm. 'lhe common or worst pasture of 

a farun ('' Innis” 1s the best pasture. 





2 Poor 
person. 
daibhireach, see daibhreach. 
daich,** s. f, Beauty, cumeliness, handsome- 


Dess. 

-——enlachd, s.f.ind. Handsomeness, beauty, 
gracefulness. 2 Dignity. 3 Plansibility. A 
False appearance. 

daicheil, -eala, a. Handsome, graceful. 2 Gen- 
teel. 3 Majestic,stately, diguitied. 4 Haughty, 
proud. 5 Strong, 6 Keen. 7 Severe, hard. 
8 Well appointed. 9 Bold—Dain I. Ghobha. 
10 Queer— The Aird. 11* Plausible. 12 Out- 
warily a hero, inwardly a cowar'l. Has 
various meanings in ditferent districts.] Is 
minic a bha ’n Donas d., the Devil has often 
been found plausible ; le ceum d., with a state 
ly step ; is ann boi lheach 's cha'n ann d., bon- 
nie rather than graccful, 

da dean, -ein, sm, Daddy. (child's prattle.) 2 
Foster-father, 

daidhbhir, -e, a. see daibhir. 

daidlibhreas, -ris, see daibhreas. 

dailhear, see daoidh, 

tdaidhin, -e, a. Poor, spoiled. 

daididh, s.m. Daddy. (child's prattle.) 

fdaif, s.m. Drink. [** zives s./.) 

daigear,** -eir, s.m.  Ga-lic spelling of dagger. 

daíyeil,tf -eala, a. Firm, strong. 

fdaigh, s.m. Fire. 2 Pain. 3 Matter, cause, 
4 Hope, confidence. (now dòigh.) 51iPlunder. 
Cifslaughter. [** gives sf.) 

tdaigh, v.a, Give, grant. 

f—— -bhiorasg, s.m. Fuel. 

tdaigheadh, -idh, s.m. Giving,delivering,grant 
ing, bestowing. 2**Great odds.  A'd—,pr 
pt. of daigh. 

daigheann,** see daingeann, 

daighear, -ir, -an, sm. see daoidh. 

———ra, a. see daoidhearra. 

daighneach, -ich, -ictiean, see daingneach. 

——adh, see daingneachadh. 
see dainguich, 


daighnichte 


daigbnichte, see daingnuichte. 

dëi, -e, -ean, $s.J. Kind of wooden collar for 
cattle, 2 stall-halter for a cow. 

bn dalach, -lthewnu, sf. Field, dale, meadow, 
plain. 

fdàil, s.f. Portion, share. 2 Tribe. 

dail, dàiach, dalaichean, sJ. Delay, procras- 
tivation. 2 Meeting, couvention, congress, 3 
Attempt. 4 Friendship, attachment, 5 Fort- 
Tess, fa-tness. 6 Credit, trust. 7 Prepara- 
tion. 8 [w erval. 9 Int-rmediate svace be- 
tween theraf'ers ofa house. 10 Contact. 11 
**Decree. 1.**Nearness, neighbourhood. 13 
**pesire, willingness. 14ttAccount, history. 
liifRelation, friend. lett sparingness. 171f 
Giving, bestowing. 18 in yoverninent with the 
EA an, Hostile opposition 19 Ox-bow. 

‘Ing gun d., come without delay ; d. eadar an 

dà iámhnain, tie space between the two cou- 
pies ; d. shia mì san, credit for six months ; is 
coma lean do! ’nacth., J don't. like to get in 
contact with him, fenmaidh sin rudeigin an d. 
an Domhna:ch, we myst have something in pre- 
paration for the Sabbath ; cuir d. ann, delay, 
proc astinate ` thuir d., give on trust or credit ; 
chailh siun an d. a ché.le, we rushed towards 
each other (to figli ) ; le 'curach chaidh i 'na 
dhn., in her s if she went to meet him ; an rud 
anns an téd d., théid dearmad, delay brings 
neglect. 

dail, v.a. see dailich. 

dail-bhuntata, sr, Potato-field. Chareicea 
dh. air a tarsuinn, he will not sell his potato- 
Jld cross-1ise (in such a way that the buyer 
cau see the weak spots in it.) If he looked 
across (ur a tarsuinn), the buyer would see 
the blauk-, but he could not du so if he look- 
ed along the rows, 

dail-chatha, »/. dailthean-c-, 8./. Pitched-battle. 
2 Battle-field. 

&ail-cnuach,} -an, s m. Dog-violet—uiola can- 
ina. 





260. Dail-chvach. 


dáileach, liche, a. Dilatory, tardy, procrasti- 
nating. *?ttPertainingz to meetings. 
A, 


adh,** sm. Adjournment, delay. 
s.m. Distributing, act of 


d—, pr.pt. of dàìlich. 
daileachadh, -aidh, 
distribution. A’ d—, pr.pt. of dailich. 
aileadh, -lidh, s.m. Tradition. 2 Affiance. 
daileag, -eige, -an, s.f. seecrann-pailin. 2 Little 
dale or meadow. 
p ach, a. Abounding in little dales or mea- 
ows. 
dailean, -ein, s.m. Scoff. 
&ailgheaeb, -ich, ap, s. The withy attached 








807 





daingneachadh 


to & cow's collar, prov. 

dailgioun, -inu,(AC) s.m. Prophecy, foretelling. 

dailgneachd, (AC? s. f. Auspices, prophetic vision 

dailich, pr.pt. a’ daileachadh, v.a. Distribute, 
deal. 2 Give, deliver. 

dàilich, pr.pt. a’ dàileachadh, v. a. & n. Delay, 
procrastinate, postpone, prorogue. 2 Linger. 

daille, see doille. 

daillidh,** a. Corpulent. 

oe: past pt. of aM å 

dailtean, -an, 8.2. Stripling. 2 Coxcomb,pu 
jackanapes. 3**Rascal. — 

————ach, -niche, a. Coxcomical. 

dailteanas, -ais, s.m. Impertinence. 2 Foppery, 
coxcombry. 3**Scurrility. 

dailthe, prep. After. see daithle. 

dailtheach,tt a. Abounding in fields or plains. 

dailthean, n.pl. of dail. 

daimh, gen. sing. & n.pl. of damh. 

dàimh, s.m. dr Relationship, connection, af- 
finity, friendship. 2**Kindness. 3**Friend. 
4tiRelative situation. Coris tha do dhàimh ? 
with whom is thy connection ? mar ni athair 
d.,as a, father befriends ; an cómhstri ri d., in 
contest with friends; dlüth an d., closely con 
nected ; fad' a mach an d., distantly related. 

tdaiinh, a. Troublesome. 

tdaimh, s.m. Church. 2 House. [** gives sh) 
8 People. 4 Assent, free will. 65 Poet. 
Learned man. 7 Guest, stranger. 8(AH) Man 
who eats or otherwise helps himself to excess. 

each, Ach, s.m. Relative, friend. 2 As- 

sociate, companion. 3 Guest. 

each, -icbe, a. Having many relations or 
frieuds. 2tt Related. 

dàimhealachd, 8.7.índ. Relationship, 2 Friend» 
ship, Kindness. 3* Kindred disposition. 

daimheil, -heala, a. Affectionate towards one’s 
relatious. 2 Related, relative, connected. 3 
Friendly. 4 Kind, benevolent. Gu d., ina 
friendly manner. 

daimh-fheoil, -fhedla, sf. Beef. 

daimhich, n. pl. of daimheach. 

tdaimbleag, -eig, s.f. Place of worship. 

daimsean, see daimsin. 

———-—ach, see daimsineach. 

daimsear, s.m. Rutting of deer. see büiridh, 

daimsin,§ s.m. Damson— prunus damascena. 

—each, a. Abounding in, of, or like dam- 

sons. 

daimsir, s.m. Mud. 

dain, gen. sing. & n.pl. of dàn, 

daindeoin, see dh’ aindeoin, 

dàine, comp. of dàna. 

daingean, -ein, -ngnean, sf. see daingneach, 

daingean, see daingeann. 

daingeann, -geinn & daingne, a. Strong, firm. 2 
Fortified. 3 Unmoveable, tight. 4**Tightly 
bound. 65ffStraight. Gu d. laidir, frmly and 
strongly. 

daingeann an ceart, adv. In thorough earnest. 

fdaingeann, s.m, Assurance, contract. 

daingionn, a. see daingeann. 

daiugue, comp. of daingeann. 

daingneach, -iche, -ichean, s. f. Stronghold, 
castle, fortification, fastness, garrison, fort. 2 
Prison. 3**Compact, assurance. 4**Bul- 
wark., 5**Ratitication. Mo charraig ’s mo 
dhaingneach, my rock and my fortress ; mar 
chrannaibh daingnich, like the bars of a castle. 

h. -aidh, s. m.  Fortifying. 2** 

Binding, fastening, 3**Establishing a ratifi- 

cation. 4**Fortitication.  5**Constipation, 

constipating, constringating. 6 Confirming. 

7 Founding. 8 Sanctioning. 9 Obliging, 

compelling. 10 Strengthening. A’ d—, pr.pt. 

of dainguich. 











——a 





daingneachail 


308 


dallanach 





daingneachail,** a, Affirmable, affirmative. 2 
Corroborative. 

—air,** s.m, Affirmer, 2 Corroborator. 

——as, -ais, s. m. Same meanings as 
daingneachd. 

daingneachd, s.f.ind. Strength, firmness, tight- 
ness, 2 Confirmation. 3**Fortification, bul- 
wark. 4**Compact, ratification, affirmance, 
assurance, security. 5 Surety. 

daingnich,pr.pt. a’ daingneachadh,v.a.Strength- 
en, fortify, confirm, establish, found. 2 
Bind, fasten, tighten. 38** Confirm, ratify, 
sanction, 4**Oblige,constrain. 5**Constipate. 

---———_—idh, fut. af. a. of daingnich, 

-.—— ——-te, past pt. of daingnich. Confirmed, 
fortified. 2 Established, founded. 3 Bound, 
tightened. 4**Obliged, constrained, ^ Baile 
d., a fortified town. 

dainn,* et Rampart, barrier. 

— —each,* see daingneach. 

eachas, -ais s.m. see daingneachd. 

dainnion, see daingeann. 

tdain-oide, s.m. Schoolinaster. 

tdair, -e, -ean, (darach) s.f. Oak. 

dàir, dara, s.f. Pairing of cattle, also daireadh. 
2(MMcD) Calving—Lewis. Bliochd is d. air 
an ni, the cattle teeming with milk and calving. 
When a cow is brought to the bull, AT say 
in W. Isles, tha 'n d, oirre ; in Wester Ross, 
tha i fo dhà'r ; in Argyll, tha i air theas. 

dàir, pr.pt. a’ dàireadh, v.n. Rut, c -pulate. 

lairb,(AC) s. f. Insect of the beetle tribe. 

-—— eng, -eige, -an, s.f. Tadpole. XAF) Min- 
now. 3 Any very small fish. 

-——vart,(AC) 8.7. Water-beetle, | 

dairbh, a. see doirbh, 

, &m., see doirb. 2 **Little slender person. 

re, &f. Oak. 2 Nursery or grove of oaks. 

daire, Ki &] -achan, see doire. 

dàireach, a. Rutting, copulating, breeding. 

diireadh,** -ridh, s.m. Bulling, copulation, cop- 
ulating. Béair ıl., a cow that is a-bulling. 

dairghe,** et Oak-apple. 

d'irireach, Aen, -ichean,  &.f. Loud rattling 
noise, noise of shooting. 2 Volley. 3 Smart 
blow. 

dairirich, -e, s.f. see dairireach. 

dàir-na-coille, s f. The first night of the New 
Year, when the wind blows from the West— 
the night of the fecundation of trees, 

dairt, -e, 8$. f. Heifer. 2**Clod. 

dairte, sf. f past pt. of dàir. 

—-—ach,** a. Of clods, full of clods. 

dais, -e, -ean [& -eachan,] s.f. Heap or mow of 
peats orcorn. 2*Pile of seasoned fish. 3 (M 
McL) Haystack. 

——, v.a. Mow or pile, as seasoned fish. s 
Trample hay. 

——,-eachan, s. m. Fool, blockhead. 2 (AC) 
Musical instrument. 3 (AF) Fallow deer or 
buck. 

——each, -eiche,a. Having mows of hay or corn. 

-——eachan, -ain, s.m. Insipid rhymer, low-wit- 
ted poet. 

daisgean,** -ein, ssm. Writing-desk. 

dait, s.m. Daddy—child's prattle. 

dàite,tt o see dòthta. 

daite, a. & past pt. of dath. see dathta. 




















2?tFMuch coloured. 

an,-ein, s.m. *'Daddy." f2 Foster father. 
13 Foster child, 

ftdaich, a. Quick, nimble, active, supple. 

f- —e,s.f. Revenge. 

dab head -eid. -an, s.f. Gaelic spelling of diet. 
(Perthshire dint.) Meat, as dinner, &c, 
(MMcL) guf, jee, 





ach, -iche, a. Fresh-coloured, fair-coloured. | 


Caithealachd, see daichealachd. 

daithear,** -eir, s.m. Avenger. 
uen. 

fdaitheasg,** -eisg, s.f. Eloquence, 2 Speech 
3 Remonstrance. 

daitheil, see daicheil. 

ti’aithle, prep. After, 

daithte, see dathta. 

— — —achan,* -ain, s.m. Miserable sized look- 
inz person, 

daitidh, s.m. Daddy. Gaelic form of Welsh tad. 

fdàl, see dail. 

fdala, s. m. News, 2 Oath. 3 Espousals. 4 
Wedding. 

dàla, gen. sing. of dàil. 

dala, see dara, An dala, the one of two. 12 see 
dail. f3 adv. Asto,as for. 4 gen.sing. of dail 

dàlach, gen. of dàil. 

d, sf.ind. Delaying, act of delaying. 

tdalaigh, v.a. Assign, appoint. 

dà-làimh, a. see dà-lànhach. Claidheamh d., € 
two-handed sword. 

da-lamhach, -aiche, a. Ambidexter, equally 
expert with both hands. 

d, s.f. Ambidexterity. 

dalan-dé, -ain-, see dearbadan-dé. 

dalba, a. see dalma, 

chd,** s.f.ind, Impudence, pertness, for 
wardness. 

ida bh. s.m. Lie, contrivance. 

dalbhadh,** -aidh, gun. Sorcery. 

dà-lid, s.f. Dixresis over a letter in writing à 

dall, pr. pt. a’ dalladh, v.a. & n.  Dlind, make 
bli.d. 2 Mislead. 8 Deceive. 4**Puzzle. 
Dallaidh tiodhlac, a gift blind th ; diall ind 
air an fhaghal. they made for the ford ; dh. 
iad air, they attacked. him sewrely. l 

dall, doill. s.m. Blind person. Radharc iùil 
do 'n dall a guiding vision to the blin , 

dall, doijlle, a. Blind. 2 Lrnorant. 3 Obscure. 
4 Dark. 5**Misl d. 6**Puzzled. "san oidh- 
che dhoirche dhaill, in tle pithy dark night. 

datiabhrat.tt -au, sam. bindiig banda e. 

dallachran,tf-ain, 8.231. Ignorance. 2 blind- 
Tess, 

dal!'achreileimh,tt s.m. Blind faith. 

dalladn, -aidh, saa. Gäil, 2 Misleading. 
8 aer of binding ormisie: ding, 4 Darkeniny. 
6**Blinduess. A d—, p pt. of dail. D. na 
h-inntinn, a blinding of the mind; a’ d. aléir- 
sinn, darkening his vision; bha e air a d - 
he was blin' fou ; air a sheann dh., nse aud 
wont in drinking. 

-elin, -aidh-eun, 8. mM. 

defect of vision. 

dallaz, -aize, -an, $.f. Shrew-mouse—sorez are 
ansus. dormouse. 2 Mole. 3 Leech. 4 Any 
little biind creature. 5 (DJM) Spotted dog- 
fish.—scyllium catulits. 6 Young dogfish. 
Small shark. 8**Buffet. 9 (AF) King-fish. 

ach, a. Like, or pertaiuiug to, a shrew- 

mouse, dormouse, mole or leech. 2**Butfct- 

ing. 


2 Revengefu' 








Purblindness, 





-an-fhedir, s. f. Dormouse, 2 Mole. f 
(AC) Grass monse, shrew. 

-an-fhravich,«./. Shrewmonse, field shrew. 
-fcóir, see dallag-an-fheoir. 
-na-h-urlaich, see dallig. 

dallaig, gen. & dat, sing. of dallag. 
dall-aigeantach, -aiche, a. Dull, slow-witted, 














stupid. í 
dallan, -ain, 8. m. Winnowing fan. 2 Blind 
person.  **3 Short-si:hted person,  4**Dn 


provident persou., 65**Blindfoldsd person, € 
tiGieat bulk. N b 
ach, -aich, 8.7. Large winnowing fan 


(Scots, weebt.) 2 Volley, broadside. Leig 





Aallanach 


iad d., they fired a volley or broads:de. 

— ach, -aicin, sm. £ f. Inebriation, state of 
complete intoxicatiou. Air an d., ‘*ddin’ 
fou. 

——arh,tt a. Abounding in winnowing fans. 

Jallanachd,** sf.ind. Winuowing with a large 
fan. 

Jal an-cloiche, -ain-cli-, s.m. Monnmental stone. 

lallun-dà, eum, The gaine Blind man's buff. 2 
(AH) Spider. 

Jillan-dlait, see dallan-da. 

allan-dé, see dearbadan-dd. 

datlan-nan-caorach,§ s.m, Large fuzz-ball, see 
beach. 

ialaran, -ain, an, s.m. Blind person, 2 Con- 
fused, stupid person. 

achil, sfind. Blindness. 2 Confused- 

ness, 3 Groping in darkuess. 

Qll-bhrat, au, sm. Blinding bandage. 2 Dark 
covering or mantle. b. va h-owhche, the 
dark mant’: of nyht, 

lxl'-cheo, s.m.ind. Dark thick mist. 
darkness. 

tall-chcéthir, Aire, a. Very mi-ty. 

lsil-cbreidesmh, sm. & f. Implicit faith. 

Ixl-elreidmh:iche,** va. Bigot. 

Lutl-iuntiniv ach, -iiche, a. Stupid, weak-mind- 
ed, dull-witted. 2ttDark-minded, blind. 

laii-Iuch. s.f. l:'ormouse. 

lell-o:dhch?, sf. Tne darkest time of night. 2 
Dark uizht. O° n ò -mhaduinn gu d., from 
early morn tll dark night. 

bi: ag ob, a, s.m. The alloy in metals. 

lail-shuil, s. f. Dim eye. 2 Sightless eye. 
Mealiaith gach neula dh., every cloud de- 
ceives his d'm -ye. 

lallta,*s.n. Th? very same case,way or method. 

.* adv. In the very same way or manner. 
D. Sheumais, jest as James would do; d. an 
fhir nach maireanu, just as he that ts no more 
would have don, 

—— ch, a. Tricky 

tum, a. Bold forward, audacious, impudent. 
£*'*«Lout. 3ff Oustinate, Gu d., stoutly, 
haw tily. 

——chil, s. f. ind. 
wardness, nolduess, temerity. 
8;1)0b tinacy. 4 H rughtiness. 

Ei [-an-achan &) -aichean, 





2?tGross 





Impudence, audacity, for- 
2** Stoutuess. 


am. Foster- 


cn. 2% God-crild. 3 Step-child. 4ipbis- 
ciple. 
blrebaistidh, 8. mw. d& f. God-son. 2 God- 


diuzater, 
Jal.a-; olrionn 
daushter. 
daitach, -aiche, a. hetrothed. 
ing to, a foster-child. 
an, pl. of dalta. 


Che 
WA 


sf. Foster-laughter. 2 Step- 


2 Of, or belong- 


daltadh, see dalta. 
db tas, -ain, -2, s.m. dim. of dalta. 2 Foster- 


son. 3**Discip:e. 4ttstripling. 
dam. -àim, san. Reservoir, conduit, mill-dam. 
2 black mnd, wire—Suth'd. 
@amacrarch(CR) sf. £ np, TWesitating. 2 
(DU) Walking unstea lily and elumsity. Tha 
ea’ l. he is wudeceled ; ciod e an d. ath’ ort ? 
what mikes you hesicatei— W. of Ross-shire. 
damain,* v.a. Gaelic form of damn. 
te, a, & nast pt. of damain, 


— — — ————— 


Accursed, 





most abandoned, 
Bord | danilisa-clis,* 
| damh air, ean, 


| 


dàmais, -e3n, 8. f. Draughts (gaine.) 
d., a dravgAt-board. 

dxmiiscar.(Cli, sam Mud, nire—W. ef Roxs-xh 
2 (AH) Large ugly pool of muddy water stand- 
ing where it ought not to bo, Gë, near a 
dwelling-house or faruesteadary, 

fásmnaisto, cw, sm. Guclic spelling {dumuy-. 


3^9 


damh-ursainn 


damanta, a. see damainte. 

d'amh, (for domh) see do. 

damh, $.m. Learned man 2**rarely Learning. 

tdainh, v.a. Give, grant, permit. 

danh, amb, dat. pl. daimh, s.m. Ox. 2 Hart, 
stag. 3 Male of the red deer. 4 Buck. 5 
Beam, that part of a harrow in which the 
teeth are fixed. 6* Mast—Ossian. 7 Joist. 
tet? Earthquake, D, sùirn, a kiln-joist ; thuit 
au d., the buck fell. 

ach, a. Of, or belonging to, an ox or hart. 

2 Full of oxen or harts. 

ach,** Ach, 8.35. see dabhach. 

t-——adh, -aidh, 8.2. Granting, giving, permis- 
sion. 

—— —Aaich, gen.sing. d: n.pl. of damhach. 

ail, f-e &) -hala, a. Stupid, boorish. 2 

Of, or belonging to, oxen. 

üil,** -ean, sm. Student, 

dàmhair,-e, a. Karnest, keen, eager, zealous. 
(** gives damhair.) 

, ean, S.E Hntting of deer, 2 Rutting- 
time. 3 The month of October [preceded by 
the art. an.) i**Noise. 5 (CR) Time—a^out 
Inverness & IN. of Ross-shire, Mu ’n d. seoan 
dé, about this time yesterday ; facal an d., a 
word in season, GT Earnestness, keenness, 
7 Rutting riot— Duin lain Ghobha. Bhuail 
chuca au d., the noise came suddenly upon them; 
an d. a’ mheadhon oidhche, in the dead of 
night, 8 Middle. An d. a’ chuain, in the 
middle of the ocean, 

—————each, -riche, à. Keen, earnest, eu- 
deavourinz, industrious, diligent, £**Noisy. 
9trHauttivg. 

eachd, s. f. ind. Keenness, eagerness, 
diligence, iudustry. 2**Noisiness. 

dauihais,* v n. see danns. 

damirallaidb,(AF) s.m. Wild ox. 2 Wild stag. 
3 Pygarg. 

tlunbamhail, ssm. Studeut. 

damnaun,** -ain, s.m. Spider. 

dumhan-alluidh, -ain-, pl. -ain, [& -a-,] s. m. 
Spider. Lion au damhain-alluidh, the spi- 
der’s web. 

d:imnhan«allaich, see damhan-alluidh. 

damis, see danns. 

damhasg, see dathas. 

camu-cabrach,(AF)s.m. Antlered staz. 

damh-learg (AF) s.m. Stag of red deer. 
damidha,** a. Scholastic. 

dainli-fé dh,5* sm, Hart, stag, buck. 

lien Zwee Na s.m. Wild ox, buffalo. 2 

y ary. 

dainh-imir, s.m. 

danib-'ann, -lainn, s.m. 

tlamh' iis. arig, -an, sm. Cathedral, 

duntnadh,** .-aidh, s. m. Daul, tie. 
ter out of which anychineg is formed. 
fdlambhna, s.m. Cause, reason. 
damh-nartaid (AF) s.m. Bullock. 
dà-atliozillaceh (AF) s ve. Bivalve shell-fish. 
dà-mhonsullach tt a. Bivalve. 

{danth-oide, eren, Doctor. 
master. 

~achd, sf. School-instruction. 

damnra (AV) s.i. Wildl beast, 

damhs, v.n. see dauns, 

huulisa, saa. sea dau a lh. 

damhsa. (for domh-sa, emr^a*. of do.) 

S e dannsadli-clis, 

see danasi-. 

Luut teach. ft a. Ox-2yed. 

tlenbt a, a Neuolastie, 2 san. Scholar. 

da n*-ursainn, son (Lt door-posts ox, i.e. the 

us ft ox; The best or ouly ox of a wi- 
dow, taken by ihe protetor on chs death 














Twenty-acre field. 
Ox-si all. 


2 Mat- 


2 Teacher, school, 





damnach 


of her husband. 

damuach,** a. Condemnatory. 

——— h,** .aidh, s. m. Condemnation, 
condemning, 2 Doom. A’ d—, pr. pt. of 
damnaich. 

damnadh, -aidh, s.m. Cursing. damning. Con- 
deinnation, condemning. 3* Doom, judgment, 
punishment. 

damnaich, pr.pt. a’ damnachadh,v.a, Condemn, 
dooim, judge, punish. Damuar e, he shall 
be damned, 

-— ——-te,** past pt. of damnaich. Condem- 
ned, doomed, judged. 2 Punished. 

dà-inogullach,(AF) see dà-mhogullach. 

damuinte, see damaint. 

dàn, -ain, pl. däin dana E dàintean, s.m. Poem. 
2 Song. 8**Verse. 4 Treasure. 5 1iWork. 
Ma tha sin an d., if that be ordained ` bha sin 
an d. dhomh, that was my fate ; seann dain le 
Oisean, Ossian’s ancient poems ` is duilich cur 
au aghaidh dain, to oppose fate (or destiny) is 
dificult ; ma tha e 'n d. dhomh a bhi beo, if 
it be destined for m» to live; am fear do ’n d. 
an donas, ’s aun da bheanas, it is he that will 
suffer for whom evil is destined. 

dàn, -din, s.m. Fate, destiny. 2 Decree, pre- 
destination. 

———, a see dana. 

dàn, -a, a. Bold, daring,intrepid,resolute. 2 Con- 
flent, audacious, presumptuous, forward, iin- 
pudent. Chad. leai iunseadh dhuit, Z do 


not think it presumptuous in me to tell you; cho |t 


d. 's a chaidh e air aghaidh ! how impudently 
he behaved ! or how resolutely he went forward ! 
d. mar ledghann, boid as a lion. : 

Dana,(CR)3.f. ‘he Evil One. Tha e ‘dol thun 
na Dana, he is qoing to ruin. 

danach, -aiche, a. Foetical, of, or connected 
with, poems, metrical, 

- ,** -aich, s.m. Fatalist. 

lanachd. s.f.ind. Poetry. 2 Poesy, art of com- 
posing poetry. 3 see dànadas, 

làmwlail,** a. Fated, destined. 

Janadas, -ais, s. m. Assurance, presumption, 
audacity, boldness. 2 Familiarity, — 3119Se- 
curity. Agus mar an ceudna o pheacadh 
danadais cum t’ óglach air 'ais, keep back thy 
servant also from presumptuous sin ` am bheil 
d. agad mo bhualadh ? have you the boldness 
to strike m» ? 

dinaich, pr. pt. a’ dànachadh, v.a. Defy, chal- 
leage, dare. 2 Adventure. 

tl!anaigh, see danaich. 


fdanair, s.m. Stranger. 2 Foreigner. 

t eachd,** s/f.ind. State of being strange 
or foreign. 

dàn-aoghaireil, s.m. Pastoral poem. 

danar AF) s.m. Peregrine, see seabhag. 

danaradh, see danarra. 

danardha, see danarra. 

chd, see danarrachd, 

danarra, a, Stubborn, obstinate, contumacions, 
presumptuous, opinionative. 2 Impudent, 
forward. 8 Firm, steady. 4 Bold, resolute, 
undaunted. 6ffFroward. 

——-chd, 8f.ind. Stubbornness, obstinacy, 
contumacy. 2 Presumption, forwardness, im- 
pudence. 3 Boldness, resolution. 4 Opinion- 
ativeness. 

dàu-cluiche, s.m. Dramatic poem. 

dan-cruite, s.m. Lyric poem. 

dàn-mór, Gm. Epic poem, 

daunarra, see danarra. 

tdanndha, a. Fatal. 

danus, pr.pt. a’ daunsadh, v.n. Dance,hop,skip. 

a, sm. see dannsadh. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Dancing, act of dancing. 





8 Guest. 














310 


daoireachd 


2**Dall. A’ d—, pr.pt. of danus. Le d., witA 
dancing; maighstir-daunsaih, a dancing mas 
ter; seomar-dannsaidh, a ball-room, 
daunsadh-clis, s.m. Corant, 
adh-deise,** sm. Strathspey. 
adh-nan-clag, s.m. Morris-dance. 
aidh, gen. sing. of dannsadh. 2 fut. af. a. 
of danns. 
ail,** a, Fond of dancing. 
—Aair, -ean, san. Dancer. D. dubh an 
uisge, a water-spider ; deagh dh., a good dan- 
cer. 




















aireachd,** &.f.ind. Dancing. 
tdant, -aint, s.m. Morsel. mouthful, 

portion. 
dàntuigheacad, see danachd. 
dàntachd, 


s find. Fatalism. 2**Poetry (dàn- 
achd.) 


dao,t a. Obstinate. 

daobhaidh, -e, a. Wicked. 2 Perverse, stubborn, 

daoch, 8.f.ind. Strong dislike, disgust, autipa- 
thy. 2 Horror, fright 

,**-oich, s.m. Periwinkle, sea-snail. 

ag,** -aig, -an, 8. f. Small periwinkle or 

sea-snail, 

ail, -ala, a. Disgusting, exciting great 
aversion. 2 Confounded, 

— ——aál,**-ail, s.m. Morsel, bit. 

alachd, s.f.ind. Disgustfulness, 

tdaochan, -ain, s.m. Vexation. 2 Auger, fit of 

passion. 

ach, a. Angry, passionate. 

daoi, a..t s.m. see daoidh. 

d'ao bh, for l’ uibh. 

dauibhir, a. see daibhear 

daoidh, -e, a. Wicked, fool ab, perverse, tur- 
bulent, worthless, 2 Weakiy, feeble. 3. AH) 
Adverse to taking medicines, cordials or 
special diets in sickness, when coaxed to do 
so by nurses or friends, ‘Tha e cho daoidh 
(daobhaidh) ’s ged bu phaisd e, he is as di 
cult to coax as a child wowd be. " 
Cnideachd dhaoine d., the company of foolish 
men. 


2 Share, 

















,-e,-eaAn, s.m. Wicked man, reprobate, 
rogue, 2**Foolish man. 3°*Vain man. 4(AF) 
Wild beast, Comhairle nan d., the council of 
the wicked ; rug e air an d., he seized the vain 
man. 

eachd, s.f.ind. Wickedness, folly, worth- 





lessness. Moladh na daoidheachd, praise 
Jrom the worthless. 
——-—ear, sm. Rogue, wicked man, 
——-—earra, a. Sly. 


daoifhear chd, see daocidheachd. 

dioighear, see daoidh. 

daoil, ean, s.f. see deala. 2 gen.sing. of daol. 

-——each,** a. Like, or of, à leech. 2 Full of 
leeches. 

daoimean, -ein, -an, s.m. Diamond. 

-—————üch, a. Tesselated. 2 Full of dia- 

monds. 3 Of or like diamond, 

fDaoin, sf. Thursday. 

davine, pl. of duine. 
people. 

— — -.— ach, -iche, a. Populous, numerous. 

-——-—achd, sf.ind. Population. 

ax, -eis, s.m. see dminenlas. 

daoin’-itheadh. ft s.m. 


Moran dhaoine, many 





Anthropophagy. 


daoire, comp. of daor, Dearer, dearest. Ni’s 
d., dearer. 
,*san. Extreme dearness. 2 Dearth. 





ad,** sm. Dearth, 
ting dearer. and dearer. 
id, comp. of daor. Is d. e sin, it ts deare 
er on that account. 

achd,tt sf. Chargeableness. 





A’ dol an d., get- 








daoi:engan 


daoireagan, -ain, sm. prov. for doireagan. 

daoir-fhine,** sf. Subjected or enslaved people. 

daoirich, gen. & wat sin). seo daoraich. 

davir mhaighstir, see dior-mhaighstir. 

daoirse, s.f.ind. Jwarth, scarcity. 2 Famine. 
3°*Captivity. slavery, see daorsa. 

ach,** a. AtHicted with dearth or fam- 

2 In captisity or slavery. 

ach,** s.n. Captive, slave. 

davirsian, s.f, see daorsainn. 

davite, (Qua dhaoite—ior math dh’ fhaoiteadh) 
2 

daol, -vil, s f. Beetle, chafer. 2 Bug. 3**Worm. 
4** Caterpillar. 5(AF) Fierce animal. An 
d. a ré.r ^ ghuò, the beetle after his kind. 

daolaig, -nige, An, s,/. Li.tle beetle or chafer. 
2 Bug. 3 Miser, 4 in derision Slovenly wo- 
man. 5 Lazy young female. 6**Worn. 7** 
Caterpillar. Gun bhi ro chaithleach no 'm 
dh., without being a spendthriit or a miser. 

daviagach, -aiv-he, o Abounding in beetles, 
worin or caterpillars. %**Vermicniar. 

daolag-blireac, -an-vreava, sf. Lady-bird, lady- 
cow. 

daolig-bhreac-dhearg, -an-breac-dearga, 8. f. 
Lady-bird, lady-cow, 





ine. 








261. Daolag-bhreac-dhearg. 


daolag-bhuidhe,* sr, Chafer, 

daolag-dheargz-bhreae, see daolag - bhreac- 
dhearg. 

diolag-zhorm,(AH) s f. Cockchafer. 

daola:r, -e, -ean, s.m. Lazy, inactive man. 2 
Mean, sueaki y, grovell ng fellow, 3ttMiser. 

—-—each,** a. Lazy, lounging. 

eachd., «.f.ind. Penury. 2 Laziness, in- 
activity. 3**Frequent lounging. 4 Meanness. 

daol-bhreac,(AH) sf. Ladv-bird. 2 Beetle. 

daol-bhuidhe,(AF) s f. Yellow worm or cater- 
villar. 

E oih, (AF) s.f. Blind stag-heetle. 

daol-dhubh.** s.f. Black-beetle, cockroach. 

davomhais,** v.a. Ruin, demolish. 

dlion, v.a. Ruin, demoli-h. 

d.vonaehd, see daonnachd. 

daonail(AC) s. Mankind. Roimh dh., against 
mankind, 

daonalt,** atv. prov. for daonnan. 

— ———aà,** alo. Perpetually. 

damda, see daonna. 

daoudach, see daonnachdach. 

daondan, see dlaonnan. 

d' aon fbuil,** a. Akin, allied, related. 

daonna, a. Human. 2 Humane, charitable, lib- 
eral 3 Hospitable. 4 Civil An cinne d. 
mankind. 

ch, -aiche,@. see daonna. 

chd, s.f.ind. Humanity, charity, bene- 
volence, liberality, hospitality. 2**Civility. 
Fer na d., the humane man ; an d., in liber- 
ality. 

daonnachdach, -aiche, a. Liberal, benevolent, 
hospitable, charitable, alinsgiving. 2**Civil. 

daonnachdail,** a. Same meanings as daon- 
pachdach. 

daonnairceagh, -eiche, à. see daonnachdach. 

daonnan, adv. Always, continually,at all times, 
habitually. 











301 


daosgar-sluaigh 


daonnanach, ft -aiche, a. Continual. 

daonndach, -aiche, a. Humane. 

daonntach, see daonndach. 

daontan,(CR) Suth'd for daounan (& aspirated) 
]stha ‘nis 'nau cuideachd dhaontan, and he 
ts always in their company now. 

daor-, tt intensive particle, 

daor, -aoire, a. Dear, costly, scarce, precious, 
2 Enslaved, bound firmly. 3 Imprisoned. 4 
Condemned. 5 Deeply involved. 6 Guilty. 
7* Most abandoned, completely corrupted. 
Sttslavish. Chuir e ceangal gu d. air an righ, 
he bound the king firmly or in subjection ; 
bliadhna dh., a year of scarcily; d. shlaightear, 
a most abandoned rascal; d. mheirleach, @ 
most abandoned thief, d. bhodach, a complete 
churl; d. bhalach, a complete boor; mar dhaoine 
d., like bondinen ; bean d., a bondwoman ; gu 
d., dearly; is d. leain e, I think it dear; is tuill- 
eadh "ad leam e, J think it too dear; tha d.- 
an-ceannach aig an duine bochd eadhon air 
cadal pa h-oidhche, the poor man pays dearly 
even for his night's rest—he would need to be 
working even at night to make both ends 





meet. 
»** -oir, s.m. Slave. 12 Earth, land. 
——, v.a. ën. Raise the price, make dearer. 


2 Sentence, doom, condemn. 3 Enslave. 

—ach, -aich, s.f. Intoxication, drunkenness, 
Air an daoraich, drunk; cha’n fhaicear d. air 
's cha’n fhaicear aodach air, ke '$ never seen 
drunk and he 's never seen properly clad—said 
of a person who is by no means a spendthrift, 
and yetis ever in difficulties ; tha 'n d. air, 
or tha e fo 'n d., he is drunk. 

——achadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of raising the price 
or enhancing the valueof anything. 2 Act 
ot condemning, condemnation. A'd—, pr.pt. 
of daoraich. 

daorad, -aid, see daoiread. 

daoradh, see daorachadh. 

daoraich, pr. pt. a’ daorachadh, v.n. Make 
dearer, enhance the value of. 

daorair,** s,m. Slave, bondman., 2 Captive. 
3 Oppressed man. 4 Oppressor. 

daoranach, -aich, s. m. Slave, bondman. 323 
Captive. 

daor-bhalaeh, -aich, s.m. Man-slave, captive. 
2 Unmannerly, low-bred fellow, churl. 

daor-bhean, s.f. Bondwoman. 

daor-bhodach, -aich, s.m. Slave. 2 Churl. 

daer-chlaun,** s. pl. Slaves. 2 Servants. 3 
Plebeians. 

daor-éigeantas, -ais, 8. m. Absolute necessity. 

daorgan, corruption of an t-adharcan., 

daor-ghille,** au, sm. Man-slave. 


daor-mhaighstir,** s.m. Taskmaster. 2 Op- 
pressor. 
daormunn, -uinn, -an, s.m. Dwarf. 2 Miser, 


niggard. 3 Curmudgeon. 

——— ach, a. Dwartish. 

daor-òglach, -aich, 5. an. Slave, bondman. 2 
Captive. 

daorsa, &.f.ind. Bondage, captivity. 2 Dearth, 
famine. Ar clann an d., our children in cap- 
tivity. 

daorsadh, -aidh, s.m. see daorsa. 

daorsa-geamhail, sf Bondage of fetters, 

daorsainn, gs. f. Fainine, dearth. 2 Bondage, 
slavery. 

daorsaun, -ainn, sf. see daorsa. 

daorta, past pt. of daor. Condemned, convicted. 

daor-thaigh, -ean,s.m. Prisou,house of bondage. 

daosgar,9*-air, 8.m. Refuse, remainder. 

——— — ,** a. Unteachable. 

Mobby. 


ach,** a. 
Mob, populace. 


-&luaigh,** an, 


"am daoth 

unoth, @ Obstinate, stubborn. 

fTdsothain,** s.f. Sufficiency, enough. 
ea ch.. he ate enough. 


Dh’ ith 


da-pheighian, s.m. Ancient coin of two pennies: dartan,** -ain, s.n. Herd, drove, 


Scots, or one-sixth penny sterling. 

dà-phunc,** s.m. Dipl thong. 

ach, -aich, s.m. Diphthong. 

ach, -tiche, a. Diphthongal. 

dar, prov, for 'nuair. adv. When, while. 

dar, prep. By, through. [Used only in swear- 
ing, ax, dar mo làumh, by my hand.) 

da 'r, prep. (for do ar, toour. Sometimes used 
in error for de ur.) 2 (for do bhur,) to your. 

dara, a. Second, either, either of two. And. 
h-uair, te second time; an d. h-àite, the secon 
pluce, an dara la mu dheireadn de 'n mhios a 
dh'fhalbh, thelast day vut one of last month ; 
enaidil mi dara leth na h-uine, 4 slept hals 
the time ; ane mini.tear a tha anns an dara 
fear aca seo P do you mean to suy thas one oi 
these two nen is a minister ? ; büeir thusa air 
an dara fear, agus beiridh mis’ air an fhcar 
eile, you catch one, and 1 will cateh the other, 
D. does not aspirate, cha d’ fheum i riawh an 
dara gluasad, she never required à second, ur- 
ging ; thoir dhoinh an dara fios ma’s fa!bh tnu 
às a Seo, tell me one way or Le other before you 
lave here ; exceptions, and. whaireach, t^e 
second morning** ; toga'dh mi thu an dara 
mhar erch—iskhop Carswell. Kor “and. 
cuid” see votes uuder cuid. Abbreviated 2rd: 
ern. 

darab, (do+an+robh) v. To whom was. 

dar-aviail, see dareanhall. 

aarach, -aich, s.n. Oak-tree—qurrcus robur, 
Badge of the Camerons. 2 Oak-timbcr. § 
Oali-wood. 4 by metaphor, Ship. Craonh-thar- 
aie), an c ak-tree ; sron daraich, an oak prow. 

varach, @ see daireacn. Gu bilocidach, där, 
ach, srutn-blainneach, milky, breeding and 
avick- lowing. 

darach-buidhe, 8.f. Wainscot. 

Jarach-sior-naine,§ 8. m. Evergreen oak, see 
eraobh-thuitm., 

diradh, see dara. 

dàradh, see da:readh. 

darag, -aige, -an, sf. Oak-tree. 2 Oak wood. 
Sr Stump of a tree. 4 Small stone. 

wed 7 Sek, 8f. Germander,—1 Plant 
1 red. 

da-ramhach, s.m. Two-oared boat, see báta,p.78. 

dararach, see dairirich. 

Guarüraich, -e, sf. see dairirich. 

tiaras, -ais, s.m. Home, dwelling. 

tdarb, -a, sm. Worm, reptile. 

tdarbh, -airbli, s.m. Cuach, chariot. 

darcain, gen, sing. & n. pl. of darcan. 

direan,-aiun, s. m. The hollow of the hand. 2 
Acorn. 3**leal, cout. 4ttPine-cone. +5 Mast. 

ach,** a. Abounding in acorns or teals. 

daicon,** s. Dram, (measure. ) 





Tlardal, s.m. Storm, 2tt¢Weather. 8 Severe 
Season. 

dar-daoil(AF) s.f. Venomous beetle. 

da rireadh,* adv, In earnest, seriously, An ann 


an d.a tha thu? are you in earnest ? 
tdarn, -airn, s.m. Schoul. 
dàrna, a. see dara. 
———(h, see dara. 
d»rnaig,f s.f. Gaelic spelling of darning. 
carail, -e, a. Libidinous. 
darsa, see daras. 
darsan,** see dearrasan. 
tuart, -airt, s.m. Dart. 
Tart, v.a. Burla cow. 
aurtach, (AF) -aich, s.m. Two-year-old bull, 
uurtardh,(AF) sm. Leifer. 


312 


dath 


dartailh-Inide, (AF) 8.2. Heifer three years old 
at Shrovetide, 

dsrtuig. (AF) sf. Yearling cow, 

2 Two-year 

old bnll. 

-eallaigh.(AF) s.m. Herd, drove. 

tdartluich, a, Impossibie, see fairtlich. 

dar-ubvhall, -aill,-übhlan, s.m. Oak-apple, 2 
Gali-nui, 

tdas, -ais, $ m. see dasg. 

dàsachd, s.f.iud. Fierceness, furionsness, mad- 
ness, raze, fury. Z"*:m: ertinerce, 

ach, -aiche, a. Fierce, furious, mad. 
2**finpertinent, assuming. 

dàsaidh, -e, a. Furivus. 2 DU) Audacious. 

da-san, prep. pron. emmhat, (do+esan) Lo Min- 
self, [Generally aspirated.] "'hoir dba-san e, 
give it lu hims-ij. 

fd.sau, a. Binocular. 

dàsan, -ain, sae. Fury, frenzy. 

ach, -atche, a. Cunniug, wily. 2 Pre- 
sumptuous, 3 Furiou., fierce, frautic. 

—— —aücna,** s.7.ind. buriousuness, ferceness, 
frenzy. 

dasg, aisg, -an, 8.51. Gaelic spelling of desk. 

da-sgiathach,** a. Bipennated, two-wiuiged. 

dà--goltadh, sm. Ea.-inark on sheep. (For its 
position see comnarradh-ciuais. } 

da-shealh, san. Ambiguity. 
——-—ath fj a. Ambiguous. 

dà-shealladh, -aidh, s.m. Secondsight, 
sealladh. 

la-shivlach, a. Dissylabic 

dá--hioladh.** 844. Dossyiiaule. 

dà-shligheach f; a. Bivious. 

là shüileac,** a. Bisocular. 
Loops, 

Jasuimach, see dàsanach. 

tdata, a. Pleasant, handsome, agreeable. 

‘latan, see daitean. 

labh, see doth. 

dath, v.a. Colour, dye, tinge stain. á 

nn -a, -an LE -aithean,) s.m. Colour, stain, 
dye, tincmre. 2 Coiour ng, appearance, Oha 
luidh d. air dubh, luidhidu dubh air gach d., 
black materials will rot dye & colour, but any 
colour wilt take black ; do ghrnaidh air d. na 
céire, thy cheeks culnured like red waz ; d. 
bréige, a Juise dye , dathan eug-samhuil, 
various colours. , 

The following are the principal native vego- 
table dyes used in Gaeldom, witn the colours 
they produce, Several of the tints are very 
bright aud pretty. but have now, nufortunate- 
ly, in many cases been superseded by foreign 
mineral dyes. 

Claret—coreur--a lichen scraped from the 
rocks and steeped in urine three months,then 
taken ont. made into cakes and hung in b 
todry. When ua, these cakes are reduce 
to powder and the colour fixed with alum. ` 

Buck (finest) —Conumnon dock root with 
copperas. 2 Darach, oak bark and acorns, 
with copperas, 3 vor grey) Seilist.ar, Pris 
root. 4 Sgitheach, hawthorn bark wich cup 
peras. 5 Aller Lark with copperas, 6 bluish) 
Comaiou sive—pruntus spinosa, proas-uau-a:r- 
neag. 2 (biuish) Red bearberry—arbucue 
uva ursi, grainuseag. 

Biue—blaeberry, with alum or copperas, 2 
Elder, with ahun. 3 Ailleann, elecampane. 

Drown—QConnmon yellow wall-lich.n —par- 
melia parietina. 2 Dark cnotal —parmeiig 











2 Having two 


cetarophilla. 3 Duileasg, dulse—kind of soa- 
weed. 4 Currant with atum, 6 Daraca 


oak) bark, or berries of craobh-an-dromain, 
A 6 (Dark chestnut) Roots of rabbag- 











University of Toronto 
Library 


DO NOT» 
REMOVE 
THE: 


CARD S 


FROM = 


THIS 
POCKET 


Acme Library Card Pocket 
LOWE-MARTIN CO, LIMITED 





eat A en 


i Är lk 
"Y YE 


Cp KSE P Y " 
vi Ip 
nios A. | A ` in Pa Ka mt 


MEN re ETA teen A 


I 
"af 


r3! f 


LI 
y 


nA LP (A) LE 













tk 





H a Sv 
Me 3 Cy OS 238 X n - 
- vi il r Ar yu s AEN m 
Tr s i DAFI TH 1 Li p J J Oo? 
Mo Fe de LAN Ja "n T WW 
LU) sie i . Se 
Lex T ar Wal af Ya ry es ^ us JN ^r 
7 (E Lt ` MES A: Le i AT 
Ü ue D p i ap | I A, i 5 
H F n Tn E " d Wa , M ' r vi i J 
aes mi d LO L Lu: Eh M | [DM 
i VE i Or, 
| 7 iv at i n -EARE " ISI " I i 
KEEN TT N, Mi (M X UPS Let 
TE UR d, E 2 AUS. gut * : T 
Am "a C y * | i " ' j 
d ge ve ie eS 4 A nnm Ww 
vi Jay dÄ An A D i ) (ré I s ! "^ ^ I 
|o kascht" Ce hg | | k 
IL K d 1 V. AW J ' J 
DN my ew TT AT Í 7, kv: ) 
Oil e, an ` CA i JU i SEN, An WW DM . | , 
Lë GT CAN i ‘ 1 a L| ' L| ! 
ës, ON. d ` Mi ii aE A I i 
Loo t d K TA i ' j I 
LIS" [| , 
‘ Í it i i i 
i 1 I D Ou l^ Ar VK A A t 
i U “4 T L| A T . à À b i i 
a. "` LT H ` ; J | 
ASSA ` MI I , m . 
KREE 1 L| H Ii i 
| A KM | Y T E 4 ! i 
y d CU i AE n ni ' VW 
M A , ! I 
wi AAG RU MS KA Y ^ IN l ’ : i 
at GK i Mr x H A i 
nim ‘ S LCE TL "i "m. TN j 
1 Vie ite t T" | F A , 
Pe D | Je A | 7 te L| t Ly 
ny i Zu AR , Wa n E a 1 ; Uu j 
* ah K In A lY ' "Y AC, 
Nie SAlkasen A i n I Te, " í déi v i 
L MM Lj i i 
at JA SL T di 1! V i i f 
KA 4 T. y ^r 1 ' ". MU y TA MEO ' 
kr e b I [| PT ) 
AXE Ae . Y dé n SA ! , u T 
MÄ d UE f E : Te Lk A | 
A RTT T De d uu . i ‘i Y^ A 
Wk Seu zw Nn sath Mt 
; TM 1 1 
" , A dech 
AT d ` 
It yy £ t 
di n LU 
Y T 
t i is Un Li 
7 : TAN T 
SE E E 
d( 7 ii ; T 
T it L| n 
i 
MY CG . f $ 
i WI 
Zu i iit 
i i 1 Y * 
Lé if A^ 
Ee 47 "a | 
' L| | ` It 
"ew" 
r Pai . J dt 





ol 0 
Da 


8 
T 
B 


` 
| 
` 
E 
E 
A 


dru 
by, "v ATI 
* y hm : g NI 


wll ZA 
ll, 


"o Wë "m n LEE IT "b AY "Turm Lé I 


Wa dE i Mont i - 


ae wh. te 


Li 
J 
D Ee 
iv Lj 
m E 
Lj 
i 
i 
I 
i 
i 
A 
N^ I 
I 
T 
! i 
i 
Ä i 
L| i 
ii 





The illustrated Gaelic dictionary : specially designed for beginners 
and for use in schools, including every Gaelic word in all the other 
Gaelic dictionaries and printed books, as well as an immense number 
never in print before / by Edward Dwelly. 


Dwelly, Edward, 1864- 
Herne Bay : E. Dwelly, 1911. 


http://hdl.handle.net/2027/uiuo.ark:/13960/t4pk5m49f 


Hathi [rust 





www.hathitrust.org 


Public Domain in the United States 
http://www.hathitrust.org/access use#pd-us 


We have determined this work to be in the public domain 
in the United States of America. It may not be in the 
public domain in other countries. Copies are provided 
as a preservation service. Particularly outside of the 
United States, persons receiving copies should make 
appropriate efforts to determine the copyright status 
of the work in their country and use the work accordingly. 
It is possible that current copyright holders, heirs or 
the estate of the authors of individual portions of the 
work, such as illustrations or photographs, assert copyrights 
over these portions. Depending on the nature of subsequent 
use that is made, additional rights may need to be obtained 
independently of anything we can address. 





Q 
Qu 
= 
aal 
42 
Uu) 


Latest Date 


ing of books 
ion and may 
iversity. 


i 
nary act 


and underl 


scipl 
| from the Un 


for d 


Theft, mutilation, 
are reasons 
result in di 


is Library 


ty of Illino 


Universi 


L161—O-1096 





sn-pd#asn ssa22e/buo'snaniuyeu'MMWM//:dyu / 53845 payun SU) ui urewog ai[qndg 
J6tusxdpi/ooeccT/:1e'onin/7zozAsu'sjpueu'ipu//:dmu / LNS SO:6T #I-Z1-61T0z uo payesauag 





The person charging this material is re- 
sponsible for ‘ts return to the library from 
which it was withdrawn on OF before the 
Latest Date stamped below. 

Theft, mutilation, and underlining of books are reasons 
for disciplinary action and may result in dismissal from 


the University- 
To renew call Telephone Center, 333-8400 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS LIBRARY AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


APR i9 13% 


L161—O-1096 


Digitize 


h 
` L 
à 


INTERNET ARCHIVE UNIVERSITY OF Il 


sn-pd#asn ssa22e/Bio jsnjiujeuMMm//:dyy (sage payun au) ul ulewog ai[qnd 
jJorucydpi/oo6eT/se'onin//zozAeu s|jpueu'pu//:dmu / LW S0:6T tFT-ZI-6I0z uo payeiauag 





LA 
(m 
em 

m 
= 
-— 
im 
x 
a 
ru 
= 


5 - II 
- E i] 
r 
- T V 


(AA) 


E 
= 


Ü 


19: 


2-14 


-17 


9 


5n 20° 


ed ¢ 


Ts 
L 








= =- —- 


GER 


groqulud 03 uorjeAouut Sumeng wv DI dn 498 8€ 


"XWYNOLLOI([ AHL IO AdJAL AHL ONLLLWS 


‘II "10A 93 eoetrdsrquoJdT ] 





e S tad i a ais ts icin aera Be 
= e Ze E e a i d Eu 9, SQ 
e e ` S dx » P, > 


"ny. 


1euol 





[opi P 


UATIANO 





e 


Q AL 


"oloy d 


241010 fiQ 








Illustrated 
GAELIC ~ 
Dictionary 





F 





SPECIALLY DESIGNED FOR 


|| BEGINNERS AND FOR ` 
_ USE IN SCHOOLS, 


INCLUDING EVERY GAELIC WORD IN ALL THE 

OTHER GAELIC DICTIONARIES AND PRINTED 

BOOKS, AS WELL AS AN IMMENSE NUMBER 
^ NEVER IN PRINT BEFORE, 










BY 
EDWARD DWELLY. 
F.S., 
Yol. 2 





MehisedD Cvition | 












PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHOR 
SINGLEHANDED, AT HIS:PUBLISHING OFFICE 
3 . Daie : MILL LANE, SAM - 












VIITE 








aen, white weter-lily. 1 (Dark) Blaeberry 
nut-galls. 8 (Reddish) The dark purple 


olo 





de 


-adh,** -aidh, s.m. Colouring, dyeing, 
staining. A’ d—, pr. pt. of dathaicb. 





, ‘cen cerig cen du'—(gun chéire gun | dathadair, -ean, s.m. Dyer. Fitheach dubh air 


| — neither crimson nor black) treated in the 
manner as the lichen for claret dye. 9 
ilumot) — yellowish (dead leaf coloured) 
cnotal—parmelia saxaiilis. 
Drab or Fawn,—Birch bark, betula alba. 
Green—Ripe privet berries with salt. 2 

Wild mignonette, reseda luteola, lus buidhe 

mor, with indigo. 3 Rusg conuisg, whin bark. 

4 Cow-weed. 5 (Lively) Common broom. 

Rach Heather,erica cinerea, fraoch bhadain, 
ith alum. The heather must be pulled 

PZ flowering,and from a dark shady place. 
Iris leaf, duilleag seilisteir. 

Magenta -bandelion,—contodon taraxacum, 
bearnan Brice. 

Orange—Ragweed (stinking W illie)— senecio 
Jacobea, buaghallau. 2 Barberry root—ber- 
beris vulgaris, barbrag. 3 (da; k).—Bramble-- 
rubus D uticosus, preas smeur, 

Purgple—Euonymous (spindle-tree,) with sal- 
ammoniac. 2 Sundew—drosera rotundifolia, 
lus-na-fearnaich. 3 Blaeberry—vaccinium myr- 
tilvis, with alum. 

Red —Vormentil—poteniilla tormentiila,lean- 
| artach. 2 Rock-lichen — ramalina scopu- 
lorum. enotal. 3 White cnotal—lecanora pal- 
| dexcens, cnotal geal. 4 (fine)—Rue—gallium 
virum, ladies’ bedstraw.. A very fine red is 
` obtained from this, Strip the bark off the 

' roots, then boil them in water to extract the 
remainder of the.virtue, then take the roots 
out and pub the bark in and boil that and 
the yarn torether, adding alum to fix the 
colour. Gallium boreale treated in the same 
way alsc produces a red dye. 5 (purple)— 
Blaeberry, vaccinium myrtillis, lus-nan-deare, 
with alum, verdigris and sal-ammoniac. 6 
(erimson)— cnotal corcur—lecanora tartarea, 
white and ground and mixed with urine. 
This was once in great favour for producing a 
bright crimson dye. 7 (scarlet)—limestone 
lichen—wurceolaria calcaria, enotal elaci-aoil. 
Used by the peasantry in limestone districts, 
as Shetland. 8 (scarlet) Ripe privet berries 
with salt. 

2 Violet— Wild cress— nasturtium oficinalis— 
biolair. 2 Bitter veteh—orobus tuberosus— 
eairmeal. 3 Bilberries fixed with alum. 

Yellow—Apple-tree, ash and buckthorn. 2 

[ Poplar and elm. 3 Roid, bog-myrtle. 4 Ash 
roots. 5 Teazle—dipsacus sylvestris—lus-an- 
fhücadair or leadan. 6 Raineach mhór, brac- 
ken roots. 7 Cow-weed. 8 Tops and flowers of 
fraoch, heath»f. 9 Wild mignonette—reseda 
- iuteola, dried, reduced to powder and boiled. 
10 Leaves and twigs of beithe beag, dwarj. 
birch 11 (bright) Sundew with ammonia.— 
drosera rotundifolia — lus-na-fearnaich. 12 
(rich) Achlasan Chalum Chille, St.John’s wort, 
fixed with alum. 13 (dirty) Peat soot. 14 
Rhubarb, (monk's)—ymez alpinus—lus-na- 
purgaid. . i 

T'he pr employed is to wash the thread 
thoroughly in urine long kept (fual,) rinse 
and wash in pure water, then put into the 
boiling pot of dye which is kept boiling hard 
on the fire. The thread is lifted now and 

eain on the end of a stick, and again plung- 
by in until it is all thoroughly dyed. 

blue, the thread is then washed in salt wa- 

ter, but any other colour in fresh. 

| datha-ban,§ s.m. Dropwort—enanthe. 

de -aiche, a. Coloured. 2 Of various 

colours. o**Colouring. 4**Apt to tinge. 


| 


| d€ 


^ 


Digitized by 
4 EERWNEH ARCHIVE 
















dathadh, -aidh, s.m. 
dathadh,** -aidh, s.m, 


dathag,** -aig, -an, 8. 


body. 








dathais, -e, -ean, s.f. 
dathan, n.pl. of dath. 
dathas, -ais, dat.pl. dathasaibh, s. m. Fallow- 


de, prep. Of, off. 


nt eth i 0 


mullach an taighe, fios gu nighean an datha- 
dair,a black raven on the roof, & warning to the 
dyer's daughter—a death omen, suggesting the 


probability of there being clothes to dye black. 


—eachd, 
Process of dyeing. 
at the trade of a dyer. 
Singeing, act of singeing, 


s. f. ind. Trade of a dyer. 2 
Ri d., dyeing; ris an d., 


see dòthadh, 

Dyeing, tincturing. 2 

Dye, colour, tincture. A’ d—, pr. pt. of dath. 

f. Worm in the human 

body. 

ach,** o Abounding in worms, as & 
2 Like a worm. 

-mhortach, a. Destructive as worms. 


dathaich,** pr. pt. a’ dathachadh, v.a. Colour, 


dye, tincture, stain, P 
te,** past pt. of dathaich. 


dathaidh, fut. af. a. of dath. 


, see dachaidh. 


dathaigh, see dachaidh. 
dathail, a. Coloured. 


2 Well-coloured. 3 De- 
cent, comely. 4 Agreeable. 

eachd,** s. f. ind. Pleasantness, comeli- 
ness, decentness, 2 Finery. | 

see dathas. 


deer, buck of the fallow-deer. 


dath-chlodhach, -aiche, a. Parti-coloured. 
tfdathnaid, -ean, s.f. Foster-mother. 

dath-reodha,( AF) s.m. 
dath-ruadh,(AH ) s.n. 


Mole. 
Saw-dust of Californian 
red-wood tree, used for dyeing purposes. 


dà-theangach, o. Bilinguous, bi-lingual. 
dathta, see dothta. 

dathta, past pt. Coloured, stained. 

dé ? int.pron. 


What? Desin? what isthat? 
dé’b’ aill leat ? what is your will? Curtailed 
form of ciod e P what is it? Dèan t-each a 
th' agad ! what an extraordinary horse you 
have ! 

According to MacBain, the 
peculiar eustom of confusing this word witn 
do, to, in speaking Gaelic, extends back to 
Old Irish in pre-accentual de compounds, but 
the erroneous practice has no doubt largely 
been increased by the publishers of the Gaelic 
Seriptures, the instances of the use of do, in- 
stead of de making the meaning of the text 
in Gaelic just the opposite of what the origi- 
nal conveys. It is strange how tenacious 
some Gaelic writers are of the pernicious 
custom of using do for both de and do, while 
it is quite plain that the meaning of one is 
just the opposite of the other. It is no excuse 
to say that it is often spoken so (in some 
places de is practically obsolete) for it is 
the duty of scholars and those who write or 
speak Gaelic, to do so correctly, and so help 
to correct popular errors instead of perpet- 
uating them. This is only one case among 
many, where any unprejudiced person can 
see the absolute necessity of Gaelic being 
taught in every- school, at least in Gaelic- 
speaking distriets, to prevent its becoming à 
mixture of exceptions like Engiish. 

An gabh thu roinn dheth sin? will you Lake o 
part of that ? bheir mi ’a ghlas de ’n dorus, 
Iwill take the lock off the door ;thug mi 'n 
ceann de m’ òrdaig, I took the tip off my 
thumb. If do be substituted for de in each of 
above examples, the result is mere nonsense, 


Re Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


n. sd 


de 314 deagh 
De mar a bha mo dhalta de "n chomhraig ? cog—Uist. (Ugh deachaidh in Gairloch.) 
how did my foster-som come of in the battle 2 deachaidh, past neg. d interr. of rach. An ¢ 
[De becomes dh’ before a vowel, and ø dh’ if| tu P hast thou gone 2 ; cha d. mi, I have not go 
also following a consonant, it aspirates every-| no; gu'n d. na daoine a mach, that the me 
thing following it, and governs the Dative! went ous, 
case. ] ie deachaidh, a. Gairloch for deachadh, a. 
Armailt mhór de dhaoinibh agus a dh’ each- deachainn, see deuehainn. 
aibh, a great army of men and horses ; làn de Tdeachair, -e, a, Bright, glittering. 
reubainn agus a dh’ aingidheachd, full of | tdeachair,** s,f, Separating, 2 Separation. 
ravening and wickedness. Brightness. | / 
De is thus declined in conjunction with the Tdeachair, v.n. Follow. i 
personal pronouns : ' à deachamh, -àimh, -aimhean, see deicheamh, } 
Sing. diom, of me, Plur. dinn, of us, —aich, v. see deicheamhaich. 
diot, of thee, dibh, of you, i indi 2 lnspire. 
deth, of him, diubh, of them, Make completely certain, assure positively. 
dith, of her, m. À **Interpret. 5** Debate, 6** Teach. 
The initial d is generally aspirated (dhiom, -—,** -a, -an, s.f. Dictate. 2 Word. 3 fo 
dhiot, &c.) in composition. diadhachd. | 
de’, prep. Of or of his or its. [Used before a 


word beginning with a vowel, or when poss. Pë Ce e ee Ne 
deachdadh, -aidh, -aidheadh, s.m. Inditing. 
deachdaich, v.a. Dictate, indite. 
deachdair, -ean, s.m. Dictator. 2 One who € 
dictating. 2 Dictation. 3**Teaching. 
deachlach,** q. Hard, difficult. 
Tdeachosa, int, Lo ! behold ! there l'see ! | 
chd, see deacaireachd. I | 


} deachdadair, s.m. see deachdair. 
pron, is understood.] —- each, see deachdaireach. 
de h-, prep. Of or off her, (poss. pron.) [Used 
Act of dictating. 3 Dictate, thing dictatel, 43 
Infusion. 5**Inspiring, 6**Law. A? d—, pri 
——te, past pt. of deachdaich, Dictated 
deachdainnear,** g. Lexicon, dictionary. . 
dictates, 3**Teacher, 4**Doctor. 
—each,** o Dictatorial. 
deachdannair, see deachdainnear. 
deachdta, past pt. of deachd. Quite certain, 
deachmhaieh, v.a. see deichmhich. 
Tdeachmhor, -0ire, a. Smoky. 
Tdeachradh,** s.m. Indignation, anger. $ 
deacra, comp. of deacair, if 
dead,** a, Meet, proper, decent, becoming. 
Hereditary, 

















































before a word beginning with a vowel, or 
when poss. pron. is understood.) 
dé,** s.m. Day. 
Dé, gen.sing. of Dia. 
dé, adv. (an dé) Yesterday. Air bho ’n dé, the 
day before yesterday. 
deabastach, tt -àiche, a. Bawdy. 
déabh, pr.pt. a’ déabhadh, v.a. & n. Drain, dry 
up, shrink, 2**Battle. 19 Encounter. T4 
Hasten. [pronounced dè-u.] 
——~—ach,** a, Contentious, 92 Litigious. 3 
Causing haste. 4 Apt to dry up. 
adh, -aidh, s.m. Drying, draining. 2 
Evaporating. 3 Shrinking, as the staves of a 
dish. 4 Circumstance of becoming dry, hay- 
ing shrunk or , become parched. 5 Hasty en- 
counter. 6**Wrangling. +7 Skirmish, battle. 
18 Haste, despateh, hurry. Thun ar fuil a 
dh., almost drying wp our blood. A’ d—, pr. 
t. of déabh. A Lochbroom rhymer says ‘‘’Ge 
a sluagh an t-saoghail thu,” by which ahe 
seems to mean, you are of the scum of creation, 
This word does not appear to be used in this 
sense elsewhere.—D.U. 
—. —aidh, fut. af. a. of déabh. 2 gen.sing. of 
déabhadh. 
deabhunn, s.m. Horse-fetter, 
deabhlach, see deabhthach. 
déabhta, past pt. of déabh. Parched, shrunk, 
dried up. 
Tdeabhbthach, -aiche, a. Contentious. 2 Liti- 
ious. 
ead -€, -ean, S.f. Jacket. 2 Waistcoat, 3 
*Bodice. 4 Corsets. 
each,** q. Having a waistcoat, 
deacair, -e, a. Difficult, hard, abstruse. 2 Sad, ! | 
mournful, grievous. 3 Surly, gloomy. 4 Sorry, deadh-, For words beginning thus, see deagh. 
grieving, sorrowful. 5** Wonderful, strange, deadhachd, see diadhachd. 
rare, 6**Powerful. 7**Terrible, 8**A bstract- deadhail,** gf. Separation of night and 
ed. 9**Thorny. 10* Sore, Is d. brigh do dawn of,day, twilight. 2 Releasing. 3 W | 
sgeòil, sad is the substance of thy tale;is d. ness, D. na maidne, morning dawn. ; 
leinn 'achmhasan, Ais reproofs are grievous to deadhair,** o. Swift. 


us. deadhan, see deaghan. 
eachd, s.f.ind. Difficulty, hardship, 2 achd, see deaghanachd, 
Sorrow. 3**W onderfulness, 4**Grievousness. deadhman, (AF) s.m. Moth. | 
5**Terribleness. 6 Essay. deadla,** o Bold, confident. | 
deacait, -ean, $.f. see deacaid. deadlas,** s.m. Confidence. 
- each, o see deacaideach, deagaid, see deagha. 
deach, past interr, d neg.of rach. see deach- | deagailt,** Sf. Separation. 2 Divorce. 
aidh. An deach e dhachaidh ? has he gone | d eagal, conj. For fear, lest, ĉin case. D’ —_ 
home 2 gu, for fear that ; q’ eagal nach, for fear 
» a. See deagh. 12 Profitable. not, 
t-—, sm. Movement. 
deachadh, past subj. neg. & interr. of rach. 
(DC) o. ` Addled. Ugh d., an addled 

















-—eachd, see deachdaireachd. 
pt. of deachd. 
—achd,** y. f ing. Lexicography. A 
—eachd, s.f.ind. Dictatorship, act ol 
Gu d., most certainly, most assuredly, 
deachmhoradh,** “aidh,s.m.Courtesy,affability, Jj 
- ch,** o, see deacaireach. } 








dead, déid, s.m. see deud. 
-——ach,** see deudach. | 
fdeadh, -a, s.m. End, purpose. d 


— 


deadh, adv. (air dheadh) Otherwise, else. Rac 
ann am màireach na dheadh cha’n fhaic t: 
e, go to-morrow else you will not see him. [Aii 
deodh & air dheodh in Perthshire, and na 
dheadh in Suth'd.] 


——-,0. See deagh. 


xs 








— 











deagal,* s.m. see deaguil. 
deaganach,** -aich, s.m. see deaghan. 
deagh, a Good, excellent, worthy, Da dheagh 








UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 


Sé P AN Le 

; Fa r A N A pmi j A n 8 Lë ge d 
- | | H -= B | J i, E KA H Aer al L3 l 

` dë i E 

RIT E^ P3 d a a Fi E; i H LT / E 

j| -— Jet LI m sl kh v" E 

i L = LI 1 = 


TEN 
edd 
= 


deagh 315 deagh-thoil 


 mheann, two good kids; d. dhuine, œ good 
man. X [Always precedes its noun, which it 
d aspirates. It never predicates of its noun, 
thus you never meet with ‘‘ tha thu deagh,” 
nor yet ** is deagh thus 
| Sëch, (mu'n) for mu'n rachadh. Mu’n deagh 
' 'n glacadh no ’n tarraing, ere they would be 
caught or drawn— Dàin I. Ghobha. 
| eagha,** s.m. Banewort. Preceded by the 
| article an]  2(AF)Chafer, bug. 
—.  pagha-buidhe,$ Yellow cen- 


formed, 2 Handsome. 

deagb-fhaclach, -aiche, 4a. Eloquent, well- 
spoken, fair-spoken. 

deagh-fhonn, -fhuinn, $. m. Good mood, good 
humour, good tune. 2 Good disposition, good 
principle. 

deagh-fuinn,** s.f. Good-will. 

deagh-fhulang, -aing, s.f. Patience under suffer- 
ing, patient endurance. 

——— ach, -aiche, @. Patient under 
suffering. 2 Hardy. 3 Persevering. 

deagh-ghean, -a, Ss. m. Good will,favour. 2 


























































































Mme ] „perfoliate yellow- 
wort—chlora perfoliata. | Benevolence. 2 Grace. 4 Good humour,good 
waghad,t s.m. Living, diet, mood. D. dligheach, due benevolence. 
morals— Uist, deagh-ghloir, -e, s.f. Affability, courteousness. 
eagha dearg,? s.m. Red cen- deagh-ghloireach, -iche, a. Affable, courteous, 
taury, see ceud-bhileach. condescending. 
eawhaidh, -e, -ean, S. fe see deagh-zhné,** s. Candour. 
déigh. deagh-ghniomh,1l-a, -ara, s.m. Benefaction. 
eagh-ainm, -ean & -eannan, deagh-zhnüis,** s, f. Pleasant countenance, 
(00 sm. Good name. good face. 
P eaghan, -ain, s.m. Dean. 2 deagh-ghradh,** -ghraidh, s.m. Sincere attach- 
Any noted person. ment, ardent love. 
| ———achd,** s.f. Deanery. aich, v.a. Love ardently, sincere- 
es gh-bheachd, -an, s. M. ly or fervently. 
Due attention or consider- deagh-ghuth,** s.m. Good word, 2 Good voice. 
ation. 2**Civility. 3ttGood 3 Euphony. 
intention. 4(AH) Vivid re- - ach, -aiche, a. Sweet-voiced. 
collection, certainty, assur- deagh-iomchar, -air, s.m. Good comportment, 
ance, conviction. proper bearing, good conduct. 
wagh-bheart, -airt, -an, sJ. deagh-ith,** :.f. Toothache. see déideadh. 
Virtue, good deed. deagh-labhair. * s.f. Elocution. 2 Eloquence 
eagh-bheus, -an, s.m. 262. Deagha-buidhe. good utterance. 
Good morals, good behaviour, virtue, virtuous deagh-labhartach, w. see deagh-labhrach. 
habits, morality. deagh-labhrach, -aiche, a. Well-spoken, elo- 
—— ach, -aiche, a. Well-behaved, vir-| quent. 
tuous, moral, well-bred. _- o, aich, s.m. see deagh-labh- 
ieagh-bhlas, -ais, -an, s.m. Good taste, relish. raiche. 
da,a. Well-tasted, pleasant to taste, deagh-labhraiche, -an, s.m. Orator. 
dainty, well-relished. deagh-laoch,** s.m. Good soldier. 
———— ta, see deagh-bhlasda. deagh-mhaise,** s.f. Handsomeness, comeliness, 
deagh-bholadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s. m. Sweet} excellence. 
smell or odour, fragrance. ^ Aileadh deagh-|—— ach, -siche, a. Good-looking,hand- 
bholaidh, om odour of sweet smell. some, comely. 9**Excellent. 3 Decent, be- 
dea;h-bholtan,** -ain, s. m. see deagh-| coming. iz 
E —as,** -ais, bholadh. achadh, -aidh, s.m. Ornamenting, 
Lc -aiche, æ. Aromatic, perfum-| adorning, decorating. 2 Improving one’s per- 
' , fragrant. sonal appearance. A’ d—, pr. pt. of deagh- 
Kee , -aich, -aichean, sf. Sweet mhaisich. 
Gë flavour. _ — -—Achd, s.f.ind. Beauteousness. 
E mn nm as,tt -ais, s.m. Odoriferousness. deagh-mhaisich, pr. pt. a’ deagh-mhaiseachadh, 
 deagh-bholtraich,** v.g. Perfume, scent, aro-| "C Adorn, decorate. 
" nmiatize, cense. te, past pt. Adorned, orna- 
i" .——— te, a. & past part. of deagh- mented. ) 
. .  Jpholtraich. Perfumed, fragrant. 2 Sweet- deagh-inhisneach,** -nich, sf. Good courage. 
| flavoured. ` 2 Confidence. 





———— -—-ail, -ala, a. Of good courage. 
2 Confident, bold, hopeful. 

deagh-inhüinte, a. Well-bred. 2 (MMcL) Well- 
educated. 

tdeaghnad, -aid, s.m. Frost. 

deagh-obair,** -oibre, s.f. Good work. 2 Good 
deed. 

deagh-oideas,** -eis, s.m. Good education. 

—————— ——aách,**a. Well-educated. 2 Discreet 

deagh-drduich,** v.a. Methodize, arrange. 

——— te, a. Well-ordered, methodize 
9 Prudent, provident. ; 

deagh-thagarrach, a. Argumentative. 

deagh-thairgneach,11 -aiche, a. Of good omen, 

deagh-theis,** s.f. Good report. 2 Good t&cti- 
mony. 


A n-bhuil, -e, s.f. Good management, good 
$ disposal. good use. 2 Economy. 3 (MMcL) 
| sood result. Cuir gu d., put to good use; 
tha d. air, it shows a good result. 
a —each, -iche, o, Economical, well- 


— 





of. 

eachadh, -aidh, s.m. Economy, fru- 
gality. 2 Actof putting anything to a good 
use, proper disposal of anything, proper man- 
agement. A’ d—, pr. pt. of deagh-bhuilich. 

——--— eachas,** -ais, sm. Economy, pro- 
per management, good usage. 

deagh-bhuilich, pr. pt. a’ deagh-bhuileachadh, 
v.a. Bestow well, manage well. 

deagh chainnteach, -iche, a. Eloquent. 

deagh-chliu, s.m. Good repute. 

h-choingheallach,-iche, a. Humane,benign. 

deagh-chridheach, -iche, a. Good-hearted, kind- 

* ly disposed, benevolent. 

— . deagh-ehruih, s.m. llaudsume form or shape. : 

ach, -aiche, 4. Shapely, well- | will, benevolence, 3**Gratuily. 











- —teas,** eis, s. m. Good testi/nony 
favourable evidence i 

deagb-théisd, see deagh-theis. 

| deagh-thoil, -e, s. f. Sincere desire. b Good 


4** 


X2 Jem 


į 


TI to, 
ri Oy igi al from 


| Digitized by D Ao A VE AS) | 
i i UNIVERSITY Ó F ILI hr S AT 


INTERNET ARCHIVE | ' 
LG INTERNET ARCHIVE | URBANA-CHAMPA 


a F 
/ / 








i 








et 


deagh-thoil 
Dh'fhalbh e le d., he left with good- 





ance, 


will. 

deagh-thoileach, -iche, a. Favourable, friend- 
ly, benevolent. 2 Voluntary, gratuitous, 
willing. 

deagh-thoill, v.n. Deserve well, merit. 

——tinneach, a. Meritable. 

deagh-thriall, s.m. Good gait, portliness. 

deagh-thuigse, s. f. Good understanding, 2 
Knowledge, wisdom. 

——ach, -iche, a. Of good under- 
Standing. 2 Of quick apprehension. 3 Pru- 
dent, wise, sensible. 

deagh-uair, s.f. Good season, good time, good 
opportunity. 

deaguil, s.f. Twilight. | 

deailgne,(AC) see dailgionn. 2(DC)Soothsaying 
Argyll, Mara thübhradh anns an d., as was 
spoken in the prophecy, 

deainte, see deanta. 

deairbean,(AC) s.m. Glow-worm. 

deaith,** s.f. Wind. 

each, a. Windy. 

deal, -a, a. Zealous, keen, eager, 
Friendly. 3ftRelative, 
irue friend. 

deal, s.f. see deala. 

deala,ff-n, s.f. Link. 

deala, -n & -chan, s.f. Leech. 9 Cow's dung. 
3 Sheep's teat. 4 Nipple. 5(AF) Eel. 6(AF) 
Lamprey. Tha ’n d. 'snàmh, thig frasan 
blàth roimh fheasgar, the leech is swimming, 
warm showers will come ere evening—N.G.P. | 
[** gives s.m.] | 

, comp. of deal, 5 

——-, 8.m.ind, Kindred, friendship. 2 Refusal, | 
denial. 

dealachadh, -aidh, s. m. Parting, separating. 
2 Act of parting,separation,division. 8 Space. 
d {iSchism. 5 Divorce, divorcing. 6**Fare- 
well. 7**Difference. A’ d—, pr.pt. of dealaich. 
D. dà rathad, a place where two roads diverge ; 
balla dealachaidh, o partition wall ; cuir d, 
eatorra, separate them ; d. nan tràth, the morn- 
ing and the evening twilight. 

dealachail, -ala, a. Separating, causing sepa- 
ration, separable. 2 That may be separated. 
3 Liable to separation, 

dealachd, see dealachadh. 

deala-eich, see deala. 

dealag, -aig, see dealg. 

deali;"ch, see dealgach. 

dealag..4, see dealgan. 

dealaich, pr.pt.a’ dealachadh, [a’ dealachdainn, 
a’ dealachdan & a’ dealaichdean—Suth’d. ai 
dealaicheadh,] v. a. Separate, divide. 2 
Divorce. 3** Make a difference. [This 
verb takes ri or ris after it, either simple or 
compounded, as, d. ri t’ airgiod, part with 
thy money; d. riu, part with them.] 

———ear, fut.pass. of dealaich. 

te, past pt. of dealaich, 
vided. 2 Divorced. 

dealaidh, -e, a. Keen, zealous. 2 Affectionate, 
fond, dear. 3+}Relative. 4¢tFriendly. 5t} 
More related. 

eachd, s.f.ind. Keenness, zealousness. 

2 Affectionateness. 9tTKindred, relationship. 

4tt Loyalty. 

cplair,* v. see dealraich. 
lan, -ain, -an, s.m. Lightning. 2 Nocturnal 
Aghtness in the heavens. 3 Wooden bar of 

‘oor. 4**Coal, 5**Flaming coal. 611Wood- 
Zeg fastening a cow-halter round the neck. 
lef deala. 18(WO)Blister. 9 (WC) Mark 

ST on hand or face, caused by the bite of an 

7 "t asamidge. 10 (DC) Electric spark— 











earnest. 2 
Mo dh. charaid, my 








Separated, di- 





Digitized by 


IKITEPMIFT An VIE 


316 


















dealanach, -aich, s.m. 











dealan-dé, s.m. 





——achd, ot (nd, Zealousness, 


/——-—aiche, comp. of dealasach, 
deala-tholl(AF) s. m. Leech, 





| 
| 
dealbh | 
Uist. D. biais, lightning of death. 
} Lightning. 2 Electricity. 
Bha dealanaich mhór’ ann, there were vivid 
Jlashes of lightning. 
ach,** -aiche, æ. Like lightning. 2 Flash- 
ing. 3 Electric, electrical. 4 Pertaining to 
a door-bar. | 


i 


| 


achd, s.f. Electrification. 


——-~—aich, pr.pt, a’ dealanachadh,v.n. Lighten, 


flash as lightning, 2 Electrify. 

air, s.m. Electrician.- 

The appearance produced b 
shaking a burning stick to and fro, or by 
whirling it round. 2 sf. see dearbadan-dé. "` 


dealan-doruis, -ain-, -an-, s.m. Latch, door-bolt. 
dealann, | 
dealan-spéid, s.f. Telegraph. 
dealas, -ais, s.m. 


see deileann. 


| 
Zeal, vehemenee, keenness, 
hurry, speed, eagerness. 9 Affection, loyalty. 
3** Contention. 4* Keenness of a woman 
spinning, or in household affairs. | 
ach, -aiche, o, Zealous, vehement, fervid, 
keen, eager, earnest, acute, 2 Friendly. 
D Wee 
ar 


| 
| 
| 
speediness, eagerness, keenness, 


your. 


see deala. 2*9 
amprey—lampetra, 


dealb,(AF) -eilb, s. Water-beetle, | 
dealbh, -a [& deilbh,] -an, s.m. Image. 2 Statue. 


9 Picture, delineation. 4 Photograph. 5 Ap. 
pearanee, form, figure, shape.  6**Face. 7 
Contemptible, unsubstantial person. $ 
Spectre, spectral-looking person. 9 Frame 
(of a cycle.) 10 Order, arrangement. 11 Abb, 
warping, stitches ** east on’’ for knitting. 12 
Mould. 13 Warping-frame. | 


263. Dealbh (18.) Dealbh-àrd. 

262a. Suidheachadh na creiseim. 
The warping-frame shown in illust. is known 
in Uist as ‘“‘ deilbh àrd,” and the term deilbh 
(dealbh) is seldom used in this connection 


alone. Itis called deilbh àrd because the old 
original, and still usual manner, of warping 
the thread is by fixing the fuaintean in the 
clay floor. Consequently, when a frame was 
constructed and raised up against the wall, 
it received the name of ** deilbh ard.” 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINC 


aD A 


URBANA-CHANM 


our, CH f 


Fr h^ 


—— — 
——— 


= Ae 


| 


| 


1| is : a 


GW 











A 


J dealbh 
PARTS OF A WARPING-FRAME :— 


! l Crann-deilbhe, crann-dealbha, or beart- 
| dheilbh, fraine. [bar. 
2 Sparr-mullaich, sail-mhullaich, upper cross- 
8 Sparr buinn, sail-bhuinn, lower cross-bar. 
4 Bacain, puist, na sailthean cliathaich, side 
sticks of frame, uprights, posts. 


, 6 Fuaircean, fuaintean, pinneachan, fuaid- |. 


nean (sing. fuaidne) pins or?pegs. [ 
| 6 Bocsa na deilbhe, bocsa na céirsle, box for 
holding the clew. 
| 7 Croisean, thretds on frame. Croiseadh an 
t-snatha,is the name of the operation shown 
here. Double threads are used, and when 
finished, half the threads are on each side 
ofthe creiseum-stick. 

8 Dealbhach, thread on frame. 

9 Creiseim. These two pegs on upper cross- 
| bar, as in second illust., and two similar 
, ones on lower cross-bar, explain the old form 
. . of dealbh formerly in use in Lewis, but the 
| form shown in first illust., is that generally 

used elsewhere. For modern form as used 
in Lewis see appendix. The form of winding 
| thread on twotop and bottom pegs in lower 
ill. is called ereiseim in Lewis. 
| 


, . Ghoid Rachel na dealbhan, Rachel stole the 
‘images ; agus bha ’n talamh gun dealbh, and 
| the earth was without form ; gnothach gun d., 
an absurd thing ; is beag d. a th’ air, it is 
out of form or arrangement ; cuir air d., or 
‘cuir d. air, arrange, adjust, put in order; 
maiseach 'na dealbh, comely in her person ; le 
‘da dhealbh chuilean, with the remains of two 
doas—Leabh. na Féinne, p. 164. 
filealbh,** a. Poor, miserable. 2 Spectral. 
Jealbh, pr.pt. a’ dealbhadh, v.a. Form, figure, 
shape, mould. 2**Construct, make, build, 3 
IDelineate. 4 Contrive, plot, devise, feign, 5 
Warp, weave, make abb of. 6 “Cast on" 
stitches for knitting. Dh. i a h-eachd- 
raidh, she wove her history ; curach a dh. m’ 
athair, @ boat constructed by my father ; mu 
^n do dh. thu an talamh agus an cruinne, ere 
| thou hadst formed the earth and the world; 
glacar iad ’sna h-innleachdan a dh, iad, they 
shall be taken in the devices which they have 
imagined; thai a’ dealbhadh, <a’ deilbh— Uist) 
she is warping, or making abb. 
ach, -aiche, a. Shapely, symmetrical. 
2 Handsome. 3 Evident, manifest, probable, 
likely, congruous. 4 Specious, ingenious, in- 
ventive. 5 Like a picture. 6 Allegoric.  7** 
Sagacious. 8**Resembling. 
ach,* -aich, $.f. Abb. (yarn on a wea- 
ver’s warping-frame.) 
dealbhachadh, -aidh, s.m. Forming, act of form- 
ing, framing, delineating, picturing. A’ d—, 
pr.pt. of dealbhaich. 
dealbhadair, -ean, s.m. Framer, inventor,, con- 








triver. 2 Statuary. 3 Painter, delineator. 
4 Warper. 
———————eachd, sf.ind. Art of painting. 2 


Statuary, moulding, delineation, framing. 3 
Warping, 4**Framework, 

dealbhadan, -ain, -an, s.m. Mould or frame in 
which to cast anything. 

dealbhadh, -aidh, s.m. Forming, shaping, paint- 
ing, delineating. 2 Contriving, planning, 
feigning, devising. 
ing, imaginable. A’ d—, pr. pt. of dealbh. 

dealbhag,** -aig, sf. Picture, miniature. 2 
Statue. | 

dealbhaich, pr.pt. a’ dealbhachadh, v.a. Same 
meanings as dealbh. 

dealbhaiche, comp. of dealbhach. 

dealbhaidh, sr Web of cloth. 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


317 


3 Statuary. 4**Imagin-|f 


dealman-dé 


dealbhail,** a. Shapely. 2 Spectral, ghost-like. 
3 Like an image. 

dealbhair, -can, s.m. Photographer. 2 Painter. 
3 Statuary. 

dealbhaireachd,** s.f. Painting, delineation. 2 
Statuary. 

dealbhan, sm. Little image, statueor picture. 

2 n.pl. of dealbh. 

—————— -dé -ain-, -an-, see dearbadan-dé. 

dealbhas, -ais, s.m. Misery. 2 Poverty. Chan 

"eil ac’ ach an d., they have nothing but poverty. 

--———— ach, -aiche, a. Poor. 2 Miserable. 3 
Causing poverty or misery. 

dealbh-bhruis,** s.f. Artist’s ‘‘ pencil” or brush. 

dealbh-chaochladh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Trans- 
figuration. 

dealbh-chluiche, -an & -annan, s.f. Play, stage- 
play, drama. [actor. 

——— adair, -ean, s.m. Stage-player, 

dealbh-chluith, -e, -ean, CN see dealbh-chluich, 

————— --———eadair, see dealbh-chluicheadair. 

dealbh-duthcha, s.m. Map. 

dealbh-inntinneach, -eiche, o Ideal. 
dealbh-liobhair, -ean, s.m. Painter. 

dealbh-sgriobhadh, -aidh, -aidhean, 8. m. 
roglyphic. 

dealbh-sgriobhaidh, s.m. Etching. 

dealbhta, past pt. of dealbh. Formed, 2 Built, 
constructed. 3 Woven, warped. 

CPA enters -eich, pl. dealachan-each, s.f. Horse- 
eech. 

dealg, -eilg, -an, s.f. Pin, skewer, wire. 2 
Thorn, prickle. 3 Bodkin. 4** Needle, knit- 
ting-needle, ‘‘ stocking-wire.’’ 5 Skye for 
(and) ealag (an dealg). 6 Pin of a pulley, 
see under ùlag, p. 78. 7 Goad. 8 Brooch-pin. 
D. gualainn, o pin to fasten the plaid on the 
left shoulder. 

—— ——ach,-aiche, a. Prickly. 2 Stinging. 3 
Of, like, or beionging to, pins, skewers, wires, 
&c. 4*Thorny. 

—— —achadh, -aich, s.m. Skewering. 2 Pin 
ning. A’ d—, pr.pt. of dealgaich. 

achd, s.f.ind. Prickliness 

—-—adh, -aidh, s.m. Act of prickling. 2 Stim- 
ulating, urging. 

——aich, pr.pt. a’ dealgachadh, v.a. Skewer. 
2 Pin. 

dealgain, gen.sing. & n.pl. of dealgan. 

dealgan, -ain, [p/. -ain- &] an, s.m. Spindle,— 
Bible. Used in ancient times for spinning 
thread. 2 Small spindle. 3 Little pin or 
skewer. 4 Collar bone, 5**Thorn, prickle. 
6**Needle. 7 n. pi. of dealg. 

dealganach, -aiche, a. Full of, or like, little 
prickles, spindies, skewers, pins, &c. 

dealgan-gabhar,(AF) s.m. Lizard. 

gx. RDN DA S.f. Sny, toggle, see bàta, No. 1. 
p. 76. 

dealg-cheangail, s.f. Belaying-pin, see No.2 p 76. 

dealg-chiuais,** s.f. Ear-picker. 

dealg-doruis, (WC) s.f. Door-bar, latchet. 

dealg-fhiacall,** -aill, s.f. Toothpick. 

dealg-fhuilt,** s.f. Hair-pin. 

dealg-gualainn,tt s. f. Pin or brooch by which 
the plaid is fastened on left shoulder. 

dealg-maraig, (PM) s. f. Wooden pin, used in 
SUME ends of white or black Scots pud- 

ings. 

[dealgnaiche, a. Unjust. 


Hie- 





2 Unlawful. 

———————, s.m, Outlaw, rebel. 

dealg-snaime, s.f. Belaying-pin, see No. 2, p. 76. 

dealg.ursainn, WC) s.f. Peg used of old for 
holding one side of a two-leaved door, now 
superseded by the iron bolt, 

tdeallas, s.m. Zeal, quickness, hurry. 

t-— ach tf a. Hasty, quick. 

dealman-dé, see dearbadan-dé. 





deal-mhara 


deal-mhara,(AF) s.f. Sea-leech. 2 Skate-worm. 

dealrach, -aiche, a. Bright, radiant, shining, 
refulgent, gleaming, brilliant, beaming. 2 
Clear, resplendent. Cia d. gloir a’ mhath- 
shluaigh ud! how bright the glory of those 
saints ! 

dealrachadh, -aidh, s.m. Shining, gleaming, 
resplendence. 2 Act of shining, gleaming or 
beaming, <A’ d—, pr.pt. of dealraich. 

dealrachd, s.f. see dealradh. 

dealradh, -aidh, s.m. Brightness, effulgence, 
lustre, light, radiance, splendour, shining. 2 
Act of shining or gleaming. D. glando ghniis, 
the clear light of thy countenance. 

——-——ach, -aiche, a. see dealrach. 

dealraich, pr.pt. a’ dealrachadh, v.a. & n. Shine, 
radiate, gleam, flash, beam, brighten, glitter. 
2 Emit rays. 

——--——ead, -eid, s.m. Degree of brightness, 
A’ dol an d., growing brighter and brighter. 

-— — ——idh, fut.aff.a. of dealraich, 

dealraidheachd, s.f. see dealradh. 

dealrait, Suth’d for dealraichte. 

dealruich, see dealraich. 

dealt, -a,-an, s.f. & tfm. Dew. 2 Drizzle. 38 
Rain glittering on the grass. 

-——ach, -aiche,a. Dewy. 2 Drizzly. 3 Rainy. 

dealtag, (PM) s,f. Small quantity of rain—Uist. 


dealtag, 1 s.f. Badenoch for ialtag. 


-anmoch, 
dealtair,* v.a. Glitter. 2 Gild, see dealtraich. 


dealt-dhaolag, s.f. Dew-worm. 
deal-tholl, see deala. 
dealt-lus,| s.m. Moon-wort, see luan-lus, 
dealtmhor, a. see dealtach. 
dealtrach, a. see dealtach. 
dealtradh, -aidh, s.m. Besprinkling, spangling, 
gilding, bedropping, lacquering, varnishing, 
glittering. A’ d—, pr.pt. of dealtraich. 
dealtraich, pr.pt. a’ dealtradh, v.a. Gild, be- 
drop, lacquer, varnish. 
dealt-ruaidhe,l s.f. Round-leaved sundew, see 
rós-an-t-soluis. 
dealuich, see dealaich. 
see dealaichte. 
dealuigheach, -iche, a. Separable. 
dealunn, -uinn, s.m. see deileann, 
Tdeamal, -ail, s.m. Demon. 
tdeamh, s. Want, deficiency. 
deamh,** q. Wicked. 
deamhais, pl. deimhsean, [& deamhaisean] s.m. 
see deamhas. 
deamhais, gen. sing. of deamhas. 
deamhan,-ain, s.m. Demon, devil, evil spirit. 
21iPerson bent on mischief. Tha d. aige, he 
is possessed of a devil. 
-—— ———üàidh, a. see deamhnaidh. 
—-—— -eolas, -ais, s.m. Demonology. 
Tdeamharruin, -e, -ean, s.m. Mystery. 
Tdeamharun, -uin, -üintean, see Tdeamharruin. 
deamhas, -ais, s.m. [tt f.] Pair of sheep-shears. 
2 Scissors. 
deamhnaidh, -e, a Devilish, malicious, design- 
edly wicked, 
deamhsadh, -aidh, s.m. Fleecing, plying of 
shears in sheep-shearing. 21I]Working with 
ali one’s might. 
dean, v.irreg. Do, make, act, work, perform, 2 
*Suppose, imagine, think. Conjugated thus: 
Active Voice— 
IND. past, rinn mi, &c., 7 did. 
» Jut. ni mi, &c., I shall do. 
INTERR. past, (an? nach?) d' rinn mi, &c. did 
I (not?) NEGATIVE, chad’ rinn mi, &c., 
I did not. 
fut. (an ? nach ?) dean mi, shall I(not ) 
NEGATIVE, cha dean mi, Z shall not 





—— — te, 


39) 


do ? 


D 


=== be or gm "m 
JTERKIET ARI UE 
^ E [^i A a NK 


318 
do. [cha dhean (asp.) in Suth’d.) 


Gean 














SUBJ. past, (ged) dheanainn, (though) I woul 
do; (ged) dheanamaid, (though) we would d 
ged) dheanadh tu, e, i, sibh, iad, (thoug 
thou, he, she, ye, they would do. [Ch 
dheanadh (asp.) in Suth’d.] 

» fut. (ma) ni mi, &e., (if) I do. 
IMPER. 1st.p.sing., deanam, det me do. 
“INFIN,” a dheanamh, to do. [properly i 
doing. There is no Infinitivein Gaelie, b: 
unfortunately the Gaelic Verbal Noun f 
quently appears in places where in Englis 
infinitives would be used. A true infiniti 
cannot govern the genitive case. A particip 
is a noun, and therefore governs the genitiy 
case, an infinitive is a verb, and therefo 
cannot govern a noun in the genitive. Whe 
one sees a thing called ** an infinitive " go 
erning something in the genitive, it may T 
concluded that it is a noun, not a verb, and 
consequently, not an infinitive. Bonnach 
REAN PET na cloinne, is æ bannock for d 
ceiving of (NOT to deceive) the children ; h 
mhath leis an righ Padruig a theachd, 
translated, the king wished Pat to come, whe: 
as what is meant. is, the king wished Pat} 
coming. That teachd=coming and not co 
This appears from the following, which 
curs in MacTalla. ** Bu mhath leam iad a d 
fhàgail nan each," I wish them to leave 
leaving) of the horses. Now, nan each is 
contestably a genitive case, therefore it m 
have been governed by a noun, not by a ve 
The Latin amare was an infinitive, so it co 
not govern a genitive, but amatum was a no 
and declinable like a noun, So was the . 
Celtic gerund, or verbal noun, equally deel 
able, and many of them showed a dative 
after the preposition do. Cuir in the dati 
is, to this day, cur, which is its dative. 
further, what about ‘‘ bu mhath leam i: 
dha w’ fhàgail,” (some write ‘‘ga w’ fha 
ail")? If fàgail equals in this case an infin 
tive, i. e. if it is to be translated to come, v 
shall have my to come, In other words, be 
cause fàgail is qualified by a possessive pro 
noun, or by a possessive adjective, we se 
that itisa noun, not averb. My coming, m 
leaving, are possible, my to come, my to leave 
are inconceivable, As every one of the so 
called infinitives can (1) takea possessive ad 
jective, and can (2) govern a noun in the geni- 
tive, the conclusion is that these ‘‘infinitives”’ 
are all nouns and not verbs.] 


PRES. PART., a’ deanamh, doing. 


Passive Voice— {properly a GRAPHI 
or HISTORIC voice, not '' PASSIVE.” No in 
transitive verb can have a passive voice, bu 
all intransitive verbs in Gaelic have an im 
personal or graphic form. Chualas a bhi ’fos} 
gladh an doruis, Z heard (people) opening th 
door; dh’iarr a’ mhuir a bhi ’ga taghal, the sea 
wished people to resort to her. Here “a bh 
aig’? seems to include a subject (people.) 
However, this is not revelant, see MacYalla 
vi. p. 50** Deanar caol-direach air an aite,” 
(they) made straight for the place. ‘* Deanar" 
is an intransitive verb, like ** go." Translate 
it for a moment as ''go." If it be passive, 
then the sentence means (they) are go-ed (or 
went-ed) straight dée, Again, cha tigear as 
eugmhais na pioba, (people) cannot get on with- 
out the bagpipe—*' tigear ” is passive, then the 
sentence means without the bagpipe it wil! not 
be comed. Tachrar maighdean Kilean-an-éisg 
orra, thuit i an trom ghaol air D., the maiden 


Whe «ne PUN 
























dean 


ef Eilean-an-éisg meets them, she falls in heavy 
love on D ; NOT the maiden will be met on them, 
NOT she will be fallen in heavy love on D.) 


IND. past, rinneadh mi, de, I was made, 

i fut. nithear mi, &c., Z shall be made. 

INTERR. past, (an? nach ?) d' rinneadh mi, 
was I (not) made? NEGATIVE, cha d rinn- 
eadh mi, J was not made. : 

» fut. (ani? naeh ?) deanar mi, e, shall 
I (not) be made ? NEGATIVE, cha deanar 
mi, J shall not be made. 

SUBJ. past, (ged) dheanteadh mi, (though) I 
should be made. 

» Jut. (ma) nithear mi, Ge, (if ) I shall be 
made. 

PART., deanta, dene. 

. aithreachas, repent. [=gabh aithreachas.] 

. aoibhneas, rejoice, 

. athchuinge, supplicate. 

breug, tell a lie. 

. bròn, mourn. 

. bun, trust, confide. 

cabhag, hasten, make haste. 

cadal, sleep. 

. caithream, triumph. 2 applaud. 

ceannairc, rebel. 

. ceartas, decide impartially. 

. comhnadh (leinn,) aid (us.) 

. còmhnuidh, dwell. 

dàil, delay. 

. deifir, hasten, make haste. 

. dhe, receive, show hospitality te. Rinn e 
glé mhath dhiom, he received me well, treat- 
ed me hospitably. 

d dichioll, endeavour. 

d dimeas, despise. 

d. do bhiadh, make or cook your food. 

ww: yum run away, (make use of your 

eel. 

d. do chluasan, Aearken, (use your ears.) 

d. do chrochadh, hang thyself. 

d. do shuilean, look, attend, (use your eyes.) 

d. éigin, compel. 

d. eòlas do, heal by counteracting incantation. 

d. fadal, delay. 

^ nts watch. 

. faisneachd, prophesy. 

d. fanoid, mock. RE 

d. fianuis, bear witness. 

d, firinn, speak the truth. 

d. foighidinn, have patience. 

d. foirneart, oppress. 

d. fuasgladh, release, deliver, 

d. fuireach, stay. 

d. furtachd, delay. 2 give relief. 

d. gàirdeachas, rejoice. 

d. gu réidh, do at leisure, 

d. guth aige "san dol seachad, calé 
in passing. 

d. iochd, pity. 

d. iomlaid, exchange. 

d. iomraüh (air,) speak of. 

d. iteag, fly. 

d. iùl, guide. 

d. 

d. 

d. 

d. 

d. 

d. 

d. 

d 

d. 

d 

d 

a 


ES re ee OOS Ee Ee Die 


on him 


luaidh (air,) speak of. 

luidhe, lie down, 

magadh, mock, 

masgul, flatter. 

mir, make a piece, help yourself. 
mire, play, sport. 

moille, delay, stop. 

. mulad, be sorry. [=bimuladach.] 
oran, compose @ song. 

. réite, make peace, reconcile. 
. Sanas, whisper. 

. seasamh, stand. 


Dir LI zi D 


NTERNET ARCHIVE 


319 


deangan 


sgeul (air), declare. 

. sgur, cease. 

socair, do at leisure. 

soradh, hesitate. 

spairn, strive. 

stad, stop. ` 

stri, try, strive, compete, 

. suas, make up, compensate, 

subhachas, be glad, | =bi subhach.] 

sugradh, sport. 

. Suidhe, sit down. 

. Sùil ri, lay an evil eye upon. 

. tair, despise. 

. t anail, rest yourself, draw your breath, 

[betier leig t’ anail.] 

d. tarcuis, despise. 
d. truas, show pity. 
d. uaill (air or as), boast, be proud of. 
d. ùrnuigh, pray. 
D. air do shocair, or d. air t’ athais, do at lei- 
sure ; cha d. cas luath maorach, or cha d. bean 
luath tràigh, (one with) a hasty foot will ı ot 
get shelifish ; ge b' e co rinn dhuit an t-sùil, 
whoso laid on thee the (evil) eye; tha mi a 
deanamh dheth, I suppose ` am bheil thu ai 
deanamh dheth ? do you suppose ¢ d. dhomh, 
make for me; d. fasdadh, hire yourself ; d. 
suas càirdeas, make up friendship; deantar 
truas rium, let pity be shown to me; bha e ’n 
dùil gu’n deanadh e an rathad dhachaidh 
leis fhéin, he thought he could find the way 
home by himself. 

Tdean, s.m. Colour. 

deanabh, for deanadh. 

deanachdach, -aiche, a. see déineachdach. 

deanachdachd,* s.f. see déineachd and dean- 
adachd. 

deanachdas, -ais, s.m. see déineas & déineachd. 

deanadach, -aiche, a. Laborious, industrious, 
diligent, active, endeavouring, busy. 2tf 
Thrifty. Oganach d., an industrious youth. 

—_——_-—d, s.f. Agency. 2 Industry, activity, 
exertion, 3 Perseverance, diligence. 4 Con- 
duct, behaviour. 5 Industries (in trade.) . 

deanadaich,(CR) Shin e air deanadaich, it has 
begun to rain—Suth'd. 

deanadaiche, see deanadair. 

deanadair,** s.m. Achiever. 

deanadas, -ais, s.m. Industry, activity, exer- 
tion. 2 Conduct, behaviour, doings, act. 3* 
Perseverance, diligence. 4 Result. 

deanadh, see deanamh. 

deanaich,(CR) pr.pt. Working. Am bheil e a’ 
d. an dràsd ? has he got employment, has hea 
job at present? ; er of a mill,is it going at pres- 
sent ? in opposition to being closed and dis- 
used—Perthshire. |In the first example obair 
is understood, in the second one, mine, Perth- 
shire Gaelie is often so much contracted. ] 

deanam, ist.per.sing. imp. of dean. Let me do. 

—_——aid, 1st,per.pl.àngp. of dean. Let us do. 

deanamh,-aimh, s.m. Doing, acting, performing. 
2ttForm, figure. A’ bitn-dheanamh uilc, æl- 
ways doing evil. A’ d—, pr.pt. of dean, 

deananaich,** s.f. Doings, behaviour. 

deanannas,** ais, s.m. Doings. 

deanar, fut.int.pass. of dean. 

deanas,* -ais, s.m. see deanadas. 2**Space, 
while, interval. D. (deanadas) a meòir, the 
work of her fingers. 

——-—ach, -aiche, a. see deanadach. 

—-—achd,* s.f. see deanadas. 

¢+deanbh, an, s.j. Effect. 

dean-chlodhach,** a. Of changeable colours. 

dean-choire,** s.f. Caldron. 

deang, v.a. see diong, 

deangan, see seangan. 


eRPRRRRRRRRRPRR 


deanmhas 320 


deanmhkas,** s.m. Consequence, effect. 

deanmhasach,** a. Prim, spruce. 2 Coy. 

deanmhasachd,** s.f. Primness. 2 Coyness. 

deangalta,** a. see diongalta. 

deann, -a,-an, s.f. Force. 2 Haste, velocity, 
hurry,speed, 3 Particle,very small quantity of | 
anything comminuted. 4 Rush or dash,ra- 
pid motion. [No direction implied, as in Mac- 
Alpine, but simply the idea of ''running 
amok."] 5**Noise. 6**Colour. 7**Figure. 8** 
Pinch, as of snuff. T9 Mist. T10 Gibe. 11**Im- 
petuosity. Cha'n'eild. snaoisein agam, I have 
nota particle of snuff; thàinig e a steach "oa 
dh., he came rushing in ; an t-each ’na dh., 
the horse at full speed ; a’ leum thar saile 'na 
d., bounding speedily over the deep ; dearg dh., 
violent speed ; deanna-nam-bonn, as fast as the 
feel can carry ; tha na clachan-meallain a’ cur 
d. asantalamh, the hail-stones are spattering 
(putting mist out of ) the ground ; mar dh. a 
bheir dà ord, like the noise of two hammers. 

deanna,** s.m. Clap. 

deaunach, -aich, s.f. Dust, mill-dust. 

` e E sd 
eannachdach, t 

deannachdaidh, } a, Dusty. 

deannadh,* -aidh, s.m. Sweep. 2**Career. 

deannag, -aige,-an, s.f. Very small quantity 
of any comminuted matter. 2 Pinch, as of 
snuff. 3 Small grain. 

deannagach, -aiche, d. In small quantities. 2 

^ In pinches, as snuff, or any pulverized subs- 
tance. 

deannaibh, dat.pl. of deann. Tha e ’na dh., he 
is running with all his might. 

deannal, -ail, s.m. Conflict, onset, contest,stir. 2 
Haste,hurry. 3 Shot. 4 Flash. 5*Spell or little 
while at anything with all one's might. Le 
d, nan gairdean ann an d. nan claidheamh, 
with the force of the arms in the clash of 
swords ; thug sinn d. cruaidh, we made a furi- 
ous onset, 

deannalach, -aiche, a. Impetuous, vehement, 
hasty. Gu d., impetuously. 

deannalachd, s.f.ind. Impetuosity,vehemence, 
hastiness. 

deannan, -ain, -an, 
















Sguab 


s.m. see deannag. 2 dim. 
of deann. 3**see deuran. 4 Lewis for deann- 
ruith. Is mairg a chrathadh a dh. salainn 
air, pity anyone who would sprinkle his salt on 
him—said of a doubtful character ; thainig 
iad 'nan d.,(d.-ruith), they came at utmost speed. 

deannanach,ft -aiche, a, Atomical. 

deann-ruith, -e, s.f. Great hurry, velocity, im- 
petuosity, utmost speed. 

deanntag, -aige, -an, S.f. Nettle—wrtica urens 
and urtica dioica. 

ach, -aiche, a. Aboundingjin nettles. 
2 Like a nettle, of nettles. 

m=———--ach, -aich, s.m. Place where nettles 
grow. 2 Tuft of nettles. 

deanntag-arbhair, s.f. Corn-nettle, caltrop. 

deanntag-bhan,3 s. f. White dead-nettle, see 
teanga-mhin. 

deanntag-dhearg,$s. f. Red dead-nettle—lam- 
ium purpureum. see ill. 264. 

deanntag-Ghreugach,§ s.f. Fenugreek—trigon- 
ella ornithopodioides. see illust. 265. 

deanntag-mharbh,§ s.f. White dead-nettle, see 
teanga-mhin. 

dl (MMcD) s.f. Corn-nettle, cal- 
crop. 

deant’, see deante. 

deanta, see deante. 

deantach, -aiche, @. Practical, practicable, 
possible. 

———-.—, -aich, 





s.m, Agent, one who acts or 


Digitized by 
PC ed LN 
- - J 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 





264. Deanntag-dhearg. 


deantag, ] 
deantanas, see deanadas. ! 
deantar, 3rd.per.sing.imper.pass. of dean. | 
deantas, -ais, -an, s.m. see deanadas. 2 Poetry, 
rhyming. 7 


dearbadan-dé 


performs, doer. 2 Industrious man. 
see deanntag. 


ach, -aiche, a. see deanadach. 


acte? past pt. of dean. Done, made, perfor!a- 
ed, 


_ finished. D. ri cogadh, trained to watr ; 
duine d., o grown-up man. | 


deaorachan,** -ain, s.m. see deurachan. d 
dear, see deur. 2**s.f, Refusal, denial. 3** 


Daughter. | 
—,** a. Great, large, prodigious. 
—ach, see deurach. -` 


—ach,** -aich, s.m. Destruction, 2 Pillage. 
dearadh, -aidh, s.m. see deareadh. 
dearag-thalmhuinn,} see lus-deatach-thalimh- 


uinn. 


déarail, [-e &] -ala, a. Beggarly, poor, wretcihed, 
2t Feeble, dependant. | 

mir ea s.f.ind. Want, defect, 2 Dest%tu- 

ion. 

Tdearaointeach, a. Despairing. 

dearasan,* for deireasan, pl. of deireas. 

dearb,(AC) s, Kind of beetle. 

dearbadan, -ain, s.m. 

dearbadan-dé, -ain-, s.m. Butterfly. (Butterflies 


see dearbadan-dé. 


are very frequently confounded with moths|, 

which are a different kind of insect altogether.) 
'The following Gaelic names of the principal 

varieties of butterflies are from Forbes’ Gaelic 

Names of Beasts, óc. | 

An t-ailean donn,—hipparchia janira—mea- 
dow brown. 

àrd-sheoladair ban,—dimenitis BEA od 
admiral. 

argus beag,—lyceena agestis—small argus. 

argus Albannach,—erebia blandina—Scots am- 


gus. M 
argus donn,—polyommatus agestis—brown ar: 


gus. 

am baintighearna dreachmhor,—cynthia car 
dui—painted lady. | 

an t-iompaire coreurach,—apatura tris—put- 
ple emperor. | | 

dealbhan gorm airgiodach,—polyommatus @- 
gon—silver-studded blue. t 

dealbhan fad-earr,—lyceena wegon—long-tail- 
ed blue. | 

dealbhan gearr-earr,—lycena beetica—short- 
tailed blue. | 

dealbhan mór an fhraoich,—Aipparchia titho- 
nus—large heath, 

dealbhan beag an fhraoich, — cænonympha 
pamphilus—small heath. ; 

dealbhan breac na coille—lasiommata egeria 
—speckled wood. de De 

Diùc Bhurgundi,—hemeobius lucina—tfritillary 


Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


265 Deanntay Greene. 


mew 


dearbadan-dé 


321 


dearcach 





Duke of Burgundy. prover. 3 Ascertainer. D 
an donnag bhailach, or dounag a’ bhalla,— | dearbhadas, -ais, s.n. Capability of proof. 2* 


lasiommata megeera—wall butterfiy. 


Way ot leading proof. 


an donnan Arainneach,—erebia diyea—Arran dearbnadnh, -aidh,-aidhean, s.m. Evidence, proof. 


brown. 
an dounan tuathach,—erebia cethiope—north- 
ern brown. 
am faineag,—hipparchia hyperanthus--ringlet. 
faineag a’ mhonaidu,—erebia casstope—mount- 
ain ringlet. : 
irt bheag,—canympha davus—small ring- 
et. 
an glaisean,—Ahypar chia samvele—grayling. 
x n — polyommotus alexis — common 
ue. 
canan na cailc,—matus corydon—chalk-hill 
ue. 
nen beag,—polyommatus alsws—little 
ue. 
marsairionach mór nan creag,—polyommatus 
acis—bvlue mazarine. 
an gris-fhionnach geal,—arge galathea—mar- 
bled white. 
an leumadair beag,—pamphila linea—small 
skipper. 
an leumadair breac-bhallach,—steropes panis- 
cus—chequered skipper. 
an leumadair lachdunu,—thanaos tages—dingy 
skipper. 
an leumadair gris-fhionn—pyrgus alveolus— 
grizzled skipper, 
Lulworth mór Shasunnach—pamphila actoeon 
— Lulworth skipper. 
an litir bhàn,—tAecla w. album—white letter 
ha.r-streak. 
an roinne donn stiallach, — thecla betule— 
. brown hair-streak. 
an roinne dubh stiallach, —thecla pruni— 
black hair-streak. 
an roinne stiallach chorcurach,—thecla quercus 
—purple hair-streak. 
. an roinne stiallach uaine,—thecla rubi—green 
hair-streak. 
an t-umhach beag,—chrysophanus phleas— 
. small copper. | 
[Description and illustration of every native 
British butterfly may be found in *' British 
Butterflies.’’] 
dearbh, pr.pt. a’ dearbhadh, v.a. Prove,confirm. 
2 Try. 3**Experience. 4**Demonstrate. 5 
e+ Ascertain. 6**Affirm. 7**Attest. 5**Tempt. 
9**Put to the test. D. sin, prove that. 
dearbh,** -an, s.m. Proof, demonstration. 2 
Experiment, test, trial. 3 Churn. 4 Milk- 
pail. Cuir gu d., put to the test. 
dearbh, -a, a. Sure, certain. 2 Particular, pe- 
— culiar, identical. 3 Demonstrative (in gram.) 
4**True, genuine. 5**Fixed. And. ni a bha 
dhìth orm, the very thing I wanted ; an d. 
dhuine, the identical man ; tha gu dearbh, yes 
' indeed ; gu dearbh fhéin seadh,—a very em- 
phatic affirmative. 
dearbh (gu) adv. Truly,really, certainly,indeed. 
Is d. eum bheil, it is truly or positively so. 
ach, -aiche, a. Sureof. 2 Confirmatory. 
3 Affirmative, 4**Demonstrative. 5 Capable 
of proof. | 
—achadh, -aidh, s.m. Proving, confirming, 
attesting. 2 Act of confirming or attesting. 
3**Protesting. 4**Swearing. 5**Allegation. 
A’ d—, pr.pt. of dearbhaich. 
achail,[f a. Conclusive. 
dearbhachd, s.f. Experience, 
timony, demonstration. 
Assurance. 
e adaich, v.a. Demonstrate, prove, confirm. 
dearbhadair,** s. m. Affirmer, alleger, 2 Ap- 











2 Proof, tes- 
3 Experiment. 4 





Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 








2 Proving, act of proving. 3 Trying, coniirim- 
ing, test, trial. 4 Demonstrating. 5**Uer- 
tainty. 6**Approbation. 7{{Hxperience. 8 
see dearbhag. 9(MMcW) Disputing, arguing. 
Mar dh, air sin, as a proof of that; a’ d. na 
cùise, confirming the fact, proving the case. A’ 
d—, pr.pt. of dearbh. 
— ———— -sul,** s.m. Autopsy. 
dearbhag, -aige, -an, s.f. ‘louch-stone. 
dearbhaich, pr.pt. a’ dearbhachadh, oo Prove, 
2 Contirm, attest. 3 Swear. 
dearbhail,** a. Affirmable. 
dearbhair, see dearbhadair. 
dearbhann, -ainn, -ainnean, s.f. Axiom, propo- 
sition evident at first sight, truism. 
dearbhar, ful. pass. of dearbh. 
dearbh-art, -airt, s.m. see dearbhag. 
dearbhas, -ais, -an, s.m. Proof. 
-—_———-ach, -aiche, a. Capable of proof. 
dearbh-bhann, -ainn, -an, see dearbhann, 
dearbh-bheachd, -an, s.m. Certainty, assurance, 
confidence, confident hope. 3**Full view. 4 
TtFull aim. 5tfFull notice, Lan d., full as- 
surance. 
-— — ——air,** s.m. Assurer. 
dearbh-bhrathair, -thar, -àithrean, s.m. Brother, 
full brother, own brother. 
dearbh-bnràthair-athar,** -ar-, -àitlirean, s. m, 
Full uncle on the father's side. 
dearbh-bhràthaireachd,** s.f. Brotherhood. 2 
Society. 
dearbh-bhràthair-imàthar, -ar-, -àithrean-, s. m. 
Full uncle on the mother's side. 
dearbh-bhriathar, -air, -thran, 
truism, dogma, true saying. 
dearbh-bhriathrach, -aiche,  q. 
axiomatic. 
dearbh-ehinnte, s.f. see dearbh-chinnteas. 
ach, -tiche, a. Sure, certain, be- 


2 Affirmative. 





s. m. Axiom, 


Dogmatical, 





yond doubt. 
nenn Al, -eis, s,f. Certainty, full as- 
surance. 
dearbh-chlach, -chloich, -chlachan, s.f. Touch- 
stone. 


dearbh-chliamhuinn, -ean, s.m. Son-in-law. 


dearbh-dheante, a. Accurate, correct. 

dearbh-fhios, s.m. Certain knowledge, correct 
knowledge. 2**Assurance. 3**Certain news. 

——— rach, -aiche, a. Absolutely certain, 
having certain knowledge, well assured, con- 
vinced. 

dearbh-radh,** s.m. Axiom. 

dearbhtach, -aiche, «4. Capable of proof, or of 
demonstration. 

dearbhte, a. & past. pt. of dearbh. Proved, con- 
firmed, tried, ascertained, affirmed, attested, 
established. 2**Demonstrated. 3**Approved. 
4**Tempted. 

dearbhthachd,-an, s,f. see dearbhachd. 

dearbh-theachdair, -an & -draichean, s.m. Sure 
or trusty messenger. 

dearc, -an, s.f. Berry (general term.) 2 Grape. 
3 Lizard. 4(AF)Speckled serpent. 5(AF)Dart. 
Fàgaidh thu dearcan, thou shalt leave grapes. 

tdeare, s. Eye. 2 Cave, grotto. 3 Hole. 4 
Grave. 


dearc, pr.pt. a’ dearcadh, v.a. Behold, look, ob- 


serve. 2 Look keenly or piercingly, examine, 
inspect. 3 Fix the mind on inteusely, watch. 
Dearcam ort do gnath, I will make thee the 
subject of my meditations continually ; dh. mi 
le solas, I looked with delight. 

dearcach,** œ. Abounding in berries, bearing 


E HRH DE SN e 
ILLI NK J[* 


dearcach 


322 


deargan-aitinn 














berries, like a berry, relating to a berry. 2 
Watchful, observant. 3tf Abounding in, of, 
or relating to, lizards. 

dearcadh, -aidh, s. m. Advertence. 2**Look- 
ing, inspecting, examining, beholding. 3** 
Look, inspection, examination. A’ d—, pr. pt. 
of dearc. 

dearcag, -aig, -an, sf. Little berry. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Full of little berries. 

— ——— -choille, s.f. Hurtleberry. 

—— —— -F hrangach, see dearc-Fhrangach. 

-fhiadhaich,** s.f. Heathberry. 

——  ——— -fhraoich,** see dearc-fhraoich. 

-mhonaidh, s. f. Bilberry, blaeberry— 
Lochaber. 

dearcaidh, fut. af. a. of dearc. 

dearc-aitinn, -an-aitinn, s.f. Juniper berry. 

dearcam, Ist.p. sing. of dearc. Let me look. 2 
( ded dearcaidh mi) fut. af. a. of dearc, I will 
ook. 

dearcan, n. pl. of dearc. 2 see deargan. 

-allt, see deargan-allt. 

-alltaidh, see deargan-allt. 

-ithich,$ s.m. Whortleberry, see lus- 
nan-deare. 

———— -suiriche,**s.m. Bur. 

dearc-bhallach, -aiche, s.f. Speckled serpent. 2 
Lizard. 

dearc-dharaich, -an-daraich, s.f. Acorn. 

dearc-dhearg, -an-dearga, s.f. see raosar-dearg. 

dearc-dhubh, -an-dubha, see raosar-dubh. 

dearc-eighinn, -an-eighinn, s.f. Ivy berry. 

dearc-fhiona,-an-fiona, s.f. Grape. 2 Crowberry. 

dearc-Fhrangach, -an-Frangach, s.f. Red or 
white currant, see raosar-dearg & r.-geal. 

deare-fhraoich, an-fraoich,s.f. Blaeberry, heath- 
berry, cowberry, bilberry. 

Jeare-fithich,$ s.f.Crowberry,see lus-na-feannaig. 

dearc-iubhair, -an-iubhair, s.f. Yew berry. 

dearc-luachair, see dearc-luachrach. 

learc-luachrach, -an-luachrach, sf Lizard, 
asp—lacerta agilis. 




















266. Dearc-luachrach. 
learc-luachrach uisge, s.f. Asker. 


learenach, -aiche, a. Goodly, handsome. 2 

Likely. 

—adh, -aidh, s.m. Act of marking with 
emphasis. 2 of examining, of inspecting keen- 
ly. 3 of confirming by observation.  4* Of 
criticizing. A’ d—, pr.pt. of dearcnaich. 

learenaich, pr.pt. a’ dearenachadh, v.a. Mark 
with emphasis. 2 Confirm by observation. 3 
Examine keenly, inspect. 4ttView. 5*Criti- 
cize. 

dearc-na-süla, s.f. Apple of the eye. 

dearc-ola, -an-ola, s. f. Olive. 

dearc-roide,}-an-roide, s.f. Bog-myrtle berry— 
vaccinium uliginosum. McL & D gives bil- 
berry. [Badge of Clan Buchanan.] 

learc-ubhal,** -ail, s.m. Oak-apple. 

dear-dhun,** -uin, s.m, Penitentiary, oratory. 
[dear-theach.] d 

dearg, deirge, a. Red, ruddy. 2 
Flaming. 3 Red-hot. 4 Real, 
very, intense, inveterate. 5 Vio- 
lent. 6 Downright mad. 7*Most 
abandoned,or notorious, 8 Com- 268, Dearg. 








| 


e "d gl 
| 
i 


à i 
x oua. uu eR. Ze 
d ` 1 r E 
a = Li Hi l 
— LI i 


NT 


[TI 


bo L 





267. Dearc-roide. 

plete. 9** Bitter. 10** Severe. | 
11**Turned or ploughed. 12++ Impetuous. 13 
Gules, in heraldry, represented by perpendi- 
cular lines, seeillust, D. amadan, & complete 
Jool ; d. mhèirleach, o notorious thief; d. 
striopach, a most abandoned strumpet ; d. mar 
fhuil, red as blood ; air an d. chuthach, stark 
mad; talamh d., turned or ploughed land ; 
feòil dh., red or raw flesh. [Dearg is often 
prefixed to a noun, when it is required to ex- 
press an extraordinary degree of guilt, &c., 
as, tha 'n dearg-chiontach saor, the glar- 
ingly guilty is free ; tha ’n d. chuthach air, he 
is mad with rage.] 

dearg, pr. pt. a’ deargadh, v.a. & n. Redden, 
make red. 2 Blush. 3 Plough. 4 Make an 
impression. 5**Kindle. 6** Burn. 7**rarely 
Make, prepare. 8i{Draw blood. 9(AC)Wound. 
Cha d. e air, i£ makes no impression on him ; 
cha d. iubhair mi, no arrow shall wound me. 

dearg, deirg, s.m. Red colour, crimson. 2 Red 
deer, mountain deer,roe. 3 Right hand side 
of land ploughed, as distinguished from bàn, 
the left hand side. 4(AC) Impression, see 
deargadh. 5(AC)Wound. 6(AC)Creature. 7 
Red mark on sheep. 8 not ** a single fish." as 
given by tt. Chad’ fhuaradh d, éisg air an 
loch, means, (they) did not find any fish at all 
on the loch. Cha’n "eil d. an abhainn, there 
is not a fsh in a river ; aonach nan d., the 
hill of deer ; sruth an deirg, the deer’s brook ; 
tha d. air an t-slinnean oirre, tt (the sheep) 
has the red mark on its shoulder. 

deargachadh, pr.pt. of deargaich. 

deargad, s.f. see deargann. 

deargadh, -aidh, sm. Reddening, act of mak- 
ing red. 2 Act of blushing. 3 Ploughing, 
act of ploughing. 4 Impression. 5 Act of 
making an impression. 6**Kindling. %JM) 
The smallest of the dorsal fins, i.e. the one 
near the tail—Hebrides. 8 Ear-markf; for ne 
naoi deargadh, see p. 288. 9 Creature. A' d—, 
pr.pt. of dearg. Cha toir mi d. air, I cannot 
make an impression on it ; cha d fhuair sinn 
d. éisg, we did not get any fish. 

deargaich, pr.pt. a’ deargachadh, v.a. d n. Red- 
den, make red. 2 Blush. 

deargain, gen. sing. of deargan. 

dearg-ainmhidh,(AF) s.m. Red cattle. 

deargan, -ain,-an, s. m. Red stain, red dye, 
rouge. 2 Crimson. 3 Purple, 4 Essence. 5 
Reality. 6 Bream (fish.) 7 (AF) Kestrel, 
hawk, falcon, red-necked phalarope, stench- 
el, redstart. 18 s.f. see deargann. 9ttRed 
spot. 

oe -aich, s.m. Red-coat (cant term for 
a soldier.) 2(DU) Mouse or rat before hair 
has grown on it.—d, lucha, d. radain. An 
aimsir a dhearbhar na dearganaich, the time 
when the Whig soldiers were tested. 

dearganaich, n.pl. of dearganach. ; | 

deargan-aitinn, s.m. Juniper starter, bird found 


in Lewis. 


. deargan-allt 


-ain-alit, -ganan-allt, s.m. Kest- 


deargan-allt, 
2(AC) Redstart. 


rei, see clamhan-ruadh. 


boreus. 

——aidh, see deargan-allt. 

deargan-coille,(AF) s.m. Bullfinch. 

deargand, see deargann. 

deargan-doirionn,* s.m. Nebula. 

deargan-fraoich, -ain-, -anan-fraoich, s.m. Gold- 
finch. 2 Bullfinch, see corcan-coille. 

deargau-ghiuthais,{ san, see eam-ghob. 

deargan-leadh, (AF) s.m. Red cattle. 

deargann, -ainn,-nnan, s. f. Flea. Rinn e 
luath is deargannan ann, he made ashes and 
leas (berg, i.e. he stayed there long enough— 


AO EN 
ach,** -aiche, a. Full of fleas. 
deargann-traghad,(AF) s.f. Seashore flea, mul- 
tipede. 
deargan-seilich, 4| s.m. Common red-pole— /inota 
linaria. 
deargan-sneachda, T s.m. Redwing, see sgiath- 
deargan. 2 Snow-bunting,s.m.see eun-buidhe- 
an-t-sneachdaidh. 
deargant, -aint, -au, s.f. 
dearg-chneadh, -chneidh, s. 
wound, severe wound. 
—— ——ach,** a Causing bloody wounds. 
2 Full of deep wounds. 
dearg-chreadh, -a, s.f. Ruddle. 2** Ochre. 
dearg-fhravich, see deargau-íraoich. 
tdearglaice, s.f. Offer, bribe. 
dearg-las, v.n. Blaze up, break into flames. 2 
Give out red fiames. 
ach, see dearg-lasrach. 
rach, -aiche, a. 








see deargann. 
m. & f. Bloody 











hot. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Red-flaming, emitting 
red flames. 

dearg-léigh, s.m. Surgeon. . 

eachd,** s.f. Surgery. 

deargnaien,tfv a. Impurple. 

deargnaidh, a. Unlearned. 

dearg-shoilleir, a. Fallow. 

dearg-shüil, -shüla, -shüilean, s, f. Red eye, 
blood-shot eye. 2**Flaming eye. A dh. fo 
dheòir, his red eyes in tears. 

-—each, -iche, a. Having red eyes. 2 
Having blood-shot eyes. 

dearg-theinn,(AC) s. Great difficulty. 

deariaic,** s.f. Gift. 

dearlan, see déarr-lan. 

dearlanachd, see déarr-lànachd. 

dearmad, -aid, an, s.m. Omission, negligence, 
neglect, forgetfulness. 2 Inattention, slight. 
Cuir air d., neglect, forget ; ge dàil do fhear an 
uile cha d., though the wicked man's (punish- 
ment) is delayed, it is not forgotten ; na ma h-e 
do dn. a thoirt leat, do not forget to bring it 
with you, 

dearmad, pr. pt. a’ dearmad & a’ dearmadadh, 
v.a. £ n. see dearmaid, 

ach, -aiche, a. Forgetful, negligent, 

careless, inattentive. 

achd, s.f.ind. Negligence, carelessness, 

forgetfulness, inattentiveness, omission, 

aich, v. see dearmaid. 

—ail, -dala, a. see dearmadach. 

dearmaid, pr.pt. a’ dearmad & a’ dearmaideadh, 
v.a. & n. Neglect, fail to perform, disregard, 
forget, omit, slight, overlook. 

dearmail, -e, -ean, s.f. Anxiety, solicitude. 2tt 
Worldliness. 

, a. Anxious, 

each,tt a. Anxious. 2 Worldly. 

~—~——eachd,{t s.f.ind. Anxiety. 

dearmal, .see dearmad. 
































Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIV 
IN I RIE I | H DN 
A LI | LE I AN K | d 


323 


d 


{Red-necked phalarope—phalaropus hyper-|tdearmhbail, a. 





Red-flaming. 2 Red- | déarrasach, 


déarrsgnachd 


— -— ach, -aiche, a. Anxious, solicitous. 2f 
l'orgettul. 

Huge, very great. 

tdearmnair, a. Huge, very great. 2 Excessive, 

violent. vehement. 


+:learmharadh, -aidh, s.m. Wonder. 


see dearnadh. 
Do, act, accomplish. 
see déarnadh. 


(learn, 

(learn, v.n. 

déarna, pl. -rnan & -naichean, 

dearnad, see deargaun. 

dearnadair, -ean, s.m. Palmist, one who prac- 
tises divinatiou by palmistry. 2 Chiromancer. 

— ————.—eachd, s.f.ind. Palmistry. 2 Chiro- 
maney. 

déarnadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s. f. Palm of the 
hand. 2 Palm-ful. Air déarnaibh mo dhà 
laimh, on the palms of my hands. 

déarnag, see dearnagan. 

déarnagan, -ain, -an, s.m. Small cake made on 
the palm of the hand. 2 Wafer. 3 Little 
hand. 4 n.pl. of dearnag. D. neo-ghoirt- 
ichte, unleavened cakes. 

déarnan,* s.m. Shoemaker's waxed thread. 

Tdearrach, -aich, ssm. Apartment in a monas- 
tery consecrated for prayers. 

dearrais,(AF) s. Serpent, winged serpent. 

dearral, see dearralach. 

ach, -aiche, a. Beggarly,wretched, poor. 

achd,** s.f.ind. Want. 2 Wretchedness. 

3 Defeat. 

dearras, -ais, s.m. see diorras. 2 s.( AC)Ser- 
pent. 3 a.(AC) Venomous. 

dearras, (an) After, 2 Since, seeing that. 
An d. dhuit sin a dhéanamh, since you have 


done that. 3 
2 Fretful. 








-aiche, a. Obstinate. 


3 Keen, eager. 


| dearrasain, gen. sing. & n. pl. of dearrasan. 
| dearrasan, -ain, 


s. m. The noise of anything 
crackling, burning orroasting. 2 Hurling. 3 
Gurgling. 4 Hissing, buzzing, rustling. 5 
Snarling. 6 Flapping noise of a banner. Tem 
Balm cricket. 8**Hurry. 

dearrasanaich, -e, s.f. see dearrasan. 

dearrasan-uisge,(W C) s.m. Heavy shower of 
rain. 

déarr-làn,ff s.m. Complete fill. 

-— —— — , a. Brimful 

déarr-lanachd, s,f. Brimfulness. 

dèarrs, pr. pt. a’ déarrsadh, v.a. én. Shine, 
beam, gleam, radiate, emit rays. 2 Burnish. 

déarrsach, -aiche, a. Shiny, bright, beaming, 
radiant, gleaming, effulgent, glittering, res- 
plendent. 

— (DC) -aich, s.f. Heavy rain—Uist. 

déarrsachd, "s f.Shining,gleaming. 2 Vigilance. 

déarrsadh, aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Brightness, ra- 
diance, splendour, effulgence. 2 Shining 
beaming, flashing, gleaming. 3 Sun-beam. 4 
*Gleam, ray. d—, pr. pt. of déarrs. D. 
na maidne, the morning ray. 

déarrsaich, pr.pt. a’ déarrsadh, v. a. & m. 
déarrs. 2** Watch, observe, be vigilant. 

déarrsaidheachd, s.f.ind. Vigilance, watchful- 
ness. 2 Brightness. 

déarrsanta, see déarrsach. 

déarrsg, v.a. Polish, burnish, make bright. gee 
File. 3**Command. 4**Surpass. 

déarrsgach,** a. Polished, burnished. 2 Filed. 

déarrsgnach,** a. Polite, polished, excellent, 
complete, accomplished. 

dearrsgnach,** s.m. Polished or accomplished 
man. 

déarrsgnachadh, -aidh, s.m. Polishing, act of 
polishing, burnishing, brightening. A’ d— 
pr.pt. of déarrsgnaich. 

déarrsgnachd, s.f.ind. Politeness, excellence, 





see 





déarrsgnachd 324 deat 
accomplishment. as nom. sing.] 
dearrsgnaich, see déarrsg. —,*v.a. Argue, dispute. 
——_—_—_—_-——e, -an, s.m. Polisher. 2 Polished, | each, -aiche, a. Argumentative. 


accomplished man. 

Tdéarrsgnaidh, -e, a. Wise, prudent. 

déarrsgnaidh, -e, a Burnished, polished. 2** 
Polite. 3** Bright, of good parts, accom- 
plished. . 

déarrsgnuidh, s.m. see déarrsgnaiche. 2 Science. 

—— ——- eachd, s. f. ind. Polish, elegance, 
neatness, 2 Excellence. 

déarrseta, past pt. of déarrsg. 

déarrsnaiche,* see déarrsgnaiche. 

déars, see déarrs. 

déarsach, see déarrsach. 

déarsadh, see déarrsadh. 

déarsaich, see déarrs. 

déarsaigheachd, see déarrsaigheachd. 

déarsanta, -ainte, a. see dearrsach. 

déarsgaich, see déarrs. 

fdéarsgnaidh,-e, v. Excellent, perfect. 2 Wise, 
prudent. 

déarsnaich, v. see déarrsg. 

tdeart, a. Shining. 

dearta P contraction of ** de thubhairt thu ?" 

déar-theach,** s.m. Apartment ina monastery 
appropriated for prayers and acts of penitence. 

Deas, -eise, s.f. The South ( for an àirde deas) 
Q**Pew. 3**rarely Order, rule, method. Bho 
"n D., from the South. 

deas, deise,a. South. 2 Right-hand (side.) 3 
Ready, prepared. 4 Dexterous,skilful, expert. 
5 Proper, fit. 6 Easily accomplished. 7 
Pretty, handsome, 8 Trim, having an appear- 
ance of activity. 9**Portly. 10*Well-shaped, 
elegant. 11**Active. An làmh dh., the right 
hand ; gaoth dh., or gaoth ád., a south wind ; 
rinn thu sin ou d., you have done that pro- 
perly ; dune d., a well-shaped, personable in- 
dividual; 2 a prudent man—Lewis ; am bheil 
thu d. (in Lewis & Uist deiseil ) ? are you 
ready ? have you done? bu d. dhomh sin a 
dhèanamh, I could easily accomplish that ; bu 
d. dhomh mo làmh a ghlacail, I could easily en- 
gage, or close a bargain; fhreagair e mi gu d., 
he answered me readily; d. dheth, finished with 
it ; air an deise dh’éireadh fonn, who would 
most readily raise a song—Gu ma slàn a chì mi. 

deas,** v.n. Remain, abide. 

deasach, æ. Southerly. 

deasach, -aich, s.m. South-countryman. 2 Na- 
tive of Southern Gaeldom. 3 (MMcD) Loch 
Fyne type of fishing-boat.—Lewis. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Preparation, dressing. 

2 Act of preparing or dressing. 3 Baking. 4 

Batch of bread. 5 Adorning. A’ d—, pr.pt. 

of deasaich. Rinne d., he made preparation; 

d. an fhùineadair, the baker’s dressing. 

d,* s.f.ind. Aptitude, qualification, qua- 











lity. 

deasad,.-aid, s.m. see deisead. 

deasadap, -ain, s.m. Common-place book, book 
of reference. 2** Repository. 

deasaich, pr. pt. a’ deasachadh, v.a. 
get ready, 2 Dress, cook. 3 Bake. 4 Gird. 
5** Mend. 6**Correct. 7**Attemper. 8**Ac- 
complish. 9**Adorn. D. do chlaidheamh, gird 
on your sword. 

e. s.m.. Cook, baker. 2 Editor. 

te, past pt. of deasaich, Prepared, made 
ready. 2 Dressed. 3 Cooked. 4**Corrected. 
5 Adjusted, amended. 

deasail, see deiseil. 

deasal, aile, see deiseil. 

an, -ain, s,m. see deisealan. 

as, see deasalachd. 

deasbair,-ean, s.m. Disputant. [** gives —e 


Prepare, 











L pee Es fa 8 = um * ms = " 
1 ) 5 li i | i 
J — P d — 1 d Ni i d 





—eachd, s.f.ind. Dispute. 2 Reasoning, 

conference, debate, pleading, argumentation. 

3 Wrangling. 4 Act of disputing or arguing, 

disputation. Mór dh., much reasoning. 

—ich, pr.pt. a’ deasbaireachadh, v.n. Dis- 

pute, plead, argue, wrangle. j 

—iche,** s.m. Disputant, pleader, ar- 
guer, wrangler. 

deas-bhriathrach,(WC) a. Eloquent. 

deasbud, -uid, -an, s.m. Dispute. 
conference. 

deascadh, -aidh, see deasgainn. 

deas-chainnt, -e, -ean, s.f. Eloquence. 

each, a. Eloquent, witty, ready in 








2tfDebate, 








replying. 

deas-cheumach, -aiche, o Stately in gait. 2 
Having a neat manner of walking. 

deas-fhacal, -ail, -clan, s.m. | Ready word. 4 
Smart reply. 

deas-fhaclach, -aiche, a. Ready-witted. 2 Elo- 
quent, ready-worded. 

deas-fhear,ff s.m. Ambidexter. ` 

deasg, v.n. Parch. 

deasgachd, s.f.ind. Parchedness. 

deasgadh, -aidh, -ean, s.m. seedeasgainn. t2 
GEN dregs. D. an t-sluaigh, the rabble, the 
mob. 

deasgainn, -e, -ean, $.f. Rennet. 2 Yeast. 3 
Lees, dregs, refuse. 

—each,** a. Full of dregs, or lees. 2 

Yeasty, barmy. 

deasgainnean, given by * for deasgainn, 

tdeasgair,** v.a. Pluck off the ears. 

deasganan, Lewis for deasgainn. 

deasgann, -ainne, -an, see deasgainn. 

deasghabhail, s.f. Ascension-day. 

deasghair, -e, a. On the right hand. 

deas-ghluasad,f{s.m. Proper gestures. 

deas-ghnàth, -àith, -an, s.m. Ceremony. 2 Cus- 
iom, usage. Lagh nan d., the ceremonial law. 

ach,-aiche, a. Ceremonious, cere- 

2 Customary. 

achd, s.f.nd. Ceremony. 

deas-ghnath-torraidh, s.m. Obsequies, fune- 
ral rites or ceremonies. 

deasgraich, -ean, s.m. Heterogeneous mass. 

deasguinn, see deasgainn. 

—each, see deasgainneach. 
deas-iomairt,ff s.f. Proper gestures. 
deas-iuil,** see deiseal. 
deas-labhairt, s.m. Eloquence, address, fluency 

of speech. 2t{Elocution. 
deas-labhrach, -aiche, q. 
command of language. 
deas-labhradh, -aidh, see deas-labhairt. 
deas-lamh, -laimh, s.f. Right hand. 
—ach, -aiche, a. Right-handed, ambi- 
dexterous, 2 Dexterous, ‘‘neat-handed.” 3 
ea 4 Of, or pertaining to, a right 
and. 
——achd, s.f.ind. Ambidexterity. 2 Dex- 
terity, ** neatness " of hand. 
deasmaireachd, see deasmireachd. 
deasmaireas, see deismireachd. 
deasmas, ais, s.m. see deasmireachd. 
deasoireach, -aiche, a. Spicy. 
——d,** s Spiciness. 
deann (MATE s. Chain ofa padlock, 
deaspoireachd, see deasbaireachd, 
deaspoirich, see deasbairich. 
deaspud, -uid, see deasbud. 
deasuchadh, see deasachadh. " 
deasuich, see deasaich. 
deat, -a, pl. deathaid, s.m. £ f. Unshorn year- 








monial. 








Eloquent, having a 











Original from 
L M V fERBEITY P3 - | 


Kell P D X a 
DD ARIA CLUARAZDA LCR 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 
m EK: LI i LOREM LI i rm = 


LINOIS A 


deat 


old ewe or wether. 
an unfleeced year-old sheep. 

deatach, -aiche, -aichean, s.f. Smoke. 2 Va- 
pour. steam, exhalation, fume. 3* Smoke on 
the point of breaking into flame. 4 Gas. Cuir 
d., emit smoke ; à^ cur na deataich, emitting 
smoke ; breislich á deataich, drunkenness from 
the fumes (of whisky ; fhuair e car troimh "n 
deataich, he got a toss inthe smoke,—referring 
to a stroke of good luck. If you heard of any- 
one having £1,000 come in a windfall to him, 
you would say ** Fhuair e.car troimh ’n deat- 
aich," or “is ann roimhe a dh’ éirich an 

J maosg." 

Tdeatacha, see deatachail. 

 deatachail, -ala, a. Smoky. 2**Misty. 3**Full 
of vapour or exhalation. 

deatachair, -e, a. see deatachail. 

deatachan, ain, -an, s.m. Chimney, vent. 

deatach-thalmhuinn, -aich-, ssm. Fumitory, see 
lus-deatach-thalmhuinn, 

deataich, gen. sing. of deatach. 

deatam, -aim, s.m. Anxiety, eagerness, solici- 
tude. 2*i<ecnness. 

—--—ach, -aiche, a. Anxious, eager, solici- 
tous. 2* Necessary, needed—IJslay. 3*Keen 
for the world —Skye. 

deatamas,* -ais, s.m. Requisite, family necessity 
or want. 

deathach, see deatach. 

--—ail, -ala, see deatachail. 

--—-thalmhuinn, see lus-deatach-thal- 
mhuinn. 

deathadh,(CR) subj. of rach, Would go—Suth’d. 

deathaid,(AF) s.f. Two-year-old sheep. 

deathnaid,(AF) s.f. Sheep separated from flock. 

decreut,** s.m. Gaelic spelling of decree, 

Sed A of dia. Ainm an dée, the name of their 

8. 

déibh, see mu dhéidhinn. 2 see diathaibh. 

fdeibhe, s.f. Care, diligence. 

deibheach,** œ. Hasty, hurried, flurried. 2 
contentious. 3 Passionate. 

—d,** s.f. Hastiness, hurriedness. 2 

Contentiousness, 3 Passionateness. 

tdeibheadh, -eidh, s.m. Debate. 2 Battle. 3 

Haste, speed, | 

deibhidhe,** s.f. Kind of verse or dan dìreach, 
having several rules to be observed, among 
which are that the first quatrain shall end in 

a minor termination, and the second in a ma- 

jor termination. [This word, given by **, 
does not appear to be used in Scotland.] 

déibhinn, see mu dhéidhinn. 
déibhleach, a. Diminutive. | 
déibhleid, -e, -ean, s.f. Feeble, awkward, un- 
handy person. 
déibhleidheachd, s.f.ind. Inability, awkward- 
ness, wretchedness, clumsiness, helplessness. 
déibhlin, -linne, s.f. Poverty. 
déibhreagach,|| s.m. Whitlow. [Preceded by 
the article an.] 
deic, -e, a. Convenient, fitting, 2* Due. 3 Le- 
al, lawful. 4 Sufficient. +5 Hairy. 6 Easy. 
ha d. à dhol dhachaidh, it is not easy to go 
home ` cha d. luathas na h-earba gun na coin 

a chur rithe, the swiftness of the roe is known 

without the loosening of the hounds—N.G.P. 

deich, a. Ten. D. clachan, ten stones ; d. fir, 
ten men. 

deich-bhrigh, s.f. The decalogue. 

——— , See deich-bhrigh, 

deicheach, see deich-rillte. 

deicheamh; æ. Tenth. An d. fear, the tenth man. 

——,-eimh, s.m. Tithe, the tenth part. 

— 2 Decimal. 3“ Ten ” at cards, Bheir mi d. 

| dhuit, I will give you a tenth part. 














Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


325 
Cosmhuil ri d., like 


deifreach 


-—achd,** s.f.ind. Decimation. 
-—adh, s.m. see deicheainh, s. 

———--—aich, v. a Decimate, addecimate, 
tithe, divide into tenths. 

deich-fillte, a. Ten-fold, decuple. 

deichmhich, see deicheamhaich. 

tTDeichmhios, -a, s.m. December. 

deichnear, s.m. Ten persons, 2 Decade. Air 
sgath dh., for the sake of ten persons ; cha robh 
air fhagail ach aon deichnear, there were only 
ten left. [Followed by the gen. pl.] 

deich-raimhach, Kind of boat, see p. 78. [A cer- 
tain man when ordering a boat said, “ sia- 
ràmhach a dhion ochd-ramhach, a dhèanamh 
feum dvich-ramhach, ’s nach fhàgadh a bheag 
de luchd birlinn da-ramh-dheug ri la math 
soirbheis.” At that time the price of a boat 
depended on the number of oars she carried, 
so the man wanted a 12-oared boat for the 
price of a 6-oared one.] 

deich-roinn, -e, -ean, s.f. Decimal, tenth part. 

h, o Decimal. 

deich-shlisneach, -niche, -nichean, s.f. Decagon. 

———— —, 4. Ten-sided. 

deich-shlisneag,** s.f. see deich-shlisneach. 

deich-thaobhach, -aiche, o. Ten-sided. 

-———, -aich, -aichean, s.m. Ten-si- 
ded figure, decagon. 

deicir, -e, see deacair. 

déid (for téid) see under rach & theirig. 

fdeid, s.f. Obedience, submission. 2 Care, di- 
ligence. 

déid-chuaimh, see deud-chnaimh. 

déide, see déideadh. 2** rarely Submission, 
obedience. 

deide, see deid. 

déideadh, l -idh, s.m. The toothache. [Preceded 
by the article an.] 

déideag, -eig, -an, s.f. Pebble. 2 Toy, bauble. 
3 Little fair one. 4 Ribwort, see slàn-lus. 5 
trGift. 6ttDarling one. 

déidh, -e, -ean, s.f. Wish, desire, longing. 2 
Contention.  3**Fondness, love.  4** rarely 
Protector, defender. A dh. air ol, his great 
propensity for drink; tha ean d. oirre, he is 
very fond of her. 

déidh, prep. After. 'Na dh. sin, after that; 'na 
d., after her; ’nar d., after vs; m! ar d., about 
or concerning us; "Dam dh.,after me; chuir mise 
'nan d. mo ghlaodh, 1 called after them. 

déidh-bhodach,** s.m. Old lecher. 2 Dotard, 

deidhe,** s.f. Pair. 

deidhealachd, * s.f.ind. Extreme or degree of 
desire or propensity, 2 Enthusiasm. 3 In- 
dustry. 

déidheanach,**-aiche, a. Fond, loving, amorous, 
2 Pretty. 3 Late, last, hindermost. 4 Dilatory. 

déidheil, -eala, a. Desirous, fond of, addicted 
to. 2 Enthusiastic. 3 Persevering. D. air 
an uisge-bheatha, fond of whisky ; cho d. aig 
a, ghnothach, so enthusiastic at his business. 

déidhian, see mu dhéidhinn. 

déidh-laimh,* (an) adv. Too late, afterwards, 2 
After-hand, behind. 3 In arrears. 

ded bs (C) s.f, Gaelic spelling of dais—Gair- 
loch. 


————-——026 








deifir, -e, s.f. Haste, speed, hurry, expedition, 
despatch. 2 (PM) Difference.  Cha'n "eil e 
gu d., it does not matter, [A Gaelic form of 
difference.] 

-——each, -iche, a. see deifreach. 

-——ich, v.a. see deifrich. 

deifreach, -riche, a. Hasty, in haste, speedy, 
expeditious, 2 Causing hurry or despatch. 3 
Requiring expedition. 4 (PM) Eccentric. 
Gnothach d., an affair requiring the utmost 
expedition ; fhreagair mi gu d. I answered 


deifreach 


speedily; duine d., aneccentric or peculiar man, 
-—adh, -aidh, s.m. Hastening, hurrying, 





act of hastening, hurrying or bestirring. 2 


Haste, expedition. A’ d—, pr.pt. of deifrich. 
A’ d. gu mór, hastening greatly. 

deifreadh,** -eidh, s.m. Haste. 2 Difference. 

deifrich, pr.pt. a’ deifreachadh, v.a. & n. Has- 
ten, hurry, speed, bestir, make haste. D. ort, 

be quick. i 
—— te, past pt. £ a. Hastened. 

deigh, -e, pl. -ean [-eachan & -eannan] s.f. see 
eigh. [Finald of the oldartlele has been at- 

tached in déigh.] 

déigh, prep. see déidh. 

deigh, a. More fit. 

deigheach, -iche, a. see eigheach. 

déivheanach, see déidheanach. 

deigheanach,** -aich, s.m. see eigheanach. 

dei heann,(DU)-inn, s.m. Shackles for a horse. 

Each air deighinn, a shackled horse. 

déigheil, see déidheil. 

déighinn, for mu dhéidhinn. 

deighinn,(DU) v.a. Shackle, tie the legs of a 

horse to prevent it wandering far. 
déigh-laimh, see déidh-laimh. 

deighlean, -ein, -an, s.m. Quire of paper. 

deighnich, v.a. Fetter feet of cattle, &c. 

deil, -e, -ean, s.f. Turner’slathe. 2 Axle. 3 
Sharp iron rod. 4 Mare. 
(AF) Two-year-old sow or pig. 7 see deala. 
8 Two, double. 9 see dealas. 10**Twig. 11 
see déile. Fo sparradh an deile, in the cofin. 

——,0. seedéidheil. 2 see dil. 

deil,** oo Turn with a lathe. 

deil-aodannach, -aiche, a. Two-faced. 

deilb,( AF) see dealb. 

deilbh, -e, ean, s.f. see dealbh. 2 gen.sing. of 
dealbh. 

, v.a. pr. pt. a’ deilbh. see dealbh. Thai 

'deilbh an aodaich, she is warping. 

t , o, Fine, fair, sprightly, 2 Brave. 3 

Sightly. 

deil’-bhainne, (AF) s. Milk-dish or cup. 

tdeilbh-bhog, -oig, -oigean, s.f. Seal. 

deilbh-chaochladh, see dealbh-chaochladh. 
deilbheag, -eig, see dealbhag. 

tdeil-bh.alach, -aich, s.m. Meeting of two ways. 

deilbhean, -ein, see dealbhan. [ft gives —ein 
as nom.sing.] 

deilbhich, v.a. see dealbh, v. 

d-ilbhidh, see dealbhaidh. 

deilbhin, -e, -ean, see dealbhan. 

deilbhte, see dealbhta. 

deilchead,** a. Ill. 2 Bad. 3 Sad. 

deil-cheannach, -aiche, a. Two-headed, double- 
topped. 

'deile? (for ciod eile P) interr.pron. What else ? 
"D. ath’ airt aire? what else do you mean ?; 
d. a dheanainn ? what else could I do?;d.a 
dheanádh e P what else would he do? 

deile,* see déidhealachd. 

deile, gen.sing. of deil. 

déile, -idh, Lan &] -leachan, s.f. Deal, plank. 
2 Plank on which a corpse is laid. 3 
Palein Aeraldry, to represent a nar- 
row board as used in fencing. Tha 
e air an d., he is stretched—dead ; fo 
sparradh nan déilean, in the cofin. 

déileach, a. Planked. 

—_—_——-adih, -aidh.s.m. Contabulation. 

an, n.pl. of déile. 











a — 


léileadair, -ean, s.m. Turner. 2 Saw- 
yer. 269. Déile. 
—— ——-—eachd, s.f.ind. Turnery,business of a 


turner,or 2 of à sawyer. 
déileag, -cige, -an, s. f. Little deal, board or 
lath. 2**Rod. 


D 7 i : 
MCT Ej” 
iKIF 5" mg; Vg 
n L ii ai | Lil 
L- i L— 1 dm k 


326 
| déiieagach,tta. Abounding in little deals, 


ye. 

dE E s.f. See-saw— 
ist. 

deile-mhuc,(AO) s.f.Two-year-old sow 


5**Cow’s udder. 6 


+deilidh, -e, -ean,s.f. Pursuit. 


Tdeilt, -e, s.f. Separation. 





deimhinnich 


fdeilcala, s.f. Space of two years. 

deilean,** -ein, dim. of deil. Little lathe. 2 
(AF)Gunnel (fish.) 3 see deileann. 

deileang,(AF) s.m. Pig. 2 Young sow, two-yr. 
old sow. 

deileann, -linn, s.m. Loud sharp barking, as of 
a dog. 2 Whining. Bha "n cù & d. fad na 
h-oidhche, the dog was whining all night; a’ 
tabhanuaich le deifir a bhi deileann air an 
torach, briskly barking with eagerness to be at 
full bay in the chase. 

deile-aodannach,** a. see deil-aodannach. 

deileas, -eis, see dealas. 2**Grudging through 
avarice. 

ach,(CR) a. Convenient, advantageous, 

having easy access to conveniences or advan- 


tages—Sk 
Q 


270. Deile- 
roinn. 





deile-roinn, s.f. Party per pale, in 
heraldry. 

deile-thore,** -thuire, s.m. Two-year- 
old hog. 

deilf,(AF) s.f. Dolphin. 

deilg, gen.sing. of dealg. 

deilge, gen.sing. of dealg. 

deilyinneach,* s. Shingles. 2 Small-pox.—ZIs- 
lay. 

deilgionnadh, -aidh, s.m. Waste, havoc. 2 De- 
population. 

deilgne, s.pl. Thorns, prickles. 

— ach, -niche, a. Thorny, prickly. 
al d., the ** pins and needles." 

—_ ach, Dich, s.m. Spear-thistle. 

deil-gréine, s.m. see deó-ghréine. ` 

deilich, v.a. see dealaich. 2**Board (with wood.) 
3**Contabulate. 


Cad- 


déilig, Age, -ean, s.m. Gaelic spelling of dealin 
, pr. pt. a’ déiligeadh, v.a. & n. Deal, 
transact business, treat with. 








A' d—, pr. pt. of déilig. 

deilin,** s.f. Trespass. 

deilinn, v.n. Yelp, bark, as a dog. 

Tdeill, v.n. Lean upon. 

deillseag, -eige, -an, sf. Blow with the open 
hand. 2**Slap on the breech. 3**Box on the 
ear or cheek. 

tleilm, s.f. Noise, rumbling, trembling. 

tdeil-oidhche, s.f. Space of two nights. 


deil-tharruing, s.f. Trigger. 2 Iron nail. 
deil-theine,(AH) s.f. Iron rod, used when heat- 
ed, for boring holes in wood. . 


deiltre, t s.m. Druid idols. 2 School of magic, ` 


ach,ft a. Gilt. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Gilding, lacquering. 

deiltrich,** v.a. Gild. 

a B Nor (MOM 

+deim, s.f. Lack, want. 2 Failing, deficiency. 

deimh, -e, a. Dark, hidden. | 

+deimhe, s.f. Darkness. 2 Defence, protection. 

deimheas, -eis, -easan, see deamhas. 

deimhinn,** v, see deimhinnieh. 

--— — ——., -e, a. True, certain, of a truth, sure. 
Gu d., truly, indeed, certainly ; gu d., d., tha 








mi ag ràdh riut, verily, verily, I say unto thee ; 13 


d. sgeul, a true story ; tha a’ dh. agam gu... 
I know for a fact that... 
déimhinn, -e, s.f. i 
thing. 
.— — ——each,** a. Affirmative. 
..— — ——eachd, s.f.ind. Certainty, proof. 
ich, pr.pt. 





Tm FA | 
E = 
L } | 


| 
poe 
f 3 
LA 
zm 


Desire or concern about anye - 


a’ deimhinneachadh, pa — 


eadh, -idh, s.m. Transacting business, 1 e 








deimninnich 


Afiirm, confirm, ascertain, prove, verify, de- 
monustrate, assure, 

tdeimine, s.f. Assurance, certainty, 2 Truth. 
8 Edged tools, ; 

deimnneach,** a, Affirmative. 

deimihnich, see deimhinnich. 

Tdein, s.f. Lack, want. 

fdein, -e, a. Clean, neat. 2 Strong, firm. 

déin, -e, a Vehement. 

déine, comp. of dian. More or most keen or ea- 
ger. Mu choinneamh a’ chath a’s d., pending 
or about to engage in the hottest battle. 

, $.f. ind, Kagerness, keenness, vehemence, 
ardour, violence, impetuosity,  2**Neatness. 
3**Cleanness. 4 Sometimes used for teine. 

déineachd, s.f.ind. Keenness, violence, empha- 
sis, vehemence, impetuosity, eagerness,fierce- 
ness, ardour. 

——-ach, -aiche, @ Rude, rough. 2 Ve- 
hement, violent, urgent, fierce. 3 Bold. 4 
Keen. 5 Grievous. 6 Cruel. 7 Incessant. 
8 Emphatic, (as speech.) 9 Mad, Uisge d., 
incessant rain ` labhair e gu d., he spoke em- 

haiically. 

déinead, s.f. Same meanings as déine. 

déineas, -eis, s.m. Eagerness, keenness, vehe- 
mence, fierceness. 2* Faint attempt to be di- 
ligent or eager. 3 Impetuousness, violence. 
[* gives deineis as nom.sing.] 

ach, -aiche, a, see déineachdach. 

achd, s.f. see déineachd. 

déineis, see déineas. 

deinib, see deirbh. 

deinmheach,** -hiche, q. 
Void. 


wen 














Vain, frivolous. 2 


———air,** s.m. Toyman, pedlar. 2 Tri- 

fling, vain fellow. 

fdéinmheas, -eis, ssm. Vanity, self-conceit, 2 
Frivolousness. 

déinmheasair, -ean, s.m. Vain, frivolous fellow. 

deinmhich,** v.n. Vanish. 

fdeinmhin, -e,-ean, s.m. Vain fellow, trifler. 

$deinmne, a. Swift, active. 

deir, v.n., pres. ind. Say. Used thus, A deirim, 
I say; a deir thu, or deir thu, e, i, sinn, &c., 
thou, he, she, we, &c. say. 

deir, -e, s.f. The Shingles, St. Anthony’s fire. 

deir-ainfhiach,** s.pl. Arrears. 

tdeirbh, s.f. Churn. 

tdeirbhe, see dearbhadh. 

déirc, -e, -ean, s.f. Alms, charity. Thoir d., 
give alms ; naomh-dh., alms collected at church; 
mo dh. ort ! give me aims ! ; chaidh mi air an 

o I took to begging ; diol-déirc, an object of 
pity. 

-——-each, -ich, s.m. Object of charity. 2 Beg- 
gar. Bu tu fuasgladh nan d., thou wert the 
needy’s aid. d 

-=——each, -iche, a. Poor, penurious. 2 Ready 

_ to give alms, charitable. 3 Of, like, or per- 
taining to, alms or charity. 4**Seeking alms. 

déirceachail,-hala, a. Charitable, almsgiving. 

déirceag, -eige, -an, sf. Term of contempt or 
ridicule for a parsimonious female, 2 **¥e- 

. male mendicant. 

. Óéircear, -eir, -an, s. m. Almoner. [tf gives 
-eir as nom, sing. 

deirciche, see deircear. 

deircire, -an, s.m. see deircear. 

déirc-Pheadair,(AC) s.f. (St. Peter's tribute.) 

_ The fish caught in the Isles on Xmas Day, 
and given to the poor. 

. déirc-roinneadair,** s.m. Almoner. 

tdeirdeas, v. They say. 

. deir-dhunnan,** s.m. see deir-thunnan. 

_tdeire, s.f. Abyss,pool. 2 The deep. 


327 


deis 
Thrill, dirl, as the result of 





déireach,( DU) s.f. 
à sharp blow. 

deire, -annan, see deireadh. 

deireadh, a. see deireannach. 

deireadh, -ridh, -ridhean, s.m. End, conclusion. 
2 The end, rear, hindmost part of any- 
thing. 3 Stern of a ship. 4**Extremity. 5 
Back of a cart.—W. Isles, Argyll, &c. D. na 
bliadhna, the year’s end ; ceann deiridh, hin- 
der part, stern, posteriors; air dh., behind; 
air d., last ; d, feachd, the rear of an army; 
d. an ni seo, the end of this thing; d. na 
luinge, the stern of the ship; d. cuaiche, @ 
round stern, d. poite, lees; mu dh., at last : 
toiseach tighinn is d. falbh, first to come and 
last to go (motto of Goll MacMorna) ; feith ri 
a’ dheireadh, respice finem ; aig d. an la is 
math na Domhnullaich, the MacDonalds can be 
relied on at the end of the day ; is beag an ni 
nach d. a’s t-Fhoghar, it is a little thing that 
is not a hindrance in Autumn. 

————— -buana,jI s.f. Harvest-home. 

— ———- -cairte, s.m. Back of a cart. 

—— — -chre, (PM) s.m In Uist, applied to the 
ingathering of the potato and turnip crop. 
The ordinary deireadh-buana comes first, fol- 
lowed by the d.-chre, when the potavoes are 
secured. 

— -cuaiche, s.m. Round stern of a ship. 


tde1ream, v. pres. aff. a. I say. 

deireannach, -aiche, a. Last, hindmost, latter. 
2 Late, tardy, slow, dilatory, behind. ’S na 
laithean d., in the latter days; an neach d., the 
last individual. 

—— —— 0,** s.f. Backwardness. 

deireannan, -ain, s.n. Dessert. 

deireas, -eis,-an, s.m. Injury,harm,hurt. 9 Loss, 
calamity. 3 Defect, damage. 4 Miscbief. 5 
Requisite, convenience. 6 Want, scarcity. 
Deireasan; domestic requisites or conveniences ; 
tha mi gun d., J am quite well ; cha robh dith 
no d. oirre, she wanled nothing. 

deireasach, -aiche, a. Damaged, hurt, lame. 2 
Mischievous, detrimental. 3*Very requisite, 
needful. 4 Defective. 5**Calamitous,  6** 
Injurious, hurtful, 

deireasachd,** s.f, Injuriousness, hurtfulness, 
calamitousness. 

deir'-fhiachan, s.pl. Arrears. 

deirge, comp. of dearg. More or most red. Fion 
a’s d. dreach, wine of the reddest hue. 

deirge, s.f, Redness, ruddiness. 2 Red, ver- 
milion. D. shul, redness of the eyes. 

deirgead, -eid, sf. Degree of redness, red. A’ 
dol an d., growing redder and, redder. 

deirgid, second comp. of dearg. Is d. e seo, itis 
the redder for this; cha d. e sin, it is not the 
redder for that. 

Tdeirginnleadh, -idh, s.m. Red cattle. 

deirid,** s.f, Mystery. 2 Secret. 

deirideach,** a, Secret, hidden, private. 

deiridh, gen. sing. of deireadh. 

deirim, see deir. 

deirionnach, -aiche, see deireannach. 

Tdeirire, s.m. Clamour. 

deirse,** -an, s.f. Goal, gate. 

Tdeirte, past part. Was said. 

deir-thunnan, -ain, s.m. Dessert, collation. 

dèis, s.f. Pew. Gaelic spelling of dais. 

déis adv. An déis, (not for an déidh. Old Gael- 
ic was '' daneis,” after them.t) After. 2tt 
Afterwards. 

déis,* v.a. Skelp the breech. 

déis, dat.sing. of dias. 

deis, dat. sing. f. ofa, deas. 2 gen, sing. of s. 
deas, see deise, 








delsboireachd 


Avisboireachd, see deasbaireachd. 

deisceart,** ssm. The southern point, the south 
quartier. 

deisciobul, -uil, s.m. Disciple. 

achd,** s.f. Discipleship. 

a. Active, nimble. 2 Quick, fierce, 





deiscir,* 
sudden. 

deiscreideach,** a. Discreet, prudent. 2 Grave, 
sober. 

deis-dé,,AC) s. Girth, sanctuary, godwards, 
place of safety. 2 Spot in game ** tig ’’ where 
the player within is secure and cannot be 
touched. 

deis-dé,ff int. Halt! Mwn abradh tu “ deas- 
dé," before you had time to speak, before you 
could say ** Jack Robertson.”’ 

déisdinn, see déisiun & déistinn. 

——each, see déisinneach. 

déise, gen. sing. of s. dias. 

deise, gen. sing. f. of a. deas. A dh'ionnsuidh 
na làimhe deise, £o the right hand. 

deise, comp. of deas. Is ia’ Ghàidhlig ni's d. 
dhomh na a’ Bheurla, Gaelic comes more rea- 
dily to me than English. 

tt a. Dual. An t-àireamh d., the dual 
numoer. 

deise, -achan, s.f. Suit of clothes. 

deise,** s.f. Couple, pair, two persons. 2 see 
deisead. 

deiseach,** a. Southern, Southerly, towards the 
South. 

deiseachadh, -aidh, s.m. Dressing. 2 Going in 
full dress. 3 Decoration, ornament. 

deiseacnau, n.pl. of deise. 

deiseachd, s.f.ind. Convenience, neatness, ele- 
gance, handsomeness, ornament, dress. D. 
muineidh the ornament of learning. 

deisead, -eid, s.f. Neatness, elegance. 2 Readi- 
ness. 3* Symmetry of body, proportionable 
parts. 4**Cleanness. 5**Appositeness. Cha'n 
fhaca mi a leithid air dh., J never saw its 
match for elegance. 

déiseag, -eige, -an, see déillseag. 

déiseagaich,]f v. a. Breech. 2 Whip on the 
breech. 

déiseaz-thubaist, sf. Accidental slap with the 








open haud. 
deiseal,-eala, a. Towards the South. south- 
ward. 2 Having a southern exposure. 31] 


Lucky. 4 Dexter in heraldry. 5 Ready, pre- 
pared. 6 Finished. Am feadh ’sa bhitheas 
a’ ghrian a’ dol d., while the sun goes south- 
wards; d. air gach ni, the sunward course with 
everything—south course,right direction; cuimh- 
nich am beagan a bha eadarainn, gu’m beil 
e d. dhomhs! agad, remember that there is a 
little outstanding between us, you ought to have 
it ready for me. Prosperous course, turning 
from east to west in the direction taken by the 
sun. D. air gach ni, the sunward course (is the 
best) for everything. This is descriptive of the 
ceremony observed by the Druids, of walking 
round their teraples, by the south, in the 
course of their divinations, keeping the tem- 
ple always on their right. This course was 
deemed prosperous, the contrary (tuathal) 
fatal, or at least, unpropitious. From 
this ancient superstition are “derived seve- 
ral customs which are still retained a- 
mongst us, as drinking over the left thumb, as 
Toland expresses it, or according to the course 
of the sun. Martin says,‘‘ some of the poorer 
sort of people in the Western Isles retain the 
custom of performing these circles sunwise 
about the persons of their benefactors three 


times, when they bless them, and wish good 
Some are 


success to all their enterprises. 


328 





deisealachd, s.f.ind. Readiness, circumstance of 
deisealan, -ain, s.m. Box or slap on the ear. 


déisean, -ein, s.f. 


deisear, s.m. Place having a southern exposure. 





fdéisinn 


very careful, when they set out to sea, that l 
the boat be first rowed sunwise,and if this be — 
neglected, they are afraid their voyage may 
prove unfortunate. I had this ceremony paid 
me when in Islay by a poor woman, after I 
had given her an alms. I desired her to let 
alone that compliment, for that I did not care 
for it ; but she insisted to make these three 
ordinary turns, and then prayed that God 
and MaeCharmaig, the patron saint of that 
island, might bless and prosper me in all my 
affairs. When a Gael goes to drink out of à 
consecrated fountain, he approaches it by 
going round the place from east to west, and 
atíunerals, the procession observes.the same 
direction in drawing near the grave. Hence 
also is derived the old custom of describing 
sunwise a circle, with a burning brand, about 
houses, cattle, corn and corn-fields, to prevent — 
their being burnt, or in any way injured by .— 
evil spirits, or by witchcraft. This fiery cir- 

cle was also made around women, as soon as 
possible after parturition, and also around 
newly-born babes. These circles were, in later 
times, described by midwives, and were deem- 

ed effectual against the intrusion of the daoine 

sith or sithichean, who were particularly on — 
the alert in times of childbed, and not infre- 
quently carried infants away, according te 
vulgar legends, and restored them afterwards, 

but sadly altered in features and in personal `` 
appearance. Infants stolen by fairies are 
said to have voracious appetites, constantl S 
craving for food. In this case it was usual © 
for those who believed that their children ` ` 
had been taken away, to dig a grave in the ~— 
fields on quarter-day and there to lay the fairy —— 
skeleton till next morning, at which time the 
parents went to the place, where they doubt- 
ed not to find their own child in place of the 
skeleton. ”’ 


Te) 


>) ` 
Daan 


(^ ^'7 1s aen 


being prepared. 2 Convenience. 

deisealas, -ais, see deisealachd. 

see déisinn. 

deisear, eire, a. see deisearach. Fonn gun d. 
gréine, land without a southern exposure. 


The north side of the country round Loch Tay 
is called Deisear, and the south side, Tuathar. 
deisearach, -aiche, a. Sunny. 2 Having a 
southern exposure. 3* Conveniently situated, 
handy. 4 Applicable. D. air an sgoil, near 
the school; taobh d., a countryside which has — 
a southern exposure. 
-—d,* s.f. Convenience in point of situa- - 
tion. 2 Applicability. ^ 79 
deisear-gréine, s.m.ind. Southern exposure. 
deisearra, a. see deisearach. 
deisearrach, see deisearach. 
deiseil,-e, @. see deiseal. 
deiseir, see deisear. | 
deise-mharcachd,** s.f. Riding-habit. P 
déisg,tt pr.pt. a’ déisgeadh, v.a. Crack, split, - 





\ 





ry up. n 

déisgeadh, -idh, -idhean, s.m. Chink, crack, 
fissure. . 

deisgeanan, s.pl. see deasgainn. 

deisgiobul, -uil, see deisciobul. 

fdeisibh,** s.pl. Lands. 

deisich, see deasaich. 

deisimeireachd, see deismireachd. 

déisinn, e, s.f. Dislike, disgust. 2 Abomina- 
tion, abhorrence, 3 Enormity, 4**Sadness. 
5**Squeamishuess. 6**Numbness. 7**Fright. 
SttPity. 9* Disgust at the conduct or con- - 


! 
| 


 t—bhir, -e, a. 











+—idhe, s.f. Separation. 
.—ionn,(DC) s.m. Harris, Skye & Lewis for 


` deobhail, 


 deoc,(CR) v. 


—meocan-dearga,) s.m. Red clover, 
^ rag chapuill. 








ful, disgusting, shocking. 
3**Squeamish. 

—eachd, s,f.ind. Disgustfulness, ugliness, 
frightfulness. 2**Sorrowfulness. 3**Squeam- 
ishness. 


2 Sorrowful, sad. 





. deis-iuil,** s.f. see deiseal. 


deisleinn, -ein, s.m. Beam or ray of light, pro- 
ceeding from any luminous body. 

Tdeismich, v.a. Dress, adorn. 

deismireach, -iche, a. Curious, inquisitive. 

——d, s.f.ind. Curious prolixtalk, cu- 
riosity. 2 Quibile. 3 Quotation. 

deismireas, -eis, sm. see deismireachd. 

déisneach, -niche, see déisinneach, 

déis-noin,ff s. Afternoon. 

déistean, ein, -einean, see déisinn. 

—ach, see déisinneach, 

deisthinn, see déisinn. 

——--——-each, see déisinneach. 

deisthinneachd, see déisinneachd. 

déistinn, seedéisinn. 

—each, see déisinneach. 

———-——eachd, see déisinneachd. 











deith, s.f. Iron rod, used when heated for bor- 


ing holes in wood. - 
Legal. 2 s.f.Charge,custody. 
+—-—bhrigh, see déifrich. 

ear, Cowal pron. of deifir, | 
2 Care, diligence. 





deubhann. 
deithineach, -niche, «a. Dainty. 
deithleann, see deileann. 
deithlinn, see deilinn. 
deithneamach, -aiche, q. 

too eager for gain. 
deithneas, -is, s.f. Haste, speed. 
————ach, -aiche, a. Keen, hasty. 
de-meine,(AC) s. God-like mind, 


Worldly, avaricious, 


deo, s. f. Breath. 2 Air. 3 The vital spark, 
diffe. 4 Ray of light. 5 Vision. 6**Place 
where à stream falls into the sea. Gun d., 


breathless ; cha’n ’eil aige na chumas an d. 

ann, hehas not what will keep the vital spark 

in him; tha e an impisan d. a chall, he ts on 

the eve of giving up the ghost; cha’n "el d. 

gaoith’ ann, there is nota breath of wind ; 

d. gealbhain, a spark of fire; d. soluis, o ray 

of light ; cha tig d. de 'n ghréin a steach, a sin- 

gle ray of sunshine shall not enter ; an fheadh 

'sa bhitheas an d. annad, while you breathe ; 

gun d, léirsinn, without a ray of vision,stone- 

blind; glacaibh mo dn., take hold of my de- 

parting spirit or ghost ; thug Abraham suas 

an d., A. gave up the ghost. 

see deoghail. 

deobhal, -ail, see deoghal. 

—— ———ach, see deoghalach. 

adh, see deoghaladh. 

| Suck — Lewis. 

deocadan,(AC) -ain, see deocan. 

deocan, -ain, s.m. Valve. 2*Noise in suck- 
ing. 3(AC) Sponge-like substance coughed 
up by a new-born foal. 4 The five-leaved 
shamrock, supposed to grow out of this sub- 
stance after it is buried. 

-an-gamhnach, (MMcD) s.m. Honey- 

suckle. 








see seam- 


deoch, irreg.s.f. Thus declined; 


déisinn 229 deoin-bhàigh 
sequences of skelping the breeches. 10 Phy Sing. Plur. 
Saal weakness. sh: mo dheòir le d., my tears| Nom. deoch, deochan, deochannan, 
dropped with sorrow; tha d. air t’ fhiaclaibh,| Gen. dighe, dheochan, dheocannan, 
= thy teeth are numbed, or on edge. [not dibhe] 
— déisinn,** v.a, Hate, abhor, detest. Dat. deoch, deochan, deochannan, 
| —each, niche, a. Ugly, horrible, fright-| Voc. a dheoch! a dheocha ! 


Drink, potion, draught, 2 Any kind of 
strong liquor. Thoir dhomh d., give mea 
drink; thoir d. as, take æ draught out of it ; d. 
m' eolais ort ! may we be better acquainted ! (the 
drink of my acquaintance on you). 

deoch,tt -a, -annan, s.f. Drink, dram. 
t ** oo Embrace tenderly. 
air,** s.f. Difference, distinction. 
al,** -ail, sm. Grudging. 
an, n.pl. of deoch. Spirits, all sorts of 
drinks, liquors. 
-an-doruis, $.f. Stirrup-cup, parting drink. 
—— -bhan,(MMcD) s.f. Gruel, oatmeal drink. 
-bhiugh,f s. Greenshank—totanus glottis. 
-cadail, ff s.m. Sleepy dose. 
-Chloinn Donnachaidh, sm. Stirrup-cup, 
parting drink. 
deoch-eiridinn,* s.f. Potion, draught. 
deoch-eólais,* s.f. The first glass drunk to a 
stranger. 
deoch-iobairt,ft s.m. Drink offering. 
deoch-làidir, s.m. Strong drink, 
deoch-leighis,{{ s.m. Medicinal potion. 
deoch-maidne, s.f. The morning drink among 
the better-class Gaels of old, being an egg 
switched in a glass of milk, with a little 
whisky added—Gael. Soc. Inv., xiv, p. 147. 
deoch-mairt, s.f. Huge drink (tit. cow's drink.) 
deoch-réite,TI s.m. Friendship bowl. 
-reith,ff s.m. Flummery, sowens. 
-sgliap,tf s.m. Drink at other's expense. 
-slainte, s.f. Health, toast. Dh’ ol (or 
ghabh) e mo dh., he drank my health. 
-thumte.1f s.m. Decanted drink. 
-uasal,tt s.m. Costly drink, foreign drink, 
deodh, a. Everlasting. 
deodhas, -ais, s.m. see deothas, 
deoghaidh, see déidh (after.) 
deoghail, pr.pt. a’ deoghal, oo Suck, as in- 
fants, or the young of quadrupeds. 2**Imbibe, 
H -àill, s.m. Suckling. 2(AF) Sucking 
calf. 
ach,-aiche, @ Sucking, suckling, apt 
to suck or suckle. 
adair,** -ean, s.m. Sucker. 
adh,** -aidh, _ sm. Sucking. 
bing. 2 Suction. 









































2 Imbi- 


—_——ag, -aige,-an, S$. f. Honeysuckle, see 
uilleann. 

—— ———aágach,** a. Like honeysuckle. 2 Full 
of honeysuckle. 


deoghladair,** -ean, s.m. Sucker. 

deoghann, (mo dheoghann) see mu dhéidhinn. 

deoghlair,ff -e, -ean, s.m. Imbiber. 

deó-ghréine, s.f. The name of Fingal's banner. 
2 Ray, sunbeam. D. MhicCumhail, Fingal’s 
banner. 

dedidh, (fa) adv. (orfa dheaghaidh) At last, 
finally. 

deoigh, adv. see deoidh. 

deòin, -e, s.f. Accord, assent, will, purpose. A 
dheòin, willingly ; am (= do m") dbeoin-sa 
with my consent or concurrence ; le d. Diné, God 
willing, (*D. V.?”); adh, no adh’ aindeoin, 
nolens volens ; cha b’ ann ain dh. a rinn m? 
e, Z aid not do it intentionally, or on pur- 
pose (I was forced to do it) ; nach seachnadb 
le d. an àrach, that would not willingly shun 
the field (of Latile.) 

-bhaidh, -e,s.f. Strong attachment. 21] 


Y 





nai Tom 


= pmp $ -— — 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


VM LIN. KN = 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


‘Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIV 





deoin-bhàigh 
Indulgence. 
dedinich, v.a. see deònaich. 
deoir, gen.sing. & n. pl. of deur. 
¢dedir,** s.f. Will,pleasure,inclination,purpose. 
deóoireachd, s.f.ind. Proneness to tears, prov. 
deoirid, see deoiridh. 
deoirideach, s.m. see deoiridh. 
deóiridh, -e, -ean, s.m. Melancholy, tearful 
eege see deurach. 2+}Poor desolate erea- 
ure. 





i- , (given by ** as deoraidh,) -e, -ean, s.m. 
Disobedience. 2 Surety who’withdraws him- 
self. 3 Stranger. 4 Guest. 6 Exile. 6 
Vagabond. 7(MMcL) Pilgrim. 

¢dedirseach, Ach, sm. Slave. 2 Porter, door- 
keeper. 

deol, contr. for deoghail. 

dedlach, a. see deoghalach. 

dedlachadh,tt -aidh, s.m. see deoghaladh. 

deolaidh,** s, Aid. 2 Dowry. 3 Grace, par- 


don. 

deolag,** s.f, Honeysuckle, see uilleann. 

an,**s.m. Honeysuckle, see uilleann. 

deolchadh,** -aidh, s. m. Sotting, drinking co- 
piously. 

deolchar,** -air, s.m. Present. 

deònach, -aiche, a. Agreeable, willing, grant- 
ing. Gu d., willingly ; an d. leat ? art thou 
willing ? 

deonach,* adv. Most willingly, voluntarily. Is 
5 GEN e, most willingly would I 

o it. 

dednachadh, -aidh, s.m. Granting, act of grant- 
ing, giving consent. 2 Bestowing, bestowal, 
A’ d—, pr. pt. of deonaich. ; 

deònachas, -ais, s.m. see deontachd. 

ideonachd, s.f. Pudendum. 

deònaich, pr. pt. a’ deònachadh, v.a. Grant, 
vouchsafe. 2 Give consent, approve. 3** 
Bestow, impart. 4**Allow,permit. D. dhuinn 
gàirdeachas do shlàinte, vouchsafe unto us the 
joy of thy salvation; gu'n deónaicheadh Dia, 
God grant. 

-—te, past part. Allowed. 

deóntach, -aiche, a. see deònach., 

deontachd, s.f. see deòntas. 

deòntas, ais, s.m. Willingness. 

deonuich, see deonaich. 

deor, -oir, see deur. 

deor, s.m. Feeble man. 

deòir, pl. deora, Almoner. 








deora, s.m. see deòradh. 
ideórach, -aiche, a. see deurach. 5 
-—_———-adh, -aidh, s.m. Banishing, banish- 


ment. 2 Act of banishing or exiling. A’ d—, 
pr.pt. of deoraich. Fhuair e d., he got himself 
banished. 
e an, s.m. see deurach. 
deòrachd, s. f. ind. Banishment, exile. 2 Pil- 
erimage. 3 Affliction. Air d., in banishment. 
deòradh, -aidh, pl. -aidh & -aidhean, s.m. Alien, 
stranger. 2 Helpless, afflicted, forlorn being. 
3**Fugitive, outlaw. 
deoraich, pr.pt. a’ deorachadh, v.a. Banish, er: 
el. 
debraidh, -e,-ean, see deòiridh. 2 gen. sing. & 
n. pl. of deoradh. 
—— ——, -e, a. Strong, stout, robust. 
.— ——-eachd, s.f. see deòrachd. 
deorail,** a. In tears, wretched. 
deoranta,** a. Exotic, extraneous. 
ed, expelled. 3 Strange. 
deoth,** a. Active, clever, manly. 
deothadh,§ s.m. Henbane, see gafann. 2 Dry- 
ing up, as of water, evaporation. see déabh- 


adn. 
deothaidh, (deoghaidh) 'S minn bheag as an 





2 Banish- 


Digiti 


L 


D à P = | d 
-ORICT AGE irm 

MINC GH [i 1 TN a 
= 1 = i Lm P LE 


330 





deothail, 
deothal, see deoghal. 

deothan,l]-ain, s.m. Air in gentle motion. 
deothas, ais, s.m. Desire, longing, lust, great 


Longing, as of a ealf for its mother. 


—— ——aehd,** s.f.ind. Appetibility, avidity, 
deothasaiche,** s.m. Amorous fellow, lecher, 
deothlag, 


de ’r,(for 
tdes, s.f. Land. 2 Spot, speckle, 
Tdese, s.m. 
Tdesreith, -e, -ean, s.m. Judge. 
+det, s.m. Victuals. see dot, 

deteigheach, -iche, 
deth, prep. pron. Of him, of it. 





dethealaich,(J M) s.f. Uist for deith. 
dethealaidh,(MMcL) see deith. 
detheine, s.f. Boring-iron, prov. see 
detheodha, s.f. 
detheodhach,tf a. Abounding in hemlock. 
deth-tigheach, s.f. Uist for de-tigheach. 
detheogha, 
de-tigheach, -iche, s.f. 


deubh,* s.f. see deubhann. 


deubh,* v.a. 
deubhadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. see déabhadh. 


deubhann, -ainn, -an, s.f. Horse-fetter. 
deubnoil,* s.f. 


deuch,* v.a, Taste, try. 


deuchainneaeh, -aiche, a. Trying, difficult, hard, ` 


deud-cheartachd 


deothaidh ’gan deoghal mu’n chro, and little 
kids following and sucking them about th 
Donn. Ban, p. 109, 5th. Ed. do 
see deoghail. 


affeetion. 2**Fervour. 4** 


9] Eagerness. 

ach, -aiche, a. Eager, fiery. 2 Fond 
affectionate. 3* Very lustful, appetible, de- 
sirous, fervent, amorous. 4**Keen, as a calf 
for its mother. 


2 Earnestness. 


--——,** comp. of deothasach. 

s.f. Woodbine. 2**Honeysuckle. 
an,** -ain, s.m. Honeysuckle. 

de ar) Of our. 2(for de ur) Of your. 


Number. 


see de-tigiieach. 

2**From, 3*® 
From off. 4**From among. Tog dh. ! cease, 
nonsense !; air mo shon-sa dh., for my part of it. 


deith, 
Henbane. 


see detheodha. 
The weasand, gullet, 
windpipe, eesophagus, gorge, epiglottis. 


see déabh. | 


12 Fight, quarrel. 3(MMcL) Dregs, lees. Tha . 
a’ chuinneag a’ d. (déabhadh), the pitcher is — 
leaking. 3 


Enthusiasm, eagerness. 
—,* a. Keen, enthusiastic—1s/a? . 

2 Sort. } 
Trial, hardship. 2 





deuchainn, -e, -ean, S. f. 
Experiment. 3 Attempt, endeavour, 4 Proba- 
tion. 5 Proof. 6 Essay. 7 Distress. Fhuair — 
mi d. dheth, I got a taste or trial of it ; thoir — 
d, dha, give it a trial. 3 


distressing, 1 R 
deuchainneachadh,lf -aidh, s.m. Molestation. . 
deuchainnich, tf v.a. Molest. à d 
deuchainniche, s.m. One taken on trial, probas — 

tioner, candidate. 2 Competitor. KR: 
deuchainnichte,** a. Approved. 
deud, s.m. Tooth. 2 see deudach. 
deudach, -aich, s.m. The teeth. 2 Set of teeth. — 

3**Jaw. "Ga chagnadh fo d' dheudaich, to — 
chew it under thy teeth; mur comas duit ` 
teum,na rüisg do dheudach, if you cannot bite, —. 
do not show your teeth. 
deudach,* -aiche, s.f. Tooth-brush. 5 
deudach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to, teeth, - 
dental. 2 Having a good set of teeta. 3 Dent- 
ated. 4 Of ivory. 5 Large-toothed. De 

chnàmha d., of wory. b 
deudadh,** -aidh, see aéideadh. 
deudaiche,** s.m. Dentist. 
deudair,** s.m. Dentist. 
deud-cheartachadh, -aidh, s. m. 


teeth right. f à > 
deud-cheartaehd,** s.f. Dentistry, business of & 4 





Setting the | 


Original from = 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS ASS 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 





Wie, Å deud-cheartachd 
dentist., 


‘oleae al taich,** v.a. Set the teeth right, 
ras a der, 


EE on: bist, - 
eusd-cnnaimh,** s” Ivory, Adharcan d., ivory 


horns. 
deud-zhoay ++ a. White-toothed. 
deudhan, Yee deubhann. 
teug, @. ten. [Used only in composition, as, 
tail ean deug, thirteen houses. | 
deunach,, a. Sad, heavy, melancholy. 
` lancholy?" ais, s.m. Sadness, heaviness, me 
deur, deol; sm. Drop. 2 Tear. 3 Any small 
quantity of liquid. 4**Brine,  A' sileadh 
E a eU shedding tears; chan "eil d. an seo, 
i, e tS wei o drop here; a deòir a’ snitheadh, 
P ae Reeg, Ke Set 
"` aiche, a. Tearful, weeping. (ad, 
i Wach, JI 3 Dropping. 
Slow i, sich, s.f. Burning pain, caused by a 
. AA ish, or sudden exertion, 2 Stunning 
SC ~- . Dlùths na d., the closeness of the re- 
port of ‘ausketry, a rapidity of firing. 
ACh, see deurach. 
—. AL. -ain, s.m. Pain occasioned by cold 
d isa Sat Si finger ends. 
gen '"aidh, s.m. Bed-clothes, prov. 
ec ila, a see deurach. 
Pants Jain, s. m. Little drop. 2 Small 
d'Ae a gh of any liquid. 
d "et ee s.m. Moonwort, see luan-lus. 
Tearful A. Sat -shüilean, s.f. Blear-eye. 2 
Si "each, -iche, a. Blear-eyed. 2 Apt to 
eep. :3 Having tearful eyes. 
h, £o m words commencing with dh and not 


under Ph found below, see in their plain form 


dh’ (for dat) Used before certain tenses of a verb 


E UE with a vowel or fh. 

Eu "wo. <Adha no a tri, two or three. 
E ed J orm. of da. Thoir dha sin, give that 
a leis I leig dha (or leig leis,) let it alone; cha 

ju dha, he did not like it. 

5,9 4-poss.pron. To his, her, their, 


SEO ‘a. L0. 
dhachaidl, ; 2 adv. Homewards, to 
n habitation, to one’s own country. 








e's, ovi. $ Home. 
haidh.] 


abn, 2 wov. for dhaibh. 
Eu cadh, (a) infin. of adhlaic, 


To bury. 
| ah’ aidich ^ past aff. a. of adhlaic, 


Buried. 
., past aff. a. of aidich, Confessed. 


h’aindeo | : : 
j lin, adv. In defiance, in spite of. 
Did ack “mphat. form of dha. 
house of Cree 8g. of Dia. | Taigh Dhé, the 
cna Lorm of de. Am fear a’s àirde dhe’n 
dheanainr.2¢ tallest of (from among) the three. 
| would af Ist. pers. sing. past suoj. of dean, I 
|» dheanama' 


Won id, Ist. pers. pl. past subj. of dean. 


Beran, past subj. pass. of dean. Would be 
dh’ easbh, wat 

ie , prep. For want of. 
dhe: (ait: see déidhinn. 
dheth p>» see air neo. 
ah’ n al p. pron., asp. form of deth. 
Ts Iteadh, adv. Perhaps. Dh. gu’n tig e, 
E diPfhions 2 he will come ; ma dh., perhaps. 
DEA for do fhios. 
` Die c form of di, to her. 

ibh Las? £, voc. of Dia. 
zi, E . form. of dibh. emphatic, dhibhse. 

Thom E „form of dinn. emphatic, dhinne. 
» 03 p. form of diom. emphat. dhìomsa. 


| 


Digitized by 
INTERNET ARCHIVE 


331 


diadhachd 


dh’ ionnsaidh, prep. Towards, unto, to. 

dhiot, asp. form of diot. emphat. dhiotsa. 

dhìse, asp. d emph. form of di. 

dhith, (oz, Without. 2 For want of. Chaidh 
sin 'nam dhith, 4 lost that. 

—— — , asp. form. of dith. 

dhithse, asp. £ emph. form of di. 

dhiù, see dhiubh. 

dhiubh, asp. form of diubh. Cò dh.? which of 
them ? ; cuid d., some of them ; aon d., one of 
them, emphatic. dhiubhsan [& dhiubhsa.] 

dhleasadh, impers. v. see dleas, v. 

dhò, a. see dha. 

dho, for da. " 

dhoibh, asp. form of doibh. emphat. dhoibhsan. 

dholaidh, see dolaidh. - 

dhomh, asp. Jorm of domh. 

dhòsan, see dha(san.) 

dhuibh, asp. form of duibh. emphat. dhuibhse. 

dhuinn, asp. form of duinn. emphat. dhuinne. 

dhuit, asp. form. of duit. emphat. dhuitse. Sin 
duit-sa, that is for yourself; ciod sin duit- 
sa P what is that to you? sin duit, behold, 
there’s for you. 

dhut, asp. form of dut. emphat. dhutsa, see duit. 


emphat. dhomhsa. 


| di, prep.pron. To her, to it ( f.) Ni slàinte tear- 


munn di, salvation shall be a bulwark to her ; 
ri sealltainn di, while looking at her; air seall- 
tainn di, after showing her. 

di, s.m. see dith. 

di-,f negative prefix, also diom-, and dim-. | 

Di, or Dia, -day, prefix in the names of the 
days of the week. 

Dia, s.m. irreg. Declined thus: 


i lur. 
Nom, . Dia, diathan, [dée & *déidh] 
Gen. Dhé, Dhia, dhia, [& dhée] 
Dat. Dia, dée, [déibh & diathaibh] 
Voc. aDhé!a a dhiatha ! 


Dhia ! , 
God. 2 Divinity. 3 False god. 2 used as an 
emphatic pariicle. D. tha, it is indeed ; an 
d. cha robh, in sooth it was not. 
dia-àicheadh, -idh, s.m. Atheism. 
dia-àicheanach,** a. Atheistical. 
dia-aicheanaiche,** s.m. Atheist. 
dia-aitheas, -eis, s.m. Blasphemy. 
dia-athair, -thar, -thraichean, s.m. God-father. 
dia-bheum, s.m. Blasphemy. 
-—ach, a. Blasphemous. 


diabhiachd, see diabhlaidheachd. 


diabhlaidh, -e. a. Devilish, diabolical. 2 De- 

moniac. 3 Hellish. 
-—eachd, s.f.ind. Devilishness, demon- 

ism, extreme iniquity. 

diabhluidh, see diabhiaidh. 

diabhol, -oil, -bhian [& -oil], s.m. Devil. An d, 
toirt leis thu, the Devil take you; an d. mir 
dhiot, devil an inch of you; an d. toirt, the 
Devil may care. 

nach, -aich, s.m. Necromancer. 

diabhuilidh, see diabh!aidh. 

fdiabladh, -aidh, s.m. Twice as much, double. 

diachadaich, adv. Especially—Hebrides. 

diachainn, see deuchainn. 

diachair, -e, -ean, s.f. Sorrow, grief. 

diacharach, -aiche, œ. Sorrowful, sad, oppress- 
ed with grief. Gu d., sorrowfully. 

diacon,** -oin, s.m. Gaelic spelling of deacon, 

diadha, a. see diadhaidh. 

diadhach, -aiche, a. see diadhaidh. 

, -aich, s.m, Religious person, divine, 








clergyman. 

-—_———adh, -aidh, s.m. Deification, act of dei- 
fying. 2 Apotheosis. A’ d—, pr.pt. of dia- 
dhaich. 


diadhachd, s.f.ind, Deity. 2 Godliness. 2 
KS 


diadhachd 


Religion, theology. 4**Godhead. 
uile d., in all godliness. 
diadhaich, pr.pt. a’ diadhachadh, v.a. 
adore as a god. 
diadhaidh, -e, a. Godly, Godlike, pious, divine. 
"Nan giùlan d., godly in their conduct ; gu d., 
ETS ; a ghluais gu d., who walked righteous- 
y. 
— — — — eachd, s.f.ind. Piety, godliness. 
diadhair, -ean, s.m. Divine, minister of the 
gospel. 2**Theologian. 
———eachd, s.f.ind. Divinity, theology. 
diadhalachd, s.f.ind. Godliness, piety. 
dia-dhean, v.a. Deify. 
————adh, see dia-dheanamh. 
--amh, -aimh, s.m. Deification, apo- 


theosis. 

diadhuidh, -e, see diadhaidh. 

— — — —, s,f.ind. see diadhaidheachd. 

dia-dhuine, s.m. God-man, Christ, our Saviour. 

Dia-dómhnuich, see Di-dòmhnuich. 

diag, see deug. 

diaghaltach (air), (CR) «. Fond of anyone or 
anything— Perthshire. 

Dia-haoine, see Di-haoine, 

diaigh, see déidh. 

diail,** a. Quick, immoderate. 2 Soon, 

di-airmhe, see di-àirmheadh. 

di-àirmheadh,** a. Innumerable. 

dial, s.m. Weaning. 

dial,** v.a. ean. 

dialadh,** -aidh, s.m. Weaning. 
wean. 

dialan,** s.m. Diary. 

¢diall, s.f. Submission. 2 Breech, 

diall,* s.m. Attachment, fondness. 
uance. see diol. 

,** v.a. Attach, get fond of, as a child, &c. 

—ag,** -aig, see dialtag. 

dialladair, -ean, see diollaidear. 

diallaid,t e eat, see dìollaid. 

— ———eachadh, see diollaideachadh. 

eachd, see diollaideachd. 

ear, see diollaidear. 

ich, see diollaidich. 

Tdialon, -oin, s.m. Diary. 

dialta, gen.sing. of diallaid. 

dialtag, -aige, -an, s.f. see ialtag. 2**Species of 

, bonnet-grass. 3*Vespertinus murinus. 

ach,tf a. see ialtagach. 

-anmoch,(CR) see ialtag. 

Dia-luain, see Di-luain. 

Dia-màirt, see Di-maàirt. 

¢diamann, -ainn, s.m. Food, sustenance. 

diamha,(AC)s. Grief. A taigh nan diamha 
dübhra, from the house of grief and gloom, 

diamhain, -e, see diomhain. 

diamhair,t -e, œ. Secret, private. 2**Myster- 
ious, unintelligible. 3**Solitary, lonely. 4** 
Dark. Gleannan d., a solitary little glen ; run 
d., a secret purpose. 

eachd,t s.f.ind. Privacy, mystery, se- 

erecy. 2 Recess, lonely place. 3 Loneliness, 

solitude, concealment, obscurity. 4 Dark- 

ness. 


Deify, 


Cuir air d., 


2 Contin- 























eas, -eis, s.m. same meanings as diamh- 
aireachd, 2(AH) Piece of important and ex- 
clusive information confided by a person to 





332 
Anns an|diamharan,** -ain, s.m. Mystery. 2 


dian-lorgair 


3 Hermit’s cell. Hermit. 


Dia-mhaslach, -aiche, e. Blasphemo us. 








Qu 








adh, -aidh, sm. Blasph’ 

Blaspheming. KT 

Koum air, -ean, s.m. Blaspbemer, 

Dia-mhasladh, see Dia-mhaslachadk,, 

Dia-mhaslaich, po, Blaspheme. ! 

dia-mhathair, -ar, -mhathraichean, et, God- 

en E k , 
iamhlachadh,** -aidh, s. m. Darkeyj 
Growing dark or coloured. SE k 

łdiambladh, -aidh, s. m. Place of 1-etreat or 
refuge. | 

tdiamhlaich, v.a. Make dark. ! 

eg s.m. Biss | 
ian, déine, @. asty, vehement, ea. 
headlong, precipitant. 2 Violent, peer, ke M 
Nimble, brisk. 4**Strong. 5**Sad. [Often 
used before the noun it qualifies.] ‚Osag dh. 
a violent blast; tòrachd dh., eager! pursuit > 
gach neach d., every hasty person ; XQ, fhearg, 
fiery indignation ;(adv.) d. theth, intensely hot: 
d. iarr, importune; d. loisg, burn velhemently; 
d. mhear, furiously lustful; tha thu | tuilleadh 
d. orm, you press me too hard ;’na Oihian-mhi- 
amhuil, meowing dreadfully. | ; 

dian-abaich,** a. Precocious, 

dian-abachd,** s.f. Precocity. 

dian-achanaich,tt s.f. Earnest supplication or 
prayer. } 

dianadach, see deanadach. 

dianag, -aig,-an, s.f. see dionag. 

dianaich,[f v.a. see dionaich. 

dian-airm,** s.m. see dion-airm.  ' 

dianas, -ais, see déineas. 
ach, see déineachdach. Gu d., ardently. 

dian-astarach, a. Active-footed. 2 Quick- — 
moving. | 

dian-athchuinge, -an, s.f. Importunat request 
fervent prayer. ; 

———————————aàch,** a. Importunate, fervent 


in prayer. | 
dian-bharalach,tf -aiche, a, Assertive. conceit- 1 
ed in one's own opinion. | A 
— d, s.f. Peremptoriness. 
dian-bhriathraich, v.a. Asseyerate. 
tdiancecht,l s.m. God of the powers deus sa- 
lutis—name for the sage of leech-eraft. 
dian-chnusachadh,tt -aidh, s.m. Plo 1ding. 
dian-chomhla, see dion-chómhla. f 
dian-chorruich,** s. Fierce wrath. 
dian-dheothas,** s.m. Fervent zeal. 2 Bigotry. 
———— ach,** o, Fervent. 2 Bigoted. 8 — 
a PRIN Gu de cee e : 
ian-fhearg, -fheirge, s. f. Great iv .ignation. 
2 Fiery wrath. ` vente eae 
—ach,** a. Wrathful, mat eat -A 
Causing great wrath. de 
dian-fhoireigneadh, -idh, s.m. Close pursuit. 2 
Oppression. H 
fdian-ghalar, s.m. Fast consuming disease. 
dian-ghluasad,** -aid, s.m. Violent motion. 2 1 
Great agitation. y 2» 
dian-iarr,t¢ v.a. Implore. 
-.— — —tachd, s.f.ind. Importunity. 
dian-imeachd,(PM) s.f. Fast walking, 
dian-liosdach,** a. Importunate. 





u d., im- ; 4 
portunately. | 
— ———-——d,** s.f. Importunacy. 
dian-loisg, v.a. Burn vehemently. 


another under a promise of secrecy. 
.— ————ich,f v.a. Secrete, hide, make private. 
Dia-mhallachadh, -aidh, s.m. Blasphemy. u 
Dia-mhallaich,* v.a. Blaspheme, -- each, -iche, a Burning vehemently. 
diamhanach, -aiche, a. see diomhanach. dian-lorgadh, s.m.Keen search. 2 Act of search, | 
diamhanas, -ais, see diomhanas. ing keenly or eagerly. a 
Dia-mhaoin, -e, s.f. Church-property. 2**Char- dian-lorgaich,** v.g. Pursue hotly. 9 Perse- - 

ity given in church. 3 Deodand. cute. | 


diamhar, see diamhair. dian-lorgair,** s.m. Persecutor. 2 Pursuer. 


Original fram | 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS A 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGNS 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


dian-lorgaireachd 333 dicheannadh 


dian-lorga ‘eachd, sf. see dian-lorgadh. deagh of which is pronounced d? in some 
dian-losea h, -eidb, s. m. Vehement burning.| parts.) Pronounced di-beatht’ in Lewis. 
a Act or ircumstance of burning vehemently | tdibeoil, -e, a. Mute, dumb. 
or fierceY. 4’ d—, pr.pt. of dian-loisg. 
dian-mha;2dh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Keen deri- 
sion, mCKery. 
dian-mhea, 4. Extremely merry. 


dian-ruag; dh, -aidh, s.m. Close pursuit, keen 































dibh, prep.pron. Of you, from you, off you. 
dibh, Given by ** in error as dat, sing. of deoch, 
tdibh, s.f. Farm. 
di-bhall,** v.a. Dislimb. 

aich,** v.a. Dislimb. 
dibh-bhruaineach,(AF) s.m. Mite. 


EE -e, s.m. Keen running, rushing, run- | dibh-chailin,(Al’) s. Mite. 
ning at fill speed. 2 Eager, impetuous motion. | dibhe, erroneously used for dighe. 
— $n. Run impetuously. tdibheal, a. Weak. 2 Old. 





dibheach, -ich, pl. -a & -an, s.m. Ant. 

dibhealaich,** a. Without way or passage. 2 
Pathless. 3 Impassable. 

tdibhearadh, -aidh, s.m. Consoling, consolation. 

sry eae am -aiche, a. Vindictive. 2 Wrath- 
ul. 


dian-shrut?, $.?n. Rapid stream, torrent. 

dian-smuanich,ff v.n. Apply, study. j 

dian-sparridh, -aidh, s.m. Urgent demand, in- 
junction Pressing order. 

dian-theas diets Intense heat, fervent heat. 2 

reent Zeal. 

En a. Intensely hot. 

dian-thog’ach,** œ. Ambitious. 2 Extremely 

covetous 9 Keen. M 

diau-thog a dh, * -aidh, s.m. Ambition, 2 Ex- 
treme ccvetousness. 3 Keenness. 
diardan, win, s.m. Anger, surliness, snarling. 
aci,** -aiche, o. Angry, surly, snarling. 
Gu d., i; € surly manner. d | 
gcad,** sf. ind. Angriness, surliness, 
hurlisraess. 

"ai: Verog s.m. Thursday. D. a’ bhrochain 
mhóir, Maunday Thursday. It was at one 
time a cistom in the Long Island, if the usual 
drift of Seaweed were behind time, to go on 
Maunday Thursday and pour an oblation of 
gruel o! & promontory, accompanying the 
ceremory by the repetition of a certain 
rhyme.-"+3:“4°4 » 

dia, éischt, s.m. Theocracy. 

diarmad,* see dearmad. 

di-armaicl’» D, Disarm. 

- diarras, 21S, s.m. see diorras, 

ach, aiche, «. see dìorrasach. 

dias, see dithis. d d 

——, déise dat. déis, pl. diasan, S$. f. Ear 
of corn, _2** Corn. 3** Blade of a: sword. 

Seachd diasan, seven ears of corn ; fo dhéis, 

in ear ; fàs déis, the growth of corn. 

diasach, -2iche, d. Of, or belonging to, ears of 
corn. 9*Luxuriant, as a crop. 3**Bladed, as 
corn. Coire d., bladed oats. 


diasad,** -aid, s. f. Ear of corn. 2 Blade of 
rn. 

E a. see dias-fhada. 

diasag, -alg, -an, s.f. Little ear of corn. 2 
Ludierous name for a satirist's tongue. 

diasaich,"" v. Fork. 

diasair, v.d. Glean, as à corn-field, 

diasan, n: Dl. OI dias. j 

Dia-Sathuirn, see Di-Sathuirn, 

diasdach, -aiche, og. see diasach. 

dias-fhade, 9- Long-bladed. 

diasradh, -aidh, s.m. Gleaning. 

diathaibh, dat. pl. of Dia. Gu d,eile, toother 
ods. 3 

than, ai, pl. of Dia. 

di-baigh,( AC) a. Loveless, merciless. 2(PJM) 
Imparti@- : 

fdibeadach,** «a. Negative. i 

dibearra,jt a. Banished. 2 Uncertain. 

cli, $. & a. see dìobarach. 

—— — cha see diobarachd. 

iche, s. see diobarach, s. 

dibearthal see dibearra. 

-— — — h, -aich, see diobarach. 

di-beathte,(CR) past pt. do Welcome—W. of 

Ross-shire, Uist, Suth'd. dc. Tha sibh d., 

you are welcome. [Not a good form, but a 

phoneti © spelling of deagh-bheatha-te, the 


——————,s.m. Robber. 2 Fugitive. 

dibhearsain, Gaelic spelling of diversion. 

dibh-fhearg, -fheirge, s.f. Vengeance. 2 Wrath, 
rage, indignation. 

dibh-fheirg, see dibh-fhearg. 

idibhirce, s.f. Endeavour. 

dibhirceach, -ciche, a. Diligent. 2 Fierce, vio- 
lent, unruly. 

di-bhladhaich,** v.a. Repeal, abrogate. 

dibhleachadh,** -aidh, s.m, Abrogating, abro- 
gation, repeal. 

di-bhlasda,** æ. Insipid, tasteless. 

di-bhrigh,** s.f. Contempt. 2 Neglect. 

di-bhrógach, -aiche, a. Unshod, without shoes. 

di-bhruaineach,(AF) s.m. Mite. 

dibh-se, see dibh. 

di-bidh,(DU) s. Mild form of cursing. D. ort! 
confound you ! 

di-bidhidh,(PM) s. Uist form of di-bidh. 

Tdibineachd, s.f. Extremity. 

dibir, see diobair. 

dibir,** sf. Abandonment. 2 Neglect, forget- 
fulness. 

dibirt, -e, see diobairt. 

di-bith,(AC) a. Lifeless. 2 Luckless. 

dibleachd, see diblidheachd. 

dibli, see diblidh. 

diblich,** v.a. dn. Make vile. 2 Become vile 
or wretched. 3 Demean, lower. 4 Become 
drooping. 

dìblidh, -e, a. Vile, mean, abject. 2 Bashful. 
3**Wretched, poor. 4**Vulgar, worthless. 
Do ^n anrach dh., to the destitute wanderer. 

eachd, s. f. ind. Meanness, abjectness. 
9 Wretchedness. 3**Poverty. 4 Bashfulness. 

dibreachan, -ain, see diobarachan. 

dibreadh, -idh, see dìobradh. 

dibrigh, -e, s.f. Contempt. 2 Disrespect. 

—— — ——eil, -eala, a. Contemptible, contempt- 
uous. 

Di-ceadoine, see Di-ceudaoin. 

Di-ceudaoin, s.». Wednesday. D. na luaithre, 
Ash Wednesday ; D. seo chaidh, last Wednes- 
day; D. seo tighinn, next Wednesday, ‘‘Wednes- 
dayfirst;? Là ceudaoin, on a Wednesday. 

dichairt, v. @. Peel, take off the bark, decor- 
ticate. 

di-chaisg, a. Uncontrollable. 

di-chathairich,** v.a. Disenthrone. 

dìcheall, eil, see dìchioll. 

—  ——ach, -aiche, see dìchiollach. 

—— ——achd, see dichiollachd. 

Tdichealtair, s. m. Deer-park. 2 Shaft of & 
spear. 

dì-cheann, v.a. Behead. 

—ach, -aich, s.m. Beheaded man. 

—achadh, see di-cheannadh. 

—achd, s.f.ind. Decapitation. 

—adh, -aidh, s.m. Decapitation, act of 











me n M — —— 














D aitized py | IN Yl 


IKFFEDÉIET AD/^LIIVIE 
INTERNET ARCHIVE 





di-cheannadh 


‘beheading. A’ d—, pr.pt. of di-cheann. 
xlicheannaich, v.a. Behead. 
aichte, past pt. of dì-cheannaich, 
———ta, past pt. of dì-cheann. 
di-cheartachadh,** s.m. Disfranchisement. 
Tdicheil, s.f. Disguise. 
dichill, gen. sing. of dichioll. 
, sf. Protection. 
dìchioll, -ill, s.m., Diligence. 2 Attempt, en- 
deavour. 3 Utmost endeavour. 4**Persever- 
ance. 5*Forlorn effort. Le móran d., with 
much diligence. 
ach -aiche, a. Diligent, industrious, en- 
deavouring, persevering, careful. 
—achd,** s.f.ind. Practice of diligence. 
2 Industry. 3 Perseverance. 4 Carefulness. 
dichiollaich, v.n. Endeavour. 
di-chliü,** s. Disrepute. 
di-chdireachadh, -aidh, s.m. Disfranchisement. 
di-chóirich,** v.a. Disfranchise. 
di-chrannachadh, -aidh, s.m. Dismasting. 
di-chrannaich, v.a. Dismast. 
——— te, past pt. of di-chrannaich. 
di-chreid, v.a. Disbelieve. 
-—eamh, -imh, s.m. Disbelief, unbelief, 
scepticism, infidelity. 
mheach, -iche, a. Unbelieving, incre- 
dulous, sceptical. ` 
mheach, Ach, s.m. Unbeliever, infidel, 
incredulous person. 
-—te, a. Incredible. 
di-chuimhne, s.f. Forgetfulness, oblivion, ne- 
glectfulness. Tìr na d., the land of forgetful- 
ness ; air dh., forgotten ; leig air d., forget. 
ach, -iche, a Forgetful, heedless, 


























oblivious. 
—achadh, pr. pt. of di-chuimhnich. 
achd,** s.f.ind. Carelessness. 
di-chuimhnich,pr.pt. a’ di-chuimhneachadh, v.a. 
Forget, 2**Neglect. 
— eadh, -aidh, s. m. Forgetting, 
act of forgetting, forgetfulness. 
Di-ciadain, see Di-ceudaoin. 
Di-ciaduin, see Di-ceudaoin. 
diclit,(AH) s.f. Gaelic spelling of decree. 
di-cnamhaidh,** s. Indigestion. 
did, -e, -ean, s.f. Peep. 
did,* a. Worse.—Islay. Is beag is d. (misd’) 
. thu sin, you are little the worse for that. 
dideag, s.f. Peep. 2**Sly look. 3**Small can- 
dle. D. ort ! I am peeping at you. 
ach, a. Peeping. 
aich, s.f. Peeping. Ciod an d. a th'ort ? 
what are you peeping at ? 
dìdean, -ein, -einean, s.f. Fort, rampart. 2 
Protection, defence, sanctuary, refuge. 3 
**Preservation. 4**Safety. Fo dhidein, in 
safety; is d. gliocas, wisdom is a defence ; a’ 
guidhe an didein, begging their defence. 
ach,** a. Protecting, affording protec- 
tion or shelter. 2 Ready to shelter or protect. 
achadh, -aidh,** s.m. Protection, pro- 
tecting, fortifying. 
aich, pr. pt. a’ dideanachadh, v.a. De- 
fend, protect, fortify. 
aichte, a. & past pt. of dideanaich. De- 
fended, protected. 
———air,** sm. Defender. 2 Fortifier. 
dideann, see didean. 
———,v.a. see dideanaich. 
lideanta, a. & past pt. of dideann. 
didearachd,(PM) s.f. Peeping— Uist & Skye. 
lidein, gen. sing. of didean. 
———ich,tt see dideannaich. 
di-dhaoineachadh, -aidh, s.m. Depopulation, 
act of depopulating. 
Qi-dhaoinich, v.a. Depopulate, lay waste, ex- 



































itize 


Digitized by 


INTER NET AR C HIVE 


* 


534 


di-larachadh 





tirpate. 


| di-dhiol,** s.m. Arrears. 


di-dhuilleach, a. Without ieaves or j li 
didil, s. 7. Act of peeping, looking Ate 
through a hole. . 2**Greatlove. 3. E NI 
didinn, s.f. see dìdean. Cindness. 
—,v.a. Defend, protect. , | 
didionn, Ann. see dìdean. ! 
————air, -ean, s.m. Protector, gu 4: | 
didneadh, -idh, s.m. Protection, ardian. A 
d—, pr.pt. of didinn. Spee 
di-dhuilleach,** a. Without leaves c, foli 1 
Di-domhnuich, s.f. Sunday. D. ct DE ^ 
see crum-dubh. La Dómhnuich, a Si m d Un 
di-fhrithich,** v.a. Disforest. WR. 
di-fhulang, a. Intolerable. 
difir,t s. Gaelie form of differ. 
dig, -e, -eachan, s.f. Ditch, drain. 2 Mound 
to keep out an inundation. 3 Way or | 
stones, dike. [The word dike is ap isa iod 
ditch or mound in England, but ont lp 





~ 


in Scotland.] Thuit e’san d. a rin 


Unio the ditch which he made. ie, fie Jen 
ig,* v.a. Dress, hoe up, as potatoes 

row. 8 Drain. no . 2 Fur 
Tdigealre,| s. Health. 

tdige, see dighe & deoch. ` | 

digeach, -iche, a. Full of, or like, di. chos one 


Dikes. 
digear, -eir, -ean, s.m. Ditcher. 
digeireachd,tt s.f.ind. Ditching. 
digh,* s.f. Conical mouud built by tie Danese 
2 Fairy-hiliock. 3 Rampart, D. my. Thall : 
anta, a noted fairy knell in Islay. ` p j 
digh, v. n. Come, arrive. Gu'n 
dhachaidh, welcome lome— Lewis. 
dighe, gen.sing. of deoch. 


‘1. thu féin 
: t | 
Succour, help. 2 Satisf: 








tdighe, s.f, oti 

tdighe, a. Condign, adequate. ction, 

Tdighin, v.g. Suck. 

fdighiona, a. Morose, surly. 

dighne, s.m. Degenerate or dwarfis,, 

di-ghreanna,** a. Bald. EE 

chd, s.f.ind. Baldness. i 

digire, see digear. | 

Di-haoine, s.m. Friday. Di-haoine Gem 
D-imàirt gu buain, ach obair a t ERI heat B 
Di-luain bidh i luath no bidh i malj PC Gei | 
day sow, and mow on Tuesday,but t ori be 
gun on Monday will be either quel, EN sd ; 


Monday, bg he Ep ue day oí 
gives a good chance for getting on v... e 
bui if one relies too much on hawt wor 3 
dance of time, the work will probak; E ui 
off. D.seo chaidh, last Friday; D des Tus 
inn, next Friday, *' Friday first.” —'"' gr 
Though Friday has always bee, held an ` 
unlucky day in various Christian countries, 7 
and even among such people as the Brahmins. 
still in the Hebrides it is supposed CH 
lucky day for sowing the seed in tl 
Bp E e d E particular T" RE 
or potato planting—even strict D 
make a point of planting a bucket! Cath o | 
day. Probably the idea is, that & s the Re- 
surrection followed the Crucifixion and Búri 
ial, so too in the case of the seed, i that after - 
death E T life, t d | 
dil,(DU) s.f. Very small quantity, dro 7 eg 
Garg eil d. uisge agam, I haven’? of liquid. 
water. 
dil, s.f. see dile. 

dil, s. ME : 
dil a. Diligent, persevering, zealc . s 
2 Keen, close. SZ Voie 

di-lachdach, -aich, s. m. see Mìllead dan 
diiàrachadh, -aidh, sm. Depopulati bie pri 


1e ground. 


Original from ! 
UNIVERSITY OFVILLINOISSS 
URBANA-CHAMPAHSE 


*toawal - 1 3 


ihe week, ~ 


yurite day — 


ta drop of - 











i d i-làvaich 335 di-mhisneachadh 


.— — ——an, -ain, -an, s.m. Orphan, 2**Little 
orphan. 

-—anachd,** s.f. Orphanage, 

—-——as,ft -als, s.m. Orphanage. 

dilleann,(PM) s.m. The depth of the earth. As 
an d., out of the depth of the earth|(as a spring.) 
—{/7 5 

dilmain,** a. Meet, proper, fit, becoming. 

dilse, see duileasg. 

dilse, -an, s.m. see dìlseachd. 

-—— , comp. of a. dìleas. More or most faithful, 
related, or friendly. 

,** see dilsean. 'Nuair a thig thu chum mo 
dh., when you come to my kindred. 

-——achd, s.f.imd. Affection, love. 2 Friend- 
ship. 3 Relationship. 4 Faithfulness, fidelity, 
loyalty. 5**Esteem. 6**Subjection, subordi- 
nation. 7**Propriety. 8**Relations, kindred. 
Mo dh., my relations; do dh. chuir mi an céill, 
I have shown thy faithfulness. 

-—_—ad, -eid, $J. see dìlseachd. 

.—-an,** n. pl. of dìlse. Relations, kindred, 
connections, ** friends," 

fdilte, s.f. Nutriment. 

dilteadh, see dioladh. 

Di-luain, s.m. Monday. D. seo chaidh, last 
Monday ; D. seo tighinn, next Monday, ** Mon- 
day first? ; D. bannaag, the first Monday after 
Christmas, D. an t-sainnseil, the first Monday 
after the New Year. 

di-iuchdachadh, -aidh, s.m. Disencumbrance. 
A’ d—, pr.pt. of di-luchdaich. 

di-lueháaich, v.v. Disencumber. 2 Unload 

Di-miart, sm. Tuesday. D. Inid, Shrove Tues- 
day ; 2 The Carnival. 

dim-baigh, see di-bàigh. 

dimbith, see di-bith. 

dimbrigh, see dì-brìgh. 

.———each, see di-brigheil. 

—__—-—eil, -eala, see di-brigheil. 

dim-buaidh, -e, s.f. see diom-buaidh. 

__ ———each, -iche, see diom-buaidheach. 

dimeas, v.a. Despise, slight, undervalue. 

, s.m. Contempt, reproach, disrespect, 

disesteem. 2**Bad name, bad character. 3 

Scarcity of fruit. Dean d., despise ; cuir air 

d., despise ; fo dh., despised. 

ach, -aiche, a. Despieable, contemptu- 

ous, contemptible, mean, disrespectíul. 

da, a. Despised, slighted, undervalued. 

__-—dachd, s. f. Disrespect. 2 Disrespect- 
fulness. 8 Disrepute. 

dimheas,** s. m. seedimeas. 2 Scarcity of 
fruit. [** gives Great honour, high esteem, 
but dinheas in that case is a phonetic spelling 
of a provincial pronunciation of deagh-mheas.] 

ach, -aiche, a. see dìmeasach, 2 Proud, 

contemptuous, servile. 

ail, see dimeasach. 

da, see dimeasda. 

dachd, see dimeasdachd, 

di-mhill, pr.pt. a’ di-mhilleadh, v.a. Destroy. 

abuse. 

eadh, -idh, s.m. Destroying, destruc- 

tion, act of destroying. A’ d—, pr. pt. of 

di-whill. 

teach, Ach, see di-mhilltear. 

tear, -eir, -elreaD, S.T. Destroyer. 2* 

Miserable person. 

di-mhilltear, fut.pass. of di-mhill. Shall be des- 

troyed. 

dimhin, see deimhinn. 

dimhin,** s. see dimhiveachd. _ 

eachd,** sf. Provision. 2 Caution. 3 
Heed. 4 Confidence. 

di-mhisneachadh,tz; -aidh, s.m. Brow-beatire. 
2 biscouragemcnnt. 































di-làraich, v.a. Utterly destroy, annihilate, 
di-jathaireach, a. Absent. 
———d, 8.f.ind. Absence. 

di-lathairich, see di-làirich. 

dile, gen. dileann, d«t. dilinn, s.f. Flood, deluge. 
2 Heavy rain. 3** blast. 4**|he Earth. An 
d. ruadh, Noah’s flood ; an searbh dh., the bit- 
ter blast ; ged thigeadh d., though rains were 
to come; ged nach tigeath dileann a thigeadh 
tu, though you should never come—Lewis. 

dile, comp. of dil. 

dile,} s.m. Strong-scented or common dill—an- 
ethum graveolens. 

dile, s.m. Wort. 

tdile, s.f.ind. Love, friendship, affection. 

dileab, -eib, s.f. Legacy. Mar dh., as æ legacy. 

ach, -aich, s.m. Legatee, heir. 

ach, -aiche, a. Of,or belonging to, a legacy. 

aiche, -an, s. m. "Testator. 2 Legatee. . 

Cha d eug duine riamh gun d., no man ever 

died without an heir. 

air, s.m. see dileabaiche. 

dileach, -aiche, «. Beloved, affectionate, 

dileach, a. Delugiug, rainy. 

dileag, -eig, -an,{T s.f. Blossom, flower. 

dileag, -eig, -an, s.f. Drop, small quantity of 
liquid. 

dileagach,tt a. Abounding in flowers. 

dileagach,tt a. Abounding in small drops of 
liquid. 

dileagh,** v.a. Digest food. 

tdileaghadh, -aidh, s.m. Digestion. 

dileaman,** -ain, s.m. Love, affection. 2 Kind- 
ness. 

dìleann, gen. of dìle. 

dileann, PJM) s.m. Rope used to tie the fore- 
legs of a horse, to prevent its Jumping over 
dikes—Lewis. 

dileant,-a, a. Profound. 2 Inundating, rainy. 
Gu d., for ever. 

dìleas, dìlse, a. Beloved. 2 Faithful, loyal, 
trusty. 3 Favourable, faithful. 4 Nearly re- 
lated or connected, 5{fJ ust. 6**Friendly. 7 
Real, as opposed to spurious. Bi d. do ’n rìgh, 
be loyal to the king ; d. dhomh, nearly related 
io me ; d. do d mhaighstir, faithful to your 
master; na ’s dilse, more loyal ; gach d. gu 
deireadh, the best loved (ast ; tearmunn d., a 
trusty refuge ; airgiod d., real silver ; is d. 
duine dha fhéin, a man is faite ful to himself. 

fdileas-choimhead, s.f. Protection. 

di-leum,t (accent on leum) s.m. Shackle. 2(DC) 
Horse-fetter— Uist. 

di.ghean, s.m. Affection. 2 Suppression. 

dilgheann, -inn, $.m. Destruction, plundering, 
pillaging. 

Tdilgionadh, -aidh, s.m. Emptying. 

dilib, see dileab. 

—each, see dileabach. 

dilich,** v.a. Digest, as food. 

— ———te,** past part. of dilich. 

dilimich,(AC) v.a. Endow. - 

dilinn, dat. of diie. Gu d., ever; gu d. cha 
duisg thu, thou shalt never awake; gus an 
caillear an d. aois, till age is lost in the 
jiood of time ; cha d. a thig e, he shall never 
conve. 

, a. Endless. 2 in situ, 9 see diolain. 

Leac d., a stone in situ, a rock appearfng above 

ground, 

each,** a. Deluvian, inundating. 

diionnach, -aicae, a Deluging. 

di oun, see dìleann. 

diiseachd, see dilseachd. 

ditit,** s.m. Peewit, see adharcan-luachrach. 

dileachd, see dilleachdan. 

ach, -aiche, @ Fatberless. 






























































- 





Digitized by à ie | 
= J | | V i | ED E — d om 
V LE J 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


di-mhisneachail 


di-mhisneachail,(PM) o Faint-hearted. 

tdimhneachd, s.f. Confidence, 

dimhnich, see deimhnich. 

dimhnidheach,** a. Sad. Gu d., sadly. 

— — —d,** s.f.ind. Sadness. 

di-mhol,** see di-mol. 

—— — —adair, see di-moltair. 

di-mholtair,** s.m. Slanderer. 

di-miadh, -miaidh, s.f. Disrespect, irreverence, 
dishonour. 

di-mill,t+ see di-mhill. 

di-inillteach, -ich, s.m, Glutton, prov. 
horse that breaks through fences. 

tdimnidheach, a. Sad, sorrowful. 
———— d, s.f. Sadness, sorrowfulness. 

dimreas,** eis, sm. Necessity, want. 

di-mol, pr.pt. a’ di-moladh, v.a. Dispraise, un- 
derrate, abuse, disparage. 

di-moladair, see di-moltair. 

di-moladh, -aidh, s. m. Dispraise, aet of dis- 





2 Cow or 





praising, abusing, disparaging or under- 
rating, disparagement, slander. A’ d—, pr. 
pt. of di-mol. 


di-molta,** æ. Dispraised, blamed, censured, 
disparaged, slandered. 

di-moltair, -ean, s.m. Dispraiser, disparager, 
slanderer. 

Tdin, a. Pleasant, delightful, agreeable. 

tdin, s. Sucking. 

tdin, v.a. Drink, suck. 

di-naire,** s.f. Shamelessness. 

di-nàireach,** a. Shameless. 

Tdi-naisg. po, Disjoin, loosen, undo. 

dinait,** og, Desolate. 2 Dislocate. 

eadh,** -eidh, s.m. Dislocation. 

din-aodach,** -aich, s.m. Frock. 

di-nasgach,** o Dissolute. 

di-nasgadh,** -aidh, s.m. Untying, loosening. 
2 Disjoiuing, 

Tdine, s.f. Generation, age. 2 Beginning. 

dineach,** ich, s.m. Salutary draught. 

dineamait, s.f. Gaelic spelling of dynamite. 
tdi-neart, for Dia-neart. 

di-neart, -eirt, s.m. SImbecility. 2** Infirmity. 

——--——-aich, v.a. Weaken, enfeeble. 2 Flank, 

din-eudach, see din-aodach. 

ding, ro see dinn. 

—,s.f. see dinn. 

fdinge, s.f. **Thunder. 2 s.pl. Dictates, doc- 
trine. 3 Oppression, tyranny. 

adh, -idh, s.m. see dinneadh. 

dingir, s.f. Custody. 2 Incarceration. 8 Place 
of confinement. 

e, -an, s.m. Paver’s rammer. (dinnear.) 

diniath,** s, Headpiece. 

dinib,** s. Drinking. 

linidh,(AF) s.m. Lamb. 

Fdinimh, s.f. Weakness. 2 Diminution. 

dinn, prep. pron. Of us, from us, concerning us, 
from amongst us. 

finn, s.f. Wedge. +2 see dun. 

——, pr. pt. a’ dinneadh, v. a Press, force 
down, cram, stuff. 2Trample. 3 Wedge. 4 
**Invade, encroach, 

dinne, prep. pron., emphat. of dinn, 

d, s.f. see déinead. 

dinneadh, -idh, s,m. Pushing in, stuffing, for- 
cing down. 2 Act of pressing, trampling or 
stuffing, 3**Depression.  4** Encroaching. 
A’ d—, pr.pt. of dinn. 











— 


dinnean, -ein, s.m. Small heap. 2 Pittance. 3| + 


¢tSmall quantity, as of meal. 

dinnear, -an, sm. Paver's rammer. 2 Wedge. 
3 Ramrod. 

dinneasg, -eisg, -an, s.f. Mischief, mishap. 

dinneir, dinnearach, Lean &] -ichean, s.f. Din- 
ner, An déidh tràth dinnearach, after din- 


Digitized by 


ata e 
ITERNET ARCHIV 


336 













diobhan ach 


ner-time. 

dinnire, see dinnear. 

Tdinnis, s.f. Oath. 2 Contempt. 

dinnsear, see dinnear. 

, -eir, -eirean, s.m. 

ach,H e. Gingery. 

dinnte, a. £ past pt. of dinn. Pressed, closely 
stuffed, packed. 

achd,* s f.ind. Condensity. 

dinseadh,** -idh, s.m. Contempt. 

tdiobadh, -aidh, s.m. Point, 2 Edge. 3 Prick, 
4 Thorn, 

diobair, pr.pt.a’ dìobradh, v.n. Desert, quit, 
abandon, forsake. 2 Omit. 3 Neglect. 4 
Fail, 5* Extirpate, expel, root out. 6 De- 
populate. 7 Banish. 8**Forget. 9**Depart. 
10**Put away in anger. 11**Circumvent. Na 
d. a bhi mar iadsan, do not forget to be like 
them ; na flathan a dh., the nobles who have de- 
parted ; an d. màthair a cìochran ? can a mo- 
ther forget her suckling ? ; dh. mi an deann- 
tag, I have extirpated the nettle. 

—_each, -ich, see diobarach. 

diobairt, -e, s.m. same meanings as diobradh. 

—e, past part of diobair. 

diobanach, see diobarach. 

diobar,** -air, s.m. Disrespect, eontempt. 

diobarach, see diobarach. 

diobarach, -aich, s.m. Deserted, forlorn person. 
2 Outcast. 3 Exile. 4 Orphan. Diobaraich 
Israeil, the outcasts of Israel. 

,"* -aiche, a. Banished. 2 Needy. 3 
That banishes. 

diobarachan,** -ain, s.m. Wanderer, outcast, 
exile,destitute person. 2 Orphan. 

diobarachd, s.f.ind. The condition of a forlorn, 
desertedor banished person. 2 Banishment, 
exile. 3**Want. Fhuair e 'dh., he was ban- 
ished, 

tdiobhadh, -aidh, s.m. Destruction. 2 Death. 
3 Inheritance, any transitory or worldly in 
heritance. 4 Dowry, portion. 

tdiobhaidh,** v.g. Destroy, ruin. 

diobhaidh,** o, Impious. 2 Destructive. 3 
Ruinous, 

dìobhail, -alach [& -e,} -ean, s.m. Loss. 2 De 
feat. 3 Destruction, ruin. 4 Mischief,harm. 
calamity, distress. 5 Pity. 6 Want. 7** 
Robbery.  8** Profusion.  9**Frenzy. 10** 
Injury. Thàinig an d., their destruction came; 
d. misnieh, want of courage ; mo dh. ! my ruin- 
ation ! is mór an d., it is a thousand pities ; a 
dh. làimh, without a hand, with the loss of 


a hand. 
diobhaileach, see diobhalach. 
, -aidh, s.m. Conipensation. A’ 


Ginger. 














— — — ll 
d—, pr.pt. of diobhailich. 

—————-——d, see diobhalachd. 

diobhailieh, pr.pt. a’ diobhaileachadh, v.a. Im- 


pair. 2 Recompense, compensate, make up 
deficiencies. 

dìobhair, pr.pt.a’ dìobhairt & a’ diobhradh,v.n. 
Throw up, vomit. 

———t,s.m. Vomiting, act of vomiting, A’ 
d—, pr.pt. of diobhair. 

diobhalach, -aiche, a. Destructive. 2 Rob- 
bed, spoiled, damaged. 3 Profuse. 4 De 
trimental. 5 Extravagant. 6 Adverse. 7 


Abortive. 8 Ablative. 9 Mischievous, hurt- 
ful, pernicious. 10*Heart-rending. 
——,-aich, s.m. Ablative case. ) 
d,** sr, Privation. 2 Robbhery. 3 
Damage. 4 Destruction. 5 Ablation, 








diobhalaich,f{ v.a. Impair. 





—e, s.m. Impairer. 


diobhall, a. Old, ancient, antique, 
diobhanach,** -aich, s.m. 


Outlaw. 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF- ILLINOIS S 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


re NIFA sr ati lens Lum mh Snag at Ure ASEE a dm SUP PR geg 


i 


a ] WS? MIT SSS H 
DTP «e L “r= z 
e E EN m Cie AE Nt 





T “= 


| 











ne o 


Lisp 


diobharnach 


—— —-.——, -aiche, a. Lawless, unruly. . 
--——d, s.f.ind. Lawlessness, unruliness. 
diobhar,** s.m. Disrespect. 2 Omission. 
diouhargach, -aiche, a. Keen, fierce. 
diobhargadh, 
tivity, slavery. 





` diobhathadh, -aidh, s.m. Destruction. 


as,** -ais, s.m, Ingratitude. 
diobhlach,**‘a. Prodigal. 
--— d, s.f. Prodigality. 
"diobhladh, s.m. Accusing. 
diobhlaiseach, a. Prodigal. 
diobhlas,** -ais, s.m.  Prodigality. 
tdiobhraice, a. Warlike. 2 Destructive. 
f¢diobhrath, pg, Discover. 
diobhruaineach,(AF) s.m. 
¢diobhuan, -ain, see diom-buan. 
diobhuantachd, see diom-buanachd, 
fdiobhuidhe, s.f. Ingratitude. 
diobhuidheach,** a. Ungrateful, thankless. 
-Gu d., ungratefully. 
diobhuidheachas, -ais, s.m. Ingratitude., 
diobhuir,* pr. pt. a’ dìobhairt, see dìobhair. 
——_——+t, see dìobhairt. 
diobrach, see dìobarach. 
-—an, see diobarachan. 
dìobradh, -aidh, s.m. Forsaking, abandoning, 
deserting, failing, 2 Banishing,  3*Extirpa- 
ting. 4**Banishment. 5 (PM)Lessening.— 
Uist. A’ d—, pr.pt. of diobair. Cha’n ’eil d. 
air an uisge, the rain is not abating. 
diocail, pr.pl. a’ diocladh, Lower, diminish, as- 
suage. 2 Abate, as rain. 
diochain, -e, see di-chuimhne. 
diochairt, see di-chairt. 
diochanach, see di-chuimhneach. 
diochd, -a, a. Small. 
¢diochoisgeach, -iche, a. Implacable. 
diochrach,** a. Diligent, zealous. 
tdiochron, a. Immediate, without time. 
¢diochuidh, a. Small. 
diochuimhne, see di-chuimhne. 
————-——-ach, see di-chuimhneach. 
dìochuimhnich, see di-chuimhnich. 
diocladh, -aidh, s.m. Act of lowering, dimin- 
ishing, assuaging. 2 Abatement. Uisge 
gun d., incessant rain. 
diocras,** s.m. Inappelancy. 
fdiocuir, v.a, Drive. 
¢diocuireadh, -idh, s.m. Driving, expulsion. 
diod,* s.f. Drop, spark. [** gives s.m.] 
— ag, -aig,-an, s.f. Sip. 2**Drop of water. 
——agach, ** a. Guttulous. 
fdiodhailin, s. Mote, atom. 
¢diodhaoineachadh, s.m. Depopulation. 
+diodhaoineadh, s.m. Depopulation. 
¢*:odhma, s.m. Fort, fortification. 
4diodhnadh, s.m. Satisfaction, comfort. 
diofhlainn,** a. Pale, bloodless. 
tdiofhulaing,-e, a. Intolerable. | 
. diog, -a, s.m. Syllable. 2 The least possible 





^ — * 











effort of speech. 3 Breath. 4 Life. Nah- 
abair diog, do not say a syllable ; cha’n ’eil d. 
ann, he is breathless ; cha’n "el d. innte,—ap- 
plied to a cow found to be without calf aiter 
taking the bull— Lewis. | 

diog, see dige. 

——Ail, pr.pt. a’ diogladh, v.a. Tickle. 2 Suck 
closely. | 


, 8 Crisis 
Cuir d. ann, 


a. Tickling. 2 Ticklisb, 


—ailt, -e, s. f. Tickling. 2 Terror. 
of timerous determination. 
tickle him. 

——ailteach, -aiche, 
difficult, dangerous. 

diogair,-e, a. Kager, keen, vehement. 


diogalach,** a, Sucking closely. 2t+ see diog- 


— ailteach, 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIV 


337 


-aidb, s.m. Persecution. 2 Cap- 


see di-bhruaineach. | 


fdioghais, a. 





diogiadn 


diogaladh, -aidh, s.m. & pr.pt. see diogladh. 

diogan, -ain, s.m. Revenge. 2 Severity. 3 
Spite. 4 Grief, sorrow. 5 Cruelty. 

diogana, a. see dioganach. 

———ch, -aiche, a. Fierce. 2 Revengeful, 
spiteful. 3*Severe. 4*Cruel. Gu d., revenge- 
fully, vindictively. 

—achd, s.f. Revenge, spite. 2 Cruelty. 
3** Fierceness. 

dioganta, see dioganach. 

diogantach, see dioganach. 

d, see dioganachd. 

diogar,** a. Eager, intent, vehement. 

Tdiogha, a. The worst. 

dìoghail, v. a. , Revenge, avenge, retaliate, re- 
pay, requite. 2 (AH) Pay or settle, as in à 
commercial transaction. 

v, s. f. Revenge, vengeance, spite. 2 
Grief, sorrow. D. fear na dàlach, the tardy 
man's revenge. 

che, a. & past pt. of dìoghail. Reveng- 
ed, avenged, retaliated. 

High, tall, stately. 
see dioghaltas. 

— ————a, past pt. see dioghailte. | ; 

—ach, -aiche, dg, Revengeful, vindictive. 

g**Fond. 3* Requiring much. 

ach,** -aich, s.m. Avenger. 2 Revenge- 

ful person. An d. mi-cheart, the unjust aven- 








dioghalt, -ailt, 








ger. 
— — achd, s.f.ind. Revenge, spite. 2 Cruelty. 


aiche, -am, see dioghaltach. 
air,-ean, 8.m. Avenger. 2**Revenge- 
ful man. 


as, -ais, s.m. Vengeance, punishment, 
revenge, spite. 2 Grief, sorrow. Dean d., 
revenge. 


asach, -aiche, a. see dioghaltach. 


1dioghann, a. Plentiful, not scanty. 


dioghaoth,** -aoithe, s.m. Blast in corn. 
tdioghart,** s.m. Decollation. 
fdioghbhail, see diobhail. 


dioghbhalach, a. see diobhalach. 


dioghladair,** s.m. Bridle-cutter. 


dioghladair, see dioghaltair. 


eachd, see dioghaltachd. : 

dioghladh,** -aidh, s.m. Avenging, revenging, 
repaying. 2 Revenge, requital. 3 Injustice. 
4(AH) Act of settling or paying, as in a com- 
mercial transaction. A’ d—, pr.pt. of dioghail. 








dioghlaidh, fut.af.a. of dìoghail. D. coireach 
no neo-choireach ris, the guilty orjinnocent will 
sufer. 


dioghlagan,** s.m. Weanel, weanling. 
dioghlais,** s.f. Abuse, defamation. 
dioghluim, pr. pt. a’ dioghlum & a’ dioghlum- 
adh, v.a. Glean, cull, gather ‘minutely.  2** 
Lease. 3**Weed. i g 
dioghlum, -uim, s. m. Gleanings, the thing 
gleaned or gathered. t 
—aich, see dioghluim, 
— — -—3air,**-ean, s.m. Gleaner. 2 Weeder. 
dioghlus,** -uis, s.m. Darkness. 
dioghnadh,** -aidh, s.m. Contempt. 
fdioghnas, «. Rare. 
dioghradh,** -aidh, s.m. Moroseness. 
ness. 18 Hatred. 
— a, see dioghradhach. 
—ach, a. Morose, rude, unlovely. 
Tdioghrais, adv. Constantly, frequently. 
dioghraiseach,** a. Beloved. l 
dioghras,**-ais, s.m. Zeal, 2 Uprightness. 
.———ach,(PM) a. Excessively keen. 
+dioghrog,** v.n. Belch. 
- ** s. Eructation. 
dioglach, see diogailteach. j 
diogladh, -aidh, s.m. Tickling, act of tickling or 


2 Rude- 











diogladh 


sucking closely. 
Seillean a’ d. cluarain, a bee sucking the thistle 
lower. 

diograis,** s.f. Diligence, secret. . 

diogras,** -ais, s. m. Honesty, integrity, up- 
rightness. 2 Zeal. 

diol, pr.pt. a’ diol & a’ dioladh, v.a. Avenge, 


revenge. 2 Pay, render. 3 Fill, satisfy. 4 
Ransom. 5 Restore, renew. 6 Recompense, 
requite. 7** Empty. s**Change. 2 Wean. 


Dh. thu sin, you have recompensed that; d. 
dhomh, pay me ; diolamaid do ’n iompachan, 
let us pay to the penitent ; diolaibh a’ ghloine 
gu bonn, drain the glass to the bottom. 

diol, a, s.m. Recompense, satisfaction, retri- 
bution. 2 Reward, pay, hire. 3 Satiety, 
sufficiency. 4 Object, end proposed. 5 Fate, 
destiny. 6 The act of weaning, as a child. 7 
*Condition, state. 8 Complement, proportion. 
9** Use. 10**Selling. 11**Restitution. Is 
bòidheach a dh., keis in a pretty condition ; tha 
mo dh. agam-sa, I have my satisfaction or a- 
bundance ; a dh. tin’ aige, he has plenty of 
time; clach càise le a d. de dh’ im, a stone of 
cheese with its complement of butter ; d.-déirce, 
an object of charity ; bu dubh a dh., black was 
his fate; chuireadh air d. e, he was weaned ; 
mo dh. mhnatha, rather too much of a wife 
for me ; is mór an d. à th’ aige air an uisge, 
ihereis a great continuance of rain;'se rinn an 
d. air, he gave him an awful mauling. 

tdiol, a. Worthy, sufficient. 


diolachd,** s. f. Requital. 2 Restoration. 8 


Recompense. 4 Satisfaction. 5 Payment. 6 
Orphan. 
dioladair,-ean, see dioghaltair. 





-—eachd, see dioghaltachd. 

diola-deirce, see diol-déirce. 

dìoladh, -aidh, s.m. Paying. 2 Filling, satis- 
fying, requiting, restoring. 3 Payment. 4 
Requital. 5 Ransoming. 6 Yielding, 7 Res- 
toring, restitution. 8 Atonement. A’ d—, pr. 
pt. of dìol. D. iomlan, full restitution. 

dioladh-deirce, see diol-deirce. 

— Pheadair, s.m. The fish caught in the 

Isles on Christmas Day aud given to the poor. 

—mhàil, s.m. Receipt, discharge. 

diolaid, see doillaid. 

dìolaidh, fut.af.a. of diol. 2 gen.sing. of dìoladh. 

—eachd, see dioghaltachd. 

diolaim, see dioghluim. 

dìolain, -e, a. Illegitimate, unlawfully begot- 
ten, bastard. Mac d., an illegitimate son or 
bastard. 

each,** s.m. Bachelor. 

diolair, -nan, s.m. Avenger, restorer, requiter. 
2 Rewarder. 3 Amender. 

eachü, s.f.ind. Conduct of an avenger 
or requiter. 2**Requital. 3**Revengefulness. 

diolam, see dioghluim. 

diolamair, see dioghlumair. 

1diolamhnach, s.m.  Hireling, soldier. 

diolan, see diolain. 

achd, s.j. see diolanas. 

as, -als, s.m. Fornication, bastardy, ille- 
gitimacy. 2**Celibacy. Rugadh an d. e, 
he was born in fornication; fhuair i urra le d., 
she got a child by fornication. 

diolanta, **a. Brave, manly, stout. 2 Gene- 
rous. 3 Hospitable. 

s,** -ais, s. m. Manhood, bravery. 2 

Generosity. 3 Hospitality. 

diolar, fut.pass. of diol. 

dio-larachadh,** -aidh, see di-larachadh. 

dio-làrachd,** s. f. ind. see di-larachadh, 

dio-làraich,** v.a. see di-làraich. 

idiolas, see dìleas. 























Digi TERT 


MTERNET AR C HIV 


338 
A’ d—, pr. pt. of diogail. | dio-lathaireachd,t{ s.f. Absence. 


diom-buzidheach 


Td'olbhrugh, -a, s.f. Shop 


{diolchomhan, an, s.m. Confederacy. 

diol-chuan,** -ain, san, Shop. 

diol-déiree, an, s.m. Beggar. 2 Object of 
charity. 3**Giving of charity. 

diolfar, see diolar. 


tdiolg,** v.a, Dismiss. 2 Forgive. 

——--ad, -aid, s.m. Forgiveness, remission. 

t-——adh, -aidh, s.m. Dismissal. 2 Forgiveness. 
3 Dismissing, forgiving. 

tdiolgion, v.a. Empty. 

diollad, see diollaid. 

achadh, see diollaideachadh. 

diolladair, -ean, s.m. Saddler. 

—-———eachd, see diollaideachd. 

diollaid, -e, -ean, s.f. Saddle. 

each, a, Of, or pertaining to, saddles, 
eachadh, -aidh, s.m. Saddling. A’ d--, 

pr.pt. of diollaidich. 

— ————-eachd, 8. f. ind. Saddlery, saddler’s 
business. Risan d., at saddle-making. 

—ear, -eir, see diolladair. 

—ich, pr. pl. a’ diollaideachadh, v. a. 
Saddle. 

fdiolmhannach, s.m. see diùlannach. 

diolmhaoin,** sr. Alimony, 

diolta, past pt. of diol. 

diolta,s.m. Girth. 

dioltag, see ialltag. 

dioltair,** s.m. Seller, 

dioltair, s.m. see dioliadair. 

diol-thuarasdal,** -ail, s.m. Reward,recompense, 
wages. 

dioluim, see dioghluim. 

diolupta, see diülanta., 

see diulannas. 











dom, prep. pron. Of, off or from me, 2 Con- 


cerning me. Ghabh e truas dh., he took pity 
on me. 

diom, see dionib. 

diom, -a, s.f. see diombadh. 

diomach, -aiche, d, see diombach, 

diomadh, -aidh, s.m. see diombadh. 

diomail, see di-mol. 

diomain,-e, a. see diom-buan. 

diomaladh, -aidh, s.m. & pr.pt. see di-moladh. 

dioinaltair,** s.m. Glutton. 

diomarag,ts.f. Clover seed, 

diomas, -ais, s.m. Pride, arrogance. 2**Defi- 
ance. 

ach, -aiche, a. Proud, arrogant, bold, 
haughty, defyiug. 2**Disrespectful. 

diomb, s.m. Hatred, disdain, dislike. 2 Indig- 
nation, dissatisfaction, offence, resentment, 
displeasure. Na toilid.duine sam bith, do 
not incur the displeasure of any person. 

ach, -aiche, a. Displeased, dissatisfied, 
discontented, 2* Indignant. 3**Sorrowful, 
mournful. Gu d., unthankful; d. ri m’ [or 
de mo] mhathair, displeased with my mother. 

FOR By s.f.ind, Reluctance. 2* Indigna- 

ion. ; 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Anger. 
displeasure. 3 Indignation. 4 Offence. 5 
Pain. G6**Grief, trouble. 7 Spite. 8 Hatred. 
Moran diomaidh, much trouble, 

———aiche, comp. of diombach. 

diom-baigh, see di-baigh. 

diombas, -ais, s.m. Lasciviousness, 

uadhach, -aiche, see diom-buaidheach. 

uaghail, -ala, o see diom-buadhach. 











2 Discontent, 








diom-buaidh,-e, s.f. Unsuccessfulness, bad luck, ` 


21tDispleasure. 3** Defeat. 4**Mishap, mis- 
fortune. 5 "*Crime. 

—— each, a. Unsuccessful, luckless, un- 
fortunate. 


Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF 


Uu NA-CHAMPA 


E E A 
ré m. 
RT" = 


IG 


E D | d S f c 
(UNO: 


i 





ERE 


diom-buainead 


diom-buainead, -eid, see diom-buanaclid. 
diom-buan, -uaine, a. Fading, fleeting, tran- 
sitory, transient, not durable. Is d. gach cas 
' an tir gun eòlas, the foot is ever moving in the 
land of strangers—where there are no friends 
to visit, the traveller quickly passes. 
diom-buanachd, s. f. ind. Transitoriness, evan- 
" escence, shortness of continuance. 
diom-buanas, -ais, see diom-buanachd. 
diombuidheach, see diombach. 
 dom-buil, -e, s.f. Prodigality, waste. 2 Pro- 
fusion. 3* Misapplication. 4 Abuse. 
diom-buil, v. see diom-builich. 
diom-buileach,** a. Wasting, extravagant, pro- 
digal, giving without;discretion. 
—adh,tt -ridh, s.m. Abuse. 
diom-builich, v.a. Waste, consume.;2 Put tobad 
use, abuse. 
diomgha, s.f.ind. see diomb. 
'omhagad, s.m. Enfranchisement, liberty, free- 
" dom. 
diomhaidis, see diomhanach. 
diomhain,-e, a. Idle, lazy. 2 Frivolous, vain, 
trifing, unavailing, nugatory, useless, to no 
purpose. Beairt dh., vain doings ; iasgair d., 
an unsuccessful fisher ; 2 a bird, see under iasg- 
air ; gud., vainly. 
diomhaineach,-eiche, «. Larkish, 
dionibair, -e, a. see diamhair. 
diomhaireach, see diamhair. 
diomhaireachd, see diamhaireachd. 
diomhaireas, -eis, seediamhaireas. 
diomhairich, see diamhairich. 
diomhaltas, -ais, s.m. Caution, notice. 
diomhan, see dìomhain. 
E -—ach, -aiche, a. Idle, lazy. 2 Vain, in 
vain. 8**Trifling, frivolous. 4**Nugatory. Is 
d. dhut teannadh ris, it is idle (or vain) for 
you to attempt it; cainnt dh., idle talk; breugan 
d., lying vanities. 
diomhanachd, s.f. Inactivity. 
diomhanaiche, -an, s.m. Idler. 
dìomhanas, ais, s.m. Vanity, idleness, lazi- 
- ness. 2 Emptiness. Diomhanasan breugach, 
. lying vanities. 
diomhar, see diamhair. 
diomharachd, see diamhaireachd. 
diomharan, -ain, see diamharan. 
idiomharg, v.a. Quench. 2 Suppress. 
tdiomhothuigheach, -eiche, a. Stupid. 
fdiomhrachd, see diamhaireachd. 
fdiomhran, -ain, s.m. Mystery. 2 Cell. 
| diomhuinn, see diomhain. 
| diomol, see di-mol. 

















adair, see di-moladair. 
——adh, see di-moladh.; 
——ta, see di-molta. 
—-—tair, see;di-moltair. 


| diomrac, -aic, s.m. Temple. 

| dion, -a, s.m. Shelter, protection, covert, fence. 

| 2 State of being wind and water tight. 3** 

| Second semi-metre or leth-rann of a verse. A 

** Apology. 5 Defence (in law.) Fo dh. do 

| sgéithe, under covert of thy wing (or shield) ; 

| air son mo dhiona, for my defence or protection; 
tha d, 'san taigh, the house is wind and wa- 
ter tight ; cum d., shelter, protect. 

dion, pr.pt. a dion &ia'"dionadh, v.a. Defend, 
protect, shelter, shield, guard, save. D. thu 
fhéin, defend yourself ; d. mi le d' sgéith, de- 
fend me with thy shield. 

dìonach, -aiche, o Close-joined, air-tight, 
water-tight, water-proof. 2 Safe, secure. 3 
Reserved, 4 Sheltered. laid up. Taigh d., 
a water-tight house ; long dh., à ship without 
a leak; àite d., a sheltered place. 

— dionachadh, -aidh, s.m. Tightening, defending. 

2 Act of securing, tightening or rendering 









t 


Digitized by 
INTERNET ARCHIV 


239 


diongmhaltas 


water-tight. 3**Caution, bail. 4**Sheltering. 
5**Security. A’ d—, pr.pt. of dionaich. 
dionachas, see dionachadh. 
dionachd, s. f. ‘Security, shelter. 
stance of being water-tight. 
dionadaen, a. Preventive. 
dìonadair, -ean,s.m. Protector, defender. 2 
Fender. 3 Fend-off, see under bata, 17—20, 























2 Circum- 


p. 76. 

dìonadh, -aidh, s.m, Protecting, defending, shel- 
tering, shielding. 2** Defence, shelter, se- 
curity. A’ d—, pr,.pt. of dion. 

dionag, -aige, -an, s.f. Two-year-old sheep or 
goat. 2**Hoggerel. 3 Dimmont, see under 
CA Ora, 

dionaich,tf v.v. Make water-tight, caulk. 2 
3 Join closely, as a vessel. 4 Shelter. 5 Secure. 

dionaiche, comp. of dionach. 

dionaire, see di-nàire, 

ach, see di-nàireach. 

dion-airm, -e, s.f. Place of refuge, sanctuary. 2 
Depot. 

tdionaisg, see di-naisg. 

dion-aite, -aiteachan, s.m. 
shelter, sanctuary. 

dion-amhaiche, s.m. Habergeon. 

dionasach,** a. see dianasach. 

dionasgach, see di-nasgach. 

dionasgadh, see di-nasgadh. 

dion-bhothan,** s.m. Cloister. 

dion-büréid, -ean, s.m. Apron. 

dion-chainnt, ean, s.f. Speaking in defence. 

dion-eharn,** -chuirn, s.m, Fort. 

dion-chomhla, s.m, Aide-de-camp. 2 Officer 
of life-guards. 

dion-theachd,** s.f. Fencibles. 

diong, -a, -an, s.f. Hillock. 2 Immoveable 
object. 3 Worthy. 4 s.m. see gliong. 

diong, pr.pt. a’ diongadh, v.a. Join. 2 Match, 
equal, pair. 3 Overcome, conquer. 4 Ef- 
fect, accomplish. 5 Pay, recompense. Is 
iomadh ceud à dh. thu, many a hundred hast 
thou conquered; diongam-sa righ Innis-con, let 
me match the king of Inniscon; as a seo cha 
diongadh e, out of this, he could not drag ; 
diongam fear ma dh'ifhuiricheas mi, agus fuil- 
ingeam teicheadh, PU match a man if L;stay, 
and I can suffer @ retreat—N.G.P. 

diong, v.a. & n. see gliong., 

diong, -a, @. Worthy. 2* Immoveable. ` 

diongach, -aiche, a. Able to accomplish, to 
match or to overcome, matching. 2**Suitable, 
proper, meet, worthy. f 

diongadh, -aidh, s.m.» Matching, act of match- 
ing, overcoming, conquering. .2tfEffecting. 
concurring. pr. pt. of diong. 

diongail,** œ. Worthy, fit, proper, suitable, fit 
to bear. 

diongail, s.f. see gliong. 

diongalta, see diongmhalta. 

diongaltas, see diongmhaltas, 

diongar,(DU) a. Persistent, stiff, 

dionghair,** s.f. Tribute, benevolent succour. 

diongmhail, -e, s.f. Effect,sufticiency, efficiency. 

see diongmhalta. 

a. Worthy. 


Place of refuge, 





ea a. 

tdiongmhalar, 

diongmhalta, a. Firm, tight, strong. 2 Per- 
fect, sufficient, substantial. 3 Effective. $4 
Worthy, meet, proper, suitable. 5 Complete- 
ly certain. 6 Able-bodied. 7(AH) Trustwor- 
thy, reliable. Seachd cathaich d., seven able- 
bodied warriors. f 

diongmhaltachd, s.f.ind. 
diongmhaltas. ‘ 

diongmhaltas, -ais, s.m. Firmness, tightness. 
9 Perfectness, efficiency, sufficiency. 3 State 
of being fast, fixed or firmly bound. 


same meanings as 


diongnach 


diongnach, -aiche, a. Fortified. 

dion-lathaich, -a-, s.m. Mud-guard, à 

dion-long-phort,** -uirt, s.m. Harbour garrison. 

¢dionn, -a, s.m. Hill. 

dionnal, -ail, -an, see deannal. 

tdionnan, -ain, s.m. Little hill. 

Tdionnsuighe, for dh’ ionnsuidh. 

dion-oglachas,** -ais, s.m. Heroism. 

dionta, past pt. of dion. Defended, protected. 

jdior, a. Meet, proper, decent. 

Tdior, s.m. Law. 

Tdiorach, @ see dìreach. 

diorachd, s.f.ind. Ability, power, capability of 
performing or enduring. 2{{Inveteracy. 

fdiorachrach, a. Lawless. 

tdiorang, v.n. Belch. 

dirras, see diorras. 

diorbhsail, s. Snarling of a dog. 

1diorgas, -ais,s.m. Uprightness, integrity. 

tdiorma, s. Troop, crowd. 

tdiormach, o In troops, in companies. 2 Crowd- 


,ed. 3 Numerous. 4 Infinite. 5 Unfit to 
walk. 
Tdiorna,** s. Quantity. 


Tdiorr, s. Spark of life. 

diorrais,(CR) s.f. Perpetual work, bustle. 

dìorras, -ais, s.m. Stubbornness, obstinacy. 2 
Crossness, irascibility. 3 Vehemence, keen- 
ness, enthusiasm. 4* Tenacity, pertinacity. 
5 Childish efforts. Am feara nid., is iomadh 
a ni d. ris, he that is obstinate will often find 
his match. 

dìorrasach, -aiche, a. Stubborn, obstinate. 2 
Cross, irascible. 3 Vehement, forward, rash, 
fierce, keen. 4*Tenacious. 65 Opinionative. 
6 Striving in vain. 

diorrasachd, s.f. Extreme pertinacity or tena- 
city. 2**Irascibility, hastiness, rashness, for- 
wardness, fierceness. 

diorrasail,(DC) v.n. Spatter, hiss, crackle. 2 
Nag peevishly. 

diorrasan, -ain, sm. Fretful person. 2 Grass- 
hopper. 3 Snarl. Fraoch an diorrasain, a 
kind of heather that sparkles when burning, 
(called also fraoch spreadanach.) 

-- ach, a. Irascible. 2 Fretful. 3 Snarl- 

ing. 

--——aich, sJf. Irascibility. 2 Snarling. 3 
**Crackling. 

fdiorrasg, -aisg, s.m. Suddenness. 2 Fierce- 
ness. 3**Hastiness of temper. 4 Rashness. 

ach, -aiche, a. Forward. 2 Sudden, 

rash. 3**Irascible, fierce. 

Tdiorsan, ain, s.m. Bad news. 

dioruanach, see di-bhruaineach. 

diosd, v.a. & n. Jump. 2 Kick with the heels. 

diosg, a. Barren, dry, applied to à cow that 
gives no milk. 

diosg, -a, -an, s.m. Dish, plate, platter. 2t 
Any quantity of water or liquor in a dish. 3 
(AF) Barren cow. Is bràthair do 'n d. an 
tuairnear, the turner is brother to the dish ; 
apr am mart an d., the cow has become 

ry. 

MOSE, a &n. Creak, as hinges. 2 Gnash, as 
teeth. 

dìosgadh, -aidh, s.m. State of being barren or 
dry, not giving milk, as a cow, barreuness, 
dryness, 2**Grating or squeaking noise. 

liosgaidh-dasgaidh, (CR) ar Sucking sound, 
as made by walking with water in the shoes 
—Suth’d. 

liosgail, s.f. Creaking noise, as of withes or 
iron joints when put in motion. 

liosgau,-ain, s.m. Creaking noise, as of rusty 
hinges. 2**Grating of the teeth. 3**Gnash- 
ing. 4**Crashing. OD, air gach maide, every 





INTERNET ARCHIV 


340 


"E EE ORAE Eege, 


dirich M 
timber creaking. | 
diosganach,(CR) -aich, s.m. Boarded-out dip. 
somaniac—Skye d Harris. 

diosganaich, s.m. see diosgan. 

diosgar,** -air, s.m. Mob, rabble. 

diosgarnach,** -aich, s.m. Mob, rabble. 
of a mob. 

Tdiosla, sm. Die, 

diosmuig, see di-smuig. 

diosnaidhm, see di-snaidhm. ` 

diospoireachd, see deasbaireachd, 

diot, s.f. Gaelic spelling of old pronunciation 
of diet. [Diot is restricted to one particular 
meal (dinner) when not qualified by an ad jec- 
tive, as, d. mhór, dinner ; d. bheag, breakfast. 
Tràth is applied to any meal.—W. of Hoss.] 

diot, prep. pron. From thee, of thee, off thee. 
Cuir dh. do chóta, put off your coat. 

diot, see diod., Cha’n 'eil d. ann, there is not @ E 
drop in it. E 

diotag, see diodag. | 

dioth, see dìth. T2 v.n. Die, decay. 

diothachadh, see ditheachadh. 

diothadh,** -aidh, s.m. Decaying, dying, with- 

ering. 2 Decay. 3 Death. A’ d—, pr. pt. of 


dioth. + 
see ditheachadh. K 


20ne ` 


diothadh, -aidh, 
diothaich, see dithich. 

diothaireach,** æ. Emetic. 

Tdiothramh, -reimh, see dithreabh. 
diothruaill, v.g. Unsheathe. 

tdiothughadh, see ditheachadh. 

(liot-mhor, -a-móire, -an-móra, s.f. Dinner. 
dipin, -e, -ean, s.m. Certain measure of a!neb, 
usually a herring-net. 2 Deepening in a net, 
dipinn, see dipin. 

tDiplinn, -e, see Giblinn. 

tdir, s.f. Letters. 2 Pimples. 

dir, pr. pt. a’ dìreadh, see dìrich, 


dirb, see darb. 
Tdire, s.f. Tax, tribute. 
direach, -iche, a. Straight. 2 Perpendicular, E 


upright. 3 Just, right, equitable. 4 Positive, | 
certain. 5 Direct. 6 Frugal. An ni sin tha d 
cam, cha ghabh e deanamh d., that which is y 
crooked, cannot be made straight; d. sin, just 
that ; is d. Dia, God is upright ; air ceum- 
aibh d. réidh, on a straight, plain path ; tha 
'dheanadas d., his work is right ; caol d., E 
d. air adhairt, straightforward ; d. glan, ex- D 
actly so; d. 'na sheasamh, standing upright ; a 
dan d., verse, or metre of a certain class. E 
dìreach, adv. Directly, exactly so. D, mara A 
thubhairt thu,just as you said ; d., or seadh 
d ! just so! 
tdireach, s.m. Dwarf. 
direachadh, -aidh, s.m. Making straight, be- 
coming straight. A’ d—. pr.pt. of dirich. 
direachan, -ain, s.m. Perpendicular. 
direachas, -ais, s.m. Uprightness. 2 Straight- 
ness. 3 Honesty. 4 Perpendicularity. 
direachd,** v.a. Geld 
——-——as,** -ais, sm. Act of gelding. ) 
direadh, -idh, s. m. Ascending, act of ascend- E 
ing, ascension, mounting, climbing. 2**Di- E: 
rection. 3**Panegyric. 4{fPrevailing. A’ 
d—, pr.pt. of dir. A’ d. a’ bhruthaich, as- 
cending the brae ; ceo a’ d.aonaich, mist as- 
cending a hill. 
di-riaghailt tf s.f.ind. Asymmetry. : 
Tdiribe, a. Bald, 3 
dìrich, pr.pt. a’ dìreachadh, v.a. Straighten, 2 
make straight, even, or perpendicular. 2tf 
Direct. Am fear nach d. a dhruim, he that 
will not be at the trouble of straightening his 
back. 
dirieh, pr. pt. a’ direadh, Ascend, go up,mount, 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS SS 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGNTR 





a 





T 


dirich 





thou shalt not climb the steep; dh. ean carbad, 

he mounted. the chariot. 
diriche, comp. of dìreach, 
dìrichead, sf. Erectness. 2 Straightness. 

dirichear, jut. pass. of dìrich. Also used im- 
personally, as d. [leinn] am monadh, let us 
ascend the hilt. 

dirichte, past pt. of dirich. 

dirid, s. f. Lapwing, see adharcan-luachrach. 
2 (MMcD) Puffin—W. Suth'd. 

fdirim, a. Numerous, plentiful. 2 Great. 

tdirtheach, s.m. Feast, solemnization. 

dis, -e, a. Susceptible of cold, incapable of 
bearing cold. 2 Delicate, tender. 3 Chill, 4 
Miserable. 5 Poor. 

Dis,* s.m. Celtic deity. 

dis, see dithis. 

Di-Sathuirn, s. m. Saturday. D. seo chaidh, 
last Saturday ; là Sathuirn, a Saturday; thàin- 
ig e D. [not air D.,] he came on a Saturday. 

disbeirt,** a. Twofold, double. 

discir, see disgir. 

fdiscréide,** Gaelic form of discretion. 

disd, -e, -ean, s.f. Mow, rick. 2 Layer of stack- 
ed peats or turf. 3 see disinn. 

di-se, emphat. of di, prep. pron. 

dise,** s.f. Mow, rick. 

diseachan, (AH) -ain, s.m. Person who is excep- 
tionally susceptible to, or afraid of cold. 

disear, s. m. Susceptibility to cold, delicate- 
ness— Lewis. 

disgir, -e, a. Sudden, fierce, nimble, active. 2 
1iCruel. 

dìsinn, dìsne, dìsnean, s.m. Die [p]. dice.] 2 
Cube. 3 Wedge, as in the shaft of anything, 
Ag iomairt air disnean, playing at back- 
gammon, 

dis-lann,** s.m. Gaming-house. 


. disle, comp. of dileas. 


disle, see dilseachd, 
disleach, -iche, a. Stormy. 2 Uncouth. 3 Strag- 


gling. 
disleacbadh,(PM) -aidh, s. m. Benumbing or 
overcoming with cold. 
disleachd, s.f.ind. see dilseachd. 
dislead, -eid, see dilseachd. 
dislean, s. pl. Relatives. 2** see disnean. 
disleanaiche,** s.m. Player of dice. 2 Gambler. 
dislein, see disnean. 
di-sligheach,** œ. Devious, straggling. 2 Im- 
pervious. 3 Immethodical. 4 Uncouth. 
di-smuig, v.g. Snnff, as a candle. 
di-snaidhm,** a. Smooth, without knots. 
disne, gen, sing. of disinn. [given by tt and 1 
as nom, sing.) 
disneach, -aiche, a. Tesselated, variegated by 
squares. 2tftÁbounding in dice orcubes, di- 
ced. 3 t[Cubie. 
disneag, -eig, -an, s. f. Little die. 
disnean, pl. of disinn. Dice. 
dìsnean, -ein, s.m, Dice-box. [tf gives -ein, as 
termination of nom. sing. | 
disnear,** -eir, s.m. Dice player. 
disnibh, dat.pl. of dìsinn. Deud shnaithte mar 
dh., teeth polished like dice. 
disnich,* v.n. Raffle. 
disread,** -rid, s.m. Aspergillum, used at mass 
to sprinkle holy water on the people. 
dist,** s.f. Mow,rick. 2 Die. 3 Gaelic spell- 
ing of joist. 
distean,** see disnean. 
distear,** see disnear. 
dit, pr. pt. a’ dìteadh, va, Condemn. 2 Sen- 
tence. 3 Reproach, despise.  4**Surrender. 
— BffRebuke. Có a dhiteas iad ? who shall con- 
demn them ? an d, mi air son sin, reproach me 


Digitized by 


PRNIERNEE ARCHIVE 


341 
a 
climb. 2 Surmount. Cha d. thu am fireach, 


dithich 


not for that. 

diteach, -eiche, a. Accusable. 

diteachail, -e, v. Libellous. 

dìteadh, -tidh, -idhean, s. m. Sentence, senten- 
cing, judgment, act of condemning, reproach- 
ing, condemnation, 2** Surrender. 'S e seo 
an d. gu'n d' thàinig an solus do "n t-saoghal, 
this is the condemnation that light is come into 
the world. A’ à—, pr.pt. of dit. 

diteag, see dideag. 

diteazaieh, see dideagaich. 

diteam, lst.pers. sing. pres. aff. of dit. I sen- 
tence. 2 for ditidh mi, I will sentence. 

ditear,** s.m. Accuser. 

dith, -e, s.m. Want, defect. 2 Failure, deficien- 
cy. 3 Destruction. D. céille, want of sense ; 
cha/n "eil d. air, he wants for nothing ; dé tha 
dh. ort? what do you want ? is mor a tha dh. 
orm, Z want much; chuir thu seo adh, orm, you 
deprived me of this ; is mór tha sina dh. orm, 
I want that very much ; is beag a tha sin a dh. 
ort, you have very little need of that ; théid iad 
a dh. orm, I shall be deprived of them ; 2 they 
shall become useless to me ; a dh. fasgaidh, for 
want of shelter ; tha móran a dh., there is & 
great deficiency. 

dith,++ pr. pt. a’ ditheadh, v.n. Die, perish, wi- 
theraway. Tuirc nach faodadh airm a dh., 
boars that arms may not kill. 

dith, prep.pron. Of, off, or from her, or it ( f.) 

dith, pr.pt. a’ ditheadh, v. a. Press together, 
press, squeeze, compress. 12 Suck. 

dith,* pl. -ean & -eanan, s. f. Layer, course, 
streak. 2 Stratum, vein, as in a mine. D. 
mu seach, layer about ; dithean saille, layers 
or streaks of jat, as in beef ; ditheanan luaidh 
is airgid, veins of lead and silver. 

dith-ariuaich, see di-armaich. 

dithbhir, see deiíür. 

dith-bhith,tt s.f. Annihilation. 
imprecation. ) 

dith-bhrogach, see di-bhrogach. 

dith-chealtair,** s. m. Neccomantic veil that 
renders things invisible. 

dith-cheann, see di-cheann. 

dith-cheannadh, see di-cheannadh. 

dithchioll, see dichioll. 

dithehiollach, see dichiollach. 

dithchiollaich, see dichiollaich. 

dith-chreideamh, see di-chreideamh. 

dith-chreidmheach, see di-chreidmheach. 

dith-chuimhne, see di-chuimhne. 

dith-cnamhaidh, see di-cnamhaidh. 

ditheach, -ich, s.m. Beggar. 2 Needy person. 

ditheach, -iche, a. Empty. 2 Indigent, poor. 

ditheachadh, -aidh, s.m. Abolition. 2 Destruc- 
tion, destroying.  3**Causing to cease. 4** 
Failing. A’ d—, pr. pt. of dìthich. 

ditheachail, e a. Lossful. 

ditheadh, -idh, s.m. Hoarding up. 2 Concealing. 
3 Pressing. 4 Destruction. 

dithean,f ein, s. m. Daisy, darnel. 2 Blossom, 
any flower, see breoillean. 3ttWild mari- 
gold. 4(PJM) Knoll. 5(PJM) Place on top 
of head towards back, where the hair natur- 
ally parts, forming shape of a daisy. Dithean 
nan gleann, the flowers of the valleys. 

dithean-Abraoin,?s.m. Hepatica—Aepatica. 

ditheanach, -aiche, a. Abounding in darnels or 
flowers, of or belonging to, darnels or flowers. 
9++A bounding in corn-marigolds. 

dithean-mór, -ein-mhóra, s.m. Ox-eye. 

dithean-oir, (an)& s.m. Corn-marigold, see bile- 
bhuidhe. 

dithean-ür, pl. -eanan-üra, S.M. Fresh flower. 

dith-fhear,tt -fhir, s.m. Bankrupt. 

dìthich, pr.pt. a’ ditheachadh, v.a. & n. Destroy, 


D. ort! (an 


dithich 949 diülantas 


extirpate, root out, cause to cease, destroy this no idir eadar triüir, betwixt two a secret 
utterly. 2**Fail, cause to fail. 3tf Die, per-| is unsafe, and among three persons it is no se- 
ish.  Dithichidh mi an ìomhaighean, I will| eet at all—Sgeulaiche nan caol, p. 133. 
root out their images ; dh. mo chàirdean, my | diübhras, ais, s.m. Difference. E 
Jriends have failed. -—— ———-ach, -aiche, o, Differential, making 

tdithimh, sf. Heap. (hemp in 11) difference. 2 Auricular. 

Tdithinge, a. Dumb, mute. -—— —-——aáchd,** s.f. Privateness. 

dithis, a. Two. [Used only of persons, and fol- | diubhsan, emphat. form of prep. pron. diubh. ` 
lowed by the gen. pl. Krroneously applied to|diuc, -a, s.m. & f. Thepip, a sickness iu fowis. 
two of anything in some parts.] Thàinig d.,|diüe, v.a. & n. Exclaim, ery out. 2 Approach. 
two (persons) came ; 'nan dithisean, in pairs ;| 3 Present one's self. 

fhear, two men; 'nar d., we two together. | diùc, -an, s.m. Duke. 

each, a. Mutual, tdiucadh, -aidh, s. m. Coming to, presenting 

dithisd, see dithis. one's self. 

dith-làrachadh, diücail, a. Ducal. 

dith-laraich, diucair, -ean, s.m. Bladder or small buoy, used 

dith-lathaireach, see di-l—, 

dith-lathaireachd, 

dith-lathairich, 

dithleach,** a. Forgetful, neglectful, 

dith-luchdaich,* og, see di-luchdaich. 

dithmeas, see dìmeas. 

--— ———dachd, see dimeasdachd. 

dith-mhill, v.a. see di-mhill. 

— —————eadh, see di-mhilleadh. 

—— ———-—iear, see di-mhilltear. 

dith-mhol, see di-mol. 

dith-mothachaidh, s.m. Inattention. 2 (PM) 
Want cf common sense, 

dithreabh, -eibh, s.f. Desert, wilderness. 2 The 
higher and less cultivated parts of a district. 
3**Hermitage. 4**Hermit. 

-—————ach, -aich, s.m. Hermit, anchorite, as- 
cetic. 

-— — —àch,** a. Desert, uncultivated, solitary. 
2 Bleak. 

achd,** s.f  Bleakness. 

dithreachdach, -aiche, a. Lawless, insubordin- 
ate. Gu d., insubordinately. 

dithreamh, see dithreabh. 

dith-reodha,(AC) s. see dubh-threabha, 

ditidh, fut. aff. a. of dit. 

ditig, Lewis for dirid. 

diù, a. Worth. 2 Due. 3**see diùbhaidh. Cha 
d. leam sin, that is beneath me—not good e- 
nough for me to do. 

diu, adv. see diugh. 12 Long since, 

diu, s.m. Long time. 2 see diubhaidh. 3 (DU) 
Care. D. nam beathach firionn, the refuse of 
male animals ; is d. teine fearn ur, is d. duine 
mi-rün, is d. dibhe fion sean, ach 'se d. an 
domhain droch bhean, worst of fuel alder 
green, worst of human malice keen, worst of 
drink wine without life, worst of all things a 
bad wife. Fion sean is literally old wine, but 
the Celts certainly knew what was what in 
wine as in other things—N.G.P. dence. 

diubh, prep. pron. Of, off or from them. 2 From diüididh, -e, a. Shamefaced, bashful, shy, 
among them. Cuid dh., some of them; aon| timid. 
dh., one of them ; co dh. P which of them ? diuir, see deor. 

diubhaidh, -ean, s.m. The refuse, worst. 2 Ob- diuireas,** -eis, s.m. Any worthless thing. 2 
ject of contempt. Roghainn is d., pick and| The worst part of anything. Gach d, gu deir- 
get the worst ; cha d. idir e, it is no object of | eadh, the worst is always reserved till last. 
contempt. | diul, see deoghail. 2 see diol. 

—— ——— —,0. Low, worthless, abject. diülach,* see diùlannach. 

diùbhail, -alach, -ean [& -aichean,] see dio- diulam,(DU) -aim, s.m. Sense of shame,modesty, 
bhail. reserve. Duine gun d., a man without shame. 

— — —each, d. see dìobhalach. diulannach, -aich, s,m. Hero, brave man. 2 

liubhair,** s.m. Discrepancy. Good man.  3**Handsome man.  4** Stout 

liibhalach, -aiche, see dìobhalach. man. 5**Hireling, mercenary. A liuthad d. 

adh, see diobhalachadh. ainnis, many a poor youth. 

liübhalaich, see diobhalaich. diülannas, -ais, s.m. Manliness. 2 Activity. 

liubhar, s.m. see diubhras. Cha deaned.sam| 3 Heroism, bravery. 4 Stoutness. 5 Gene- 
bith, it will make no difference. rosity, hospitality. 

aich, v.n. Contradistinguish. diulanta, a. Manly. 2 Brave, heroic. 3 Ac 

aiche,** s.m.  Distinguisher. tive. 4 Stout, lusty. 5 Generous, hospitable. 

liubhrais, for diamhaireas. Cha d. eadar di- s, see diülannas, 





















proves useless in corn, eggs, ër, 
diuchair,** v.a. Drive away, keep off, 
diuch-bhlian, (CR) W.of Ross-sh. for dubh-bhléin, 
diüchd, -an, see diùc. 
diudan, -ain, s.m. Giddiness, thoughtlessness. 
2 Thoughtless person. 


diudhal,** -ail, san. see dìobhail. 
diug ! inter. Chuck ! cry to gather fowls. Na 
h-abair d. a choidhche ris an eun gus an tig 


fore it is out of the egg. 
diug,** v.n. Cluck, cackle. 
diugadh,** -aidh, s.m. Clucking, as of a hen. 
diugan, -ain, s.m. Mischance, misfortune. 
ta, a Unfortunate. 
diugh, adv. “an diugh ” to-day. An diugh 
fhéin, this very day. 
diugha, a. see diùbhaidh. 
diughlar, see dìolar. | 
diüid, -e, a. Tender-hearted, flexible, timid. 2 
*Fearful, bashful, awkwardly sheepish. Fear 








empty hand makes a long visit unpleasant—(Llit. 
a man having nothing, bashful is his late visit.) 
diùid, e, -ean, s.m. Awkward spiritless fellow. 
2 Silliness. 3(PM) In Uist Bashful, shy, coy, 
and not meanings 1 or 2. Is d. fear na h- 
eisimeil, the dependant is timid—N.G.P. 
-——, -e, -ean, s.f. Pain. 2 Sorrow. t3 Succour. 
diuide, comp. of diùid. 
diuide,* s.f. see diuideachd. +2 Continuance, ` 
——ach, -iche, a. Sneaking, mean-spirited. 


ed. 4**Flexible. 
——achd, s. f. ind. Bashfulness, backward- 

















Original from 


Digi 


to keep fishing nets at the right depth, duck- 


er. 
diuchaidh, -e, a. Addled, of no value, what 


ach, -aiche, a. Giddy, thoughtless, prov. 


e as an ugh, never say ** chuck" to the chick be- 


gun rud aige, is d. a chéilidh anmoch, an 


2 Silly, shy, timid, bashful. 3**Tender-heart- 


ness, sneakingness, shyness, timidity, diffi- 


« 


d 
UNIVERSITY OF ILEINGI SAAS 


INTERN ET A : C HIVE URBANA-CHAMPAHZNIS 





d 


diute, see diutidh. 


 dlagh,*-aigh,s.m.Natural order. 2 see dloth. As 


= -——annach, -aiche, œ. see dleasnach. 
——annas, -ais, see dleasnas. 


E IUE"EFS IR — keen " - = A 
IE HEI tA Ñ T. 1 J 
INTERNET ARCHIVE 


diülnach 843 dluitheachd 


dleasdanach, see dleasnach. 

dleasdanas, see dleasnas., 

dleasnach, -aicue, a. Dutiful, dutious. 2 Affee: 
tionate. $**Rightful. 

dleasnas, -ais, s.m. Duty, filial duty. 2 Affec- 
tion. 3 Obligation. 4**Right. Rinn mimo 
dh., I did my duty: a réir mo dhleasnais, 
according to my duty. 

dligead,** -eid, s.m. Separation. 

dligh, v.n. Owe, be indebted. Ma dhligheas mi 
ni sam bith, if I owe anything ; thoir moladb 
dhasan do ’n dlighear e, give praise to him to 
whom it is due; dlighear mo thaing dha, my 
thanks are due to him. 

dlighe, s.f.ind. Law, ordinance. 2 Duty. 3 
Right, due. 4 Tribute, custom. 5 Perquisite. 
6 Property. Is e seo mo dh., this is my due, 
le d. cheirt, with just right. 

ach, -iche, a. Lawful, rightful. 2 Le 
gitimate. 3** Right, due. 4**Dutiful. Oighre 
d., a rightful heir ; clann d., legitimate chil- 
dren ; ma 's d.dhuit sin, if that be due to you. 

——achail, see dligheil. 

———achas, -ais, s.m. Duty. 2 Lawful right 
8 Absoiuteness. 

dligheachd-breitne,ff s.f. Legitimacy. 

dligheadh, -idh, see dlighe. 

dlignean-air-leth, s.m. By-laws. 

diighear,** a. see dligheach. 

: , fut. pass. of dligh. 

— ———,-ir, s.m. Lawyer. 2 Magistrate, jus- 
tice of the peace. 3ffCreditor. 

dligheil, -e & -gheala, a. Just. 2 Obedient ta 
law, lawful. 3 Rightful. 4**Skilled in law. 
5**Litigious. Duine d., @ litigious man. 

dligue-thabhairt,tt s.m. Legitimation. 

tdhghleannigh, -ean, s.m. Lawgiver. 

dlightneach, -iche, a. see dligheach. 

dlisteanach,** a. see dligheach. 

dlisteanas, sce dligheachas. 

dlithe, see dlighe, 

dlitheach, a. see dligheach. 

dlithear, see dlighear. 

dlo, -tha, -than, s.f. see dloth. 

dlochd, -an, s. m. Strainer. 2 Colander. H 
Snare. 

dlochdair, see dlochd. 

dlochdair, v.a. Strain, press, Squeeze. 

dlochdan, see dlochd. 

dlodan,** -ain, s.m. see dlochd. 

dlogh,* s.m. Wart. 2 see dloth. 

dloghainn,* s.f. Sheaf-corn half thrashed, given 
to cattle when fodder is scarce. 

dldintibh, dat. pl. of dlòth. 

+dlomh, v.n. Tell. 2 Refuse, deny. 3 Make 
evident or plain. 

fdlomh, s.m. Refusal. 

dlomhadh,** -aidh, s.m. Refusal, denial. 

tdlomhaisinn, s.f. Destruction. 

dldth, -a & -ann, dat. -ainn, pl. dlointean, s.f. 
Handful of corn or grass cut with one stroke 
ofthe reaping hook.  2**Lock of hair. XX 
gruaige, a lock of hair; cuid de na dlothaibh, 
some of the handfuls. 

ach, a. Pertaining to, or full of handfuls 
of corn. 

do, see dlùth. 

dlug,** -uig, s.f. Avarice., 2 Penury. 

dluigh, see dluigheil. 

dluigheachd, s.f. Activity, nimbleness. 

dluigheil,ta. Handy, active. 2 Prepared. 3 
Tidy, trim, neat. 4tfThrifty. 

dluimh, s.f. Cloud, darkness. 2 Blaze of fire. 

dluith,* v.a. see dluthaich. 

dlüithe, comp. of dluth, More or most fast, or 





ditinach, see diùlannach, 

diù nas, see diülannas, 

dutt, pr.pt. a’ diditadh, v.a. Refuse. 2 Misgive, 
reject, deny, disown. Nach dititadh stri, who 
would not refuse battle ; is tearc each a dhiült- 
as a mhuing, seldom will æ horse refuse his 
mane, 

a——,** s.m. Refusal, denial. 2 Negative. 
Fhuair e an d., he got a refusal. 

--—ach, a. Negative in grammar. 

-——adh, -aidh, -aidiiean, s.m. Refusal, denial, 
act of refusing or denying. 2**Negative. A’ 
d—, pr.pt. of diult, Is buaine aon d. na da- 
thabnartas-deug, one refusal is longer remem- 
bered than a dozen offers. 

diumach, see diombach. 

diumb, see diomb. 

diùmbach, see diombach. 

uiùwhlach, -aich, see diùlannach. 

diumhlannach, -aich, see diùlannach. 

diùmhlannas, -ais, see diùlannas. 

tdiun, a. Gaelic spelling of French jeune, young. 

diùaach, see deònach. 

diunanachadh, -aidh, s.m. Walloping, drub- 
bing. A’d—, pr.pt. of diunanaich. 

diunanaich,* pr.pt. a’ diunanachadh, v.a. Wal- 
lop, drub. 

diünlaoch,* -aoith, see diùlannach. Ceum 
air adhart aig gach d. (diùlannach), each hero 
marching forward. 

tdiur,** -a, a. Bad. 2 Difficult, hard, dire, Bu 
d. an gàbhadh, it was æ dire necessity. 

diurasan, see dearrasan. 

fdiürn, va, Drink greedily, gulp. 2 Swallow. 

diurnach, -aich, s.m. One who drinks or swills. 

diürr,* s.f. Vital spark. Chan eil d. ann, 
he is quite dead ; na h-abair d., say not a 
wheest.—P.J.M. 

diürrais,* s. f. Secret, mystery. 2(PJM) De- 
sire to bite, as a child when teething. An d. 
as a secret. 4 SEA 

— — —each,* a. Secret, private, requiring se- 
crecy. 

¢dius, s.m. Protection. 

diu-san, see diubh-san. 






























diutha, prov. for diubh. . 

¢diuthach,| s.m. Nomen doloris, produced , by 
rubbing the thighs in travelling. 

diùthadh, a. see diùbhaidh. 

diüthaidh, see diubhaidh. 

fdiuthan, see Tdiuthacn. 

diutaidh,(DC) a. Uist for diuididh. 


a dh., out of its natural order or arrangement. 
dlaigh, gen. sing. of dlagh. 

dlaimh,** s.f. Darkness. 

dlaogh, see dlagh. 

dlaoi, see dlóth. 

dleachd, see reachd. 

air, see reachdadair. 

dleas,*-a,-an, s.m. Right, due, merit, desert. 
2*fOffice. 3 see dleasnas. Mo dh. fhéin, my 
own due or right. 

-——,* a. Due, deserved, merited, incumbent, 
in duty bound. Is d. dha sin, that is due to 
him; ma tha sin d. dhut, if that be due to you; 
an d. dhomh sin a dheanamh ? is it incum- 
bent on me to do that ? i 

.——, pr. pt. a’ dleasadh, v.a, d n. Merit, de- 
serye. 2*Owe, extort. 3* Procure. Na d. ni 
do dhuine sam bith, owe no man anything ; 
dleasaidh airm urram, arms procure respect. 

———ail, -ala, e, Dutiful. 

-——alachd, see dleasnachd. 








near. 
dliitheachd,  s.f.ind. Closeness, nearness. 2. 


Diaitizet | 


| dlüith eachd 


Thickness, 3 Quickness, fastness. 
dluithead, -eid, see dluitheachd. 
dlüitheadh, see dlüthadh. 
dlüithean,** s.m. Closet, little study. 
— —————,(PJM) s.pl. Relatives, 
dlumh,** s. Much, plenty. 
dlüs, see dluths. 
dlùth, -uithe, a. Near, close to, close. 2 Thick- 

ly set, dense, tight, confined. 3 Quick, 4** 

Incessant. 5 Related, nearly connected. 6 

**Nimble. Neoil a tha d. mu’n cuairt, clouds 

that are thick around ; uisge trom d., heavy 

incessant rain; a’ choille thiugh dh., the thick 
close wood ; ’gad phogadh gu d., kissing thee 
incessantly ; 's mi 'falbh leam fhéin gu d., and 

1 walking along communing with myself, (ina 

brown study.) [Dlùth takes after it in gov- 

ernment the preposition air, do, an or ri, sim- 
ple or compounded. ] Is d. aoibhneas do 
bhron, joy is close upon grief ; d. ri chéile, close 
to each other; d. an daimh, nearly related ; 

d. orm, near me ; d. air an là, near daylight ; 

d. air a chéile, near or close upon each other. 
dlùth, -a, s.m. Warp of cloth. Gu leòir de dh. 

is fuigheal innich, abundance of warp and re- 

mainder of woof—i.e. enough and to spare, 
something to go and come upon; gheibh bean 

bhaoth d. gun cheannach, ’s cha’n fhaigh i 

inneach, a silly woman will get the warp with- 

out paying, but won't get the woof; d. glic 
agus inneach górach, said of o person who 
seems foolish but is really wise. 

dlùth, -üith, s.m. Joining. 2 Enclosure, fence. 

9 Cloister. x 
dlùth, v. a. House corn—Harris & Uist. 

dlüthaich. 
dlùthachadh, -aidh, s.m. Approaching, act of 

approaching, 2 Joining, joining closer. 3 

Crowding. 4 Contracting. 5**Warping, as 

of Ge 6 Knitting. A’ d—, pr. pt. of dlùth- 

aich. 
dluthachd, see dluitheachd. 
dlüthadh, -aidh, s.m. Building of corn-stacks. 2 

Housing of corn. 8{{ Pounding of clods. 4 

see dlùthachadh. A’ d—. pr. pt. of dlùth. 
dlùthaich, pr. pt. a’ dlùthachadh, v. a. Ap- 

proach, draw near. 2 Join, adhere, join 
closely together. 3 Warp. 4 Press together, 


2 see 


pack together. Dh. iad ris a’ bhaile, they ap- | 


nroached the town. 
dlüthaicheadh, see dlùthachadh. 
dilüthaichear, fut. pass. of dlùthaich. 
dluthaichidh, fut.aj.a. of dlùthaich. 
dlüthaichte, a. & past pt. of diüthaich. Made 
c'ose, cemented, glued, pressed, joined, com- 
pressed, knit. - 
dluth-aireach, a. Intense. 
diuthas, ais, s. m. Nearness, closeness, pro- 
pinquity, neighbourhood. 2(PM) Denseness. 
D. nan craobh, the closeness of the trees, 
dlüth-bhailtean,** s.pl. Suburbs. 
dlüth-bharrach, s.m. Brushwood. 
dluüth-bheachd, an, s.f. Meditation. 
diuth-bhuidhneach, -eiche, a Close-banded, 
dlùth-chàirdeas, s.m. Intimacy. 
dluth-charcair, -ean, s.m. Labyrinth. 
dlùth-cheangail, v.a. Bind firmly. 
dluth-cheangladh, -aidh, s.m. Binding firmly. 
dluth-chinneas,** s.m. Aggeneration. 
dlüth-chlódh, v, & s.m. Stereotype. 
dlüth-dhuilleach, -eiche, a. Olose-leaved, 
PROM Raa ae a.Intimate, acquainted, fami- 
iar. | 
dlüth-eólas, ais, s.m. Intimacy, familiarity. 
dluth-fhas,** s.m. Ageeneration. 
dluth-fheachd, -an, s.f. Phalanx. 
dluth-fhraoch,§ s.m. Siaooth-leaved heath, see 


344 do 


fraoch-a’-bhadatn. 
diüth-ghleus, -edis, -an, s.m. Gathered form. 
dlüth-impidh,ff sf. Adhortation. 
diüth-lean, pr.pt. a’ dlüth-leanail & -leantuinn, 
Cleave unto, stick close to, adhere, 2 Follow 
elosely, pursue. 
diüth-leanachd,** s.f. Adherence. 
dlàüth-leanailteachd, s.f.ind. Adherence. 


diuth-leanmhuinneach, ff -eiche, a. Conti nuous, 


dogging, 
dluth-leanmhuinneachd, s.f. Continuity. 
dluth-oidhirp, -ean, s.f. Assiduity. 
dluth-phreas,** -phris, pl. -phris & -phreasan, 
s.m. Thicket. 2 Thick bush. 
dlüth-phreasach, ** o Full of thickets or of 
thick bushes, 
dlüth-phreasarnach, s.m. Brushwood. 
dlùths, dlüiths, see dlüthas. 
dlüth-sheanachas,(PM) -ais,s.m.Close conversa- 


tion. 
dluth-shéidrich,** a. Asthmatical. 
dlith-stol, -stoil s.m. Close-stool. 
dlüth-smuainich,v.a. Revolve in mind, consider, 
dlüth-smuainteach, -eiche, a. Abstracted (in 
mind only.) 
dlüth-spàgach, -aiche, a. Palmipede. 
dlàth-thàirngeach, -iche, see d— tharruingeach, 
dlüth-tharruing, v.a. Attract. 
dlüth-tharruingeach, -eiche, a. Drawing close- 
ly. 2 Attractive. 3 Magnetic. ? 
dlüth-tharruingeachd,** s.f.ind. Magnetism. 
dlüth-tharruingeadh,** s.v. Attraction. 
dlüth-theannm, pr. pt. a’ dlüth-theannadh, v. a, 
Press elose upon, draw near. 2**Crowd to- 
gether, approach in crowds. : 
dlüth-theannadh, -aidh, s.m. Pressing close 


upon, hard pressing, act of pressing closely. 


A’ d—, pr.pt. of dluth-theann. 

1dó, a. see dà. i 

do, prep. To (i.e. unto.) [Aspirates word fol- 
lowing, and governs the Dative case. It is 
often dh’, or redundantly do dh’, or a dh, be- 
fore a word commencing with a vowel. In 
other cases it is often q, or is omitted entire- 
ly. Chaidh e dh’ Eirinn, [or do dh’ Kirin, 
or adh’ Ririnn,] he went to Ireland ; chaidh 
iad a Phort-righ, or chaidh iad Phort-righ, 
they went to Portree. 

Do is joined with the personal pronouns 
thus :—domh, to me ; duit, to thee ; da, tohim; 
di, to her ; duinn, to us; duibh, to you ; doibh, 
to them. These prepositional pronouns are 
generally aspirated. j 

Do is a remarkable preposition too subtle to 
analyze, but the examples given below give a 
fair idea of its different meaning in various 
contexts. Do "n duine, to the man; do di 
mhathair, to thy mother; do mo réir-sa, ac- 
cording to my views; gür pailt liagh do na 
ràmhan na linn, the blades of the oars are too 
big for the oars; a dh’ olc no a dh’ eiginn [or 
a choir no a dh’ eugcoir, or a dheòin no a dh’ 
aindeoin,] somehow or other,by hook or by crook, 
willy nilly. Asa prepositional pronoun :— 
Is aithne dhomh sin, J know that; is math 
dhomh sin, that is well (good) for me ; is léir 
dhomh, I can see ; leig dhomh, permit me; dé 
dh’ éirich dhuit ? whut has befallen thee ? nach 
anndomh a dh’ éirich ! to me what evil has be- 
fallen ! cha’n eil dhomh ach—, all that is ne- 
cessary for me is—; leig dhomh, let me alone, 


(also leig leam); roimh tighinn dhuinn, before ` 


we came ` mhothaich e da ged a bha e uaig- 
neach, he perceived (to) it though it was in sv- 
cret; is dona an ceann sin dhuit, that is against 
your health; an urrainn duit ceann a thoirt 
dhaibh ? are you able to vanquish them (lit. à 


Original from 


Wa 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS M 


URBANA-CHAMPAHGNE 


- do, poss.pron. Thy, thine. 



















. do, substitute 


_do-aisigeachd tt s.f.ind. 


do 


345 





head to give them) , [also are you able to face 
them ?] ; oidhche dhomh ’sa bheinn-sheilg, J 
being one might in the hunting mountain ; ri 
teachd dhomh, just «s L was arriving : an 
déida dhomh falbh, after I had gone ; an am 
dhomh dol sìos, when 4 go down (to battle) ; an 
duszadh no an cadal duinn, both when we are 
asieep and awake : a’ falbh á Loch-nam-madadh 
dhuinu, when we, going from Loch Maddy ; cia 
as duit P whence have you come ? also where 
was your birth-place? bhiodh an àireamh 
diom-bnuan doibh, their number would soon be 
reduced for them ; is dithis duinn sin, mu ’n 
dubhairt an fheannaig mu a casan, they ’re a 
pair, as the crow stid of her legs ; bu lion- 
mhoire dhuit 'shracadh ann, na cunntas shlat 
an cliabh, you could find more rents in it than 
withies in a basket ; gure dhùisg mo shcana- 
thas domh...., what caused my muse to awake 
is.. ; nuair dhuisgear ascaoin duit, when 
your anger be awakened ; theirig gual domh, 
my coal has given out; cha'n e am bord a their- 
ig dhuit, ach am beagan fearainn, i£ is not the 
— plough that failed you, but that there was not 
enough (and; a réir fios domh, as far as I 
know ; ma ’s fior daibh féin, if they may be be- 
lieved ; fhuair mi fios bho phiuthar dhomh, Z 
got word from a sister of nine ; chuala mi an 
t-oran sin aig caraid domh, I heard that song 
being sung by o friend of mine; ma 's e bas 
dhomh gu ma h-e dhuit e ! if it be a case of 
death for me may it be so to you ! is pailte bru 
na biadh dha,—said to a glutton ; mar a chi- 
thear dha, os circumstances may warrant. 
For note on the pernicious practice of con- 
fouuding do and de, see under de. 
[Aspirates its noun, 
and there is a pernicious practice of dropping 
the o after prepositions ending in vowel, 
even before consonant initials, as do d' mhac, 
to thy son, which must be guarded against,] 
Do làmh, thy hand ; do fhreagairt, thine an- 
swer. [T" before a vowel, t’ athair, thy father.] 


Qo, particle, placed before verbs, but not the 


sign of the past tense, as is often stated. An 
do fhreagair ef did he answer ? 


do, worn down in most districts to dh’ or a, 


is still retained in Suth’d before the infinitive, 
and in c-rtain phrases, Nach 'eil thu dol do 
shuidhe P are you not going to sit? ; tha e dol 
do shealtainn ort, he is going to see you ; do 
dh’ fheuchainn (for a dh’) ; dol do ghabhail, 


going to tate. | 
for a dh’ in Suth'd. Cha toir a’ 

bho ain bainne d easbhuidh fiach, the cow 
will not give her milk without its equivalent. 

do-, negative initial particle of the same import 
as Latin and English ?n-, or English un-, im- 
plying sometimes difficulty, sometimes im- 
possibility. [Aspirates consonants following.] 
Compounds of do not found below, can be 
translated by finding the meaning of the se- 
cond portion, and placing in- or -un before it. 

doacal, -ail,** s.m. Affliction. 

do-aichidh, a. Incontestable. 

do’ail, see domhail. 

do-aill, -e, a. Close, 2 Boisterous, 
raging. i 

do-ainmeachadh,** a. Indefinable. 

do-àireamh, a. Difficult to count. 
less, innumerable. 

do-àireamhach, -eiche, a. 

do-aireamhtachd, 


compact. 


2 Number- 


see do-aireamh. 
s.f. Innumerability, 
irrevocableness, 
do-aithneacha:!h,** a. Not easily known. 
aithnichte, PM) a. Unknowable. 


` do-aithrisead ,,** a." Not easily repeated. 


docair 
do-aomadh, -aidh, a. Immovable, inflexible, 
inexorable. 
——eachd, s.f. Inexorability. 


do-aslachaidh, a, Inexorable. 

do-atharrachadh, a, 
changed or altered. 

do-atharraichidh, a. see do-atharrachadh., 

do-atharraichte,tff a. Immutable. 

Tdob, doib, s.m. River, stream. 

tdob, s.m. Plaster. 2 Gutter. 

tdòb, v.a. Plaster, bedaub, cement. 

tdòbadh, s.m. Daubing over. 

Tdobail, see tdòbadh. 

dobair, -ean, «sm. Plasterer. 

dobh, -a, a. see dóbhaidh. 

-——achd,(AC) s.f. Unrighteousness. 
na A., on the sea of unrighteousness. 

dòbhaidh, æ. Boisterous, stormy. 2**Raging, 
swelling, destructive., 3 Terrible, dreadful, 
awful. 4**Felling. Isd. an companach an t- 
acras, hunger is a violent companion ; oidhche 
dh.,a boisterous night; buillean trom d., heavy, 
felling blows. 

tdobhair, s.m. Border of a country. 2 Water. 
9** Territory. 

fdo-bhàis, a. Immortal. 

dobhar,** a. Dark, obscure. 

do-bharalachaidh,ft a. Inconceivable. 

dobhar-chu, -choin, s.m. Otter, 2 Otter-hound. 
3(AF) Beaver. Iasg a teicheadh o ’n d., e 
fish. fleeing from the otter. 

dobhar-lus, -uis, -an, s. m. Water-cress, see 
biolair. 2 Any aquatic plant, name applied 
to all cresses. 

dobhar-shoitheach, -ich, -ichean, s.m. Bucket, 

not 


Immutable, not easily 


Air cuan 


pail, pitcher. 
do-bheachdachaidh,** a. Unimaginable, 
easily perceived, S 
dó-bheart, -bheairt, -an, s.f. Bad deed, vice, 2 
Iniquity, mischief, prank. Leth do dh., the 
half of thy vice, [tt gives do-bheirt as n.sing.] 
———ach, -aiche, a. Wicked, vicious. 
do-bhliadhnach, Ach, s.m. Animal of two years 
of age, said of cattle and sheep in Outer Isles 
and Argyllshire, for dà-bhliadhnach., Also 
applied to certain fish, as d. piocaich, a two- 
year-old coaifish. Pronounced ** dorlunn-ach” 
and ‘‘dobh’lunnach” in Isles, but as spelt 
here in Argyllshire. 
do-bholadh,** -aidh, s.m. Stench. 
dobhrach, -aich, s.m. Cress of any kind, see 
biolair. D, ballach min, smooth-spotted water- 
Cress. 
dóbhrach-bhallach, -aiche, s.f. Orchis. 
dòbhran, -ain, s.m. Fresh-water otter—mustela 
lutra. 2** Dog. 3(AF) Beaver. Bali dòbhrain, 
a freckle or mole on the skin. , 
——ach, -aiche, a. Dry, distant, shy, stiff. 
2 Abounding in, or like otters. 
-donn, s.m. see dòbhran. 
-leaslan,** -ain, s.m. Otter. 
— -leas-leathann, -ain-, s.m. Beaver. 
dó-bhinntichte,Tt a. Incoagulable. 
do-bhrisidh,ff o Infrangible. ` 
———-—— eachd,l1f s.f. Inviolability. 
do-bhrigh, adv. Because, as, for the reason that. 
do-bhròn, -din, s.m. Sorrow, grief, sadness, mel- 
ancholy. 2 Great grief. 
-—ach, -aich, a. Sad, sorrowful, melan- 
choly, dejected. Gu d., sorrowfully. 
do-bhuidheachas, -ais, s.m. Ingratitude. 
do-bhuileachaidh, a. lucomniunicable. 
fdocail, see docair. 
each, see docair. 
- eachd, see docaireachd. 
docair. ean, s./. Trouble, uneasiness, agitation 
of mind, affiiction, restlessness. a eae 

















Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


Digitized by 


My INTERNET ARCHIVE 





docair 


Ceum docair, an annoying occurrence: 
,-e,«. Hard, grievous, painful. 2 Diffi- 
cult. 3 Uneasy. 4 Sullen. 5 Intractable. 6 


Not settled. Aite-suidhe d., an uneasy seat ; 

socair no d., either easy or uneasy. 

eachd, s.f. Difficulty. 

+doch, s.f. One’s native country. 

dócha, comp. of a. toigh. More or most dear, 
esteemed, valued or preferable. Is toigh leam 
thusa, ach is d. leam esan, { like you, but I 
prefer him. 

dòcha, comp. of a. dogh, More or most likely 
or probable. Is d. gu 'm bheil, probably it is 
so ; ’se seo a’s d., this is more probable ; is d. 
leam, Z presume, or I suppose. 

dòcha, s. Likelihood, probability. 


ance. 








tdochad, 
tdochaide, \ adv. Rather. 
mA ea y a. see docha. 


do-chailite, a. Imperdible, unlosable. 

dochainn, pr.pt. a dochainneachadh, & a’ doch - 
nadh, v.a. Hurt, injure, wound, „bruise. 2 
Annoy. 

, gen. sing. of 

dochainneadh, s. m. Injuring, act of injuring, 
hurting or damaging. A’ d—, pr. pt. of doch- 
ainn. Chaidh a chliabh a dhochainneadh, his 
breast has been wounded. 

dochair, -e, -ean, s.f. Hurt, damage, injury, 
wrong. 2 Misery, sorrow. 3 Pain. 4 Wound. 
5**Loss. 6 Fault. 7**Discontentedness. Dè 
do dh, ? what has hurt you? 

see dochainn, 

(DU) a. Same meanings as dochaireach. 

Tha thu d., you are wrong. 

each, -iche, a. Wrong. 2 Hurtful. 3 

Uneasy, troubled, agitated. 4 Injurious. 5 

Grievous. 6**Preposterous. 7**Athwart. Is 

e an suidhe d. 'san taigh-osd’ a’s fhearr, the 

uneasy seat in the ale-house is best. 





dochann. 


—— —— ,* DO 











eachd, s.f.ind. Incorrectness. 2 Injuri- 
ousness. 
—  — — eas, -eis, s.m. Hurt, wrong, injury, dam- 
age. 2 Sorrow, pain. 


ich,** v.a, Disadvantage. 

fdochairt, -e, a. Sick. 

do-chaisgte, a. Invincible. 

do-chaitheamh, a. Inexhaustible. 

—_——achd, s.f. Inexhaustibleness. 

dochann,(DC) v.a. Punish. 2 Thrash— Uist. 

—, -ainn,-an, s.m. Hurt, injury, damage. 

2* Harm, mischief. 3 Agony. 4**Mishap,ca- 

lamity. Ad. bàis, from the agony of death ; 

fhuair e d., he got a hurt ; a thaobh dochainn, 

on account of damage. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Hurtful, mischievous, 

injurious, causing pain or damage. 2 Preju- 

dicial. | 

—achd,** s.f. Hurtfulness, mischievous- 
ness, injuriousness. 

—— ———aich,** v.a. see dochainn. 

—aiche,** s.m, Injurer. 

do-chaochlaidheach, tt -eiche, a. Incommutable. 

——d,ttsf. Incommutability. 

Jochar, see dochair. 

docharach, -aiche, see dochaireach. 

Jo-charachadh,* qœ. see do-charaichte. 

Jocharaich, v.a. see dochainn. 

Jocharaiche, comp. of docharach. 

do-charaichte, a. Unmoved. 2 Immovable, 

Jochartach, s. see dochartas. 

dochartach, -aiche, a. Sick, very ill. 

dochartas, -ais, s.m. Sickness. 

dòchas, -ais, -an, s.m. Hope, expectation. 2 
confidence, trust. 3 Couceit, notion, presump- 
tion. Tha mi an d., I hope ; gun d., without 


























ee 


Digitized by 
= d de —— Be el | 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


346 





docranach, -aiche, 


docranach 


hope zan d. do theachd, in expectation of thy 
coming ` do dh., your conceit or presumption 5 — 
dé an d. a ghabh thu a nis ? what has come — 
into your head now ? ; beo-dh., a lively hope. 
dòchasach, -aieh, a. Hopeful, confident. 2 Vain, 
conceited. 3* Presumptuous. 4 Confiding. - 
51iDroll. 'S e fear d. e, he is a conceited Jellow; 
tha thu d., you are confident, | 
—— ———d,* sf. Confidence, 
Conceitedness. 
do-chasg, œ, see do-chasgadh. v 
do-chasgadh,-aidh, e. Unruly,turbulent,unoians ` p 
ageable. 2 Unquencbable. 3 Invincible. 
do-chasgaidh, see do-ehasgadh. 
tdochd, a. Strait, narrow, close. 2 
do-cheangal, æ. That cannot be bound, not ea  — 
sily bound. N 
do-cheannsach, see do-cheannsachadh. 
do-cheannsachadh, -aidh, a. Untameable, un- 
controllable, unmanageable, unruly. 2 Im - 
vincible, i 
do-cheannsachd, s.f. Incorrigibleness. 
do-cheannsaichte, past pt. Unruly, 
unappeasable, unmanageable. ] 
do-cheannsail,-sala, a. see do-cheannsaehadh, — 
do-chiosnaekadh, a. Invincible, unconquerable, - 
2 Indefatigable, 
do-chiosnaichte, see do-chiosnachadh. E 
do-chiurraidheachd, s.f.ind. Invulnerablenesg  - 
do-chlaoidh, see do-chlaoidheadh. a 
do-ehlaoidheadh, a. Insuperable. 2 Indefati 
gable. 3**invulnerable, invincible, A 
do-chlaoidheachd,** s.f. Invincibility. P 
do-chlaoidhte, a. see do-chlaoidheadh. 3 
do-chlaoidhteachd, s.j. Insuperability. 2Inse - 
vincibility. 3 
doch-luachair,(AF) s.m. Lizard, newt. q 
fdochma, a. Weak, incapable, j 
do-choimeasgta, a. Immiscible, that cannot be 
mixed. | | 
do-choimisgte, see do-choimeasgta, 
dochoir, -ean, see dochair. di 
dochoireach, see dochaireach. E 
do-choireachaidh, a. Irreprovable, irreproache — 
able. E 
do-chowhairle, -ean, s.f. Bad advice. e 
do-chomhairleach, -iche, œ. Incorrigible, that ` 
will not be advised. 2 Untameable. ^d 
— ———-——d,** s.f. Incorrigibleness. 
do-chomhairleachadh, see do-chomhairleach. —— 
do-chomhairlichte,tf @ Incorrigible, unadvisae — 
ble. E 
do-chomhdachaidh, o. Indemonstrable. » 
dochrach, -aiche, see docair & dochaireach. 
dochrachd, s.f.ind. Hardship, difficulty. 
dochraid,** s.f. Servitude. 2 
dochraidh,** s.f. Lust, R 
do-chreidsinn, a. Incredible, improbable. Mar - 
ni d., as an incredible thing. E 
do-chreidsinneach,(PM) a. Inconceivable, be- 
ond belief. E 
do-chronachaidh, a. Irreprovable. 1 
idocht, v. see tachd. ` 
+dochta,** a. Learned, instructed. 
dochtair,** -ean, Gaelic spelling of doctor. 
dochtrail,** s.f. Luxury. 
dochuinn, v.*. see dochainn, 
do chum, see a chum. 
dochunn, -uinn, see dochann, 
do-chunntaidh, a. Innumerable. 
docoisle,(AF) s. Whale. 3 E 
docrach, -aiche, @ see dochaireach. 2** MoT- 
tifying. à i ; 
docran, -ain, s.m. Sorrow, vexation, distress. 
2 Fit of anger. Së 


hopefulness. 2 


bé S T 


forward, 











Pa Troubled, vexed, dis- 


tressed, 2 Causing sorrow or vexation, 


Original from kb 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 
URBANA-CHAMPALHaNE 








docras 347 doichinmhil 


dogan, s.m. Sort of oath, prov. t“ dog-on-it.'"] 

dogan, -ain, s.m. dim. of dog. D. maraig, a 
bit of pudding. i 

doganta, a. Fierce, ferocious. 2**Revengeful. 
3*Thick-set, stbumpish. Gu d., revengefully. 

dogantachd, s.find. Brutality, canine ferocity, 
fierceness. 2**RKevengefulness. 

dogh,* s.m. Opinion. Am dh.-sa gu’m bheil, 
in my opinion it is. 

dogh,* a. et. comp. docha. Like, probable. Is 
d. naeh "eil, it is probably not so ;’se seo is 
docha, this is more probable, 

doch, v.a. see doth. 

dogha, s.m. (meacan-dogha) Burdock. 

doghadh, see dòthadh. 

doghaltas,** -ais, s.m. Revenge. 

do-ghiülaimnteachd,1f s.f. Insupportableness. 

do-ghiulan, -aine, a. Insupportable, intolera- 
bie, insufferable. 2fflImportable. 

eects a. Not easily taken, impregna- 

e 


docras,** s.m. Discontent, discontentinent. 

dochraid,** s.f. Servitude. 

dod, -oid, s.m. Peevishness, the pet, the dumps. 

Tha ’n d. air a’ bhò mhaol, cha’n ith i fodar 
no fraoch,the hornless cow has taken the duinps, 
she'll eat neither straw nor heather—said to a 
child remaining in the dumps after being pro- 
mised ‘‘something nice ;” gabh an d., take the 


















et. 
| Wi ’d, or do d’? (for do do) To thy or thine. 2 
not Of thy or thine, which is de do. 
dodach, -aich, a. Morose, peevish, pettish. 
dodachd, s.f.ind. Pettishness. 
do dh’, prep. Used before fh or a vowel redun- 
dantly. Do dh’ fhear, toa man. [DR is do, 
with d aspirated and o dropped before the 
following fh or a vowel.] 
Tüodhail, s. Bad news. 
do-dhathach, -aiche, see dà-dhathach. 
a80-dhéabhaidh,If a. Inexhalable. 
do-dhealachaidh,** a. Inseparable,indissoluble, 
not easily parted. 
AG, SCH a.  Indissoluble. 2 Inalien- 
able. 
do-dhealbhach, -aiche, a. Unlikely, improba- 
bie. 2 Not easily painted or delineated. 
do-dheanamh, a. Impracticable, difficult to be 
done. 2**Impossible. | 
do-dheanta, a. Impossible, not practicable, 
ifficult. 
do-dheantachd, s.f. Impossibility. 
do-dheantas, ais, s.m. Impracticability. 

- do-dhideannachaidh,ft a. Indefensible. 
do-dhionaidh, a. Indefensible. 
*do-dhithichte,ff a. Inconsumptible. 

. do-dhitltach,-aiche,a. Irrefragible,irrefutable. 
. 2(PJ M) Irresistable. 
do-dhruigheachd,tt s.f. Impenetrability. 

.do-dhuine,** dhaoine, s.m. Bad man, rogue. 
dod-stüirtealachd, s.f. Heaviness. 2 Morose- 

ness. 

dodum,f s.m. Teetotum. 
i1doer-galar,| s.m. Head-ache. 

Tdoeth, s.f. Sickness, disease, 

| da-fhaghail, e a Hard to find, difficult to 
| come at, scarce. 

do-fhaicinneach, -iche, see do-fhaicsinneach. 
do-fhaicsinn, see do-fhaicsinneach, 

do-fhaicsinneach, -iche, a. Invisible. 2ttHard 
to be seen. 

-—_———d,** s.f. Invisibility. 

| do-fnairsuingeachadh,(PM) s.m. Impossibility 

to widen or broaden. 

| do-fhaisneis, -é, v. Unspeakable. 

do-fhalachaidh, a. Inconcealable. 

do-fhalbhuichte, a. Inexhaustible. 
do-fhaothachaidh,ft a. Implacable, inexorable. 
do-fhasgaidh,{{ o Incompressible, 

— —eachd,fțt s.f. Incompressibility. 

do-fhogharach, -aich, see dà-fhoghair. 

\do-fhreagarrachd,tt s.f. Irresponsibility. 

do-fhuasyladh, -aidh, see do-fhuasglaidh, 

‘do-fhuasglaidh, e a. Inextricable. 2 Insolu- 

ble. Sf[lrrelievable. 

eachd,ffs.f. Irresolubleness. 

do-fhulang, a, Intolerable, not easily borne, 

do-fhulangach, see do-fhulang. 

lo-fhulangachd,1t s.f. Insupportableness. 

dog,f -a, s.m. Bit, junk, short thick piece of 
anything. 2 Thickset person. D. buill, a 

Junk of rope. 

dog, v.a. Gaelic spelling of dock. 

dogail, -ala, a, Cynical, dry, prov. 
tdogaladh, -aidh, s.m. Revenge, revenging. 

dogaltach,-aiche, a. Revengeful, prov. for dio- 
| khaltaeh. 

oan, TT -ain, s.m». Stot, steer. 


doghlas, -ais, see dòlas. 

do-ghleusadh,** a. Untuneable, 

do-ghlideachadh,** a, Immoveable. 

do-ghlideachd, s.f. Immobility. 

do-ghluaiste, a. Immovable. 

do-ghluasad, a Immovable, not easily moved. 

do-ghluasadach, -aiche, a. Constant. 

—— ———d,it s.f. Impassiveness. 

doghlum,* a. Needy. 

doghnasach,** a. Ill-favoured. 

do-ghnath, adv, Always. 

eae -aiche, a. Uncommon, unprao- 
tised, 

do-ghniomh, s.m. Injury. 

doghradh,** -aidh, s.m. Sorrow, sadness. 2 
Duiness, stupidity. 

dó-ghrainn, -e, -ean, see doruinn. 

Tdo-ghreas, see do-ghnath. 

do-ghrisleachadh, Lewis for do-ghlideachadh. 

doghruinn, -e, -ean, see dòruinn. 

doghruinneach, -iche, a. see doruinneach. 

doib, s.f. Piaster, daub. 

doibealach, a. Plastering, daubing. 

doibealadh, -aidh, s.m. Daubing. 

doibh, prep. pron. To them. Thoir dhoibh e, 
give it to them, 7 

doibhear, -eire, @ Rude, uncivil, boorish. 2 
Sullen. 

dcibhear,(DC) s.m. Miserly churl—Argyll. 

doibheart, see do-bheart. 

doibheas,-eis, s.m. Vice. 

doibhir,(DC) a. Greedy, seeking too much. 

Tdoibhre, s.f. Sacrifice. 

tdoivil, v.a. Bedaub. 

tdoibleadh, -idh, s.m. Daubing. 

tdoibrith, s.m. Sowens, gruel. 

doich, pr.pt. a’ doichioll, v.a. Hasten. 

Tdoich, -e, @ Swift, quick. 2 Early. 

tdoiche, s.f. Hope, contidence. 

doicheall, -ill, s.m. Churlishness, boorishness, 
inhospitableness. 2 Grudging. 3 (PJM) 
Unwiilingness to receive on the part of a 
guest. AT d—, pr. pt. of doichill. Cadalan 
doichill, the sleep of churlishness.—A’ Chaill- 
each bheurr. 

doicheallach, -aiche, æ. Churlish, inhospitable, 
boorish, sordid, niggardly. 2 Angry, enraged. 

doichealiachd, s.f. isohospitableness. 

tdoicheidhe, adv. Rather. 

doi-chiallach, -aiche, a. Ambiguous, obscure. 

doichill, p: . pt. a doicheall, v.n. Grudge, þe- 
grudge, be churlisu. 2(DC) Treat exclusive- 
ly, boycott. Cha’n ann ’ga dhoicheall dhuit 
à tha ui, Z am not grudging tt to you. 

doichinmiieal,** s. Enamel. 

doichinmhil,** v.e. Enamel. 



































E — n 





Z2 


Original from 


RIEXZJIF"FSESEUPX ee 
UNIVERSITY OF 


Digitized by 


ESIE AT 
N LJ] Ss, E | 


AR INTERNET ARCHIVE URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


doichioll 848 doimhneachd 


doichioll, ill, s.m. see doicheall. 2 pr. pt. of Fograidh e d., he will banish sorrow; na biodh 
doich. 3 Warning. | 4. oirbh, be not grieved. 

doichiollach, -aiche, æa. see doicheallach. doilgheasach, -aiche, @ Grievous, sorrowful, 

doid, -e, -ean, s.f. The hand, grasp. 2 Little| afflicting. 2**Troubled. 3**Causing trouble 
farm. 38*Croft. 4 Pendicle.  5**see doit. or sorrow. | 
D. gheal, a fair hand. doilghios, see doilgheas. 

ddideach, -iche, a. Frizzled up, shrunk (of hair) | doilghiosach, see doilgheasach. a4 

doiliag, sf. see doigh-leug. d 

doilich, -e, see duilich. 

‘doilicheachd, s.f. Forwardness. 

‘doilicheadas, see duilicheadas. 

doilichinn, -ean, see duilichinn. 

doilidh, see duilich. 1 

doilinn, s.f. Grief, dolor,—Dain Iain Ghobha. ` 

doilisg,(AC) s.f. Vexation, annoyance. 2 State - 

|. of death. 

doill, pl. of dall. E 

doille, s.f.ind. Blindness. 2 Darkness,dimness. . 
3*Stupidity. Bhuaile iad le Q., he struck — 
them with blindness; d. na h-oidhehe, the dark- ` 
ness of night. 

doille, comp. of a. dall; More or most blind, ` 
stupid or ignorant, 

doillead, -eid, s.m. see doille, s.f. 3 

doilleir, -e, a. Dim, dark, shaded, sombre. 2 - 
Obscure, ambiguous. 3 Scarcely visible. 4 ^ 
Mysterious, mystical, Bha 'n oidhche d., the - 
night was dark;is aoibhinn ge d. an cuimhne, - 
pleasant though indistinct is the remembrance ` 
of them ; duine d., o stupi-! fellow. 

doilleireachadh, -aidh, s.m. Darkening, state — 
of becoming dark, 2 Shading. A’ d—, pr.pt. . 
of doilleirich. E: 

doilleireachd, s.f. Dimness, darkness, shade, ` 
obscurity, cloudiness. 2 Ambiguity. 3 Mys- ` 
teriousness. 4 Stupidity. Eë, 

doilleiread, -eid, s.m. Degree of darkness. d 

doilleirieh, pr.pt. a’ doilleireachadh, v.a. Dark- — 
en, obscure, cloud. 2 Become dark. 3 Per- 
plex. 4 Foul, soil. / 

doilleirichte, past pt. of doilleirich. Darkened, — 
aa shaded, clouded. 2 Perplexed. 3 
Fouled. E 


























prov. 

doideach, -iche, o Strong, muscular.  2ff 
Hauded. 3 Strongly grasping. 4 Fond of 
Gress. Le’n gairdeanaibh d., with their mus- 
cular arms. 

Doideag, s.f. Famous Mull witch. 

doid-gheal, -ghile,a. White-handed,fair-handed. 

d oidhche, adv. (dh' oidhche) By night, 

doi-dhitltach, see do-dhiultach, 

doidhrean,-ein, s.m. Duel. 

doidire,* s.m. Crofter, cottager, 

doidse, s.f. Dint.—Badenoch. 

idoif, -e, -ean, s.f. Potion. 

doigh, -e,-ean, s.f. Manner, method, knack, 
ways and means. 2 Case, trim, condition, 
state, order. 3 Good order. 4 Proper arran- 
gement. 5 Hope, confidence, trust. 6** Fire. 7** 
Supposition, opinion. 8 Guess. 9 Testimony. 
Tha d. air a h-uile ni—tha d. air buan an 
fhraoich, theresa knack in everything, there's 
a knack in pulling heaiher; air an d. seo, in 
this manner; dé an d. a th’ ort P how are you ? 
cuir air d., arrange, adjust, put in order; cuir- 
idh mi mo dh. an Dia, £ will put my confidence 
in God ; gun d., out of order, absurd ; co-ionn- 
an air gach d., in every way equal ; ciod an d. 
ath’ ort 2? how are you ? ma's ole no math mo 
dh., whether my condition be good ov bad ; tha 
d. mhath orra, they are in good or comfortable 
circumstances ; 'se th’ air a dh.,he is very 
pleased or happy... 

tdóigh, -e, s.f. Guess, opinion. 2 Testimony. 3 
Fire. 

doigh,** a. Sure, certain, of direct aim. 2(PM) 
Contented— Uist. Gud., certainly. 

doigh-bhriathar, air, s.m. Phrase, idiom, by- 
word, proverb. 

dóoigh-bhriathrach, a. Proverbial. 

doigheadh, -idh, s.m. Hoping. 92 Adjusting. 

doighealachd, s.f. System, regulation, arrange- 
ment. 2 Capability of adjustment. 

doighear, -ir, s.m. Spear. 

dòigh eiginn,* adv. Somehow, somehow or other. 

do-ghniomh, s.m. Injury. 

doigheil, -eala, a, Systematic. 2 Well-arranged, 
well-appointed. 3 Good-tempered. 4 Conve- 
nient. 5 Hopeful, confident. 6ttAccommo- 
dating. 7**Decent. 8(DC) Suitable— Uist. 9 
(DC)Tradesmanlike—Uist. 10* In good trim 
orcondition. 11 Well-off, in good circum- 
stances. Am bheil thu gu d. ? are you in 
good trim ? 

¢doighir, s.f. Flame. 

doigh-leug, s. Touchstone. 

doi-zhniomh. see do-ghniomh. 

doilbh, -e, @. see doirbh. 

doilbhe, s.f. see doirbhead. 

doilbheachd,** s.f. see doirbheachd. 

doilbheas, -eis, see doirbheas. 

doileag, s.f. Stone. 

doilean, -ein, s. m. Eddying wind, circling 
breeze. 

doileanach, a. Eddying, circling, as wind. 

doileas, -eis, s.m. Injury. 2 Prejudice, 3 Dif- 
ficulty, hardship. 

doileasach,ff a. Injurious. 

doilghe, a. see duilich. 

doi-leighis, -e, see do-leighis. 

doilgheas, -eis, s.m. Sorrow, affliction, mourn- 
ing, vexation, melancholy. 2 Bitterness, | 


tdoim, -e, a. Poor, slovenly. E. 
do-imeachd, a, Passless. a 
do-imeachdail, a. Passless. 7: 
doimeag, -eige, -an, s.f. Slut, slattern. Is mór 
le doimeig (al. donnaig) a cuid abhrais, spin- ` 
ning troubles a, drab. 2 
doimeagach,tt a. Slatternly. r 
doimh, -e, a. Gross, cumbersome,clumsy, bulky, ` 
2 Unshapely. 3 Poor, needy. 4 Galling, vex- 
ing. 5 Inconvenient. Gu dòmhail d., mar. 
a bhitheas màthair fhir-an-taighe an solus na 
cloinne, no an rathad nan eun, erowding,cum- 
bersome, as the husband's mother in ihe lig 
of the children, or in the way of the fois, — 
doimhe, a. Intractable. E 
doimheachd, {tt s.f.ind. Bluffness. 1 
doimheadach,* a. Vexing, galling. Is d, an 
ni e, it is à, vexing thing. z 
doimheadas,* ais, s.m. Vexation, grief, 
doimheal, o. Stormy. - 
doimheamh,ff -eimhe, a. Vexed, grieved, sad, 
doimhne, comp. of domhain. Deeper, deepest. ` 
doimhne, s.f.ind. Depth, profundity. 2 with 
the article, The deep, the sea. D. a’ gairm 
air d., the deep calling unto the deep ; air gnüis 
fhoisneach na d., on the still face of the deep 
'san d., in deep water. 
doimhneachadh, -aidh, s.m. Deepening. 2 Act 
of deepening. 3 Fathoming. A’ d—, pr. på 
of doimhnich.: 3 
doimhneachd, s.f.ind. Depth, deep. 2**Deep- 
ness, profundity. 3**Deep water. ‘San d, 
in deep water (air an tanalach, in shallow wa- 
ter) ;ád. mhòir, from a great depth ; doimh 




















D 
e 
H 


Original from | 
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF ILLINGISS 
INTERNET ARCHIVE URBANA-CHAMPAITGNI 


doimhneachd 
neachdan na fairge, the depths of the sea. 


doimhnead, -eid, s.f. Deepness, depth, degree 


of deepness. 
doimhnich, pr.pt. a’ doimhneachadh, v.a. Deep- 
zen. 2 Hollow. 3 Fathom. 
doimhsheamh, -eimhe, a. see doimheamh. 
—dach,(PM) a. Vexed—Uist. 
T das, -ais, s.m. Vexation, chagrin. 
. doin-dearg, see donn-dhearg & donn-ruadh. 
doineach,** a, Sorrowful, sad, mourning. 2 
Calamitous. 3 Baneful. Tha ’n dùthaich 
uile d., the whole country is sorrowful, 
—as,** -ais, sm. Sorrow, mourning. 
doineann, Ann, s, f. Inclement weather, tem- 
pest, storm. 2 Storminess. 3 Force, power. 
| Thàinig d. a’ gheamhraidh, the inclemency of 
| winter has come ; gach d. ’gar léireadh, every 
8torm distressing us. 
ach, -aiche, o Tempestuous, stormy, 
blustering, Gu d., tempestuously. 
achd, s.f. Storminess. 
doineanta, a. Stormy, boisterous, prov. 2ttSul- 
len. 3 Dogged. 
doinne, s.f. Brownness, brown colour. 
, comp. of donn. Browner, brownest. 
see duinne. 
do-innse, see do-innseadh. 
do-inniste, see do-innseadh. 
do-innseadh, o Unspeakable, inexpressible, 


unaccountable. 
dointe, a. ffIntelligible. 2**Unintelligible. 
Small black insect. 


dointe,(AF ) s. 

do-iomachar, aire, v. Intolerable, not to be 
borne. 

——ach, -aiche, see do-iomachar, 

do-iomchair, -e, a. Intolerable, 

| ——eachd,ff sr Insupportableness. 

EC a. *Perverse. 2** Inconver- 
tible. 

do-iompaichte, a. Inconvertible. 2 Unconverted. 

doirb, -ean, s.f. Worm, vermicule. 2 Minnow. 
3**Any small fish. 4**Attempt. 5 in derision 
pithless, diminutive person. 6(MM) Diminu- 
tive or insignificant creature. 

eag, -eig,-an, SÉ Minnow. 

beag. 5**Worm, reptile. 

ean, see dairbeag. 

doirbh,-e, o Hard, difficult. 2 Peevish. 8 
Dissatisfied. 4 Stormy, boisterous. 5 Wild, 
ungovernable. 6 Grievous, intolerable 7** 
Quarrelsome. 8**Bitter, sour, ill-natured. 9 
Cynic. Céist dh., a dificult question ; cha 
"n 'eil i dana no d., she is neither forward nor 
peevish ; oidhehe dh., æ boisterous night ; cha 
"n 'eil mo reachd-sa d., my law is not grievous; 

. duine d., a turbulent, incorrigible person. 

| ECG comp. of doirbh. More or most diffi- 

cult. 


















































2 











2 see dair- 








, S.f. seedoirbhead. 
_doirbheach, -ich, s.m. Mischief, prov. 
doirbheachd, s.f.ind. Peevishness. 2 Difficul- 


ty, hardship. 3**Sourness. 4**Quarrelsome- 
ness. 5**Dissatisfaction  6ffRoughness. 7 
|.  *Turbulence, 8**Grievousness. 


. doirbhead, -eid, s.f. ILiardness, difficulty, de. 
gree of difiiculty,peevishness, sourness, quar- 
reiso:'neness, or roughness, boisterousness, 
indocility. ` 
) doirbheadas, -ais, s.m. see doirbheachd. 
doirbbeag, -eig, -an, s. f. Ill-tempered, cross 
woman. 
| Woirbhean, -ein, pl. -ean & -an, s.m. Chur, 
_————— ach, see doirbhean. 
 Woirbheas,-eis, s.m. Mischief. 2 Sorrow, dis- 
tress, grief, anguish. 3 Difference. 4* Diffi- 
culty. 5 Boisterousness. 6**Keenness. 7** 
Adversity. 8 Mischance. Là an doirbheis, 


Digitized by 


SDINTERNET ARCHIVE 


349 


doirneanach dhuine,(CR) s. m. 








doirt 


the day of adversity; a’ dol gud., getting ob- 
streperous or unmanageable ; ciod an d., what 
the mischief ! 
— —— —àch,** y. Adverse, calamitous, 
doirbhein, -ean, s.m. see doirbhean. 
doirbheineachd, s.f.ind. Churlishness, unami- 
ableness. 
doirch, gen. sing. of dorch, 
doirch,v.n. Get dark. Dh. an oidhche dhuinn, 
we were benighted (the night darkened on us.) 
doirehe, comp. or dorch, Darker, darkest. 
— ————, s.f. see dorchadas. 
doireheaend, s.f. see dorchadas. 
doir’-choille, -ehoilltean, s.f. Grove, forest, 
doire, pl. -an, & -achan, s.f. [m. in many places] 
Grove, thicket. 2 Insulated clump of trees, 
properly of oaks. 3 Bent timber in a boat, 
see bàta, D, p. 73. 4(DU) Swelling on young 
cattle, usually on the belly similar in nature 
toa wart. Shuidhich Abraham d. chraobh, 
A. planted a grove of trees; gach coire 's gach 
d., every wood and grove. 
dcire,} s.f. Skye & Lismore for stamh. Sea- 
girdles, oar-weed stalks. 
doireach, -iche, a. Woody, abounding in woods, 
groves or thickets. 2 Of, or belonging to, a 
grove, wood or thicket. 3* Wild. 
an, n.pl. of doire. 
doireagan,f[ s.m. Lapwing, see adharcan-luach- 
rach. 
doirean,§ s.pl. Sea-girdles—Lismore, see stamh. 
2(PM) Mange-like spots round the eyes, head, 
and neck of young cattle— Uist. 
doireann, see doineann, 
ach, see doineannach. 
——— ——üchd, see doineannachd. 
doireanta,* a. Sullen. 2**Dogged. 
doirearach, see dairirich. 
doire-oigh, s.f. Dryad. 
doiriarach,** o, Difficult. 2 Ungovernable. 
Tdoiriata, a. Lewd. 
doirionn, -inn, -an, see doineann. 
ach, see doineannach. 
achd, see doineannachd. 
doirionta, see doineanta, 
doirireach, -ich, see dairirich. 
doirling, -e, -ean, s.f. Isthmus, 2 Peninsula. 
3 Stream. 4 Gulf. 5* Islet to which one can 
wade at low water.—Mainland. 6 Pebbly or 
stony part of a shore—IJsles. 7**Promontory. 
8(AH) Narrow sound separating an islet from 
the mainland, and liable to ebb dry. 
each, -iche, a. Belonging to an isthmus, 
peninsula, gulf, stream, de 2 Abounding in 
promontories, 3**Peninsular. 
doirlinn, see doirling. 
each, see doirlingeach. 
doirneag, -eige, -an, s.f. Round stone of a size 
to fill the fist, or that can be thrown without 
inconvenience. 2 Pebble, round pebble, cog- 
glestone. 3 Oar-handle. Fras nan d., the 
shower of stones ; bho 'n is e is ni do Chlann 
Néill na doirneagan, gabhadh iad d' an ionn- 
suidh, since the property of the MacNeills con- 
sists of pebbles, let them take to them. 
— ach, -aiche, a Abounding in round 
stones or pebbles, pebbled, like a pebble, cal- 
culous, gravelly. 



















Thickset man 
— W. of Ross-shire. 


doirse, ( for doruis) gen.sing. of dorus. 


ach, -iche,@. see dorsach. 
ar, -eir, -an, see dorsair. 


doirseir, -ean, see dorsair. 


eachd, see dorsaireachd. 


doirt, pr.pt. a’ dortadh, v.a. Spill, shed, pour 


out. 2 Stream. 3 Rush forth, as a multitude. 


dòirt 350 doltrum 
4* Scatter. Dh. e'fhuil, he shed his blood ; adh deagh ghnìomh a dheantadh mur b’ea@ 





























dh., many a good deed would be done but for A 
miscarriage. $ 
dolaidh,** a. Impatient, restless. 
do-làimhseachaidh, (PM) a. Beyond control, ; 
generally applied to grown-up children— Uist, E 
dolair, (AC) v.a. Withhold. E 
dol a mach,** s.m. Carriage, behaviour, con-  . 
duct. Dé an dola mach a th’ air? what carry — — 
on has he ? ; dol a mach na cuideachd, the pro- ` 
ceedings of the meeting. - ` 
dd-lambach, -aiche, a. see dà-lànhach. 2**Nob —— 
easily handled. P 
—-—d, s.f. see da-lamhachd. A 
dolar, -air, s.m. Gaelic spelling of dollar. 
dòlas, ais, s.m. Woe, grief, mourning, 2 Mis- — 
hap, harm. 3 Dissolution, destruction, 4 B. 
Loathing, abborrence. 5 Disdain. Glen:  - 
lation. 7ttPain. 8(DU) Cause of evil. Fòg-- 
raidh e gach d., Ae will drive away all grief. 
dol as,** s.m. Escape. 
dolasach,-aiche, a. Disastrous. 2 Sad, melan- 
choly, mournful, grieved, grievous. 3 Bane- 3 
ful, hurtful. 4 Destructive. 5**Sick. Gud. . 
sadly. 1 
— —— d, s.f. Sadness, melancholy, mournful- — 
ness. 2tfTorment, pain. Ü 
dó-lasair, -lasrach, p/. -lasraichean, s.f. Inaus- — 
picious or destructive flame. 
do-lasta,** a. Not inflammable. 2 Not easily - 
blown to a fiame. 
Tfdolbh, s. Witcheraft, sorcery. 
tdolbhad, -aid, s.m. Fiction. - = 
do-leaghadh,** a. Not easily melted. 
do-leanachd, a. see do-leanmhuinn. E 
do-leanmhuinn, @. Inimitable, that cannot be . 
followed, difficult to be followed. 4 
— — ——-—eachd, s.f. Inimitableness. 
do-leantalach, -aiche, a. Inimitable. 
—d, s.f. Inimitableness. 
do-leantalaiche, see do-leantalachd. E 
do-leas, -leis, see doileas. d 
ach, see doileasach. 2 see do-leasaichte. | 
—achadh, -aidh, a. Irreparable, that cane 
not be helped. 2 Incurable. ‘ 
do-leasaichte, a. Irreparable. 2 Incurable. 
do-leigheas, -is, a. Irremediable. 2 Invulner- . 
able, 3 Incurable. Creuchd d., an incur- 
able wound. E 
—-ach,tf a. Irremediable. 7 
eachd, s.f.ind. Incurableness. 2 Ir ` 
recoverableness. a 
do-leighiseach, see do-leigheasach. 3 
do-léirsinn, see do-léirsinneach. | 
-—each, a. Invisible, dark, hidden. SÉ: 
Inexplicable. Iomadh sloc d., many, @ 
hidden gulf. E 
-—eachd, s.f. Invisibility. E 
do-leónaidh, a Invulnerable. | f 
do-leontachd, s.f. Invulnerableness, 
do-leubhadh, see do-leughta. 
do-leubhta, see do-leughta. 
do-leughadh, see do-leughte. E 
do-leughte, a. Illegible. [see foot-note p. 53.] 
chd, s. Illegibility. S 
do-lionadh,tt a. Insaturable. 2 (DC) Insa- 
tiable. P 
do-loghaidh,ti a. Irremissible. d 
E eachd, s.f.ind. Irremissibleness. | _ 
do-lorgachaidh,** a. Difficult or impossible to b& 
traced. s: 
do-loszaidh,ti e. Inremable, unburnable. -2 
(MM)Inflammable. ` A 
do-lotaidh,ff a. Invulnerable. 1 
— — .——eaehd, s.f.ind. Invulnerableness, .— 
doltrum, -uim, s.m. Griet, vexation, auguish. 
2 Terror. 3ttGloom. Gaelic spelling of doe 


A 


dh. em’ a cheann e, he poured it on his head; 
Gh. iad chun a’ chladaich, they rushed towards 
the shore ; dh. e ’fhuil air son Thearlaich, he 
spilt his blood for (Prince) Charles. 

doirte, past pt. of dòirt. Spilt, poured out, &e. 

ach, -iche, a. see dortach. 

ach, -ich, s.m. Spiller, pourer, shedder, as 

of blood. 2 Dative case in grammar. 

ach,* s.f. Flood, sudden pour of rain. 

al, eil, -an, s.m. Sink, sewer, drain. 

ar, fut. pass. of doirt. Shall be spilt. 

ar,** -eir, s.m. Spiller. 

il see doirteach. 

doirtheas, see doirbheas. 

doirtidh, fut. af. a. of doirt. 

doisheamh, see doimheamh. 

doit,tf-e, sf. Mite, small coin one-twelfth of a 
penny (Scots, doit.) 

doit,tt -e, s. f. Darnel, cockle. 

——, à. see doite. 

doite, a. Foul. 2 Dark-eoloured. 3 Grim. 

doite, a. Singed, scorched, burnt. Is d. ceann 
gach firieh, scorched are the tops 0j every hill. 

doiteachan, see daithteachan. 

doiteag,(CR) s.f. Stout little woman-—A rran. 

Doiteag Mhuileach, s.j. Celebrated Mull witch. 

doithcheall, see doicheall. 

doithcheallach, -aiche, see doicheallach. 

doithehearnas,** ais, s.m. Churlishness, nig- 
gardliness. 2 Abhorrence. 

doithir, a. Dark, gloomy, obseure. 2 Il-fea- 
tured, ugly. 3 Deformed. 4**Dull, unplea- 
sant. 5**1ll-humoured. 

tdoithir, s. Contract, covenant. 

dol, s.m.ind. Going, travelling. 2 Proceeding. 
3 Ways. 4 Walking. 5 Space, distance. 6* 
Condition, state. A’ d—, pr.pt. of rach, [Dol 
and rach have no connection etymologieally.] 
A’ dol dhachaidh, going home, dol fodha 
na gréine, the selting of thesun ; a’ d. iomraill 
air a chéile, missing each other ; a’ d. as, esca- 
ping, going out, as a fire or light; a’ d. sios, 
oing down, (of stairs and battle only) ; a’ dol 
e, descending ; a’ dol suas, going up (of stairs 
only) ; a’ dolri, ascending ; tha dol aige air 
glé mhath, he has a good grip of the matter; 
2n d. a dh’ fhàg thu air, the state in which 
you left him ; is bòidheach an d. a th’ air, it 
is in a pretty condition ; dol an t-saoghail, 
the state of the world ; chan 'eil d. as aige, 
he has no way of escape; ise seoa bu dol dhaibh 
aig gach siubhal, this was the method of their 
going at every trip they took ; mhothaich mi 
rud a’ dol mu’m chasan, I noticed that my foot 
had caught in something. 

tao], s. m. Grief. 2 Cunning. 3 Trap. 4 
Kind of fishing net. 

do la, adv. By day. 

do-labhairt, -e, a. Ineffable, unspeakable, in- 
expressible. 

-—eachd, s.f.ind. Ineffableness, 

do-labhrach, see do-labhairt. 

òlach, -aiche, a. Destructive, pernicious, grie- 
vous. 2* Indifferent. 3**Each, individual. 4 
**Single. 5 Mean, poor, wretched.— Dain I. 
Ghobha. Gach d. là, every single day ; duine 
dona d., a bad or indifferent man. 

Yolach,(AC) see dòrlach. 

Jolaid,g s.f. Oyster-catcher, see gille-bride. 

lolaidh, s.f. Harm, loss, injury, damage, de- 
fect. 2 Detriment. 3*Mischief. Cuir a dh., 
ruin , spoil the well-being of ; is beag an d., it 
is no great harm ; dé an d. a rug ort P what the 
mischief came over you ? cha’n "eil d. ann, 
there is no harm done 5 is sàmhach an obair| t 
dol a dh., going to ruin is silent work. ; is iom- | 





















































———— t 














Original fram A | 

Digitized by l z : 

| | 1 v UNIV : og 
INTERNET ARCHIVE J R ` ^ NA: S $ "T y" E 


. doltrum 
d» uns. ) 


doltrumach,** -aiche, a. Grievous, vexatious. 
Unspeakable, unutterable, 


do-luaidh, .e, a. 
unmentionable, 


to be milled. 


do-!uasaichte, a. Inadmissable. 





Stubbornness, inexorableness. 
do-lübadh, see do-lübaith. 


do-là;aidh, -aidhe, a. Stubborn, obstinate. 2 


Intiexible, 
do-lubtachd, 
doluidh, -ean, 


rigid. 
see do-lübachd. 
see dolaidh. 





, uim, s. m. Wretchedness, 
Poverty. 3tfMurinuring. 

ach, -aiche, a. 
Iudigent, 

dolus, see donas. 

do ’m (for doam) To their, 
Do 'm bailtibh, to their towns. 







































m' mhathair, to my mother. 





House, 


corn, &e. 





jurious, 
fdomain, a. Transitory. 


. rarely Speech. 
domar,(MM) Badenoch for domail. 
domblachd,* see doinhlachd. . 
domblas, eis, s.m. Choler, gall, anger. 2 | Bile, 
biliousness. [Preceded by the article an. | 
ach, -aiche, a. Biliary. 2 Disgustful. 
3 Ill-tempered. 4**Unsavoury. 5**Choleric. 
> achd, s.f.ind. Bitterness, 2 Nauseous- 
ness. 3 Turbulence of temper, choler. 
fdomblas ae, Bitterness of liver, bile. 2tTAn- 


ger. 
domblas-àighe,tt s.m. Gall-bladder. 
domblasda, a. see domblasach. 
chd, see domblasachd. 
domblas-sàth,* s.m. Gall-bladder. 
ae, -iche, same meanings as diom- 
ach. 
tdombuileach, -iche, a. Prodigal, wasting. 
. domh, prep. pron. To me. Cha’n fhios domh, 
I know not. 
tdomh, s.m. House. 
domhach, -aich, -aichean, s.m. Savage. 
 dómhail, -ala, a. Bulky, corpulent, thickset. 2 
Crowded. 3 Dense. 4 Clumsy. 5 Inconve- 
nient. 6 Suffocating— Dàin I. Ghobha. 7(AH) 
Pregnant. Taigh d., a crowded house ; dubh 
dh., dark and dense; gun bhi meanbh no d., 
without being puny or bulky ; cuideachd d., 
a crowded company; Mod nau Criochan Dòmh- 
|. ail, the Congested Districts Board. 
domhaileachd, s.f.ind. Lustiness. 
domhain, doimhne, o. Deep, profound. 
. Double-minded. 3**Hollow. 
—, gen. sing. of domhan. 
domhainn, see domhan. 
. domhainneachd, see doimhneachd. 
do-mhaithidh,tt a. Irremissible. 
do-mhaithte, a. Irremissible, unpardoned. 
domhalachd,** s.f, Crowdedness. 2 Bulkiness. 
doinhalas,** -ais, s. m. Crowd, throng. 2 
Crowded condition, 














9** 





Digitized by 


MP INTERNET ARCHIVE 


851 


do-luaidhte, (PM)a. Unwaulkable, impossible 


do-lubachd,** s.f.ind. Inflexibility, stiffness. 2 


dòlum, a, a. Surly, morose, peevish, 2 Mean, 


penurious. 3 Rigid. 4 Searce, poor— Dàin 
i. i bh O "n bha thusa d. as thou wert 
surly. 


misery, ill. 2 


Wretched, miserable. 2 


[Not of their.] 
dom'(fordo mo) To my. [Not of my.] Do 
dom, -a & duim, s.m. Gall, gall-bladder. 12** 


domail, -e & -alach, -ean, s.f. Loss, damage, in- 
Jury, *particularly damage by cattle, as to 


each, -iche, a. Hurtful, causing loss, in- 


domairm, s,f. Armoury, magazine, depót. 2** 


dona 


domhan,-ain, $.m. The world, the universe, 
the globe. [Preceded by article an.) An d. 
'S na bheil ann, the universe and all it contains; 
and. mu "n iadh grian, the globe round which 
the sun revolves ; Righ an Domhain, the King 
of the World. 
— -Sgriobhadh, -aidh, s.m. 
domhar, see idobhar, s. 
do-mharbhadh, see do-mharbhte. 
do-mharbhte, a. Immortal. [see foot-note p.53.) 
do-mhearachdas,tt -ais, s.m. Infallibility. 
do-mheasgaichte, see do-mheasgaidh. 
do-mheasgaidh,]f a. Immiscible. 
-—eachd, a. Immiscibility. 
do-mheasraichte,tf a. Incalculable. 
Tdomhghnas,** s.m. Inheritance, patrimony. 
f— ——————, a. Hereditary. 
Se ert a. Imperdible. ?(PJM) Indestruo- 
tible. 


do-mhineachaidh, a, Inexplicable. 

————-—eachd, s.f. Inexplicableness. 

dòmhlachadh, -aidh, s.m. Thickening, crowd- 
ing. 2 Crowd. 3 Affluence. A’ d—, pr. pt. 
of dòmhlaich. 

dòmhlachd, s.f. Bulk, thickness. 2 Crowd, 
throng. 3** Weight. 4 Clumsiness. D. 
shluaigh, o large crowd of people. 

domhlad, -aid, s.m. Girth. 

————as, -ais, s.m. see dómhlachd. 

dòmhlaich, pr.pt. a’ domhlachadh, v.a. Crowd, 
2 Assemble, gather in crowds. 3 Swell, in- 
crease in bulk. 4t+Thicken. 

domhlas, ais, s.m. see dòmhlachd. 

Tdomh-lios,** s. m. House surrounded by a 
moat or watered trench as a means of de- 
fence. 

dómhluich, see dómhlaich. 

Domhnach, -aich, s.m. Sunday. see Di-ddmh- 
naich.  2** rarely Church, great house. 3 
Lord. D. Càisg, Easter Sunday ; D. Inid, 
Shrove Sunday ; D. Caingheis, WhitjSunday. 

domhnach, -aiche, o Sabbatical. 2 Lament- 
able, sad. 

Tdomhnus, s.m. Place of residence. 

do-mhogullach, see dà-mhogullach. 

do-mhothachaidh,** a. Imperceptible. 2 Cal- 
lous, unfeeling. 

do-mhùchadh, -aidh, a. Inextinguishable, nob 
easily smothered. 

do-mhuinte, a. Intractable, indocile, perverse, 
21r Unlearned. 

domhun, -mhuinne, o see domhain. 

do-mhunaidh, a. see do-mhuinte. 

do-mhüthaidh,ff a. Intransmutable, inconvere 
tible. 2(PJM) Unchangeable. 

domlas, -ais, see domblas. 

domlas-sath, see domblas-sath. 

Tdon, s, Water. ] 

don, -a, s.m. Defect, want. 2 Mischief, evil. 

D. bidh ort! 4 betide thee (lit. may you 


want food.) j 
To the. 2 To their. [Not 


do ’n, ( for do an) 
d n. Make worse. 2 Deteriorate. 


of the, oftheir, which is de 'n.] 
don,* v.a. 

- Don-bidh, don-fhardaich, vile food, wretched 
hearth. 



















Cosmography. 











dona, 1st. comp. dona, 2nd. comp. donaid, 2rd, 


comp. donad. a. Evil, bad. 2 Contemptible. 
3**Sad.  4**Dangerous. 5**Awkward. 6** 
Mean.7 **Pusillanimous. 8** Unlucky, un- 
fortunate. A’ dhonainn dh., the good-for-no- 
thing wretch ; an dubhra d., the sad darkness ; 
a dhonainn dhona ! oh  good-for-nothing 
wretch ! bu dona mo ghnothach ris, it were not 
for me to tackle it, not in my province, it were 
presumption on my part. 


Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILI 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


EN EF pg AT 
INOIS Al 


donachas 


Govachas, -ais, see donas. 

donad, -aid, s.m. Degree of badness or vile- 
ness. 

donadas,-ais, s.m. Badness, evil. 2** Miser- 
ableness. 3 Contemptibleness. A’ dol an d. 
deteriorating. 

donadh,-aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Hurt, evil, mis- 
enief. 

donadh, a. see dona. 

donaich,** v. a. Deteriorate, 
Hurt,damage. 3 Make bad or worse. 
troy. 

donamhare,** s. Naughtiness. 

donas, -ais, s. m. Mischief, harm, hurt. :..2 
Bad luck, mishap. 3 The Devil. 4 Worthless 
fellow. 5* Badnsss. Thad. fo theangaidh, 
ihere is mischief under his tongue ; a dhonais 
chrìne ; you little devil ! ; thoir an d. ort ! go 
to the devil! ; cha bhi d. toirteach, a worthless 
fellow is not ready to give ; thig am d. ri iom- 
radh, spzak of the devil and he will appear ; 
an d. bonn a bhiodh agam, devil a coin would 
I have ; tha "n d. ort, the devil is in you. 

donasach, -aiche, a. Cross. 

donasan, -ain, -an, s.m. Littie devil or mischief. 

don-fhois,Tf-e, s.f. Intranquillity. 

dongaidh, -e, a. Moist, humid. 
gaidh in Lewis.—PJ M.] 

don-inuleachd,tt¢ s.f. Indexterity. 2(PJ M)Re- 
sourcelessness. | 

don-ionnsachadh,(PJM) -aidh, s.m. Naughti- 
ness, bad-breeding. 

don-iunnsaich, see don-ionnsachadh & don-ionn- 
saichte. 







































depreciate. 2 
4 Des- 


[pron, ton- 





te,(MMcD) a. Bad-mannered, im- 





pertinent. 

don-mathais,(CR) s.m. Bad requital for labour 
or kindness.—W.of Ross-shire. 

don-mhodh,if-a, -an, s.m. Incivility. 

üonn, duinne, &. Brown, brown-coloured, 2 
Brown-haired. 3 Surly, bad-tempered. 4* 
Indifferent, bad. 5**rarely Pregnant. 6 Dun. 
Diarmad d., brown-haired D. ; nighean d. an t- 
sugraidh, the brown-haired flirting girl ; each 
d., a bay horse ; cha’n 'eil ann ach duine d., 
he is only an indifferent man ; le sgiath duinn 
na doininn, with the dusky wing of the storm ; 
is tu a’s duinne de "n triùir, you are the green- 
est of the three ; dìreach d., instantly. 

donn, pr.pt. a’ donnadh, v.a. Imbrown, make 
brown. 2 Bronze. 3 Grow brown. 4ttSinge. 
Nuair a dhonnadh na speuran, when the hea- 
vens were darkened. 

donnachadh, -aidh, s. m. 2 
Growing brown or dun. 

donnadh, (a’), pr. pt. of donn. 

donnag, -aige, -an, s.f. Large kind of cockle. 
2 Hose-fish. 3 Young ling (fish.) 4 Hedge- 
sparrow, see gealbhonn-nam-preas. 5**Brown 
cow. 6 Drab, slut. 7{{Brown-haired woman. 
[ex. under doimeag.] 

donnaich, v. see donn, v. 


Embrowning. 


donnal, -ail, -an, s.m. Complaint. 2 Howl of 
a dog. 2 Loud cry. 
donnalach,** a. Apt tohowl. 2 Howling as a 


dog. 

donnaladh, -aidh, see donnalaich. 

donnalaich, pr.pt. a’ donnalaich, a’ donnalach- 
adh & a’ donnaladh, v.a. Howl or bark as 
a dog. 2**Yell. 

——, s.f. Continued howling, slow drawl- 
ing barking. 2 Loud wail. 3 Burst of lam- 
entation. 4**Yell. A’ d—, pr.pt. of donnal- 
aich. Ciod an d.a th’ ort? what are you 
howling for ? 

donnan, -ain, s.m. (Bird) see donnag. 

donn-chleachda,** sm. Brown-haivr.. 





Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


352 


doun-chleaehdach,** a. Brown-haired. 
donn-dhearg, 
donn-eun, s.m. Hedyge-sparrow, see gealbhonne 


donn-ghlas, o. 
doun laogh-na-h-éilde, s.m. Fawn-brown colour, 
donn-lus,$& s.m. Figwort, see lus-nan-euapan, 
donn-ruadh,-ruaidh,a.Bay orchestnut-coloured, — . 
donn-rusg,$ s.m. Bird-cherry—prunus padus. ~ —— 
donn-shüileach, a. Brown-eyed. 
donn-uaine, s.f. Olive-brown colour. 
donus, -uis, 
do oidhehe, (a dh’ oidhehe) By night. 
do-phàirteachaidh, a. Incommunicable. 
do-phianta,ff a. Impassible. 

—— —-—chd, s.f. Impassibility. 

fdor; s.m. Door, confine. 

dora, see dorra. 

dorachar, see dorchar. 

Tdoradh, 
doraghadh,((AQ) s.m. see dorghadh & dorghach. 
doraidh,** s.f. 


dóraman, 


dorchraich 


o see donn-ruadh. 


nam-preas. 
Ash-eolour. 


see donas. 


-aidh, s.m. Line, rule. 


Strife, dispute, conüroversy, 
wrangling. 


doraingeachd,** s.f. Forwardness. 
dòrainn, see dòruinn. 


— ————each, see dòruinneach, 

eachd,tt s.f. Torment. 

see dòrraman. 

—_—_——ach, see dorramanach, 

doran, see dòbhran. 

doran, -ain, s.m. see dorran. 

ddran-donn, see dobhran. 

dorangach, -aiche, a. Froward. 

doran-leas-leathann, (AF) s. m. see dòbhran- 
leas-leathann. 

do-rannsachaidh, a. Inserutable,unsearchable. 

do-raunsaichte, see do-rannsachaidh. ) 

idorar, -air, s.m. Conflict, scuffle, battle, 

doras, see dorus. 7 

dorathach, see dorghadh. 

dorbh, doirbh [& duirvh] see dorgh. 

dorbhach, see dorghach. 

dore, s.m. Piece. 

dorean,** s.m. Yearling 

dorch, -a [& duirche,] a. Dark, black, dusky. 
2* Mysterious, doubtful. 3 Obscure. 4 Proud. 
5* Gloomy. 6**Stern. (ist. comp. dorcha or 
duirche ; 2nd. comp. dorchaid or duirchid ; 
2rd. comp. dorchad or duirchead.] Is d. do 
mhala ’s duirche do ghné, dark is thy brow 
and darker thy temper ; oidhene dnubü dh., @ 





vw 


bull-calf. 


pitchy dark might ; asgailt dh. na h-iargailt, — j 


the black bosom of the storm. 
dorch, v.q. see dorchaich. 
dorcha, Ist. comp. of dorch. 
dorchachd, see dorchad. 


d df - 
4 ^f i 
DPA m 


A d H 


— «us | 
P H 


et 
as 
ON 


dorchad, -aid, 3rd. comp. of dorch, & s.m. Dark- Ei 


ness. 


dorchadas, -ais, s.m. Darkness, degree of darke- — 
ness. 2 Obscurity. 3 Gloominess. 4 Duski-  . 


ness. 5 Mysteriousness. 


dorchadh, -aidh, s.m. Darkening, obscuration, E 


2 State or act of darkening.  3** 


5**Darkness. 


shade. 
Gloom. 4**Eclipse. 


a’ d., his sorrow darkening. 
dorchaich, pr. pt. a’ dorchadh, v.a. 
cloud, obscure, shade, 
Œ uiw’ an d. thu laithean na h-aois ? why wilt 
thou darken the days of age ? 4 
te, past pt. of dorchaich. Darkened, ` 
clouded, obscured, shaded, sullied. X 
dorchaid, 2nd. comp. of dorch, |, 
dorchar,(AC) s.m. Darkness. 2 Dark man. 
dorch-chainnt, -e, s.f. Ambiguity in speaking. 
each,** a. Ambiguous. l 





DH 
j 








| dorchraich,(DU) Gairloch form of dorchaich, 4 


» 
= 


" 
Original from $ 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOISA 

URBANA-CHAMPAIOGNA 


tifying. A' d—, pr.pt. of dorchaich. A bhròn - 


Darken, — 
sully. 2**Grow dark. | 


Gr Mys — 







dorch-thuigseach 


dorch-thuigseach,ft -eiche, «. Blind of under- 
standing. 

dór-chü, see dóbhar-chü. 

dord, see dùrd. 

—ail, see dùrdail. 

dordalan, see durdalan. 

dórdan, see dùrdan. 

dordha, see dorcha. 

chd, see dorchadas., 

dór-dhuille,** s.m. Folding-door. 2 Leaf of a 


door. 

- do-reamhraichte,(PM) a. That;cannot be fat. 
tened— Uist. 

do-reicte,(PM) a. Unsaleable, unmarketable— 


- Uist. 

do-réidhtichte, see do-réitichte. 

do réir, prep. According to, agreeably to. Do 

| réir t’ iarrtais, according to your request. 

| do-réiteachaidh, a. Implacable, irreconcil- 
do-réiteachail, able, not easily disentan- 

gled, not easily made clear, smooth or level. 

| 

| 

| 








do-réiteachas, -ais, s.m. Irreconcilability, im- 
placability. 2(PJM) Inability to disentangle. 
do-réitealachd, s.f. see do-réiteachas. 
do-réitichte, a. Irreconcilable, implacable. 
do-reothaidh,t} a. Incongealable. 
do-riarachadh,tt a. Insatiable. 2 Ungovernable, 
dorga,** a. Despicable. 2 Crusty. 
` sz gee dorgh. 
dorgadh,** -aidh, s. m. 
ing-net. 
dorganach,** a. Recusant. 
dorganta,** a. Discourteous, surly. 


see dorgh. 12 Fish- 





271. Dorgh. 
dorgh, duirgh, s.m. Handline for fishing, as 
applied to the whole arrangement by means 
. of which a piece of wire or whalebone is 
used to connect the lines to which the hooks 
are attached with the line held in the hand. 
12 Mason's line. 
[also spelt dorbh, dorga, dro, drobha, and 
drogha.] 
PARTS OF A HANDLINE (DORGH) :— 
1 Sreang. In Gairloch, streang, part of line 
held in the hand. 

. 2 Bodag, loop of string at each end of meigh. 

3 Meigh, piece of streng wire. 

4 Clach-luaidhe, lead. 

5 Cas-ghaoisid, part of line attached to hook, 
usually in two parts, each called snothd. 

6 Dubhan, hook. 

4 Snaim, snaime-gaoisid, knot. 

8 Snathgaladh, the thread wound round the 
cas-ghaoisid and dubhan, to attach the lat- 
ter to the hair line. 

9 Clarag,square frame,on which line is wound, 

10 Crócan, or gdbhlag, fork-shaped twig, barked 
or otherwise, for the same purpose. When 
neither frame nor twig is used, the line is 

oe hanked and called conn. 

8 Dk ch, -aich, s.m. Act of fishing with hand- 

nes, | 


6 —ÀÀÀMÀM ie 





Digitized by 


RSINTERNET ARCHIVE 


353 








dorn-chur 


dorghach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to hand 
lines. 2(DJM) Bottom-fishing. 

dorghadh, -aidh, s.m. see dorghach, 8. 

do-riaghlachadh, see do-riaghlaidh. 

do-riaghiaichte, see do-riaghlaidh. 

do-riaghlaidh, a. Ungovernab'e,unmanageable. 

do-riarach, see do-riarachaidh. 

—aidh, æ. Insatiable. 2{{Insaturable. 

3 Surly, discontented, peevish, ungovernable, 

—d, s.f.ind. Surliness, peevishness, dis- 
content, insatiateness. 

do-riaraichte,same meanings as do-riarachaidh. 

do-riarthachd, see do-riarachd. 

do-riaruicht:, see do-riaraichte. 

dorlach, -aich, s.m. Handful. 2 Bundle, good 
deal, considerable quantity or number, 
Sheaf of arrows. 4 Quiver. 5 Hilt of a sword. 
er Cluster. 7/(MMcL) Sheaf of corn. [D. eòrna 
was 60 sheaves.] D. sluaigh, a number of peo- 
ple ; d. airgid, a handful of money ; d. sil, @ 
handful of corn. The dorlach was a kind, of 
truss or wallet worn of old by the Gael 
in the army in place of the knapsack or 
valise. 

dorn, duirn, s.m. Fist. 2 Blow or box with the 
fist, buffet. 3 Hilt, haft, handle. 4* Hold 
of an oar. 5 Short cut or piece of any- 
thing.  6**Agonist. Lana dhuirn, his hand- 
ful ;an d. cli, the left fist ; thuge d dha, he 
gave him a box or thump ; chaidh d. air 
ghaisge, d. air tréine, 'us d. air thapachd, an 
uair a chaidh na tri duirn an ceann a chéile, 
1 called up any utmost energies, pulled myself 
together, and Zeit strengthened. [Duirn, & dorn 
and its compounds, although given in all the 
dictionaries as d&irn and dorn, should be 
written without the accent, for it is the li- 
quids rn that are long, and not the u and ol 

, pr. pt. a’ dornadh, v.a. Thump. 2 Strike 

with the fist. 3 Box. D. e, bow him. 

.—- ach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to fists. 

-——ach, -aich, s.m. see dornair. 

.——-achadh,** -aidh, s.m. Boxing. 2 Bruising 
with the fist. 

._—-adair, see dornair, 

dornadaireachd, see dornaireachd. 

dornadh, -aidh, s.m. Striking or thumping with 
the fist. 2 Act of striking, thumping or boxing. 
A’ d—, pr.pt. of dorn. 

dornag, -aige, -an, s.f. Glove, gauntlet. 2 see 
doirneag. 

dornaich, see dorn. 

dornaiche, ti -an, s.m. Pugilist. 

dornaidh,** s.f. Narrow channel of the sea, 
where it lows and ebbs, and where at full 
tide, a vessel can be towed to either side of 
the harbour. 

dornair, -ean, s.m. Boxer, pugilist. 

eachd, s.f. Pugilism, boxing. 2 Bruis- 

ing with the fists. 3 *Thumping. Làmhainn 

d., a boxing glove. 


dornais, s. Link. 

dornan, -ain, -an, s. m. Small fist. 2 Small 
handful. 3 That part of an oar grasped in 
the hand in rowing. 4 * Handful of lint. 5 
(AC) Glove without separate fingers. 6(AC) 
Handful of corn cut with one stroke of the 
reaping-hook. 7{{Sheaf of barley. 8(MMcD) 
Small rope with eyelets in each end, which 
goes round the head-post in a byre, and to 
which the neck-rope of a cow is tied, the end 
being reeved through the eyelets.—Lewis. 9 
**3mall bundle. 

ach,tt a. Pertaining to small fists. 

dornasg,** see dorn-nasg. 

dorn-chül,** -chüil, s. m. 

dorn-chur,** -chuir, s.m. 3word-hilt. 














see dorn-chur. 
2 llaíb or 


cmd 
Epi 


Original from 
UNIVERSI ILLINOIS AT 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


dorn-chur 854 dosgainn 
handle of any bladed weapon. 3 Oar-handle. | dòruinn, -e, -ean, sf. Pain, torment, anguish, 


Ca d. an déidh na loinne, the haft after the 
blade. 
dorn-churaidh,** s.m. Pugilist, pugilistic cham- 


pion. 

dorn-fhüar,(MMcL) s.». The feat of twisting a 
cow’s foot off without cutting the skin. 

dorn-gheal, -ghile, a. White-handed, 

dornlach, see dorlach. 

dorn-locar, -air, -an, s.f. Hand-plane. 

dorn-nasg, -naisg, s.m. Bracelet. 2 Manacle. 

do-roinneadh, see do-roinnte, 

do-roinnte, a. Indivisible, not easily divisible. 

———achd,tf s.f.ind. Imparity. 2 Imper- 
viousness, 

doromhach,(DJ M) -aich, s.m. see dorghach. 

dort, a. see dorrach. 

Tdorr, s.m. Anger. 2 Displeasure. 
harsh. 

dorra, Ist. comp. of duilich. More or most diffi- 
cult. 2 More or most sorry or vexed. 

dorrach, -aiche, a. Rough, rugged. 2 Austere. 
3**Surly, uncivil. 4**Cruel. 

dorrachd,** s.f. Harshness of temper. 2*Surli- 
ness. 3 Austerity. 4 Ruggedness. 5 Cruelty. 

dorrad,** -aid, s.m. Badness. 2 Difficulty. A’ 
doland., growing more or most dificult. 

dorradas, -ais, s.m. Hardship, difficulty. Tha 
d. agam air a shon, I am sorry for him. 

dorraid, 2nd. comp. of duilich. 

dorraman,* -ain, s.m. Person alone, hermit, re- 
cluse—A rgyll. 

—ach, a. Of, or pertaining to, a hermit. 

————achd,*s.f. Hermitage. 2 Living or 
wandering alone, seclusion, 

dorran, -ain, -an, s. m. Vexation, anger. 2* 
Offence ata trifling cause. 3* Anguish, men- 
tal heaviness. Trom dh. nan laoch, the deep 
wrath of the heroes. 

ach, -aiche, a. Galling, vexatious. 2 

Angry, vexed. 

achd,tt s.f.ind. Difficulty. 2 Pettish- 
ness. 

——-—aich, pr. pt. a’ dorranachadh, v.a. Vex, 
gall, grieve. 

dorrda, see dorrach. 

dorrtha,** see dorrach. 

dorsa, n. pl. of dorus. (for dorsan.) 

dorsach, -aiche, Full of doors. 2 Open. 8 Ob- 
noxious. 4* Exposed to the blast, as a house, 
field of corn, d'G 

dorsaiche,* s.f. Exposure to the blast. 2 Ex- 
posed situation. 

dorsair, -ean, s.m. Door-keeper, porter. 

eachd, s.f.ind. Door-keeping, office of 

a porter. 2 Porterage. Bu docha leam a bhi 
(ri)d., I had rather be (at) door-keeping. 

dorsan, n.pl. of dorus. 

,-aln, sm. see diurrasan. 

.————-ach, a. see dorsach. 

——-— -lidhaidh, s.pl. Folding-doors. 

dorseir, see dorsair. 

dort, see dòirt. 

dórtach, -aiche, &. Ready to spill or shed. 2 
Spilling, dropping. 3 Not water-tight.  4* 
Not keeping or retaining. 6**Barren. Brù 
dh., a barren womb. 

dortadh, -aidh, s.m. Spilling, shedding, pour- 
ing. 2 Act of spilling, shedding. 3 Very heavy 
rain. 4** Rusning forth. D. fola, bloodshed, 
2 an issue of blood. A’ d—, pr. pt. of dòirt. 

tdorubha, -n, s.m. Line. [see dorgh.] 

do-ruigheachd, see do-ruigsinn, 

lo-ruigsinn, -e, a. Unattainable, approachless, 
that cannot be reached. 2 Difficult to be 
reached, inaccesible. 

——--—eachd,ft s.f.íind, Inaccessibility. 


a. Indocile, 











NTERNET ARCHIV 


vexation, perplexity.  2**Tribulation.' 

Danger. D. is dorran a’ chléibh, the anguish 

and trouble of his breast. 

each, -iche, a. Pained, tormented, exe 
eruciatiag. 2**Dangerous. 3**Perplexed. 4 
**Perplexing. 6* Tormenting. 6**Wretched. 
7 Vexed. 

—--—eachd, s. f.ind. Painfulness, torment, ane 
guish. 2**Calamity. 3**Wretchedness. ` ` 

fdorum, -an, s.m. Mean wretch. 

dorus, -uis, dorsan, s.m. Door. 2 Wicket gate. 
3 Opening. 4 Orifice, as of a wound. Duin 
an d., close the door ; deoch-an-doruis stirrup- 
cup ; neasgaid làn dhorsan, a boil full of 
orifices ; failte na circe mu ’n àrd-dhorus, the 
hen’s salute at the lintel ; cha do dhùin d. nach 
d’ fhosgaild., no door ever shut but another 
opened—i. e. when troubles come, a way will 
be provided to meet them, or when one aspect 
of a matter is settled, another appears. 

—— a’ chadha, s.m. Middle door, door be- 
tween the front door and that of the kitchen, 

—— —— beòil, s.m. Front door of a house, 

—— —— cairte, ssm. Back of a cart. 

cathamh, see dorus a’ chadha., 

——— cùil, s.m. Back ofa cart. 2 Back door 
of a house. 

iat,(:MMceL) Back-door. 

—— —]lüdhainn, or lüdhaidh, s.m. Folding 
door. 

—— -— mór, s.m. Front door of a house. 

dos, dois, pl. dois & dosan, [n. pl. of Nos. 6 & 7 is 
generally duis.] s. m. Bush, thicket. 2 
Anything bushy. 3 Cluster. 4 Tuft. 5 
Plume, bow, cockade. 6 Hunter’shorn. 7 
Drone of a bagpipe. 8 Antler of a deer. 9 
Bunch of hair. 10 Forelock. 11 Tassel. 
Mane. 13**Bramble, 14**Froth,scum. 15 
figuratively Thick body of men. 16(DU) figu- 
ratively Attentiveness, watchfulness, expec- 
tation. 'S ann ort a tha 'n d., ! how expectant 











you are ! ; dosan nan ruadhag, the thickets of — 


the roes ` dosan nan carn, the bushes of the 
rocks ; d. na ceann-bheairt, the plume of the 
helmet ` gleadhraich nan dos, the skirling of 
the pipe-drones ; d. de 'n t-sioda, a tassel of silk. 

dosach, -aiche, a. Bushy,full of bushes of thick- 
ets. 2 Branche. 3 Plumy. 4 Tufty. 5 Having 
a flowing mane. 6 see dosgainneach. 7(DC) 
Haughty. Uaill dh., unreasonable pride. 

dosaich, v.a. & n. Plume. 

fdósal, see dùsal. 

dosan, -ain, -an, s.m. Little bush. 2 Little 
clump or tuft, as of hair or heath. 3 Plume. 
4** Mane. 5 n. pl. of dos. 6f[Tassel. 7 Hair 
on the forehead. 8 Cluster. 

dò-san, see dà-san. 

dosanach,** a. Ful of little tufts. 2 Full of 
thickets. 3 Bushy. | 

dosanachd,ff s.f. Bushiness. 

dosan-banntraich, s.m. Braid. | 

dosdan, -aiu, s.m. Kind of food given to horses. 

dosgach, -aiche, a. Calamitous, unfortunate, 
liable to accidents or damage.  2** Sad, 
mournful, deplorable. 3**Morose. 

dosgadh, see dosgaich. 

dosgaich,* -ean, s.f. see dosgainn. 

dosgaidh, -ean, see dosgaich. ~ 

dosgaidheachd, s.f. Moroseness. 2 Wrong. 3 
** Mischief. 4**l'roublesomeness. 5**Sadness. 
6 *Extravagance. 


dosgainn, -ean, sJ. Misfortune. 2 Loss of cat- . 


tle. 3 Accident. 4 Damage. 5 Liability to 
damage or misfortune. 6**Trouble, mischief. 
Gu’n éirich d., that mischief may arise. 
Uist applied solely to loss of farm-stock, par- 


Original from 


ILLINOIS 


UNIVE 


m e | e ef, 2 E 
[^ ell | | il LI 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGM 





à , UA a 
x "ës L^ 


gev ` 


N 
< LEI x 
= 


12 





In ` 


ef 





Kei 7 
EN A 


E E dua d E 


* 
= 


= 


2 
mm 


4 


af. Zë 


" 
A 


= HEET, 








TP , TW 


L 


- 
"vo a * Weiser * 


KI 


dosgainn 


ticularly cattle or horses.—(PM) 
dosgainneach, -niche, 

misfortunes, ill-fated, calamitous, 
———d, t sj. Privativeness. 
do-sgàinteachd,ff s.f. Imperviousness. 
do-sgairte,a. Inseparable. 2 Not easily sepa- 


rated. 
do-sgaoileadh, -idh, æ. Indissoluble. 
| do-sgaoilte, a. Noteasily spread. 2 Insepara- 
| ble. Indissoluble, 4 Inevitable. 
| do-sgaraidb,ff a. Indiscerptible, inseparable. 
| —_—_—_——-eachd, ft s.f. Indiscerptibility. 


hurtful, 





do-sgaranta, see do-sgaraidh. 
—chd,ft see do-sgaraidheachd. 
do-sgarradh, a. see do-sgaraidh. 
do-sgartha, see do-sgaraidh. 
do-sgathach, -aiche, a. Improvident, extrava- 
gant, profuse. Gu d., improvidently. 
do-sgeul,** -sgedil, s.m. Fictitious tale,romance, 
novel. 
do-sgioblaichte,(PM) a. Unadjustable, as dress 
— Uist. 
do-sgrioste, (see foot-note, p. 58) æ. Indelible. 
2(PJ M) Indestructible. 
do-sgrüdaidh, e, a. Unsearchable, inscrutable. 
dosguidheach, o Extravagant. 
| dosguidheachd, s.f. Extravagance, 
| dosguinn, see dosgainn. 
dosguinneacb, see dosgainneach. 
do-shaithte,tt o, Impenetrable.’ 
Ra a. Inimitable. 2 Unsurpass- 
able. 
^ do-shamhlachas.tt ais, s.m. Inimitability. 
do-shàrachaidh,ff a. Indefatiguable. 
do-sharte, (see foot-note p. 53.) a. Troublesome, 
difficult. 
do-sharuichte, a. Indefatigable. 
do-shàsachaidh, æ. Insatiable. 
do-shasaidheachd, s.f.ind. Insatiableness. 
do-shàthaichte,(PM) a. Insatiable. 
do-sheachanntach, see do-sheachanta. 
C NER a. Inevitable, unavoidable, 
atal. 
do-sheachnach,t{ see do-sheachanta. 
do-sheachnachd, s.f.ind. Infallibility. 2( PJM) 
Inerrancy. 
do-sheachnadh, a. see do-sheachanta. 
do-sheallte, (see foot-note p. 53.) a. Invisible. 
. 2(PJM) Indemonstrable. 
do-shedladh, -aidh, a. Unnavigable. 2 That 
cannot be guided or directed. 
do-shior, adv. Always, continually, for ever. 
do-shiubhal, a. Impassable, not easily travelled. 
do-shiubhalachd, s.f.ind. Impassableness. 
do-shiubhlach, æ. do-shiubhal. 
do-shlanachaidh,f{ a. Cureless. 
` do-shonrachaido,tt a. Indeterminable. 
do-smachdabh, -aiche, a, Ungovernable, 
do-smachdachadh, -aidh, a. Incorrigible, ob- 
stinate, stubborn, unmanageable. 
do-smuainteachadh, -aidh, a. Inconceivable,in- 
comprehensible, difficult to be understood, 
do-smuaintichte, a. Incomprehensible. 
do-spionaidh,ff a. Inextricable. 
do-spionte, (see foot-note p. 53.) a. Not to be 
rooted out. 2**Unsearchable. 
do-spriochta,** a, Stubborn, untractable. 
dosrach, -aiche, a. Bushy, branchy. 2 Plumy. 
3*Tufted, plumed. 4* Luxuriant, flourishing, 
as corn, trees, &c. A’ cinntinn gu d., growing 
luxuriantly ;ite dosrach an fhirein, the eagle’s 
plumy feather. 
dosraich, -e, s.f. Luxuriance of branches, tufts, 
. or plumes. 2 Buffeting, as of water. 


— 








row. 4* Branching appearance. 
ering. D. thonn, the buffeting of waves. 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 





955 


a. Unfortunate, liable to 


do-thollaidh,ir a. 


Tdothuar, 





3 Ris- 
ing and foaming, as of water against a ship's 
5** Floun- 


drabasda 


dostan, -ain, s.m. see dosdan. 

do-stiuraidh, o Untractable, unmanageable. 
2 Not easily steered. 

dot, see dod. 

dotaman,s.m. see dotuman, 

dotarra, a. Sulky. 2(PM) Smart in appear- 
ance (applied to old people)— Uist, 

doth, -a, a. Doting upon one. 

doth, pr.pt. a’ dothadh, v.a. Singe, scorch,burn. 

dothach,tt e. Singed, scorched. 

dothachadh,(PM) s.m. Well seasoning, as of 
corn or hay—Uist. Arbhar air a d,, well-sea- 
soned corn. 


dothadh, -aidh, s.m. Singeing, scorching. A’ 
d—, pr. pt. of doth. 
dothag,** -aig, s. f. Slight singeing, slight 


scorching. 

dothaman,(AH) s.m. Puny, shiftless, spiritless 
person, milksop, one who cannot say "bo" to 
o. goose. 

dothan, see domhan. 

tdothar, see fdur. 

+dothar-chlais,** s. m. Conduit, water-pipe, 
channel. 

do-theagaisgeach, -eiche, o Indocile. 

————-.-— ————4, s.f.ind. Indocility. 

do-theagaisgte, a. lndocile. 

do-theagasg, -aisg, @. Indocile, intractable. 
2**Unteachable. 

do-theannachaidh,{f o, Incompressible. 

U UTNE —eachd,ti s. f. Incompressibi- 





lity. s 
do-theanntachail, see do-theannachaidh. 
do-thiomnaidheach,ff -eiche, æ. Intestible. 
do-thionndaidh,tf a. Inconvertible. 
do-thiughachaidh tt a. Incoaguable. 
do-thogail, a. Ditficult to be lifted. 

cult to be reared. 


2 Diffi- 


do-thograidh,T] e. Censorious, hypercritical, 


difficult to, please. 
Unpierceable, impenetrable, 
as a suit of armour. 


do-thomhaiseachd, s.f.ind. Ymmensurability. 
do-thomhaiste, a Immeasurable, 
do-thomhas, 


-ais, @. Immeasurable, immen- 


surable, difficult to measure, 


do-thraighte,(PM) a. Undrainable, that can- 


not be exhausted, as a well. 


do-thraoghadh,11 a. Inexhaustible. 
do-thraoghaidheachd,ff s. f. ind. Inexhaustibi- 


lity. 


dothta, see dóthte. 


ddthte, (see foot-note p. 53.) past pt. of doth. 
Singed, scorched, burned. 

s. f. River. for dobhar, 

do-thuigsinn, -e, @. Unintelligible, hard to be 

understood. Cuid denithibh d., some things 

hard to be understood. 
——each, -eiche, a. Incomprehensible. 
eachd, s.f.ind. Incomprehensibility. 
dótuman,fi -ain, -an, s.m. Whirligig. 2 Boy's 
top. 

do-uair, -e, -ean, s. f. Unfavourable weather, 
stormy weather. 2 Evil hour. 3**Blight. 
Is caoin do bhlàth, ach isfagus d., thy blos- 
som is sweet, but the blight 4s near. 

douran, see dòbhran. 

drab,* s.f. Offal. 2 see dràbag. 

+drab, s.m. Spot, stain, blemish. 

drabach, -aiche, a. Dirty, nasty, slovenly. 2 
Oozy. 

drabag, -aige, -an, s.f. Slattern. 2 Obscene- 
tongued female. 

drabair, -e, -ean, s.m. Dirty, slovenly fellow. 

drabaireachd, s.f. Slovenliness. 

drabas, see drabhas. 

drabasda, a. Dirty, obscene, filthy, smutty, 








Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF 
JAN E ia L wr 


‘SITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


drabasda 


drabasdachd, s.f.ind. Obscenity of language, 
smuttiness. 2**Uncouthness, 

drabh, -aibh, s.m. Draff, grains of malt after 
the juice isextracted. 2**rarely Cart. 3(PM) 
Untidy person— Uist. '"Nuair à bhitheas a’ 
mhuc. sàthach, cinnidh an d. (or an treasg) 
goirt, when the sow is full, the draff grows 
sour. 

drabh, v.a. & n. Dissolve. 2 Solve. 3 Decay. 
4*Scatter, as a multitude. 5 Bulge, as a wall. 
[Gaelic form of draw.) 

dràbh,* sm. Ruin. Chaidh edo dh., [or 'dh.] 
he has gone to pigs and whistles or ruin. 

dràbhach, -aiche, a. Rifted, fissured. 2 HI. 
cemented. 3ftDiverging. 

drabhachd,(AC) s.f. Debauchery. 2 Indelicacy. 

drabhadh, -aidh, s.m. Separating, as a crowd. 
2 Dissolving. 3 Running out. 4 Decaying. 
5 Act of separating, separation. 6 Bulging, 
asa wall. A’ d—, pr.pt. of drabh, 

dràbhag, -aige, -an, sf. Dregs, lees, sediment, 
refuse. 2 Little filthy slattern. 3*Market 
thinly attended. 4* Scattered multitude, 

-shiucair, s.f. Treacle, 
ach, -aiche, a. Full of dregs, foul. 

** [Like leesor sediment. 

drabhailt, s.f. Grain-holder, for feeding the 
mill ue grinding corn—Lewis. [also trabh- 
ailt. 

drabhais, s.pl. Dregs—Dàin I. Ghobha. 2 (PJM) 
Off-scourings of society. 

drabhall, see draibhill. 

drabhas, -ais, s.m.  Filthiness of speech, smut. 
2 turbulence. 3 Filth. 4 Foul weather. 5 
(PM) Filthy man— Uist. 

-—ach, -aiche, a. Foul, turbulent (of wea- 

ther.) 2 Filthy, indelicate,obscene (of speech.) 

achd,** s.f. Filthiness of speech, ob- 
scenity. 

lrabhasaich,ff v.a..Bespurt, make foul. 

irabhasda, see drabasda. 

lrabhe,(CR) s.m. Lazy or stupid worker—W. 
of Ross. 

lrabhluinn, -ean, s.m. Trifler, idler. 2*Ab- 
surdity, sheer nonsense, 

——each,* -iche, 

sensieal. 

——each, -eich, s.m. Absurd person. 

——eachd, s.f.ind. Drollery, ludicrous 
exhibition, absurd conduct, farce, prov. 

jràc, dràic, -an, s.m. Drake. 

——ach,** a. Abounding in drakes, like a drake. 
An coire d., the dell abounding in drakes, 

dradh, -a,s.m. see dragh. 

ais, Gaelic spelling of drawers. 

drag, -aig, see dreug. 

+drav-aigheann, -aighne, s.f. Fire-shovel. 

dragart,** -airt, s.m. (drag+art) Flint. 

tdrag-bhod,** -bhuid, s. The constellation the 
Little Bear. 

dragh, s.m. The rope of straw or hay, which 
keeps the ends of the heather-rope loops in 
their places on a thatched roof. 2 (DU) Line 
attached to a fishing-rod, fishing (rod) tackle. 

dragh, -a, s.m. Trouble, vexation, annoyance. 
Na cuir d. air, do not trouble him ; cha ruig 
thu leas a’ dhragh sin a ghabhail, you need 
not be at the trouble ; ged éireadh d., though 
trouble should arise; cha bhi uaill gun d., 's 
cha bhi sinn a’ draghadh ris [NGP gives rithe, ] 
pride is not without trouble, so we won't be 
troubled with it. 

dragh, pr. pt. a’ draghadh [& a’ draghachadh,] 
v.a. Part, separate. 2 Gaelic form of drag. 

draghachadh, see draghadh, (1). 

draghadair, see draghair. 


2 








a. Absurd, very non- 











NTERNET A 


d I 


"i +e 
ARCHIVE 


356 
indelicate. 2**Uncouth. 3(MMcL) Crabbed. | draghadh, -aidh, s.m, Parting, separating. 



















draghalach, -eiche, 


draghlainn,ft 


dragon, -oin, -an, s.m. Dragon. 
dràib, Se 








dram 


2 
Dragging, pulling. A’ d—, pr.ot. of dragh. 


draghail, -ala, a. Troublesome, vexatious, an- 


noying, teasing. 


draghair, -ean, Gaelic spelling of dragger, and 


hence of dray. 
3 Teasing fellow. 4**Troublesome fellow. 


———-eachd, s.f. Gaelic form of dragging. 


—eachd, s.f.ind. Teasing, troubling, an- 
noying. 8 


draghaistich,* v.a, Drag in an absurd or child- 


ish way [Eng. word.] 
see draghail. 
--—d, s.f.ind. Troublesomeness, annoy- 
ance, teasing. 
2 Mess. 


s. f. Slovenly person. 
prov. 
2tt Paper kite. 


see dràbag. 
each, a. see dràbach. 


draibh, gen & pl. of drabh. 

draibhill, (PM. s.m, Most untidy worker— Uist. 
draic, 
dràic, -ean, sf. Slattern, drabbish, unthrifty 


see draig. 


person. 


-——each,** see dràiceil. 
-——ealachd, s./f. ind, Sluttishness, drabbish- 


ness. 


-——eil, a. Sluttish, drabbish, unthrifty. 
draig,** s.m. Spendthrift, unthrifty person. 


2 
(AF) Dragon. Bhiodh sonas aig d., Pam 
faigheadh e mar dhòrtadh e, the spendthrift 
would be happy, if he got as he squandered, 


draigh, see droigheann., 


T 


-bhiorasg, -aisg, s.m. Fuel. 
eann, see droigheann. 
ionn, see droigheann. 











draighearnach, see droighneach. 
draighile,tt s, f. ind. "Yrollop, draggle-tail. 
draighneach,* s.f. Lumber. 


2 Absurd deten- 
tion. 3 see droighneach. 4**Loud rumbling 


noise, as thunder. 


draighneag, see droighneach. 
draillseanach, 
draillseanta, 

draillsein, see trillsein. 


see trillseineach. 


—each, -iche, a. see trillseineach. 


draimheas, -eis, -an, s.m. Foul mouth. 


—ach, -aiche,a. Having a foul mouth. 
drain, -e, s.m. see dréin. 
eag, see gràineag. 
draing, -e, s. f. Snarl, snarling. 2*Grin. 3** 








Peevishness. Chuir e d. air rium, he snarled at ` 


me. 

draingeag,(DC) s.f. Peevish, fault-finding wo- 
man. [The ng is elided in speech—drai’ag. } 

draingean,(DC)s.m. Peevish, fault-finding man. 

draingeanta,** a. Snarling, cross, peevish. 

——chd,** s. f. ind. Peevishness. 2 

Snarling. 3 Cross, peevish temper. d 

draingeis,* s. f. Sparling, carping. 2 Child- 

ish bickering, 

————each,* a. Grinning. 3 

Bickering. 

drainn, s.m. see dréin. 2 see droinn. 

draint,** sf. Snarl. 2 Peevishness. 

draip, -e, s. f. Hurry. 2 Strait, difficulty. 3 
Confusion. 4 **Vexation. 5**Calamity. 6** 


2 Snarling. 


Slut. 

draipealachd, s. f. ind Hurriedness. 2 Confus- 
edness, embarrassment. 

draipeil, -ala, a. Hurried. 2 Confused, em- 
barrassed. 


dràis,** s.pl. Gaelic spelling of drawers. 


H 
iaat 


drallainn,(AH) s.m. Man who works or talks — 


without method. 
Hiram, s.m. Much, plenty. 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOISSE 


URBANA-CHAMP ALGAE 


A Ee 






















-drannd-eun, -eoin, s.m. Humming-bird. 


dram 


dram, -a, 
D. mar linig cléibh, a dram to line the thorax; 
tachas an drama, itching for a dram ; leitb- 
sgeul an drama, an excuse for a dram ; na 
gabh an dram gun fhios, do not make o pi &c- 
tice of taking drams secretly. 

--—ach,t+t a. Abounding in drams. 

—-ach,(DC) s.m. Mixture of meal and water. 

dramag, -aige, -an, $.f. Foul mixture. 2** 
Dram of spirits. 3 ‘‘ Crowdie." [1 gives dram- 
aig as nom,sing.] 

dramaig, -e, -ean, see dramag. 

fdramh, s.m. Wry-mouth. 

dramhd,tiv.n. see drannd, 

an, see dranndan. 

dràn, see dàn, 

drànag, see dan. 

drand, see drannd. 

drann,* s.m. see drannd & dranndan, 

drannadh, -aidh, -ean, s.m, Grinning. 2*Word, 

drannag, see dronnag. 

drannd, -a, -an, s.m. Small quantity, the least 
bit. 2 Word, syllable. 3 Chirp. 4**Hum, 
murmur. 5f Snarl. Cha d’ fhuair sinn d., not 
a word was said to us ; cha chluinn e d., he is 
stone deaf. 

dranndail, s.f. Grumbling. 2 Snarling. 

dranndan, -ain, s.m. Hum, humming, as of 
bees. 2 Snarling, growling. 3 Grumbling, 
bickerinz, murmuring. 4 Whistling of the 
wind. 5 Querulous complaint. 6* Teasing. 
7**Gurgling. 

—————— -teallaich, s.m. Fireside grumbling, 
domestic jarring. 

ach, -aiche, @ Humming, inclined to 
hum. 2 Grumbling, murmuring, complain- 
ing, querulous, prone to grumbling, inclined 
to murmur or grumble, 3 Growling, snarl- 
ing. 4 Buzzing. 5 Envious. 6 Gurgling. Am 
beach d., the buzzing bee ; alltan d., a guig- 
ling brook. 

dranndanachd, s.find. Grumbling, compiain- 
ing, murmuring, querulousness 2 Hum- 
ming. 3 Buzzing. 4 Snarling, growling. 5 
*Guregling noise, as of a brook. 

dranndanaich, s.f.ind. see dranndanachd. 

tt v.n. Buzz, hum, 

[Pre- 











ceded by the art. an.] 
drannd-sgàit, s.m. Lewis for dronn-sgait. 
draoch, -aoich, s.m. Hair standing on end. 2 
Pale, fretful, or ghastly look. 3 see driuchd. 
draoidh, -ean, see drüidh. 
each, -iche, a. see druidheach. 
each, Ach, s.m. see drùidheach. 
eachd, see drüidheachd. 
——neach, -ich, s.m. see drüidhneach, s. 
draoightear, Ar, s.m. Enchanter. 2 The Evil 
One.—Dain I. Ghobha. 











‘fdraoilinn, s.f. Tediousness, delay. 2 Inacti- 


vity. 
üraoin, s.m. see dréin. 2 (AC)Sculptor. 
draoisg, -e, -ean, see braoisg. 
—-each, see braoisgeach. 
draoitheachd, see drüidheachd. 
draoluinn, -e, s.f. Drawling, tediousness, delay. 
—-—-each, -iche, a. ‘Tedious, drawling, in- 
active. 
—eachd, s.f.ind. Prolixity. 











| draonnag,* see dronnag. 


raos, -aois, s.m. 
nity, ribaldry. 


Trash. 2 Filth. 3**Obsce- 








357 
-annan, s.m. Dram. 2 Drachm weight. 


dreagail 


draosdair, -ean, s.m. Whoremaster. 

draosdaireachd, see draosdachd. 

draoth,** -a, s.m. Pull, tug, pluck. [ Zng.draw.] 

draoth,* -aoith, s.m. Good-for-nothing person, 
humdrum, wastrel, spendthrift. 2 One shame- 
lessly vicious or profligate. 931i see drùidh. 

draothadh, -aidh, s.m. Twitch. 2 Pulling, 
tugging, plucking. 

drapuinn,f s. Tape. 

dràs, see dràsda. 

dràsda, (an dràsda—for an tràth seo) adv. Now, 
the present time, at this time. 

drasdaich, (an dràsdaich) prov. for an dràsd.: 

drathainn, see dreathan-donn. 

drathais, -ean, s.f. Gaelic spelling of drawers. 
2* Old patched pair of trousers. 

fdré, s.m. Gaelic spelling of dray. 

dreach, pr. pt. a’ dreachadh, vo, Figure, de- 
lineate, shape. 2 Adorn, polish, dress. 3 
Colour, paint. 

dreach, -a, -an, s.m. Form, figure, image, shape. 
2 Fashion, appearance. 3 Seemliness, beauty. 
4 Colour. 5 Aspect. 6 Vision. 7 Hue of the 
complexion. 8* Probability. Air chaoch- 
ladh d., in a different form or shape ` or a’s 
deirge d., the purest-coloured gold; deud air dh. 
cailce, teeth as white as chalk; air dh. an fhith- 
ich, having the appearance of a raven, as black 
as araven. 

dreachach, -aiche,** o. That dresses or polish- 
es. 2 Polishing, figuring, delineating, adorn- 
ing. 3 Ornamental. 4 Drawn, figured, de- 
lineated. 6 Fair, handsome, of good appear- 
ance. 

dreachadair, -ean, s.m. Painter. 2 Sculptor, 
statuary. 3**Dresser. 4**Polisher. 

——eachd,** s.f.ind. Occupation of a 

painter, or statuary. 2 Polishing. 3 Dress- 
ing, ornamenting. 

dreachadan, -ain, s.m. Mould. 

— —————ach,tta. Pertaining to a mould. 

dreachadh, -aidh, s.m. Portraiture. 2 Polish- 
ing, dressing, adorning. 3 Figuring. 4 Act 
of pourtraying, polishing, &c, A’ d—, pr. pt. 
of dreach. 

dreachail, -ala, a. Comely, good-looking, hand- 
some, personable, having a good appearance, 
showy. 

dreachalachd, s.f.ind. Comeliness, handsome- 
ness, personableness. 

dreach-bbuidhe, @ Beautifully yellow. 

dreachar, prov. for dreachmhor. 

dréachd, -an, s.f. see dreuchd. 

dreachd, -an, s.f. Wile, trick, stratagem, prov, 

Tdreaechd, s.f. see. dreach. ,2 Poem 

]dreachda, s.m. "Troop. 

tdreachdaire, -an, s.m. Historian. 

dreachlagh,(MMcL) s.m. Change of appear- 
ance. Thug ed. air, he made its appearance 
change. 

dreach-lübach, -aiche, a. Serpentine. 

dreach-mhin, -e, a. Beautifully smooth. 2 At- 
tractive, mild. 3 Graceful. 

dreachmhor, -mhoire, a. Comely, graceful, 
handsome, shapely, showy, specious. 

achd,** s.f. Beautifulness. 

tdreacht, s.f. Poem. 2 Draught. 3 Pattern. 

dreadhan, -ain, s.m, see dreathan-donn. 

dreug, dreige, s.f. Meteor. 2 Falling star. 3 
Fireball. 4 (AH) Corpse-eandle, 6(DU)Por- 
tent. Cruas na creige is luathas na dreige, 
the hardness of the rock and the speed of the 





draosda, o. Obscene, smutty, lewd. 2(MMcL)| meteor. 

m - Ugly-looking— Harris. ; tdreag, v.a. Fight, wrangle. 2 Certify. 3** 
E chd, s.f.ind. Smut, obscenity, ribaldry,| Signify, give notice. 
thiness, lewdness. fdreagadh,** -aidh, s.m. Advertisement. 
= il, -ala [& -aille,] a. see draosda. dreagail, -ala, a Meteorological. 
Original from 
C Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
BINTERNET ARCHIVE URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 





us 


dréagan 





dréagan, s.m. Gaelic spelling of the Scots pro- 
nunciation of dragon. 

dreaganta, a, 
ling, captious, peevish. 

—chd,** s.find. Captiousness, wrang- 

ling, peevishness. 

dreaghain, see droigheann. 

dreaghann, -ainn, see dreathan-donn. 

dreagon, -oin, s.m. see dragon. 

drea'l, -ill;, s.m. Blaze, torch. 2 see droll. 

drealiach,ff a. Abounding in door-bars. 

dreallag, -aige, -an, s.f. Swingle-tree, prov. 2 
Swing forplay. 3 Any swinging machine. 4 
Absurdity. 

dreallaire, An, s.m. Idler, saunterer, lounger. 

-——achd, s.f.ind. Idling, sauntering. 

dreallaman, (AH) s. m, Unskilled, awkward 
workman. 

dreallan, dim. of dreall. 

dreallanaiche, -au, s.m. Augur, seer. 

dreallan-doininn,łt s.m. Stormy petrel. 

dreallan-teasbhuidh, see dredlan-teasbhuidh. 

dreallsach* -aich, s. m. Blazing fire. 2 The 
face blazing with liquor. 

dream, s.m.ind. Tribe. 2 People, folk. 3 Fam- 
ily. 4 Company, band. 5 Handful, as of corn. 
óttDistorted mouth. 7 Bundle. Gluaiseadh 
gach d., let every tribe advance ; an d. a bha 
diùth do 'n bhàis, the people who were near 
to death ; chimi mo dh., I see my band ; is 
rioghail mo dh., my race is royal—motto of 
the MacGregors. 

dream, v.a. Grin, smile distortedly. 2 Snarl. 

ach, -aiche, o Grinning. 2 Snarling. 3 
Peevish, morose, boorish. Dh’ fhagadh tu 
suairc fear d., you would make a surly man 
mild. 

—-——achd, s.f.ind. Moroseness, peevishness, 
boorishness, 

--———adh, -aidh, s.m. Grinning, snarling. 2 
Act of grinning, A’ d—, pr. pt. of dream. 
ag, -aig, -an, sf. Handful, as of hay or 
corn, used as a decoy for a horse, 2 Peevish 

female. 

aiche, s.f.ind, Peevishness, moroseness. 

————aiche, comp. of dreamach. 

———alr, -ean, s.m. Barker. 2 see dreimire. 

dreaman, -ain, s.m. Madness, furiousness. 2** 
Fit of passion. 3**Fanaticism. 4 Handful, 
as of hay or corn. 5** Climax. 6(PJM) Irri- 
table, snarling person. i 

».-———— ach, -aiche, a. Mad, frantic, furious. 
2 Fanatical. 

dreamanaiche, see dreamanach. 

dreamasach, -aiche, see dreamach. 

dream-ehraos, -aois, s. f. Distorted, snarling 
mouth. 

dreamasgal, see dreamsgal. 

fdreamhnach, -aich. s.m. Fop, coxcomb. 

Tdreamhnach, -aiche, o. Perverse, foolish. 

dreamlach, -aiche, a. see dreamlainneach. 

dreaimniainu, sf. Snarling, grumbling. 2 Grin- 
ning. [*Used for drabhluinn in Skye.] 

each, -iche,  «. Morose, peevish, 

















snarling. 


dreamsgal, -ail, s.m. Heterogeneous mass. 2. 


(DU) Rubbish of any kind. 
—ach, -aiche, a. Foully mixed, hetero- 

geneous. 

tdrean, -cin, s.m. Strife, debate, wrangling. 2 
see dreathan. 

tdrean, o Bad. 

dreanach,** g, Despicable. 

dreang,* s.f. Snarl, girn. 2 Girning express- 
ion of conntenance. 

dreang,* v.t. see dream, v. 

dreangad,(AF)s. Flea. 


D ig tized py 


INTERNET ARCHIV 


358 


Fierce, perverse, cross, wrang- 


dreasarnach, -aich, 


dreaste, Gaelic spelling of dressed. 


dreathan, -ain, s.m. Wren, 





dreimire- gorm 


dreaneaire,* sm. Snarler. 
RER sf. Snarling. 
dreangan, -ain, -an, s,m. Snarler, 2 Trifii 
eee tiresome, peevish kee te 
—acn, -aiche, a. Snarli abli 
BER arling, grumbling, 
ee see dreangad. 
reann, s.m. Haste. 2 Contention battle 
3 Grief, pain, 4 Skirmis ; 
In a. Good. soie. 
tdreannach, a, Repugnant, opposite 
perverse. 2 Contentious, án duech 
dreannad, -aid, s.m. Rashness, 
dreap, see streap. 
air, See streapair. 
Cer see hte doen 
reas,y drise, an, s.f. “Brier, brambl i 
E 2** Place, stead. Geet 
reas, v. Gaelic spelling of dress. Air an 
RE dreasadh,”’ (! D dressed up, decorated, 
dreasach, "ache, o. see driseach. 
dreasadh, see under dreas, v. 
MEI “alg, -an, s.m, Little brier, little bram- 


dreasail,** s.pl. Shreds. 2 Small teats, 
,-ala, a. see driseil. 
dreasamhuil, -ala, a. see driseil. 


dreasar,(AH) s.m. Gaelic spelling of kitchen 
dresser. 











s.f. see:drisearnach. 
dreas-choill, -e, see dris-choill. 
dreas-chubhraidh, see dris-chübhraidh. 
dreasgaidh, -e, a. see driseach. 
dreas-nan-smeur, see dris-smeur. 

Anartan 
d., dressed linen. 

see dreathan-donn, 
An d. talcarra, the plump wren, 


dreathan-a’-chinn-bhuidhe, -ain-, s.m, Golden- 


crested wren, see crionag-bhuidhe. 





272. Dreathan-donn. 

dreathan-donn, -ain-, s.m. Wren—traglodytes 
vulgaris. 

dreathlann-donn, see dreathan-donn. 

dreibhse, see treis. 

dreicis, Gaelic spelling of dregs. 

dreige, gen.sing. of dreag. 

dreigeas, -eis, s.m. Grin. 2 Peevish face. 

—.ach, -aiche, a. Cross-grained, peevish. 

dreigeil, (PM) o Perverse, cantankerous. 
Duine d., æ perverse man—Uist. 

dreigeis, (PM) a. Perverse. 

dreigeiseach, see dreigeasach. 

fdreim, s.f. Endeavour. attempt. 

tdreim, v.n. Climb, clamber, scramble. 

dreimear,** s.m. Climax. 

tdreimhne, s.f. Warfare. . 

füreiniire, -an, s.m. Ladder, stair. 2 Scrambler, 
climber. 

dreimire-bnidhe, s.m. Yellow centaury, yellow 
wort$—cAiora perfoliata. [Not found in Scot- 
tish Gaeldow.] 

dreimire-gorm,$ s.m. Woody nightshade, bitter 
sweet, dulcamara, felon-wood—solanum dul- 
canada. 





/ 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS ATS 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


l 
1 


RE EE, eg nm 
rä A Joni sq gal H - 


dreimire-Muire 
dreimire-Muire, s.m. Dwarf tufted centaury, 
see dreimire-mara. 
dreimire-mara,$ s.m. Dwarf tufted centaury.— 
erythroea littoralis. 
dreimisg duine, s.m. Peevish 
dréin, -e, -ean, s. f. Grin. 2** 
Grinning. 3 (TS) Snarling 
expression. 
dréineach, -iche, a. Griuning. 
dréineag, -eige, -an, s.f. Grin- 
ning female. 
dreingein, see dreangan. 
dreis,-e, -ean, s.f. see dris. 2 
W. of Ross for greis. 
. dreisd, Gaelic spelling of dress- 
ed. see dreaste. 
dreiseag, see greiseag. 
J dreocam, -aim, s.m. The erg: 
ing of deer. 2 **Purring. 
dreochail, (AC) pr. pt. AT d., SUP 
floundering. 273. Drevmire-mara. 
dreddag, see streddag. 
dreddan, -ain, s.m. Little louse. 
fdreogh, v.a. & n. Rot. 2 Wear out, 
fdreoighte, past pt. of dreogh. Rotten. 
dreóolan, -ain, s.m. Silly, inactive person, see 
droll. 2++Dwarf. 3 Wren, see dreathan-donn. 
-teasbhuidh, -e, s.m. Grass-hopper. 
——_—-ach,** a. Silly. 2 Like, of, or belong- 
ing to, à wren. 
———achd, s.f.ind. Silliness, triflingness. 2 
Imbecility. 
dreoli, -a, s.m. Paltry, worthless fellow. 2 
see dreall. 
an, -ain, see dreolan. 
——-—anachd, see dredlanachd. 
dredllau-teasbhuidh, see dredlan-teasbhuidh. 
dreos, -edis, s.m. Blaze. 2 Taper. 
-——ach, -aiche, a. Blazing, pertaining to a 
blaze. 
dreosgach, (CR) a. Open, loosely-woven, as can- 
vas.—W. of Ross-shire. 2(PJM) Having a 
rough surface. 
dreos-theine, s.m. Blazing-fire. 
dreuchd,t s. f. ind, Trade, business. 2 Office, 
duty. D.an t-sagairt, the priest's ofice ; luchd 
d., ofice-bearers, officers. 
-——-——— ach, -aiche, see dreuchdail. 
ail, -ala, a. Official. 2 Fond of office. 
3 Of, or belonging to, office. 
dreuchd-chainnt, -e, -ean, s.f. Cant, 
dreug, see dreag. 
dreug, s.f. Mare, old and done. Bheir seann 
dreug bhan na bhitheas dh’ oighreachdan air 
Bealach chun na Cille, an old white worn out 
mare will carry all [the last of ] the heirs of 
Taymouth to the tomb. 
dreugan, -ain, see dragon. 
driachadach,** a. Stiff. 2 Inflexible. 3 Ob- 
stinate. | 


man- Lewis. 























driachadaich, s.m. Stiffness. 2 Inflexibility. 
3 Obstinaoy. | 

driachaire, -ean, $. m. Persevering, patient 
plodder. 


—ach, a. Stiff. 2 Inflexible. 3 Ob- 

stinate. 
—achd, s.f.ind. Patient plodding. 2 

Stiffness. 3 Inflexibility, 4 Obstinacy. 
driachan, -ain, s.m. Persevering, constant la- 
1 bour, plodding, drudgery. 2 Obstinacy. 
——-— ach, -aiche, a. Sickly, peevish, ailing, 
VW fretful. 2ttPlodding. 
achd, s.f.ind. Sickness. 
3ttPlodding. 4ftfBotching. 
— driamlach, -aich, -aichean, s. f. Fishing-line, 
line for a fishing-rod, made of old from the 
long hairs of a horse's tail twisted together. 2 





2 Fretfulness. 








Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


359 





driothlunn 


Tall, clumsy, disproportioned feliow. 3 Sea- 
laces, kind of seaweed.—chorda filum. 

+drib, s.f. Filth. 2 Snare. 3 Danger. 

tdribhieach, eich, s.f. Cowl. 

dric,(AF)s. Dragon. 2 Winged serpent. 

drifeag, -eige, An, sj. Hurry, confusion, tu- 
mult. 

dril, -e, s.f. Drop, as of dew or rain, sparkling 
in the sun. 2 Spark, twinkle. 3 Glimpse. 4 
*State of being slightly intoxicated. 

dril,** v.n. Drop, drizzle. 

drileanach, a. Shining, sparkling. 

drilleach,t+ a. Abounding in drops or sparks. 

- , sm. Anything sparkling. Cho chubh- 
raidh ri übhlan a’ ghàraidh air drilleachan 
cuirteil, as fragrant as garden apples on spark- 
ling dishes of erysial, 

drilleachan, -ain, s.m. see trill- 
eachan. 

drillin, see drithleann. 

neach, see drithleannach. 

drillsein, see trillsean. 

drilseach, -iche, a. Radiant, dazzling, glitter- 
ing. 2 Drizzling, dropping, rainy, dewy. 3* 
Glimmering. 4 Flashing. Na sradan d. 'thig o 
'chruidhean, the flashing sparks that come 
from his shoes—Filidh. 

drilsean,* s.m. see trillsean. 

ach, see trillseineach. 

drim, droma, see druim. 

drimneach, -iche, a. Of many heights. 2 Stri- 
ped, streaked. 3 Parti-coloured, pie-bald. 4 
Rivbed, as stockings. 

driobaid, -e, -ean, s.f. Drop. 

driobhail-drabhail, adv. Hurly-burly. 

driobhuun, see droigheann. 

driodairt, (forin of driod-fhortan) Trifling acci- 
dent, mishap. Cha d éirich d. do neach, no 
mishap befel aione—Sgeul.-nan-caol, p. 92. 

driodamhartan, -ain, s.m. see driod-fhortan. 

driodar, -air, s.m. Lees, dregs, refuse. 2 Corrupt 
matter. 3 **Gore. 

— — ——-ach, -aiche, a. Dreggy, full of lees. 2 
** Gory. 

dxiodartha, a. see driodarach. 

driod-fhortan, -ain, s.m. Misfortune, trifling 
mishap, or disappointment. 2 Anecdote. Ag 
innseadh dhriod-fhortan, relating anecdotes. 

-- ach,it a. Unfortunate. 

driod-shtileach,* a. Having a twinkling eye. 

driog, -a, -an, s.m. Drop. 2 Tear. 3 see 
triuthach. 

driog, v.a. Drop, distil. 

driogach,tf a. Dropping slowly. 

— — —.4d, s.f.ind. Distillation. 

driogair,-ean, s.m. Distiller. 

driom, see druim. 

drioman-dubh,(AF) s.m. 

white back. 

driongam, s.m. (DC)Disputing. 2(TS)Drinking. 
’S tra ’chaidh sinn gu driongam, 'tis quickly 
we set to disputing— Duanaire, p. 22 

driongan, (CR) -ain, s.m. & pr.pt. Pottering, 
trifling. Thae a’ d. fad an la, he is pottering 
about the whole day—W. of Ross. 

driongan, -ain, s.m. Slowness. 

-—ach, -aiche, a. Slow, tardy. g Un- 
ceasing. 

.——— —üach, s.m. Slow, tardy person. 

-—achd, s.f.ind. Slowness, tardiness. 

driop,** v.a. Climb. 

driop, s.m. see drip, 1. 

driopail, a. see dripeil. 

driopall, -aill, s.m. Mixture, anything confused. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Confused. 

driothlag,* -aige, s.f. Glimmering fire. 

driothlunn, -uian, see drithleann, 


Oyster-eater, 





-— 











Black cow having a 











Original from 
IVERSITY OF ILLINOIS A 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


ec -—fa, Q. 


NTERNET ARCHIV 


driothlunnach 


ariothlunnacn, -aiche, a. see drithleannach. 

drip, -e, s.f. [* gives s.m.] Bustle, hurry, haste, 
confusion. 2 Want. 3 Affliction. 4 Snare. 
{* says, snare intended for another but en- 
snaring the author of it.] 5 Combat, fight. 
6* Predicament, perplexity. ‘Trath thuiteas 
daoidh ’san drip, when the wicked fall into 
the snare ; daoine faoine an drip, foolish men 
in perplexity ; cha’n fhacas riamh mue gun d. 
oirre, you never saw a sow that was not in a 
hurry. 

dripeil, -eala, a. Hurried, busy. 2 (DC) Indus- 
trious, assiduous— Uist. 3 Confused, embar- 
rassed. 4 Unfortunate. 5 Indigent. 





274. Dris. 

dris, e -ean, s. f. Common b:amble, brier, 
blackberry or thorn.—rubus fructicosus. [The 
badge of a branch of Clan Maclean.—§] An 
d. a’ fas guh-urar, the brier freshly growing ; 
an aite dhroigheann agus dh., instead of 
thorns and briers ; mar theine dh.,asa@ fire 
of thorns ; am fear a théid ’san droighinn 
dhomh, théid mise 'san d. da, who aoes through 
the thorns for me, I will go through the briers 
for him ; ge milis à mhil, co dh’ imlicheadh 
bhàrr na dris i? sweet as is honey, who would 
lick ti off the brier 2 

dris-choill, -e, -choilltean, 
s.f. Thicket of briers or 
brambles. 

dris-chabhraidh,§ s f.Sweet 
brier or eglantine.—rosa 
rubiginosa. 

driseach, -siche, a. Bram- 
bly, briery, thorny. 2 
Prickly. 8 Cross, fretful. 

driseachan,(AF) s.m. Blood - ` 
pudding, formerly given ' 
to the family water-car- 
rier when a sheep was 
killed. — 275. Dris-chàübhraidh. 

driseag, -eige, -an, s.f. Small bramble or brier, 
2 Little fretful female. 

ach,tt a. Abounding in little thorns, 

driseamhuil, o. see driseil. 

drisean, n.pl. of dris. 

Thorny, brambly. 2 Cross, fret- 
ful. Gu d., /retfully. 

drisearnach, -aich, s.f. Thicket of brambles or 
briers. 2 Place where brambles or briers 
ZTOW. 

eei -eala, a. Prickly. 2 Thorny. 3 Full of 
riers. 

drisleach, s.f. Ach, see drisearnach. 

-— ————, a. See drilseach. 

dris-mhnine,§ s.f. Common bramble, see dris. 

dris-omeur,} s.f. Common bramble, see dris. 

dritheanaich, s.pl. Spasms-——4Arran, [Preceded 
by the art:ele na.] 

tdrithle, s.f. Sparkle. 

drithlean, -ein, -an, s.m. 








Rivet, 


Digitized by 


869 


droch-abhaist 


drithleann, -inn, s. m. Sparkle, flash, ray. 2 
Radiance. 

ach, -aiche, o Sparkling, gleaming, 
glistening, flashing. 

drithlich, v.a. Sparkle, flash, gleam, shine. 

drithlinn, see drithleann. 

--—each, d. see drithleannach, 

drithlis, -e, -nan, s.f. Sparkle. 

driubhlach, -aich, s.m. Cowl. 

driucan, -ain, -an, s.m. Beak, snout. 2*Incis- 
ion under one of the toes—Islay & Lewis. 

driuch,* s.m. Activity, energy. 2**Peevish 
look. 38 Peevishness, fretfulness. 4 Hair 
standing on end, 5**Beak, snout. Cuir d. 
ort, bestir yourself. 

,** s.n. Stand on end, as the hair of the 

head. 

adh,** s.m. Standing on end, as the hair 

of the head, 

ail,* -ala, a. Active, lively. 

jdrinchal,** -ail, s.m. Anger. 

Tdriuehail, a. Angry. 

driuchalach,** a. Angry, fretful, peevish. 

d,** s.f. Angriness, fretfulness, pee- 























vishness. 

driuchan,* -ain, s.m. see triuchan. 

driuchanach,* -aiche, a. Striped. 

driùchd, -an, s.m. see drùchd, 2**Hair stand- 
ing on end, 

driùchdach, see drùchdach. 

drra ehang (triuch-chasd) Perthsh. for triuth- 
ach. 

driuchd-a’-mhonaidh, see druchdan-monaidh. 

driuchdach, -aiche, a. see druchdach. 

driuchdail, -ala, a. see drüchdach. 

driuchdan, see drichdan. 

driug, -a, -an, s.f. see dreug. 2(CR) Any ill- 
ness, the name and cause of which are un- 
known. Ghabh e d., he had [or took] an illness, 

driülagan, s.m. Mishmash. 

dro, s,m. see dorgh. 

drobh, -oibh, -an, s.m. Drove of cattle. 2 Mar- 
ket—Lewis, 8 Crowd. 4**Calvacade. Thig 
d. nam mart, the drove of cattle shall come, 

drobha, see dorgh. 

drobhach,tf a. Full of cattle-droves. 

drobhach, see dorghach. 

dròbhair, -ean, s.m. Drover. 2 Cattle-dealer. 
3* Man at a market. 

eachd, s.f.ind. Business of cattle-deal- 

ing, occupation of a cattle-dealer. 2* Saun- 
tering at a market. 

drobhlas, -ais, s.m. Profusion. 2**Misery. 

-—ach, -aiche, a. Profuse. 2 Miserable, 
pitiable, 

droch, a. Bad, evil, wicked. 2 Mischievous. 2 
Sad, calamitous. [Always placed before its 
noun. Numbers of words with droch prefixed 
are inserted in other Gaelic Dictionaries, and 
for that reason are reprinted here. These 
words might certainly be omitted, excepting a 
few, like droch-bheart and droch-ghean \ in 
which the accent has transferred itself to 
droch.] Droch bhean, a bad woman ; droch 
fhear, a bad man; d. rùn, a wicked intention; 
droch-bheart, mischief ; d. là, a bad day ; cha'n 
"eil an droch fheum aige air, he is sorely in 
need of it [droch fheum, no need; chan "eil an 
droch fheum, there is not no need —íihere is great 
need. Compounds formed with droch whose 
second element begins with c should always 
have the c aspirated, as, droch-chleachdadh, 
not droch-cleachdadh, as in McL & D. 

tdroch, a. Right, straight, even, direct. 

t , $.m. Coach-wheel. 2 Death. 3(AF) 
Moth, cloth- or wood-worm. ; 

droch-àhaist, -ean, s.f. Bad custom, bad habit. 








Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS Ag 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


WH 
Saa däi Bag ih 


1 











bes ze 


"7 


O 
A 
H 
Ü 


droch-àbhaisteach 


droch-àbhaisteach, -iche, a. Having bad habits. 
. 2 Mischievous, vicious. 3** Idle. 
drochaid, e, -ean, s.f. Bridge. Bogha droch- 
aide, an arch ; balla drochaide, parapet of a 
bridge. 
~-—-each, -iche, a. Of or belonging to a 
bridge. 2 Full of bridges. 
drociiaid-fhiodh,** st Wooden bridge. 
drochaidich,* v.a. Overarch, bridge. 
drochaid-thogalach,** s.f. Drawbridge. 
BEE, -aiche, o, Furious, violent, 
mod, 
droch-ainm, s.m. Bad name. 
droch-airidh, a. Unworthy, undeserving. 
droch-àisteach, see droch-abhaisteach. 
, droc^-àistean, for d— -àbhaistean,n.pl. of droch- 
abhaist. 
drochait, see drochaid. 
droch-bhail, see droch-bhuil. 
drocù-bharail, -alach, -alaichean, s.f. Bad pre- 
judice or opinion. 2 Bad guess. ‘Tha d. agam 
air, I have a bad opinion of him. 
droch-bhas, -bhais, s.m. Bad death, used as an 
impreeation— Droch-bhas ort! bad death to 
you ! 
droch-bheart, -eairt, -an, s.f. Vice, evil deed, 
wickedness, mischief. Ri droch-bheart chuir 
sinn cul, we have forsaken wickedness. 
droch-bheartach, -aiche, a. Wicked, vicious, 
evil-doing, immoral, mischievous. 
droch-bheulach, -aiche, a. Foul-mouthed, 
droch-bheus, -an, s.m. Bad behaviour, miscon- 
duct, bad breeding, bad morals. 
droch-bheusach, -aiche, a. Immoral, ill-beha- 
ved, ill-bred. 
droch-bhlas,** s.m. Bad taste. 2(PJM) Dis- 
de Ghabh mi d. dheth, I got disgusted with 


im. 
E eas, -aidh, -ean, s.m. Bad smell, 
stink, 
droch-bhriathar, air, -an & -thran, s.m. Evil 
expression, bad word. 
drocn-bhuil, -e, s.f. Improper disposal of any- 
thing. 2 Evil end, event or fate. 3 (PJM) 
Want of economy, extravagance. Tha’n d. 
air, he now suffers the evil consequences. 
droch chadal ort ! (imprecation) Bad sleep to 
you. 
droch-chaidreamh, -eimh, s.f. Evil communica- 
tion. 
 droch-chaingeall,T1-eill, an, s.m.[Bad covenant. 
droc^-chainnt, -e, s.f. Bad language, swearing. 
droch-chlaonadh, -aidh, -ean, s.m.:Evil inclina- 
tion, tendency to evil. 
droch-chleachdas, see droch-cleachdadh. 
droch-chomhnil, see droch-chómhdhail. 
droch-chomhairle, -an, s.f. Bad advice. 


. droch-chomhairlich,** v.a. Misadvise. 


droch-chleachdadh,-aidh,-ean & -eachdainnean, 
s.m. Bad practice. 

droch-chomhar,** -air, s.m. Bad sign. 

droch-chomharradh, -aidh, s.m. Bad mark, as 
from a blow. 

droch-chomhdhail, -alach, -ean & -alaichean, s.f. 
Ill-omened meeting. 21fUsed as an impreca- 
tion. 

droch-chomhluadar,-air,s.m. Bad conversation. 
Truaillidh d. deagh-bheusan, evil communica- 
tions corrupt good manners. 

droch-chonaltradh,-aidh,s.m. Bad conversation. 

droch-chreideamh, -eimh, s.m. Heresy, unbelief, 

droch-chreidmheach, -mhich, s.m. Heretic. 

, mhiche, a. Heretic. 





—droch-chuimhneachan, -ain, -an, s.m. Bad re- 


membrance, bitter remembrance. 
drochd,** a. Black, obscure. 
drochdail,** s.pl. Bad news, 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


361 


droch-shüil 


droch-dhiol, -a, s.m. Evil entreating, ill-usage. 
2ttUsed as an imprecation. 

droch-dhuine, pl. -dhaoine, s.m. Bad man, re- 
probate, 

droch-fhacal, -ail, -clan, s.m. Bad word, curse, 
oath, malediction. 2 Bad character of one. 

droch-fhaistinn,** s.f. Bad report, misinforma- 
tion. 2 False prophecy. 3 Gloomy prophecy. 

droch-fhradhareach, -aiche, o, Dim-sighted. 

droch-ghaile, see droch-ghoile. 

droch-ghean,** sm. Bad humour. 

droch-zhniomh, -a, -aran, s.m. Misdeed, crime, 

droch-ghnüiseach, -iche, a, Ill-favonred, ugly. 

droch-ghoile, s.f. Dyspepsia, ill-digestion. 

———-——àeh, d. Dyspeptic. 

droch-ghuidhe, -achan, s.f. Evil wish. 2 Im- 
preeation, 3 Malediction, curse. 

droch-inutinneach, -iche, o, Ill-minded, evil- 
disposed. 

droch-iomchar, air, s.m. Ill-conduet, mis-con- 
duct, misdoings. 2 Malapert. 

droch-iomradh, -aidh, s.m. Evil report, bad 
fame. 

droch-labhariach, a. see droch-labhrach. 

droch-labhrach, -aiche, a, Ill-spoken, 

droch-mhanachail,ff a. Portentous. 

droch-mharbhadh, -aidh, s.m. Murder, treach- 
erous homicide. 

droch-mheas,{t s. Bad opinion, disregard. 

droch-mheasta, a. Ill-reputed, of bad fame. 

droch-mheitealtach, -aiche, o Alloyed. 

droch-mhéinn, -e, s. m. Grudge, ill-will, ma- 
lice, spite. 2 Irritability. 

droch-mhéinneach, -iche, a. Envious, grudg- 
ing. 2 Touchy, irritable. 38 Malicious. 4 
Sinful. 5 Despiteful. 

droch-mhéinneachd,** st Envy. 2 Despite, 

droch-mhisneach, -ich, s. f. Pusillanimity. 2 
Despondency, low spirits. 3 Cowardice. Cha 
robh an droch-mhisneach aige, taigh a chur 
an ordugh, agus gun sgeoil aige air bean, what 
a mighty cheek he had, to arrange things (as 
though ali were settled) when he had, as yet, no 
word of a wife—i.e. he thought himself cock- 
sure of victory as a suitor, 

droch-mhisneachail, -ala, a. Low-spirited, pu- 
sillanimous, desponding. 

droch-mhisneachd, see droch-mhisneach. 

droch-mhuinte, o. Malicious, wicked, sinful, 
vicious. 2 Insolent, ill-bred.  3*Perverse. 
Air daoinibh d., on wicked men. 

droch-mhuiuteachd,ff s.f.ind. Lewdness, wic- 
kedness, 

droch-mhunadh, -ailh, s.m. Bad breeding, in- 
solence. 2*Malice. 

droch-nos,** s.m. Bad habit. 

droch-nosach, -aiche, o Immoral. 

droch-obair, -oibre, -oibrichean, s.f. Bad work. 
2 Evil doing, crime. 3 Bad job. 

droch-ràit, -e, -ean, s.f. Evil saying. 

droch-raitean,(AH) s.pl. Fraud, deceit, guile, 
chicanery, mendacity. 

droch-rathaidean, see droch-raitean. 

droch-riaghladh, -aidh, -ean, s.m. Misrule, bad 
management, 

droch-run, -üin, -üintean, s.m. Malice, ill-will. 

droch-rünach, o Malicious. 2 Grudging, en- 
vious. 

droch-rünachd,** sr Maliciousness. 

droch-sgeul,-sgeoil,s.m. Bad story. 2 Bad news 
or report. 3 Detraction. 

droch-shion, -shioin, -shiontan, 
ther. 

droch-sheanachas, s.m. 
ing. 

droch-shuil, -shuia, -shüilean, 5$. f. Evil eye, 
blasting eye. 


s.m. Bad wea- 


Bad language, swear- 


= E mpya ` a, Es Kënnt 
VERSITY OF ILLINOIS 
1 


L1 Md - 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


h 


— 


a 
ssl 
Te | 


droch-shtileach 362 dronadh 


folk. [** gives s.f.pi.) 

droinip, see droineap. 

droinnse, s. Fardel. 

droinnseach, see droinnse. 

droitseach,(AH) s. f. Good deal, considerable 
quantity or number. 

fdrol, -oil, sm. Bay. 2 Plait. 3 Look. 4 Trick, 
stratagem, l 

drola, -chan, s.m, Pot-hook. 2 Handle of a pot 
or pan. 3 Chain. 4 Link ofa chain. 5(M 
McL) Noose, loop. 

drolabha,(AH) s.f. Tug-of-war. 

drolabhaid, -e,-ean, s.f. Intricacy. 2 Unne- 
cessary lumber, prov. Drialabhaid in Lewis. 
3(PJ M) Incorrigible or noisy following. Tha 
i tighinn, agus an d. 'na déidh, said of an ug- 
welcome visitor, who comes to a house and. 
followed by several of her family. 

drolabhais, -e, s.f. see drolabhaid. 

drolabhan, aid, s.m. Good-for-nothing fellow, 
trifler. 

drola-bülais, s.m. Pot-hook— Lewis. 

drolach,-aich, s.m. Pair of pot-hooks. 

drolach, à. Abounding in pot-hooks. 

drolachan, -ain, -an, s.m. Button-neck. 

drolag, -aige, -an. s.f. dim. of drola Swing. 2 
Pastime of moving in a swing. 3 Fulcrum. 4 
TrChain-link. 

droll, druill, s.m. Tail of an animal. 2 Unwieb 
dy stick. 3 Door-bar, 4 Awkward sluggard, 
idle, inaetive person. 5* Back of a beast. 6 
Rump. 7 High dudgeon. Cho corrach ri 
ugh air d., as tottering, as an egg on a staf. 

drolla,** s.m. Pot-hook. 2 **Pair of pot-hooks. 
3**Handle of à pot or pan. 4 Loop to go over & 
button—Lewis. D. an osain, the loop or point 
of headless stockings, to go over the second, and 
third toes. 

drollach,* a. Apt to take great offence, 

drollag, see drolag. 

drollaire, -an, see dreallaire, 

— ———achd, see dreallaireachd. - 

dro o, Wanting in energy or spirit 
— Uist. 

hd, s.f. Want of energy ior spirit— 


Uist. 
drolmad-bhainne,(AF) s.m. Milk-pitcher. 
droma, gen.sing. of druim. 
dromach,* s.f. Back-band of a horse. 2(CR) 
Saddle-chain of a cart. 
, @ see dromanach. 
— — —,** s.f.ind. Affirmation. 
dromadair, ean, see droman, 2**Drummer. 
dromainn, s.f. see droman (2.) 
dromairt,|| s.f Lumbago. [Preceded by the 
article an. ] 
dromaltach, s.m. Vertebra. 
droman, -ain, pl. -ain & -nan, s.m, §Dwartf; el- 
der-tree, bore-tree, see ruis. 2 Ridge. 3 Back. 
4 Dromedary. 5** Back-band of a horse, 
when in a cart. 6ffLittle hill or eminence. 
Ann an dromannan a chéile gabhar iad, in the 
backs of each other (=to grips) they take. 
—ach, -aiche, a. Ridgy, ridged, furrowed. 
2 Hilly. 3 Like a dromedary. 4 Made of el- 
der-wood, of, pertaining to, or abounding in 
elder. 5(AH) Back-band of à horse when in 
a cart. 
ach,** -aich, s.m. Place where elders 
grow. 2(DU) Wooden staple, used for fixing 
laths over thatch, made of bog-fir and formed 
by twisting the middlefwhile soft and pliable. 
-alluidh, see damhan-alluidh. 
na, [a dh— !] voc. pl. of druim. 
—nan, pl. of drunn. 
dromanta,** a. Hunched, humped. 2 Ridged 
¢dron.a@. Right, straight. 2 Sure, steadfast. 



















@roch-shtileach, Zeche, a. Having an evil eye. 

droch-spiorad, -aid, -an, s.m. The Devil. 2 Any 
evil spirit. 3 Bad temper. 

droch-tharagrach, -aiche, a Ominous. 

droch-theanga,tt s.m. Bad tongue, 2 Reviling. 

droch-theangach, -aiche, a. Ill-tongued. 

droch-thionnsgnadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Ill- 
commencement. 9 Evil imagination, con- 
spiracy. 

droch-thoillteannach, -aiche, a. Ill-deserving. 

droch-thoillteannas, -ais, s.m, Demerit. 2(PM) 
Bad crime— Uist. 

droch-thuairisgeul, -edil, -an, s.m. Bad report, 
ill-fame. 2** Misinformation. 

droch-thuar, -thuair, s.m. Badappearance, bad 
colour. 2 Bad sign, ill-omen. 

drochta-bainne, (AF) s. Milk-tub. 

droch-thuigsinn, s.f. see mi-thuigsinn, 

droch-uair, -e, -ean, s.f. Evil hour. 2(PJM) 
Danger in a storm on sea or land. [Always 
used with a’st or œ’s.} Puirt a's d., how very 
inappropriate ; gu dé a’s d. ach ...., what 
happened in an evil moment but.... 

¢drog, s.m. Agitation or motion of the sea, 
land-swell. 

drògaid, -e, -ean, s.f. Drugget. 2 Linsey-wol- 
sey. 3 Russet. 4* Anything spoiled by being 


mixed. 

drogh, see dròbh. 

drogha, -chan, see dorgh. 

¢droibheil, a. Hard, difficult. 2 Grievous. isee 
draghail, 

¢droich, v.n. Do evil, do wrong. 2 Abuse. 

droich, -ean, s.m, see troich 

droichealachd,* sg Dwarfishness. 

droicheanta, a. see droicheil. 

droichead, see drochaid. 

droicheil, -ala, a. Dwarfish. 2 Hump-backed. 

droichein, dim. of droich, 

fdroicheoin, s. pl. Deep waters. 2 The deep. 
3 Depth. 

droichilein, dim. of droich. see troichin and 
troichilein. 

G@roidheachd, see drüidheachd. 

tdroighean, -in, s. The deep. 2 Depth. 

droigheann, -inn & **droighne, s. m. Thorn, 
bramble. 2 Blackthorn, sloe. Pàirc an 
droighne, the bramble field. 

e—— ————— -mu-chrann, s.m. Honeysuckle— 
Skye. 

— — — -dubh,$? s.m. Blackthorn, see preas- 

nan-àirneag. 

—— -geal,$s.m. Whitethorn, see sgith- 
each-geal. 

¢dro‘gheil, a. Active, nimble. 2 Affecting. 

droighionn, -inn [& droighne,) see droigheann. 

droighneach, -ich, pl. -iehean, s.m. Thorns. 2 
Place where thorns grow. 3 Lumber in one’s 
way. 4 Brake fern. Fuaim droighnich, the 
sound of thorns ; croinn droighnich o ’n ear 's 
o’n iar, thorn trees on either side. 

droighneach, -iche, a. Thorny, abounding in 
thorns, brambly. 

droighneag, -eig, s.f. Blackthorn, sloe. 

droighnean, -ein, s. m. Thicket of blackthorn. 
[Some give -ein, as n.sing. and -eine, as gen.] 

droilean, -ein, s.m. Slow, unhandy person. 2 
Cluster. 

droimlein, -e,-ean, s.f. Alder. 2 Alder bush. 

droineach, -iche, a. Ragged, prov. 2 (PM) 
Worried with the world— Uist. 

droineach,*s.7. Ragged garment. 

droineap,* s.m. Ragged person, 2 Anything 
ragged. 3**Tackle, tackling. 47}Sails, can- 
vas, 5ttRag. Gach d. achrochas ri ’r 
crannaibh, every tackle that hangs to our masts. 

droing, -e, s.m, People, race, vribe, persons, 

















E 


k i = 
TEAST Fea PU SO bet Ser 
NTERNET ARCHIVE NRE BNA-CUAMPAIGR 
— 1 Ka i i We ! = P d * i - I ul Er jd - i 
ko L] i” [^i s m l eme? H Eh ri I —- | 





i 


ES . 


 dronn-uileann,** s.f. Ann, 


dron 


fdron, v.a. Affirm, assert. 
tdronadh, -aidh, s.m. Direction. 
tdron-dunadh, -aidh, s. m. Shutting, stopping. 
drong,t -oing, s.m. see droing. 2**Chest, box. 
drongair, -ean, s.m. Gaelic form of drunkard. 
eachd,s.f.ind. Drunkenness. [Eng.word.] 
tdrong-chlann, s.pl. Soldiers. 
dronn, -uinn & -oinn, SP Rump, the bard's 
portion of the mutton. 2 Ridge. 3 Back. 4 
Summit. 5 At weddings, the man to whom 
the dronn would come was obliged to make a 
verse, or an dubh chapull would be on him. 
6**Huneh. Bho dh. gu troigh, from ridge to 
basement (of a house.) 
dronnach,** -aich, s.m. White-backed cow. 
—— — —, -aiche, a. White-backed or rumped. 
-2 Ridgy. 3**Convex. 
-— ———d,]i s.f.ind. Convexity. 
dronnag, -aige, -an, $.f. Ridge of the back. 2 
Loin (of flesh.) 3 Hump. 4 Knoll. 5 Chine. 
61tBank. 7 Small burden. 8 Dorn(fish.) 9 
'reel-pillow or -pad, placed between creel and 
back of bearer,— Lewis. 10**Summit, highest 
point of a ridge, 11+{+Small height or ridge. 
12**Cow having a hunched back, 13 (DU) 
Swing, as used by children—Gacrloch. Cuan 
meamnach nan d., the bounding ridgy ocean. 
dronnagach, -aiche, a. Bunchy, ridgy, hump- 
ed. 2 Full of backs or heights. 
dronnain, gen.sing. & n.pl. of dronnan. 
dronnan, -ain, s.m. Back. 2 Ridge. 3 Back 
or ridge of a hill. 4**Hump on the back, 
dronn-chruinn,** o Convex. 
dronn-chruinnead,** s, f. Convexity. 
dronn-chuachach,** o, Convexo-concave. 
dronn-chuairteach,** a, Convex. 
dronng, s.m. Gaelic form of trunk. 
air, s.m. see drongair. 
aireachd ff see drongaireachd. 
droun-sgàit, s.m. Trunk of a skate. 
Right angle. 
each,** o Rectangular, 
- -—-ag,** -aig, s.f. Rectangle. 
rothan, -ain, -an, s.m. Gentle breeze. 
ach, -aiche, a. Breezy. 
ach,* -aich, s.m. see drothan. 
drothlair,** -ean, s.m. Carpenter, 2 Waggon- 
maker. 3 Waggoner. 
—eachd,** s.f. Occupation of a carpen- 
ter or waggon-maker ; or 2 Waggoner, 
füru, s.m. Oak. 
druabag, -aig, -an, see drubag. 
dru, bach, s.f. see druaip. 
druablaich,tt s.f. Muddy water, lees, 
druablas, ais, s.m. Muddy liquor, 
¢druadh, s.m. see druidh. 
druaip, -e, s.f. Lees, dregs, sediment, 2 Tip- 
pling, debauchery, drinkin; in bad company. 
8 Dcbauehee, 4**Slops, sloppy potion. 
———each, -iche, see druaipeil. 
ear, -eir, -an, s.m. Tippler. 
eil, -eala, o Turbid, 2 Addicted to tip- 
pling. 3**Having sediment. 4**Sloppy. 
eireachd, s.f.tnd. Practice of tippling. 
Tdruatn,** .aith, s.m, Fornication, 
drob, -a, Sam, Wiuk of sleep. 2t Mouthful of 
fiquid. Cha d'fhuair mi d. chadail, JI did not 
get a wink of sleep. 
drubag, -aig, an, s.f. Little mouthful of liquid. 
drübanta, @ Drowsy, sleepy, slumbering. 
Tdrubh, s.m. House. 2 Chariot. 
drübhag, -aige, s.f. see drùdhag. 
idrubhair,** s.m. Charioteer. 2 Cartwright, 
coach-builder. Leer. 
drubvhaireachd,** s.f. Employment of a chariot- 
2 Occupation of a cartwright or coach-builder. 














ee 














drüblach, see dreb-shuileach. 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


363 


druidh 


drübladh,(AH) s.m. Decanting to the last drop, 
as liquor from a bottle, 

drüb-shuileach, -iche, a. Dull-eyed, sleepy-eyed. 
2**Dozy. 

fdruchd, s.m. & f. Heaving. 2 Rising up. 

drùchd, -an, $.m.[**&f.| Dew. 2**Drizzling rain. 
9 Tear. 4 Sweat. D. gean, a tear of joy. 

»*v.a. & n. Ooze, emit drops. 

——ach, -aiche,a. Dewy, like dew. 2 **Driz- 
zly, rainy. 3 Tearful. 4 Oozing. Duilleach 
d., dewy foliage. 

ail,* see drüchdach. 

an, -ain, s.m. Drop. 2 Whey. 3(PJM) 
Hacking of the skin under the great toe in 
dry weather. 

druchdan-monaidh, s.m. Round-leaved sundew, 
—used for dyeing hair, 

drüchd-na-maidne,$ s.m. Round-leaved sundew, 
see ros-an-t-soluis. 

drichd-na-mona, see drüchdan-monaidh. 

drud, -uid, s.m. Enclosure. 

drùdh, v.a. d' n. see drùidh. 

drüdhadh, -aidh, see druidheadh. 

drüdhag, s,f. Sip, small drop, weak drink. 

drug,** s. see driug. 

drugair,t -ean, 8. m. Drudge, slave, 
swiller. 

— —— ——eachd, s.f.ind. Drudgery, slavery. 

drüghadh, -aidh, see druidheadh. 2**Ascend- 
ancy, superiority. 3**Auspice. 

druibheal,** el, s.m. Dark place, recess. 

druibhleagan,** s.m. Mishmash, 

druibleach, see drub-shuileach. 

druichd-a’-mhonaidh, see druchdan-monaidh. 

druid, pr.pé. a’ druideadh, ro Shut closely. 2 











mean 


Cover. 3 Enclose, surround. 4 Advance, 
come up. 5Join. 6**Hasten. 7ftStep for- 
ward. 8**Approach, draw near. Druid-sa 


gu m’ làimh, hasten to my hand. 

druid, 9 e, -ean, s.f. Starling,—sturnus vulgaris. 
2 Thrush, 

druid-bhreac, s.f. see druid. 

druid-dhubh, s.f. see druid. 2 see dubh-chreige, 

druideadh,* -idh, s.m. Shutting, covering. 2 
Act of shutting or covering. 3 Coming for- 
ward, approaching. 4* Conclusion, close. A’ 
d—, pr.pt. of druid. Naimhdean a’ druid- 
eadh oirnn, foes closing in upon us ; àm druid- 
eadh a’ gheata, the time of closing th gate. 

druideag, -eige, -an, s.f. Little starling. 2 Lit- 
tle thrush, young thrush. 

druidean, s.m. see druideag. 

druidear, fut.pass. of druid. Shall be shut, &c. 
Ié says ‘‘ Also used impersonally *' nep. 

e, simple or compounded being ex; cd or 

understood. Druidear (leam) an dorus, tA? 
door shall be closed (by mei" All verbs are 
used impersonally, the prep. le being some- 
times used, but sometimes not even under- 
stood, whereas these remarks seem to show 
that only druid is so treated.] 

druide-bord, -buird, s.m. Left earth-board of 
a plough. 

drùidh, v.a.dén. Penetrate to the skin. 2 
Pierce, make an impression, bore through. 3 
Drain, pour forth the last drop. 4**Ooze. 5 
**Operate upon. 6**Affect,influence. 7**Drop. 
8**Distil. Dn. an t-uisg’ orm,the rain has pene- 
trated to my skin ; 's ann mar sin adh. e air, 
that is how it impressed him, (or how he felt 
it); dh. e an soitheach, he poured forth the last 
drop in the dish ; drüidhidh achmhasan air 
duine glic, reproof will affect a wise man. 

druidh, -ean, s.m. Druid, magician. 2 Conjur- 
er. 3 Philosopher. 4tfMorose person. 

No direct native information is available 
concerning druidism in Scotland id ania 
2 


UNIV 


V FE 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGRN 


druidh 


and it isonly when Christianity had been long 
established and druidism had become a thing 
of the remote past, that we have writers who 
speak of the druids, and then only refer to 
them as magicians and diviners, sometimes 
only as conjurers ; there is no hint of either 
philosophy or religion in Druidism, They 
surrounded kings and chiefs, The power of 
the Tuatha Dé Danann, the pre-eminent mas- 
ters of druidic art, over the forces of nature 
shows them to have been degraded gods. The 
Druids opposed Columba and Patrick with 
darkness. A. blow from their wand caused 
transformation and spells. Their sacred wood 
was not the oak, as in Gaul, but yew, haw- 
thorn and especially the rowan. Divination 
by watching smoke and flame, chewing raw 
flesh (ef. Fionn's thumb), &c., was one of 
their chief occupations. Bards were some- 
times diviners,thus apparently showing an an- 
cient connection with the Druids. Sometimes 
we have an echo of the time whenDruidism was 
something more than mere wizardry, and even 
when human sacrifices were offered (for ex- 
ample, the Columba and Odhran story.) Prof 
Rhys sums up :— At the time of Cesar, the 
Druids were à powerful elass—soothsayers, 
magicians and priests. ln Gaul, under the 
influence of Mediterranean civilization, they 
were also philosophers, and discoursed on the 
stars, the world, the nature of things and the 
power of the gods. Rhys thinks Druidism 
non-Aryan, MacBain does not. 

The following remarks by foreign writers 
were made while druidism was still practised 
aud full particulars easily obtainable. ‘The 
accuracy of Latin writers on the military and 
domestic arrangements of the Celts is well 
known, so their remarks about the druids are 
probably quite as reliable. 

Diodorus Siculus calls attention to the 
druidic doctrine that the souls of men were 
immortal, and that after the lapse of an ap- 
pointed number of years they came to life 
again, the soul then entering another body. 

Julius Cæsar says the Druids were occupied 
with religious matters, conducted public and 
private sacrifices, and interpreted omens, 
They were the teachers of the country, and 
judges in publie and private disputes, award- 
ing damages and penalties. Any contumacy 
in reference to their judgments was punished 
by exclusion from the sacrifices—the severest 
punishment among Gauls. Men so punished 
were treated as outlaws. There was one 
supreme head over the Druids, who, on his 
death was succeeded by the nearest in dig- 
nity, or if several were equal, the successor 
was chosen by the vote of the Druids. Some- 
times the primacy was not decided without 
arbitrament of arms. Cæsar mentions the be: 
lief that their doctrines originated in Britain, 
and were carried from thence into Gaul. The 
Druids were immune from military service 
and payment of tribute. They were said 
during their training, which sometimes last- 
ed twenty years, to learn by heart a large 
number of verses, They held it wrong to put 
their religious teaching in writing. Their 
cardinal doctrine was the transmigration of 
souls, and this was a supreme incentive to 
yalour, by making the fear of death count for 
nothing. They discussed the stars and their 
motions,the size of the universe and (he earth, 
the nature and the might and power of the 
immortal gods. They presided at the human 


-Sacritices, which might be publie or private. 


I 
L 
— 8 en Lope = | 
kd DWIK- ri F, | d 
LE iE EN kt 
ii "4 E i Se 1 


964 


druighleagan 


Cicero says the Druids possessed knowledge 
of natural science, and foretold the future 

Urigen says they practised soreery, 

Strabo refers to them as judges, philoso- 
phers and divines, says they were held in ex- 
eeptional honour, and mentions their bellef in 
immortality. No sacrifice could be made 
without the preserce of a Druid. They were 
in great request iu time of war, being corm- 
sulted alike by the enemy and those of thef 
own side. Even when two armies were on the. 
point of going to battle, Druids have been able 
to stop them. : 

Lucan refers to the seclusion of the Druids' 
groves and their belief in immortality. 


Pliny refers to their veneration of the mis- 
tletoe, and the tree on which it grew (it an 
oak,) hence their predilection for oak-groves, 
and the requirement of oak-leaves for all re- 
ligious rites. He mentions a serpent-egg, pro- 
duced from the frothy sweat of snakes writh- 
ing together in a ball. 

Ammianus Marcellinus says they were close- 
ly linked together into confraternities, and 

eclared the soul immortal. 

Cesar includes under the term druid all 
non-military professional classes—whether 
priests, seers, teachers, lawyers or judges. To 
others, druids are philosophers and teachers, 
and distinguished from seers. To others 
again, such as Pliny, they were the priests of 
the oak-ritual, whence their name was deri- 
ved.—Hatracts from art. by Dr. Mach^ain in 
Celtic Mag. 1883-4, and Celtic ..eligion by Prof. 
Anwyl, 


druidheach, -iche, a, Druidical, magical. 

- —d, -an, s.f.ind, Magic, sorcery, druid- 
ism, enchantment, witchcraft. 2** Charm. 
Có a chuir d. oirbh P who has bewitched you 2 

drüidheachdaiun,* s.f. see drùidheadh. 

driidheadh, -idh, s.m. Penetrating, piercing. 
2 Soaking, oozing through, 3* Impression, 
4 Influence. 5**Affecting, as of the feelings. 
6** Distillation. Cha d' rian e and. a bt 
lugha air, if did not make the smallest impress. 
sion on him. A’ d—, pr. pt. of drùidh, 

druidhean,}s.m. The stem of the marine plant 
barr-staimh. 

druidhean, nom. pl. of druidh. 

druidheann, see droigheann. 

drüidheil, -eala, a. Penetrating. 2 Impressive. 
3 Bewitching, magical, druidical, pertaining 
to sorcery. 

druidhil, v.a. see druighil. 

druidh-lus,$ s.m. Mistletoe, see uil'-ioc. 

druidhneach, -ich, s.m, see druineach. 

drüidte, past pt. of drùidh. Penetrated, oozed 
through. 

drùidhteach, -iche, o Impressive, emphatic. 
2 Penetrating. 3**Oozing. 4**Enticing. 5 
Attractive. 6**Distilling, dropping. Cainnt 
dh., impressive or emphatic language. 

drüidhteachd, s.f.ind. Pathos. 

druididh, fut. aff. a. of druid. 

druid-mhonaidh, -e-, -ean-,s.f. see dubh-chreige. 

druidte, past pt. of druid. Shut, closed, shut 
up closely. 

druigh, see druidh. 

drüigheadh, see drüidheadh. 

druichil,** v.a. Troll, burl. 2 Roll together, 
mix by rolling together. see druithlig. 

druighleaeh, s.m. Dregs. 

druighleadh,** -idh, s.m. Trolling, hurling, 2 
Rolling together. 

driighteach, -iche, a. see drùidhteach. 

druighleagan, -ain, s.m» Meal and wates 





— 


e d £ . » 
ecu hte aho uütu 











druighieagan 


hens’ food. (Scots, drummock.) 
driighteachd, see drüidhteachd. 
druil,** v.a. see druighil. 
druilinn,** s.f. Sudden flash, especially that 
of iron heated to incandescence, when it is 
first struck on coming from the forge-fire. 
druim, s.m.irreg. Declined thus :— 


. Sing. Plur. 
Nom. druim, dromannan, 
Gen. droma, dhromannan, 
Dat. druim, dromannan, 
Voc. a dhruim ! a dhromanna ! 


Back of men or of animals. 2 Ridge of a 
hill. 3 Roof, 4 Keelof a ship, see bàta, F9, 
.p. 73. 5**Surface. 6(CR) Beam of a plough. 
p (CR) First furrows of a ridge. [6 £ 7 W. 
of Ross-shire.) 8 (AH) Crown, in ploughing, 
Cuir a staigh d., form a crown (in ploughing); 
cnàimh an droma, the back-bone ; Taigh-an- 
droma, the place-name Tyndrum (the house of 
the ridge); do dhruim nan amadan, for the 


365 


drumlaichean 


druipe,** s.f. Drudge. 

drùis, -e, s.f. Lust, lasciviousness, lechery. & 
Exudation, perspiration. 

drüis,( WC) s.m. Noise as of fish frying in a pan. 
—Gairloch. Bha e cho blian nach d’ rinn e 
d., it was so lean it did not frizzle at all. 

druis,** v.n. Play the wanton, prostitute. Dh. 
i i-féin, she prostituted herself. 

druis, see dris. 

druisdear, see druisear. 

--_——_——eachd, see drüisearachd. 

drùiseach, -iche, a. Libidinous, lustful, lecher- 
ous, 2**Dewy. 3 Disordered, disorderly. 

-——————,-ich, s.m. Lecher. 

druiseadh,** -idh, s.m. Whoring, wantonin¢. 

drüiseadh,(WC) s.m. Frizzling noise, caused by 
the contact of such as a red-hot iron with the 
flesh. Thug an t-iarunn dearg drüiseadh air 
mo làiinh. [Dris is never used in this sense, 
but dràisegdh is sometimes used in the sense 
given under ‘‘ druis."] —Poolewe, £c. 


back of fools ; gun d. ach athar, without roof druiseag,** -eig, -an, s.f. Little prostitute. 2 


but the sky ; air d. a’ chuain, on the face of 
the sea, in the ofing; d. nan speur, the vault 
of heaven ` air claisneach a dhroma air leac- 
an loma an ùrlair, on the furrow of his back on 
(the) bare flags of the ftoor ; d. uachdarach a' 
chairein, the palate or roof of the mouth ; ann 
an dromannan a chéile, wrestling ; an d, fada, 
name of æ hill in Corpach. 

druim-bogha,** s.f. Vault. 

druim-bhreac,** a. Having aspotted or speck- 
led back. Bradan d., a spotted-backed salmon. 

druim-chroinn,** s.f. Beam of a plough. 

druim-dhonn, a. Brown-backed. 

druimean,** ein, s.m. Ridge, hill. 

1 —ach, see druimneach. 2**White-back- 

ed. 


druimfhionn, a. White-backed, as of cattle. 
2 White-crested, as a wave. 

druimionn, see druimfhionn.  2**Ridgy. 

druim-luinge,** s.f. Keel of a ship. 

druimneach, -iche, a. Ridged, furrowed. 2 Stri- 
iped. 3ftFull of eminences or backs. 

druim-robach, -aiche, a. Foul-ridged. 

druin,** -e, s.f, Needlework, embroidery, 

drüin, v.a. see dùin. 

druineach, Watson in Place Names of Ross & 
Cromarty says, ‘‘ Sometimes equated with 
druidh. It is based on Old Irish druin, gloss- 
ed glice, wise, clever, and druineach in Irish 
means an embroideress. The exact signifi- 
cance of itin our place-names is far from 
clear. Logan in Scottish Gael, takes it to 
mean eultivators of the soil, as opposed to 
hunters, which may represent a genuine tra- 
dition, Martin makes mention of little round 
stone houses in Skye, capable of containing 
only one person, and called Tey-nan-druinich. 
Druineach, says Martin, signifies a retired 
person much devoted to contemplation. 

druinn, s.m. Hunchon the back. 

druivneach, -ich, s. m. see druineach. 2** 
Artist. 3**Mantua-maker, milliner. 4**Em- 
broiderer. 5**One who works with a needle. 

—-as,** .ais, s.m. Embroidery, tapes- 

try, needlework, tambouring. 2 Millinery, 


mantua-making, 

druinnean, ein, s.m. Little back. 2 Lowest 
part of the back. 

druinuein, gen. sing. of druinnean, sometimes 

used as the nom, 

——each, -iche, 2tt 
Having a little back. 

druinnse, -an, s.f. see druinnseach. 


druinnseach, -ich, -ichean, s.m, Burden. 
drüinnsear,** ein, Kidder. 








@ Hump-backed. 


Di 


f i 
Term ako A m LIE 
"i EI LE Li ml Ld E 

LE = d nas r LL 


Young prostitute. 

drùisealachd, s.f.ind. Lewdness, wantonness, 
lecherousness. 2 Perspiration. 3* Moisture, 
4**Dewiness. 5**Sap. 

drüiseamhlachd, see drùisealachd, 

fdrüiseamhuil, -e, a. see drùiseil. 

drüisear, -eir, -an, sm. Whoremonger, lecher, 
fornicator. 

achd,** s.f. Whoremongering, lecher- 
ousness. 

drùiseil, -eala, o Pithy, juicy. 2 Humid. 3 
**Dewy. 4 Lustful, libidinous, lascivious, 

druiseir, see druisear. 

druis-zhalar,tt -air,-an, s.m. Venereal affection. 

druis-ghuirean, s.m. Pimple. 

drüis-lann, s.m. 

druis-thaigh, i Brothel. 

druit, past pt. see druidhto, 

drüiteach, see drùidhteach. 

druiteag,(DU) s. f. Driblet, small quantity, 
usually applied to anything carried on the 
back. D. mhine, æ little meal in a bag. 

druithleagan,(CR) s.m. Oatmeal dough for feed- 
ing chickens—Perthsh. 

druithiiz,(CR) v.a. Drill about, drive round a- 
bout—Perthsh. [Scots, dreel,] see druighil. 

druith-mhangair, s. Pander. 

druma, -chan [& -ichean,] s.f. Drum. Chluinn- 
tear piob is drumaichean, pipes and drums 
might be heard. 

drumach,* see druman. 

„tta. Abounding in drums, 
drumadair,** s.m. Drum-maker. 

drumain, gen.sing. of druman. 

drumair, -ean, sm. Drummer. 

eachd, s.f.ind, Drumming, business of 
a drummer. 2*Absurd hammering. 3 Noise. 
4**Battering. Ciod an d. ath’ ort P what are 
you drummina for ? ri d., beating the drum. 
druma-lachdan,|| s.m. Pain in the spine. [Pre- 
ceded by the article an.] [see drumlachdan.] 
druman, -ain,s.m. Ridge. 2 Hill. 3 Summit. 
4 Little back, 5 Back-band of a cart-horse. 
6§ Common elder, bore-tree, boor-tree. 7 
Wood of the bore-tree. 

——ach, -aich, s.f. Ridge-bandofacart. 2 
(DU) Wooden staple used in thatching, see 
dromanach. 3 Elder-tree. 

Tdrumcehull, -uill, s.m. Topmost thatch. 

drumlach, s.m. Fishing-rod tackle or line. 

— — — —dan, (CR) -ain, Swelling and stiffening 
of the wrist from unaccustomed work—W. of 
Ross-sh. 

drumlaichean, s.m. Kind of long sea-weed, of 
no use, except as manure when nothing else 


drumlaiehean 


was obtainable, sea-laces. 

ürünadh, -aidh, s.m. & pr.pt. see dùnadh. 

drunnsail,* s.f. Tintillation. 

drüs, -üis, s.f. see drùis. 

drusag,(WC) s,f. Small quantity. 
a little burden,—Poolewe, de, 

drusdair, see trusdar. 

—eachd, see trusdaireachd. 

drusdar, see trnsdar. 

dris-lann, see druis-lann. 

drüs-bhaigh, see drüis-thaigh. 

drutaireachd,** s.f.ind. Fornication. 
ness, filth. 

drutan,** -ain, s.m. Drudge. 

drutar, -air, -an, s.m. Fornicator. 
dirty habits. 

drüth,f a. Lecherous, lascivious. 2 Foolish. 

drüth,* s./. Harlot. 

Grith,** v.n. see drùidh. 

ach, -aiche, a. Obscene. 

teach. 

achdainn, see drùidheadh., 

aich, -e, s.f. Obscenity. 

aidh, fut. aff. a. of drüth. 

aidheachd, s.f.ind. Obscene or filthy lan- 
guage. 

drüthail, ala, a. Lascivious, obscene. 

druthan, (AF) s.m. Snail. , 

drüthanag,** -aig, -an, s.f. Harlot, bawd. 

drüth-bhosgair, -ean, s.m. Pimp, pander. 

drüth-labhair, v.n. Blab out, 

drüth-lann, see druis-lann. 

drith-leanabh,** s.m. Bastard. 

drüth-mhac, -mhie, s.m. Bastard son, 

drüth-mhangair, see drüth-bhosgair. 

druthta, see drüth. 

Adrutoir, -e, -ean, s.m.  Fornicator, 

du. t prefiz, Badness of quality. 

du-, negative prefiz, see do. 

$du,** s.m. Land, country. 2 Habitation. 3 
Place of abode. 

dù, a. see dùth. 

du, s.m. see duth. 

du, s.m.ind. see dubh. 

duabharachadh,(AH) s.m. Vilification, aspera. 
tion, slander, ealumny. 

duabharaich, (AC) see duibhrich. 2(AH) Tra- 
duce, calumniate, slander, cast asperations. 

duad,** s.m. Labour. 2 Hardship, difficulty. 

+duadh,** -aidh, s. m. Labour, hardship. 2 
Eating. 

fduadhal, a. Hard, difficult, laborious. 

$—— ——2achd, s.f. Hardship, difficulty, labor- 
iousness. 

¢duadhmhor,** a. Laborious. 

duadh-obair,** -oibre, s. f. Hard labour. 
Handicraft. 

Tduagh, -an, s.m. Cross, 

¢duaibhseach, -eiche, a. Gloomy. 

duaiceil, -eala, œ. see duaichnidh. 

duaichneachadh, -aidh,s.m. Act of making ugly, 
disfiguring, disfiguration. A’ d—, pr. pt. o 
duaiehnich. 

duaichneachd, s.f.ind. Deformity, disfigure- 
ment, crookedness. 2 Ugliness. 3**Horrid- 
ness. 4**Mask. Gud., to corruption. 

duaichnich, pr. pt. a’ duaichneachadh, v. a. 
Deform, deface, disfigure, make ugly, cor- 
rupt. 2 Darken. 38**Mask. 4**Delete. 

duaichniche,** s.m. Disguiser. 

duaichnidh, a. Deformed, disfigured. 2 Ugly. 
3 Gloomy,horrible, dismal,black. 4 Ghastly, 
E 5**Masked. Thaiadd., they are 

lack. 

duaichnidheachd, see duaichneachd. 

duaidh, e, -ean, s.f. Contest, fight, battle. 2 Evil, 

„ mischief. 3 Terrible egent, catastrophe. 4 


D. eallaich, 





2 Filthi- 


2 Person of 


2 see drùidh- 

















2 


affliction, fatigue. 
2 Horrible. 


Digitized by 


NTERNET ARCHIV 


366 


duaigh, 
duaile, s.f.ind. Propriet 
duailean, -ein, -an, s.m. 
duailisg,(AC) s.f. Fraud, deceit. 2 Stub’~rn- 


ness. A 
fduaillbhearta, s.m. Dialect. 
duain,(CR) pr.pt. a’ duanadh, v.a. Close, shut, 








dual 


Dreadful scene, Anns an d. sin, in that 
dreadful scene. 
each, -iche, a. Mischievous, calamitous 


see duaidh. 





y. 
Little lock of hair. 


[Rare in Suth’d, common in Caithness.) 
duain, gen.sing. of duan. 
duaineil (CR) a. Ugly, ill-looking.—Suth'd. 


duainidh,(CR) a. Bad, ill of look or of conduct. 


—W. of Ross. 2(MM) Fading, going into com 
sumption, (Scots, dwine.) Ise rinn d. air, 
how badly he treated him, (e.g. of one who 
cheated another;) duine d., a repulsive man— 
Lewis. 

duairc, -e, œ. Unpolished, uncivil, unamiable,. 
surly. 2**Stern. 

duairc, -e, ean, sm. Rude, unpolished person, 

uncivil, stupid person. 

3* Get) Surliness. 4+#Vice. 

each, -iche, œ Surly, uncivil, unamiable, 

2**Stern. 3**Squabbling.. 

eag, -eige, -an, s.f. Senseless, awkward 

woman, 2 Surly, ill-natared unamiable wo- 

man. 

ean, -ein, sm. Surly, base fellow. 

eas, -eis, see duaireachas. 

———eil,* a. Unamiable. 

















ein, see duaircean. 
duaireachadh, -aidh, s. m. Slander. Sgeul 
duaireachaidh, 3 slanderous tale. <A’ d—, pr 


pt. of duairich, 

duaireachas, -ais, s.m. Sternness. 2 Commotion, 
3 Sedition. 4 Squabble. 5 Slander. 6**Fray. 
A! deanamh duaireachais, raising sedition. 

duaireasach,** a. Ungovernable. 

— ——— ——d,** s.f. TIngovernableness. 

fduairfhine, s.pl. Poets, 

dusirida, see dubhairidh. 

d’ uairibh, adv. At times, sometimes. 

duairich,(DMy) pr. pt. 2’ duaireachadh, v. n. 
Cause one to forsake a familiar haunt. Dh. 
thu air an taigh e, yow have driven him from 
the house. 

duais, -ean, s. f. Reward, wages. 
3 Bribe.  4**Gains. 5* Premium, present. 
A’ toirt d. seachad, giving wages ; d. an uile 
the wages of sin. 

duais-bhrath,** -bhraith, s.f. Bribe, bribery, 
gains of treachery, traitor’s hire, 

duais-dhéidheil,tf e a. Mercenary. 

duaiseach, -iche, a. Givinga reward. 2 Gene- 
rous, liberal. Of, or connected with, rewards, 
wages or bribes. 

duaisich,tt v.a. Reward. requite. 

e,** -an, s.m. Hireling, hired servant. 

duaisire,* s.m. Rewarder. 





f | duais-thoillteanais, eis, s.m. Merit. 


+duaithrichte, see dutharaichte. 

dual, -uail, -an, s.m. Lock of hair, plait, curl, 
ringlet, 2 Plait, fold, or strand,in ropes or 
thread. 3 Braid. 4jfDevice. 5 Eye-bar of 
a quern. Córd thri dual, a three-plaited cord ; 
ceann maiseach nan d., the handsome head of 


ringlets. : 
dual,-ail,-an, s.m. Due, hereditary right. 2 
Duty. 3 Office. Bu d. da sin, that was his 


birthright.—This is one of the most familiar 
and characteristic sayings in Gaeldom, where 
belief in blood and hereditary tendencies 
and claims is exceptionally strong. It is 
difficult to translate literally, but might be 
paraphrased, ‘“thab.is what you might ex- 


Origil al frem 


UNIVERSITY. OF ILLINOIS 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


2 Prize. 


2 Unpolished stone. - 


^ 


Aa 





dual 
pect of lis father and mother’s son" —N.G.P. 
esan do 'n d. am bàs, he whose due is death ; 
bu d. athar dhuit siu, you inherited that from 
your futher ; mar bu d. dha, as was hereditary 
to him ; nam b’ e nach bu d, da, if it were (or 
eo happened) that it was not hereditary to him ; 
mur b! e gu’m bu d. da, were it not that it was 
hereditary to him ; do "n d. gach cliù, to whom 
every praise is due. 

tual, -ail, an, s.m. Law. 211Study. 

tual, pr.pt. a’ dualadh, v.a. see dualaich. 

ual, a. Hereditary. 2 Usual. 3 Natural, 
due. 4 Probable. Cha bu d. à bhi gun 
aoidheachd, it was absolutely opposed to use 
and wont to be without hospitality. 

Aualach, -aiche, a. Braided, falling in locks or 
braids (of hair.) 2 Having luxuriant hair, 
bear’iful, 3*Plaited, in folds.  4**Curled, 
pushy, as hair. 5**Iressy, 6[fTortuous. 71i 
Carved. Falt dubh d., black and curled hair ; 
a chiabhan d., Ais bushy locks ; cord d,, a 
plaited rope. 

d ëch, It -aiche, a. Hereditary. 

dualachan,** -ain, s.n. Toil-maker, 

fualachas, -ais, see dualchas. 

dualadair, -ean, s.m. Embroiderer. 2 Carver. 
3 Plaiter, one who plaits. 4 Cordwainer. 

—eachd,**s.f. Business of a cord wain- 
er. 2**Plaiting. 3**Carving. 4**Embroidery, 
embroidering. 

dualadh, -aidb. s. m. Carving, act of carving. 
9 Plaiting. 3**Embroidery. 4** Fold, plait. 
5**Ringlet. A’ d—, pr.pt. of dual. ’Na dh. 
liath, in his grey ringlets. 

dualaich, pr.pt. a’ dualachadh, v.a. Twist,plait. 
2 Garve. 3 Braid. 4**Loop, curl, as hair. 5 
**Mngrave. 6**Weave. 7 Fold. 8ftLink. 

, gen. sing. of dualach. 

e,-an, s.m. Carver. 

Sculptor. 4 Plaiter. 

eas, s.m. Sculpture. 2 Engraving. 

dualan, -ain, -an, s. m. dim, of dual. Little 
lock, tress or ringlet. 

ach, a. Abounding in small locks, tres- 
ses or ringlets. 

dual-bheurla, see dual-chainnt, 

— — — eh, -aiche, see dual-ehainnteach. 
dual-bhruidhinn, -inn, s.f. see dual-chainnt. 
dual-chainnt, -e, s.f. Dialect, branch of a lan- 

guage. 

-——each, -iche, a. Dialectic. 

dualchas, -ais,s.m. Hereditary disposition or 
right. 2 (DMy) Imitation of the ways of 
one's ancestors. 3 Bias of character. 4**Na- 
ture, temper. 5**Native place. 6**Hire, wa- 
ges, dues. 6**Duty. ’Se do dh. a bhi duin- 
eil, it is thy (hereditary) nature to be manly. 

ach, -aiche, a. Derived from ancestors, 
acquired by birth or parentage. 

¢duain,** -aim, s.m. City. 

dunn, -ain, pl.-ain,s.m. Poem,canto. 2 Ode, song, 
ditty. 3 Oration, haraneue. D. molaidh, a 

aneqyric ; d. mórdha, an heroic poem ; duan 
Arca, a rhyme of lies,a false story.—Poolewe. 
duanach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to, poems, 
odes, songs or edid deus 2 Poetical, in verse 

3 Melodious, tuneful. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. see duanaireachd. 

d, see duanaireachd. 

duauaz, -aige, -an, S.f. dim. of duan.Little song, 
ode, little poem, catch, glee, sonnet, ditty, 
canto. 

.— — ach,f¢ a. Abounding in little songs or 
odes. 

duanaiche, 








2 Engraver, 8 











ee ——— 





- 











see duanaire, 


duanaire, -an, s.m. Chanter, reciter of rhymes. 


2 Bir: ^», bard, versifier, songster. 


Dig itized | 
EA MA 


——— E = 
i [D KIE i m es Lg 
NTERNET ARCHIVE 


367 


ünbhada. 


duanaireachd, s. /. ind. Ch-nting, rhyming, 
poetry, versification. 

Tdluanartach,** s.m. Senator. 

fduan-chruitheachd, s.f. Policy. 

duan-mór, -ain-mhóra, s.m. Epic poem. (lit. ¢ 
great poem.) 

duan-nasg, -naisg, an, s.m. Collection of poems 

duantach, -aiche, see duanach. 

duantachd, see dt^nachd. 

duantaireachd, see duanaireachd. 

fduar,-air, s.m. Word, saying. 2 Verse,metre 

duarman, -ain, -an, s.m. Murmur, growl, 

-————ach,** a, Murmuring. 

-———achd, see duarmanaich. 

-—__——-aich, -e, s.f. Murmuring, grumbling, 
expression of discontent. 

duarmanaiche,** s.m. Grumbler. 

Tduas, -ais, s.m. Poet. 

duasach,** a. Inauspicious. 

d, s.f. luauspiciousness, 

duathar, -air, s.m. see dubhar, 

-_———ach, -aiche, see dubharach. 

tdub,|| s. Bile. 

tdub, v.a. Dip. 2 Dub, 

tdubadh, -aidh, s.m. Pond. 

dùbail, pr.pt. a’ dùbladh, v.a. see dùblaich, 

te, a. & past pt. of dùbail. Doubled. 2 
Ambiguous. 3 Double-minded. 4**Cunning, 
false. 5 Double, twofold. Duine d., æ deceit- 
ful person ; uisge-beatha d., double-distilled 
whisky—this ex. from ** is a translation from 
English, the correct Gaelic form being uisge- 
beatha da-tharruingte or air a dha-tharruing. 

-—— eachd, s.f.ind, Disingenuousness, dissim: 
ulation, duplicity, deceit. 2**Ambiguity. 

dubairt,** s.f. Earnest prayer. 

dnbh, duibhe, a. Black. 2 Dark. 8 - 
Sad, mournful. 4* Disastrous. 5 
Lean, as flesh. 6 Sable, in herald- 
ry. 7**Dark-haired. 8**Wicked. 
O**rarelj Great. Bu d. a sgeul, 
sad was his tale; daol d., œ black 276, Dubh. 
beetle; isd. an t-sùil a tha ’nad cheann, black 
is the eye in your heal—this expression is 
used when it is wished to imply that some 
one concerned in a misdemeanor escaped 
scatheless—cha d thubhairt e rium is d. an 
t-suil a tha ’nad cheann, he was not able to 
congratulate me on my escape ; nedil dubha 
(not dhubha) na Caisge, the Jive days before 
Easter Nunday. D. is also used for emphasis, 
thug iad géillagus dubh ghéill, they gave it 
up, yielded totally. 

dubh, duibh, s.m. Blackness. 2 Darkness, 3 
Ink. 4 Pupil of the eye. A’ cur an duibh air 
a’ gheal, putting black on the white—prevari- 
eating, telling lies ; cha robh a dhubh noa 
dhath rifhaicinn, he was not to be seen any- 
where (alive or dead.) 

dubh, pr.pt. a’ dubhadh, v.a. Blacken, 2 Blogs 
out. 3 D rken. 4 Condemn. 5**Stain. 

dubhach, -aiche, a. Sad, mournful, sorrowful, 
melancholy. 2 Di-astrous. 3 Dark, gloomy. 
4**Frowning. Aodach d., mourning clothes ; 
òighean d., mourning maidens; a shùil a? 
siuboal gu d., his eye moving darkly or fi own- 
ing. 

dubhach, Ach, ssm. Blacking. 2**Ink. 3 Ink: 
stand. 4 Black dye. 5**Tub. D. bhròg, shoe- 
blacking ; d. cobhain, lamn-dlack, 

dubhachail,** @. Hypochondriac. 

dubhachais, gen.sina. of dubhachas. 

dubhachas, -ais, s.m. S: duess, sorrow, melan» 
choly. 2 Darkness, duskiness. 3**Bitterness. 

dubhadair,** s.m. Ink maker. 

dubhadin, -ain, pl. -an & -ain, s.m. [* gives s.f.] 
Ink-holder, standish. 2**Soot, 3**B'^ckiug. 








dubhadan 


4**Ink, 

— ————ach,**a«. Inky. 2 Black. 3 Sooty. 

dubhadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of blacking, or dark- 
ening. 2 Auy kind of substance that dyes 
black. 3**Mourning. 4**Obseurity, darkness, 
blackness, 5**Ink, 6**Any black substanee. 
7**Blotting. 8**Staining. 9**Cendemning. 
A’ d—, pr.pt. of dubh. D. nan speur, the dark- 
ness of the skies. 

dubhag, -aig, -an,s.7. Kidney, 2**Name given 
in disrespect to a young female. 3 Deep, dark 
pool. 4(AF)Little black cow. Théid d. ri 
dualchas, like mother like daughter. 

an, -ain, s.m. Deep gulf. 2 Deepest 
part of a stream or pool. 3**Ink. 4**Blaek- 
ing, 5**Pupil of the eye. 6**Ink-standish. 
D. na sùla, the pupil of the eye. 

dubh-aghaidh,** s.m. dr Blaek or dark visage. 
2 Dark aspect. 3 Dark surface. 

dubhaich, v.a. Blacken, darken, blot out,shade. 

—— —— , -0, See dubhachas. 

-— ——— e, comp. of dubhach. 

dubh-aigeann, s.m. The deep, the ocean. 2 
Abyss. 3 Bottom of an abyss. D. na fairge, 
the bottomless depths of the sea. 

dubhailc, -e, -ean, $. f. Vice, wickedness. 
Comharraichte an d., noted for vice. 

each, -iche, œ. Vicious, wicked. 

— ———eaeh, -ich, s.m. Wicked person. 

dubhailt,** s.f. Darkness, gloom. 

each, -iche, a. Sorrowful, sad. 2 Dark, 
gloomy. 

each, -eich, s.m. Sorrow, sadness. 

dubhain, gen.sing. & n.pl. of dubhan. 

dubhair, v.a, Darken, shade. 

—, gen.sing. of dubhar. 

iche,** s,f. Jointress, 

idh, s.f. Dowry. 

pi ecu (for thubhairt) past interr. d meg. of 
abair. 

dübhaith,-e,-ean, S.f. Pudding. 

Tdubhalladh, -aidh, s.m. Want. 

dubhan, -ain, s.m. Hook, fishing-hook. 2 Hook- 




















ed claw, as of cats. 3* Clutch. 4**Snare. 5 
**Kidney. 6**Darkness.  7**Soot, S(AF) 
Blackbird— Dean of Lismore. 9(AF)Spider. 


"Nad dhubhain, in thy clutches; d. busgainte, 

a baited fishing-hook ; d. cuileig, a fly-hook ; 

dubhain na briogais, breeching-hooks ofa cart 

—Lewis ; d, an t-siùil, the sail-hook. 

ach, -aiche, a Hooked, of, belonging to, 

or abounding in, hooks or claws. 

achadh,(AH) -aidh, s.m. Set to, shindy, 
spar, pugilism, wrestling. 

dubhanaich,(AH) v.a. Exchange fisticuffs, spar, 
wrestle, strive, struggle, scramble. 

-alluidh, see damhan-alluidh. 

dubhan-ceann-cósach, [dubhan, kidney +ceann, 
head+cosach, spongy.$] Self-heal — prunella 
vulgaris. [Also called, devil’s bit and all-heal.] 














277. Dubhan-ceann-- 
chésach. 


| 278. Dubhan-nan-caorach. 


Digitize 3 hy 


AG E Ee m ec EVE pp E AT 
: i RIE AB i 
NTERNET ARCHIV 


368 




















|. ...... ubh-chiabhach _ 

dubhan-deiridh, s.m. Runner of a eart— Lewis. 
-guaille, Draught-hook of a cart—Lewis. 
-lasgaich,** s.m. Fishing-hook. 

-— —— -Bàn-eaorach,$ -ain-, s.m. Sheep-bit— 

jastone montana. [Also ealled,sheep-seabious.] 
stabhruidh,(WC) s.m. Hook for hanging 
@ pot over the fire. 
.-toisich, s.m. Draught-hook of a cart— 
Lewis. | 

dubhanuith,$? see dubhan-ceann-choósach. 

dubhar, -air, s.m. Shade, darkness. 2 Eclipse. 
3**Gloom. Tha anam an righ mar dh. na h- 
uaighe, the soul of the king is like the darkness 
of the grave; d.an fheasgair, the dusk of evening; 
d. a’ cheò, the darkness of mist ; fo dh. géige, 
under the shadew of a branch, 

————ach, -riche, a. Shady, shading, sha- 
dowy, opaque, dusky, dark, cloudy, gloomy. 
An oidbche dh., the gloomy night. 

ach, -aiche, s.f. see dubharachd. 

achd, s.f. Shade, darkness. 2 Shady 
or dusky place. 3 Opacity. 4 Eclipse of the 
sun or moon. 5**Duskiness. 6**Cloudiness, 

adh,** -aidh, s.m. Shadowing, darken- 





ing. 2 Darkness, shade, duskiness. 3 Eclipse. - 


D. gréine, a solar eclipse ; d. gealaich, a lun- 
ar eclipse. 

dubharaich,* see duibhrich. 

——— —-——-te, see duibhrichte. 

dubharaidh, -ean, see dubhairidh. 

dubharan, n.pl. of dubhar. 

dubhas,** ais, s.m. Sorrow. 

dubh-bhannach, -aiche, s.f. Gun. 

dubh-bhileach, s.m. Club (in playing-cards.) 

dubh-bhlianach, -aiche, sf. Lean carcase. 2+} 
Lean or meagre flesh. 

dubh-bhreae, -bhric, s. m. Black trout.  2ff 
Large trout. 3**Smelt. 4**Spirling. 

dubh-bhrochan, (AH) s. m. Very thin porridge, 
porridge of a liquid consistency. 

dubh-bhrón, -oin, s.m. Deep sorrow. 

——ach, a. Disconsolate. 

dubh-bhuidhe,** a. Livid. 2 Dark yellow. $ 
Black and yellow. Chinn an speur gu d., the 
skye became a dark yellow. 

dubh-bhuille,** s.m. Fatal blow. 

dubh-chaile, an, s.f. Scullion, trollop. 2 Girl 
of the lowest rank of peasantry. D. a’ bhuar- 
aich, the dunghill trollop. 

dubh-chall, -a, s.m. Perdition. l 

dubh-chapull s. Chuir e'n dubh-chapull air, 
he quite outdid him. This is aLochaber phrase 
of unknown origin. It used to be the prac- 
tice at weddings to have a pleasant competi- 
tion in singing between two parties—often the 
bride’s against the bridegroom’s. The side 
that held out longest would then say to the 
others "ran dubh-chapull oirbh t” 

dubh-chasach, -aiche, s. f, 
Black spleenwort — asple- 
nium trichomanes. 2 Maid- 
enhair,maidenhair spleen- ¢ 
wort. 3** Black-foot, black- 

——, a 


leg. 
— , 4. Black- 
legged, black-footed. 
dubh-cheannach, -aich, see 
faoileag. 





————— —————, -aiche, a. 
Black-faced. Caora dh., 
a black-faced sheep. 

dubh-cheathach,** -aich, s. 
m. Black mist,thick mist. 

dubh-cheist, ** -ean, Ss E 
Puzzle, enigma. 2 Motto, 
superscription. 279. Dubh-chasach. 

aubh-chiabhach,-siche, æ Black- or dark-haired 





Original from 
UNIVERSITY, OF IL 
fa 

4 I^ 


LINOIS 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


| 


i K 
m ah Lini 4 a z 


Í 
) D 
DEN "Ri" an S. die 
DT Cdp Tae” 


ñ 


A 





@ubh-chios 


fübh-chios, -a, see dubh-chìs. 

dubh-chis, -e, $,f. Tribute, tax. 2 Black-mail. 

iubh-chladach, s.m. Flood-mark. 2 High-water 
mark of ordinary spring tides. 

Jubh-chleas,** s. Feat in legerdemain or black- 


art. 
dubh-chleasachd,** sg, Black-art. 
-————-ail, -e, a. Necromantic. 
dlubh-chleasaiche,** s.m. Adept in black-art, 
conjurer. 
dubh-chléin, -e, -ean, s.f. The flank, spleen. 
dubh-choimeasg,** s.m. Chaos [Preceded by 
art. an. ] | 
dubb-choitchinn, see dubh-choitchionn. 
Aubh-choitchionn, -a, -an, s.f. Common prosti- 


tute. 
dnbh-chosach,** see dubh-chasach. 
dubh-chosnadh, s.m. Field-work. Is bochd am 
pòsadh nach fearr na’n d., it is a poor mar- 
riage that is not better than field-work. 
dubh-chreag, s.f. Gloomy rock. 
dubh-chreige, -an, s.f. Ring-ouzel or mountain 
blackbird—turdus torquatus, 2**Gloomy rock, 








280. Dubh-chreige. 
dubh-chriotbnaich, v.a. Convulse. 
dubh-chuil, s.f. Beetle. 
ñubh-chomharrachaidh, s.m, Marking-ink. 
lübhdach, see dùdach, 


dàübhdair, see dùdair. 

eachd, see düdaireachd. 

dàübhdan, -ain, s.m. Smoke. 2 Smothered flame. 
3 Cinders of burnt straw. 4ł Soot. 

ach, -aiche, a. Sooty. 2 Smoky. 

dubh-dhaol, -aoil, -an, s.f. Beetle. 

dubh-dhearg, -dheirge, a. Dark red, liver- 
colour. [** gives auburn, russet, dark brown. | 

dubh-dhonn, -dhuinne, a, Dark brown. 2 Au- 
burn, russet. 3* Drab, dun, dusky. Falt 
d., auburn hair, 

dubh-dhorch,** a, Pitchy dark. 

iubh-dhorcha,1f -dhuirche, a. Pitehy. 

das, ais, s.m. Pitchiness, pitchy 














darkness. 

üubh-dhruim,tt -dhroma, s.f. Dark surface. 2 
Dark height. 3 Black back. 4 Black ridge. 
D. na mara, the dark surface of the sea. 

dubh-eun,** s.m. Diver (bird.) 

——ach(AF) s.m, Razor-bill, 
traiche. 

dubh-fhacal, -ail -fhaelan, s.m. Riddle, puzzle, 
enigma, parable, dark saying. 2 Bad express- 

. ion. 

dubh-fhaclach, -aiche, a. Obscure, enigmatical. 

dubh-fhad, sm. Second or lowest peat—Suth’d. 

dubh-fhalt,** -fhuilt, s.m. Black hair. 

dubh-fhaoileann,(AF) Large gull. 

dubh-fhiamhach, -aiche, a. Blackish. 

dubh-fhiodh,§ Ebony—diospyros ebenus. 

dubh-fhuathaich,tf v.a. Loathe. 

dubh-ghalar, -air, -an, s.m. Looseness, disease 
in cattle, see dubh-thuil. 

Dubh-Ghall, -aill,s.m.(*&f.] Lowlander,foreign- 





see col- 


Digitized by 
INTERNET ARCHIVE 


369 


dubh-ogha 


er. 2 Dane. 38tfReal Lowlander. 

tempt Mean-spirited fellow. 
dubh-eghlae, -aic, -an, s.f. Dark valley. [tt gives 

dubh-ghlaie as nom. | 
dubh-ghlas, -aise, a. Dark grey, dark drab. 
dubh-ghleann,** -ehlinn, s.m. Gloomy vale. 
dubh-ghnosach,** a. Black-mouthed. 
dubh-ghnuiseach, -eiche, a. Blackfaced. 
dubh-ghorm, -ghuirme, a. Dark blue, black and 





4 in con- 


blue. 
dubh-ghormadh,** -aidh, s.m. Making dark 
blue, making black and blue, generally ap- 
plied to change of colour through cold. 
dubh-ghrain, -e, s.f. Abhorrence, extreme dis- 
usb, 
EE Ed V* s.f. Abhorrence, abomi- 
nation. 


—-—— 





—eil, -eala, a. Abhorring, extremely 

disgusting. 
——ich,* v.a. Detest, abhor. 

dubh-ghruaim, -e, s.f. Dark frown. 

dubh-ghruamach, a. Dark-frowning. 

dubh-la, -laithean, s.m. Mournful day, day of 
temptation or trial. Cumaibh an d. air 
chuimhne, keep the mournful day in mind. 

Dübhlach, -aich, s.m. see Dùdlachd. 

du^h-lach,(AFE';s f. Bald coot, see lach-a’-bhlair. 

dübhlachadh,** -aidh, s.m see diblachadh. 

dubh-lachadh,** -aidh, s.m. Coot. 

dùbhlachd, s.f.ind. see Dùdlachd. 

—ail,* a. Wintry. 

duübhlaidh, -e, a. Gloomy, dark. 2 Wintry. 3 
Dark-coloured. 4**Tempestuous. Gu d., 
darkly. 

—eachd,* s.f.ind. Darkishness. 2 Dark 

blue. 3**Wintriness, tempestuousness. 

dübhlaith, e, a. Melancholy. 

——————-——each,** a. Melancholic. 

dùbhlan, -ain, s m. Challenge, defiance. 2*Har- 
dihood, capability of bearing cold, hardship 
and want. Cuir gu d., set at defiance ` 'nuair 
a théid duine g’ a dh., when a person is rous- 
ed ; a’ toirt dùbhlain, challenging. 

ach, -aiche, a. Defying, challenging, 

2 Bold, fearless, daring, brave. 3*Capable of 
bearing cold and fatigue. Gu d., proudly, in 
defiance. 

— achadh, -aidh, s.m. Challenging, defy- 
ing. A’ d—, pr.pt. of dubhlanaich. 

——achd, s.f.ind. Challenging, defiance. 2 
*Hardihood, degree of bravery, fearlessness, 

dùbhlanaich, pr. pt. a’ dübhlanachadh, v.d. 
Challenge, defy, set at defiance. 

—— — — ———te, past pt. of dùbhlanaich, 

dubh-latha, see dubh-là, 

dubh-leann, s. Melancholy, see leann-dubh. 

ach, -aiche, a. Melancholic. 

——--achd,s,f.ind Woe, sorrow, melancho- 
ly, depression of spirits. 

dubh-leum, see duibh-leum. 

dubh-liath, -léithe, see dubh-chléin. 

————, a. Ash-coloured, dark grey. 

dubh-lith, -e, æ. see dubhlaidh. 

dubh-liunn, see leann-dubh. 

dubh-lochan,(AF) s.m. Trout. 

dubh-loisg,* v.a. Burn to a cinder. 

—te, a. & past pt. Burnt black, burnt to 
a cinder. 

dubh-losgadh, -aidh, s.m. Thorough burning,in- 
cineration. 

dubh-mhéarsadh,** -aidh, s.m. Procession. 

dubh-neul, see duibh-neul. 

Dubh-nimhe, s. The name of Caoilte's banner. 

dubh-ogha, s.m. Great grandson's grandson. 
[Dubh is used to add a step to flonn-ogha, 
though Sonn here is really a prep. and not 
fionn, white.) 

















dubhra 370 duibh-leum 
dübhra, duibhre, see dùbhradh. Perthshire. D. dubh -threabha, a Mole 
27 a. Dark, gloony. Perthshire. 


dübhrach, -aiche, a. see dubharach. 

—d, -an, s.m. see dùrachd. 

.— ———üach, -aiche, a. see dùrachdach. 

dubhradan, -ain, s. m. Sable. 2 Used by * for 
duradan. 

dübhradar, impers. v. They said (abair.) 

dùbhradh, v. It was said. 

dùbhradh, -aidh, -aidhean,s.m. Shade, shading, 
shadiuess, gloom, darkening, darkness. 2 
Sternness. 3* Dark object in the distance. 4 
** Spectre. D. w’ an gruaidh, sternness in 
their visage. A’ d—, pr.pt. of dubhair, 

fdubhram, ( for thubhairt mi) I said. 

dubh-rann, s.m. Blank verse. 

dubhras,** -ais, s.m. Gloomy wood. 12 House, 
room, habitation, 

Tdubhras (for thubhairt mi.) 

dubh-reabha,(CR) s.m. Mole. 

dubh-reabhgan, s.m. Mole. 

du’-bhreac, see dubh-bhreac. 

dubh-reotha, see dubh-reabha. 

dubh-reothadh,** s.m. Black frost. Smuidrich 
an dubh-reothaidh, the mist of black frost. 

— ,** s.f. Mole. 

du’-bhron, -bhroin, see dubh-bhrón. 

—ach, -aiche, a. see dubh-bhronach. 

dubh-ruadh, -ruaidhe, æ. Dark red, *auburn. 

dubh-ruith, -e, s.f. Swift running, running at 
full s; eed, furious running. 

dubh-sgiathach,** a. Dark-winged. 

dubh-sgithich, v.a. Harass, overlabour. 

dubh-shiubhal,** -ail, s.m. Dark stream, 2 Pro- 
gress of a dark stream. 3 Dark path. 4 
Miserable journey. D. na linn,the dark rolling 
of the abyss. 

—— —— — ———, -aile, a. Dark rolling, as of wa- 


ters. 

dubh-shiübhlach, -aiche, a. Dark-rolling. 

——-———,* -aiche, s.f. Strolling female 
or gipsy. 

dubh-shnàmh, og, Dive. 

—— ———-——aicehe, -an, s.m. Diver, (waterfowl.) 

dubh-shnàmhair, see dubh-shnàmhaiche. 

dubh-shuileach, -iche, a. Black-eyed. 

dubh-shnagan,Js.m. Water-rail,see snagan-allt. 

dubh*e, past pt. of dubh. Cancelled, blotted, 
blackened. [see foot-note, p. 53.] 

dubhtach, see dudach. 

dubhtharach, -aiche, see dubharach. 

dubh-thoill, s.f. Hemorrhoids. 

dubh-thonn, -thuinn, s. Gloomy wave. 

dubh-thràth, s.m. Evening twilight. . 

dubh-threabha,(CR )s.2n.Ground mole— Perthsh. 

dubh-thriall,** s.m. Procession. fart. on. 

dubhthuil,|s. f. Diarrhoea. [Preceded by the 

düb'aüchadh, -aidh, s.m. Double, duplicate. 2 
Act of doubling or folding. 3* Distilling the 
second time. 4 Copying. A’ d—, pr. pt. of 
dublaich. 

dùbladh, -aidh, -aidhean, s. m, Doubling. 2 
Covering, lining. 3**Sheath, scabbard, case. 

dùblaich, pr.pt. a’ dùblachadh, v.a. Double, 
fold. 2 Repeat. 3 Distil à second time. 

te, past pt. of dublaich. 

düblainn,** v.a. see dùblaich. 

-— ———,** s. Double quantity, as much again. 

dublas,(AH) s.m. [sometimes /.] Distasteful,un- 
palatable infusion, as badly made tea, soup 
or broth. 

du’-breac, see dubh-bhreac. 

du'-bronach, see dubi-bhrónach 

duc, -a -an,s.m. Heap, hillock, prov. 

ducain, gen. sing. & n.pl. of dücan. 

ducait, -ean, s.7. Ducat (coin. ) 

ducan,** -ain, s.m. Little heap, little hillock— 

















dueanach, -aiche,**a@. Full of hillocks or heaps. 

ducan-faimh, s.m. Mole-hill. 

dücan-uir-íaimh, s.m, Mole-hill. 

duch,(C&)s.m. Nightfall (only in the phrase 
* bho mhuch gu duch," from morning till 
night.—Suth’d d: Perthsh. | Generally o mhoch 
gu dubh. | 

ducha, for dùtha, comp. of dùth. 

tduchan, -ain, s.m. War. 

düchannaibh, ( for dùthchannaibh.)} 

dùchas, -ais, see dùthchas. 

dùchasach, see dùthchasach. 


dùd, dùid, -an, s.m. Tingling of the ear. 2 The 
ear. 3 Horn. 4 Blast of a horn. 5* Hollow 
sound. 6**Rag. 7flWord, sound. 


dud,* s.m, see tudan. 

dudach,** -aiche, a. Ragged. 2 Thin-skinned. 
Cho d. ri circ, as thin-skinned as a hen. 

düdach, -aiche, -aichean, s.f. Sounding horn, 
bugle, war-horn, trumpet. D, sheilge, a hunt- 
ing horn. 

didag, -aige, -an, s.f. Little horn, little bugle. 

dudag,** -aige, -an, s.f. Rag. 2 Smallcup. a 
Measure of liquids, containing a drachm, and 
commonly made of horn. 4 Slight stroke on 


the ear, 5 Ragged girl. 
düdair, -ean, s.m. Trumpeter. [ff & * give œ 
as n. sing.) 
eachd, s.f.ind. Noise of horns or trumpets, 
2 Act of sounding à horn. 3**Sound of a hunt- 
ing horn, 
dùdan, -ain, $.m. Mill-dust. 2 Beard of dried 
oats. 3 (MM) Short pipe [Irísh, duidin.] 
dudarlach, -aich, s.m. Paltry wretch. 


dà-dhearg,* a. see dubh-dhearg. 
dudlach, -aich, a. Stormy,wintry,gloomy,dark, 


dismal. 

Dùdlachd, s.f.ind. Depth of winter. 2 Tem- 
pestuous weather. 3 Gloominess, dreariness, 
4 Month of December [preceded by the art. 
an.] 5ttStorm. Da gheamhraidh, the depth 
of winter. 

düdlaich, v.a. Darken, make gloomy. 2 Frown. 

düdlaidh, -e, a. Dark, gloomy, sad. 

doch, see dùth. 

düghaich, s.f. One of the intestines—Sgeulaiche 
nan Caol. 

dughall, -aill, see dubh-ghall. 

du;harra, a. Stubborn. 





düshlas, see dubh-ghlas. 
duibh, prep. pron, Yo you. Emphatic form, 
duibh-se, An cadal duibh ? are you asleep $ . 


duibb, gen. sing. m. of dubh. ; 

duibhe, comp. of dubh. Is d. na neul fo 
'ghaoith, darker than the wind-driven cloud. 

duibhe, s.f.ind. Blackness, darkness, inkiness. 
2**|]nk. 3(AC) Spaui. 

—ad, -eid, s.m. Degree of blackness. A’ 
dol an d., grewing blacker and blacker ; air a 
dh., however black it be. 

duibheazan,** -ain, s.m. Abyss. 2 Dagger, 
short sword. 

fduibhearach,** a. Vernacular. 

duibheid, -ean, s.f. Flat turf used for covering 
cottages, ** divot."' 

.— ——ich,** v.a. Cover with turf, as the roof 
of a cottage, 

duibhir,** a. 
Gioomy. 

1duibheilneach, -ich, s.m. Necromancer. 

tduibighean, -ein, s.m. Sword, dagger, 
fduibhazhein, -e, -ean, sm. & f, Foreigner. 
duibh-leas, see du'rbh-leus. 

duibh-leum, -léim, pl. -a, & -annan, s.m. Leap 
in the dark. 2* Bound, leap. 3* Sudden leap 





Melancholy, 2 Anxious. 3 


tut car Mee de i b 4 





i v 
- 


ef 
a 


duibh-leum 


—Argyllshire. [tt gives s.f.] Feithidh fear 
sona ri sith, ach bbeir am fear dona d., a 
well-advised person will bide his time, but a 
fool will leap in the dark. 

Ruibh-leus, -ledis, s 14. Shade, cloud. 

——_——ach, -aiche, a. Cloudy, shadowy. 

Auibh-neul,-neóil, s.m. Dark cloud. 2**Dark 
colour. 3**Swarthy complexion. 4 Gloomy 

. aspect. 

duibh-neul,** v.a. Darken. 

—ach, -aiche, v. Dark clouded, murky, 
2 Darkvisaged. 3 Frowning. 

duibhre, sj. ind. Gloom, shade, obscurity, 
darkness. 2 Melancholy, sadness. An d 
bàis, in the darkness of death ; mar bhruaich 
'san d., like a precipice in the dark. 

duibhreas, -eis, s.m, Darkness, 2 Mysterious- 
ness, secrecy, secret. 

Quibhrich, v.g. Shade, eclipse, darken 

| te, past pt. of duibhrich. 
darkened, eclipsed. 

dnibh-rith, -e, s.£. see dubh-ruith. : 

duibh-se, emphatic form of duibh, 

duibleid,** s.f. Gaelic spelling of doublet. 

duibreac,* s.m. Spirling. 

duidhean, ssm. The stem of the langadar, a 
kind of seaweed. J. Cameron ($) seems to be 
in error when he confounds this with stamh. 

dui-eunach,7 s.m. Razor-bill, see coltraiche. 

Tduigh, v.n. Cluck, as a hen. 

düigh,** s, Poison. | 

dùil, -c, -ean, s.f. Hope, expectation. 2 Belief. 
3 Supposition. 4 Desire. 5 Delight. Tha d. 
againn, we expect ; tha mi ’n d., I expect, 
imagine. suppose, hope; am bheil d. agad ? do 
you suppose ? an d. r' a theachd, in expecta- 
tion «j his coming ; thug sinn ar d. dheth, we 
lost all expectation of him; is beag d. a bh’ 

. agamsa, little did I expect ; tha d. agam ris, 4 
expect him ; am bheil d. agaibh ris? do you 
expect him ? chaill sinn ar d. dheth, we lost all 
expectation of him ; cha'n "eil d. no sùil agam 
ris, I neither hope nor look for him; is d. leam 
nach cian an t-àm, I expect the time is not dis- 


tant. 

dùil, e, n.pl. duilidh, dùil, düilinn, duiltean & 
düilean, gen. pl. dul, s.f. Element. 2 Animal, 
being, creature. 3 Nature. 4**Partition. 
Na duil ! poor creatures ! gach d. bheò, every 
living creature ` leaghaidh na düilidh, the ele- 
ments shall melt. 

duil,* v.a. Hoop or thread, as a hook—Perthsh. 

duilbhear,** a. Sad, anxious,melancholy,cheer- 
less, unpleasant. [The opposite of suilbhir.] 

achd,**s.f. Sadness, anxiety, suspense, 

melancholy. [The opposite of suilbhearachd.] 

ra, a. Sad, anxious, melancholy,cheer- 

less,unpleasant. [The opposite of suilbhearra. ] 

rachd, s.f. Dolefulness, cheerlessness, 

unpleasantness, sadness, anxiety. 

duil-bhriseadh, s.m. Disappointment. 

dùile, gen. sing. of dùil. 2**Poor creature, 3 
++Weak person. S{{Pleasure. 4 see duilleag, 

düileach, -iche, a. Elemental. 

duileachan,(AF) s.m. see dubh-lochan. 

duileachd,* s.f. Doubt, suspicion, as of a child. 
2**Hopelessness. ` "Ga chur an d., suspecting 
that the child is not your own. 

duileag, -eige, -an, s.f. Poor little girl, term of 
affection. 2 see duilleag. 

fduileamh, s. God. 

fuileann,* s.m. Perquisite, present, tribute. 
Móran dhuileannan eile, à great number of 
other perquisites. 
uileasg,§ -isg, s.n. Dulse, kind of seaweed— 

A rhodymenia palmata. 2§ Pepper-dulse—iau- 
rentia pinnatifide 





"Shaded, 














Dic 


KTEBNKIET. A DOLICE 
INTERNET ARCHIVE 


jitized by 


871 





duiieasgach,** a, 


duileasg-nam-beann,} s. 


dùile-theannsgnaidh, 


duileum, 









duilleag 


Abounding in, or like, dulse, 
na h-aibhne,§ s.m. Broad-ieaved pond- 
weed—potamogeton natans. 
m. 
Mountain dulse—palmel/a 
montana. 
+duileil, a. Skilled. 
see 
düil-thionnsgnaidh, 
see duibh-leum. 
düi*-fheitheamh,if -imh,s.m. 
Expectation. 
duilghe, s. see duilghead. 
, comp. of duilich. 
duilghead, -eid, s.m. Degree 
of diffieulty or sadness. 
—— —— —A8,-8is, s.m. Sor- 
row, difficulty. Cha chuir 
sin móran duilgheadais [281. Duileasg-na-h- 
roimhe, that will not cause aibhne. 
him much sorrow. 
duilgheas, see duiligheadas. 
duilghid, 2nd. comp. of duilich. 
Tduilgne, s.pl. Wages, hire, premium. 
duiliasg, see duileasg. 
duilich, æ. Difficult, hard. 2Sorry, grieved. 
Thus compared :—Ist. comp. duilghe or dorra, 
2nd. comp. duilghid or dorraid, 2rd. comp. 
duilghead or dorrad. [Duilghe, duilghid,used 
in the two senses of hard and sorry. Dorra 
only in the sense of hard or difficult in W. of 
Rosa-shire—( DU. ) Ceisd dh., a dificult 
question ; is d. leam, Iam sorry ; is d. leis, 
he is sorry; is d. dhuit 'fhàgail, it is a pity 
for you to leave him ; sgeul a bu d. leinn, news 
for which we were sorry ; is d. leam gur fior, 
I am sorry it is true ; na’s duilghe, more difi- 
cult ; tha seo d., this is dificult ; tha mi d. air 
do shon, I am sorry for you. 
duilichead,** s.m. Arduousness. 
—— ————Aa8,** s.m. Arduousness. 
duilichinn, -e,-ean, s. f. Sorrow, vexation. 2 
Compassion. Tha efo mhórand, he is very 
grieved (under much grief ); is beag d. a th’ 
ort you do not seem to be the least sorry for it. 
+duilieachd, s.f. see duileachd. 
duilinn, s.pl. The elements. 2**s./.(sing.) Tax, 
tribute. 
duilinne, -an, s.f. Tribute, tax. 
duilinnean, see duilinn. 
duilinnean, s., pl. of duilinne. 
duiliomral,** -ail, s.m. Error. 
duiliosg, s,m. see duileasg. 
duill-chuil, (AF) s. Beetle, black-beetle. 
duill-dhaol,(AF) s. Beetle, black beetle. 
duille, an, s,f. see duilleag, 2 Sheath, as of a 
knife or dagger. 3**Blade. 41IVagina. Gun 
d. chall no blath, without losing leaf or blos- 
som ; d. sgéine, the blade of a knife. 
fduilleabhar, -air, s.f. Foliage. 
duilleabhrach, -aiche, a. see duilleagach. 
duilleach, -ich, s.m, Foliage, leaves. 2**With- 
ered leaves. 
2tt 


—, -iche, a. 
Sheathed. 
adh, -aidh, s.m. Flourishing, vegeta- 
ting, putting forth leaves, A’ d—, pr. pt. of 
duillich. 
——an, -ain, s.m. Book, pamphlet, sheet. 
duilleag, -eige, -an, s.f. Leaf, as of a tree or 
lant. 2 Leaf, as of a door or book. 3* Leaf- 
et. 4**Fold. 5** Scabbard. Taobh duill- 
eige, a page ; d. còmhla, a leaf of a door, flap 
of the breast ; d. luaineach, a fluttering leaf ; 
dà dh. aon chomhla, the two leaves of one 
door ; d. leabhair, the leaf of a book; an d.,the 
diaphragm. 








gpl. Customs. 


see duilleagach. 











E IP Ia Xr 4 
| | Adr ke Lh v | 
A v Eon hd eal 


) - 
URBANA-CHAM 


L - 

k 
I 
i L3 


e EE E M EE ve, 


duilleagach, -aiche, a. Leafy, abounding in 
leaves, having foliage. 2**In folds, as a door. 
Dorus d., a folding door. 

duilleag a’ chruineachd,s.f. Common liver-wort, 

duilleag-bhaite,$ s.f. Water-lily—nymphea. 

————— bhàn,$ s.f. White water-lily— 

nymphoa alba. 

——-—— bhuidhe,§ s.f. Yellow water-lily 
—nuphar luteum. 

Qluillea2-bnràghad,$ s.f. 
eag-mhath, 

duilleag-Bhrighde, s/f. 

duilleag-mhath,§  $. f. 
communis. 








Nipple-wort, see duill- 


see duilleag-mhath. 
Nipple-wort—lapsana 





282. Duilleag-mhath. 288. Dàil-mhial. 
duilleag-mhin,$s.f. see duilleag-mhath. 
duillean,** -ein, s.m. Spear. 
fduillear, -eire, a. Leafy. 
duille-doruis s.f. Theleaf of a door. 
duille-sgéine, s.f. The sheath of a knife. 
duillich, v.n. Sprout, put forth leaves, infoliate. 

2 Flourish. 
duillinnean, see duilinnean. 
duilliur-féithlean,}s.m. Honeysuckle, see uill- 

eann. 

.-duilliur-spuino,? -e, 
liath. 

Tduill-mhial,(AF) an, s.m. Caterpillar. 

duill’-thaobh, -thaoibh, an, s.m. Page of a 
book. 2 Side of a leaf. 

duüil-mhial,$ sr Great bindweed—convolvulus 
sepium. 2**Caterpillar, 

duil-theannsgnaidh,** -tean- 
thionnsgnaidh. 

duil-thionnsgnaidh,-e, -ean, s.f. Element, 

Tduim, -e, a. Poor, needy. 

dùin, pr.pt. a’ dùnadh, v.a. Shut, close. 2En- 
close, surround. 3 Lace or button, "as boots 
or shoes. 4 Darken, obscure. Dh. ced bhliadh- 
na air a dhéarrsa, the mist of years has shroud- 
ed his splendour ; d. an dorus, close the door. 

dùin, pl. & gen. s. of dùn. 

duine, gen.sing. duine, pl. daoine, s.m. Man. 2 

Person, bod7, individual. 3 The oldest man 

of a village. D. gun mhath gun chron, is mó 

*chron na ’mhath, a man that’s neither good 

nor Ùll is more ill than good—duine gun mhath 

un chron, is also applied to a shiftless,thrift- 
ess sort of man who is otherwise quite decent; 

an duine, the good-man of the house; an d. 

acamsa, my husband—d. is often applied to ei- 

ther men or women,as,am bheil d. a staigh P is 
anyone in ? ; is fhèarr d. na daoine, a proper 
person is better than many men; ro-dh., an 
excellent man, man of rank ; fiadh-dh., wild 
mon, satyr ; d. gaoil, a male relative; d. math, 
good man; duine-nan-clag, the bell-man. Fear 
de n’ dhaoine, one of my men, is a good exam- 
ple of the difference between fear and duine. 

[Ihe following remarks apply to W. of Ross- 

shire. Duine means emphatically a married 


s.m. Coltsfoot, see cluas- 


8. mM. gee dùil- 


| 
[ITI 


duiread 


man. An unmarried man of any age is gille. 
fear is as colourless, except as to sex, as ''in- 
dividual,” “ person,” or ** one," and is gene- 
rally little more than a peg on which to hang 
an attribute. Cha robh e 'na dh. aig an am 
sin, he was not a (married ) man at that time : 
A native would never commit himself so far 
as to ask '' có ean d. sin ? whe is that man?” 
Bean is duine, is husband and wife (lit. wife 
and husband.) The precedence of the wife is 
possibly a relie of Pictish custom. The 
phrase occurs in other parts, for example 
Perthshire, which was also in Pictland. In 
Arran [& Argyllshire—AH] “ fear agus bean” 
is the invariable usage. In Gairloch both 
phrases are used. In Lewis the latter, and 
more rarely *duine agus bean” are used. 
“Ca bheil na fir ud ?" where are those fellows? 
used, for example, in reference to two boys, 
aged respectively two and three.—C.R. in 
Gael. Soc., xxiv, 368.] 

fduineabhadh, -aidh, s.m. Manslaughter, 

duineachan, -ain, s.m. Little man, manikin. 

duineadas, -ais, sm. see duinealas. 

duinealachd, s.f.ind. see duinealas. 

duinealas, ais, s.m. Manliness. 2 Warmth of 
heart. 3**Boldness, 4**Decision of character. 

duinean,** ein, s.m. Manikin. 

duinear, fut.pass. of duin. 

Tduine-bad,l| s. Plague or general destruction 
of the people. 

duineil, -eala, a. Manly, firm, like a man. 2 
(AH) Dutiful. Bi d., be manly. 

duine-mharbhadh,** -aidh, s.m. Manslaughter. 

duine-mharbhaiche,** s.m. One who has com- 
mitted manslaughter. 2 Murderer. 

duine-oircneach, Ach, s.m. Assassin. 

duin’-iaruinn,(DU) s.m. Windlass in a fishing- 
boat. This is the name always used in Gair- 
loch. [The mechanism at a distance bears a 
close resemblance to à man.] 

dùinidh, fut. af. of dùin. 

fduinionga, s.f. Onyx stone, 

duin’-itheach, -ich, s.m. Cannibal, man-eater. 

duinn, prep.pron, To us, emphatic form, duin- 
ne. Guslàinte 'thabhairt dhuinn, to give ug 
salvation ; is coir dhuinn, we ought. 

duinne, comp. & gen. fem. of donn. 

, $4. Brownness. 

ad, -id, s.f. Degree of brownness. 

dùinte, a. & past pt. of dùin. Shut, closed. 2 
Not communicative, reserved. 3 Niggardly. 

duinteachd,** s.f. Closeness. 

duintean, n. pl. of dùn. 

Duir, s.f. Oldname of theletter D. 2 Oak. 

Tduirbh, -e, s.m. Disease. 

i1duire, a. see duairc. 

, &f. Gaelic spelling of dirk. 

tt s.f. Pine-cone. 2 Acorn, 

-daraich, 8.f.pl. Acorns. 

duirce,** -an, s.f. Acorn. 

duirceall, s.f. Spud. 2 Rusty knife. 31tAcorn, 

duircean,** -ein, s.m. Diminutive naughty per- 
son. 2dim,of duirctt. 3 pl. of duirctt. 

duircein, see duircean. 

duirche, comp. of dorch. 

,** s.f. Darkness, gloom, "Thional an d., 

the darkness gathered. 

ad, see dorchad. 

duirchid, 2nd. comp. of dorch. 

duire, comp. of dur. More or most obstinate, 
unmanageable or impenetrable, 


duire, see doire, 

dùire, s.f.ind. Hardness. 2 Obstinacy, indo- 
cility. 3 Stupidity. 

duiread, -eid, s.f. Stubbornness, degree of stub- 
bornness, „Obstinacy or indocility. 2 Hard- 


























e wn ee” c ti 


te 


^n 


durread 


`- ness. 3 Stupidity. A’ dol an d., growing 
harder and harder. 

———-————, 2nd. comp. of dur. 
more obstinate for that. 

fdüir-fheur, s.n. Wet grass. 

düirig, v.n. see düraig. > ) 

duirn, gen. "o, & n. pl. of dorn. Lan duirn, 
a fistful. s fhéarr lan an duirn de cheaird 
na lan an duirn de dh’ or, ahvndful of trade 
ts better thon œ handful of gold—N.G.P. says 
** this is undoubsedly a borrowed proverb, the 
trade of the smith or armourer being the only 
one that the Gael of oid looked upon with 
any respect.”’ 

duir-shian,-tan, s.m. Tempest. 

duirt, (for d'thubhairt) past interr. & neg. of 
abair. 

duis, gen. sing. & n.pl. of dos. 

Quis, -eachan, s.f. see duais. 2** Jewel, 3** 
Crow. 4**Gloom.  5**Mist. 6 t{Chief. "tt 
Dust, dross. 8(DMy)} Lights, entrails of a cow 
or sheep, with all the fat attached to it, D. 
bà, d. caorach.—Lewis. 

duis chill,** s.f. Asylum, sanctuary. 

duiseal, eil, s.m. Spout. 2 [* gives s.f.] Whip. 3 
see duisiol. 

dùiseal, eil, s.m. Cloud. 2 Gloom, heaviness. 
3 Dulness. 4 Spellof work. a Slumber, 
drowsiness. Gun d. 'san iarmailt, without a 
cloud in the firmament ; gun d. cadail, without 
the heaviness of sleep. 

——ach, -aiche, a. Cloudy. 2 Sleepy. 

—-—ach,** -aich, s.m. Rain. 

duisealadh, -aidh, s.m. Flogging, whipping. 

duisealan, see duisleannan, 

duisealtach,** see duisealach. 

dùisg, pr. part. a’ dùsgadh, v.d. & n. Awake, 
awaken, rouse up. 2 Rouse, excite. 

E fut.ajf.pass. of dùisg. Shall be awa- 


kened. 

dùisgidh, fut.aff.act, of dùisg. 

duisgioll** -ill, s.m. Client. 

düisgte, past pt. of dùisg. Awakened, roused, 
2 Excited. 

$fduisich, v.a. Awake, arouse. 

fduisighe, see duisgte. 

duisiol, -il, s.f. Flute, pipe. 

duisleag,** -eig, -an, $.f. see duileasg. 

duisleannan, s. pl. Ill-natured pretences, false 
complaints, freaks, 2 Obstinacy. 3 Dissim- 
ulation. rov. 

duis-neul, -neoil, s.m, see duibh-neul, 

——--—— ach, see duibh-neulach. 

duis-oglach, -aich, s.m. Client. 

dui-suineach,q| see coltraiche., 

duit, prep.pron, 'To thee, for thee, unto thee. 

duiteag,(CR) Perthshire for doiteag. 

duit-se, emphat. form of duit. 

duitseach,** a. Curtailed, docked, "aa a fowl- 
SESCH d., a docked cock ; cearc dh., a docked 

en. 

dul, s.m. prov. for dol. 

dul,* s.m. see dula, 

dul, gen.pl. of dùil, elemeut. 12 used as n. sing, 
Dia nan dul, the God ofthe elements. 

dül,** -uil, s.m. Terraqueous globe, universe. 

dul,** v.a. Loop, catch with a loop. 

E s.m. Eyelet in dornan (which see), 
— Lewis. 

dula, chan, ssm. Noose, slipping loop. 2 Hol- 
low, 3 Pin, peg. 4**Trap, gin. 5**Satirist. 
6**Hook,  7tiSwivel. 8 Lock of hair.  9** 
Fishing with nets. 

-—ch,** g, Full of loops, snares, gins or 
swivels. 

Dilach, see Dùdlachd. 

Dulachd, see sudlachd. 


Is d. e sin, he is the 


NTERNET ARCHIV 


373 


dün-lios 
dalag, -aige, -an, s. f. 
Littie loop. 


prov. see dallag. 2** 


3** Little snare. 





-- ach,** a. Full of little loops. 2 Full of 
little gias or traps. 
-———àan,(*C) s.m. Holiness. D. nan seachd 


sagart, the holiness of the seven priests, 
dulaidh, a. see dubhlaidh. 
dùlan, -ain, -an, s.m. 
ach, -aiche, a. 
—-—achadh, see dübhlanachadh. 
— —achd, see dubhlanachd. 
— ——aich, v.a. see dübhlanaich. 
dulbhar,** a. see duilbhearra. 
————achd, see duilbhearrachd. 
dulchann,** -ainn, s.f. Avarice, covetousness. 
. 2 Miserableness. 
ach,** a. 
Miserable. 
—— —————achd,** s.f. Covetousness. 
dul-chaoin,** s.f. Lamentation, wailing. 
———-—teach,** a. Lamenting, wailing. 
dulenuis,** s.f. Earnestness, diligence, perse- 
verance. 2(PJM) Gumption. 
each,** -siche, a. Earnest, diligent, 
persevering. 
dulchunn, -uinn, see dulchann. 
duldach, see dudlach. 
Duldachd, see Dudlachd, 
duidaieh, see dudiaich. 
duidaidh, see dudiaidb, 
-—eachd, see Dudlachd 2 & 3, 
du’liath, -a, see dubh-liath. 
dullag, see daliag. 
dullaigh, -e,@. see dubhlaidh. 
fdüllaigh, -e, -ean, 8.7. Winter. 
dùmhail, dümhala, a. see dòmhail, 
dumhalachd,** see domhalachd. 
dumhalas,** s.m. Grossness, 
dümhehas, -ais, prov. for dùthchas. 
dùmhlachadh, see dòmhlachadh. 
dùmhladas, -ais, see dòmhlachd. D. dòrainn, 
œ weight of grief ; a’ dol an d., growing more 
bulky and clumsy ; d. mór sluaigh, a large con- 
course of people. 
dùmhlaich, see dòmhlaich. 
dùmhlas, -ais, s.m. see dòmhlachd. 
dùn, -ùin, pl. dùin & dùintean, s.m. Heap. 2 
Hill, hillock, mound. 3 Fortified house or 


see dubhlan, 
see dubhianach. 





Avaricious, covetous. 2 





—— — 





hill. 4 Fortress, castle. 6 Fastness. 6 
Tower. 7**Hedge. 8(AH)Dunghill (at a farm 
steading.) 


dünach,** o, Hilly, full of heaps or knolls. 2 
Full of towers or forts. 3 Like a tower or fort. 

dunach, gen. sing. of dunaidh. 

dünadh, -aidh, s.m. Shutting, act of shutting or 
closing. 2 Lacing, binding, buttoning, as 
shoes. 3 Barricading. 4 rarely Camp, dwell- 
ing. 5 Multitude. 6+fTermination, closing. 
A’ d—, pr.pt. of duin. 

dunaich,* s.f. see dunaidh. 

dunaidh, s. f. Woe, disaster, misfortune. 2** 
Perplexity. 3**Mischief. Dé an d.a thàinig 
air ? what the mischief came over him ? 

dùnan, -ain, s.m. dim. of dùn. Little castle. 2 
Small heap, knoll or hill. 3 Dunghill. 4** 
Little fort. 5 n. pl. of dùn. 

ach,** o, Knolly. 2 Full of little heaps, 
little hills or little forts. 

dün-aolaich, s.m. Dunghill, 

dün-àros,** -àrois, s.m. Dwelling-place. 

dun-bhalach, s.m. Mere fellow. 

duncan,** s.m.  Fortlet. 

dun-catha,** s.m. Bulwark. 2Sconce. 

dün-feamainn,]f s.m. Dunghill of seaweed. 

dun-Luchair,t} s.m. August dunghill. 

dun-lios, -lis, -liosan, s. m. Palace. 
yard. 3 Fortgarden. 4**Garrison. 





2 Palace- 


dun-lus 


` 


nan-enapan. 

rp NAC Aid v.a. Murder. 

Tdun-mharbnach, : 

4dun-mharbstach, } -aich, s.m. Man-slayer. 

idun-mharbhadh, -aidh, s.m. Homicide, mas- 
sacre. A’ d—, gr.pt. of dun-mharbh. 

¢dunn, -uinn, s.m. ‘Teacher, doctor. 

EG (CR) s.f. Large stone or boulder—W. of 

LOSS. 

dün-rainiche,ft s.m. Dunghill of mossand fern. 

dün-sheangan, s.m. Ant-hill. 

dunt, s.m. Thump. 2 Blow producing a hollow 
sound. 3fftthud. Scots, dund. 

duntag,tt -aig, -an, s.f. Plump little article or 
person. 2 (Fionn) Short knife with a blunt 
point, often consisting ol a razor-blade fixed 
in a wooden handle. 

duntail,* s.f. & pr.pt. Thumping. 

dupadaich,(CR)s.f. Staggering or tottering from 
weakness—W. of Ross. 

dir, -üire, a. Dull, stupid. 2 Stubborn, un- 
tractable, indocile, obstinate. 3 Surly. 4 
Cold, indifferent. 5 Steady, persevering, 
earnest, eager, attentive. Gu d., attentively; 
duine d., a surly fellow. 

dur, adv. ‘Prov. for ’nuair, uair, tra or trath. 

Tdur,-uir, sm. Water. 2§Oak, see darach. 

dùrachd, -an, s.f. Diligence, earnestness, sin- 
cerity. 2 Intention, good-will. _3 Express- 
ion of good-will, good wish. 4 Inclination. 
5 Luck-penny. 6**Daring, courage. Am bheil 
ean d. mhath dhuit ? has he good intentions 
towards you? does he mean well ? gun d. 
cron, without inclination to harm; le d. eridhe, 
with sincerity of heart ; maille ri d., with di- 
ligence ` cha’n ’eila’ dh. agam, I have not the 
courage. 

dürachdach, -aiche, a. Diligent, earnest, sin- 
cere. 2 Urgent. 3 Fervent. 4**Industrious, 
assiduous, persevering. Neo-dh., careless. 

dürachdaiche, comp. of dürachdach. 

düraehdainn,** s.f. Daring, courage. 2 Secret 
wishing. 3 Venturing. 

dürachdan-monaidh, 68. M. 
dew, moor-grass. 

dü:ad,11-aid, s.m. Contumacy. 

dùradan, -ain, -an, s.m. Mote, atom, particle of 
flying dust. 2 Pepper-corn. 3(AH) Moth. 
4(DH) Small insignificant man. Chaidh d. 
'nam shàil, a mote stuck in my eye. 

9 s.m. Wood-pigeon, dove, see calman- 

fiadhaich. 

açh,tt a. Abounding in motes or 
atoms. "2 Covered with dust. 

durag,** s.f. Canker. 

—— -chail,** s.f. Cabbage-worm. 

——— -mharbhach,** a. Anthelmintic. 

duraichd, v.a. see duraig. 

dùraig, pr. pt. a’ dùraigeadh & a’ dàrachdainn, 
v.a. Wish, incline, desire. 2**Dare. 3**Ven- 
ture, adventure. € ha d. ipog dhomh, she has 
no desire to kiss me ; dhùraiginn marbh thu, 
I would wish thee dead; cha d. mi dol do 'n 
t-sabhal air eagal a’ bhodaich, 1 dare not 
go into the barn for fear of the spectre. 

,** s.f. Attempt. 

duran, -ain, s.m. Morose fellow. 2 Obstinate 
fellow. 

———ach, -aich, s.m. Obstinate blockhead. 

duranta, see durranta, 

chd, see durrantachd. 

duras,** -ais, ssm. House. 2 Room. 

durb,** -uirb, s.m. Disease, distemper. 

durbadan, see dùradan. 

dùr-bhalach, see dùr-bhodach. 

dür-bhodach, -aich, s.m. Dunce. 2 Stupid old 
man. 3 Clown. 4ftStiff old man. 


Round-leaved sun- 








a m 








| LI Zt | 
E mE pm PE — m Eom = 
L E 1» P ) gs i J 
1 n d -— H mi l e d 


KENE EC R21 ds 
dun-lus, -luis, -an, s.m. ( for donn-lus) see lus- ,tdur-bhuth. s.m. Cell. 


P weg A 


durrag 


dure,** A s.m. Lump or piece of anything. 2 
Clumsy knife, dirk. 211Truneheon. D. Batts 
a lump of bread ; d. cloiche, a dump of stone. 

durcais, -e,-ean, s.f. Pincers, nippers, prov. 
[dureaisd in MacL & D. and f. | 

—— ——-each,tt a, Abounding in pincers or 
nippers. ` 

durcan, dim. of dure, 2 (AF) see dorcan. 

dur-chluasach, -aiche, a. Hard of hearing. 

dur-chridheach, -iche, a, Hard-hearted. 
dur-chu, see dobhar-chù. 

dùrd, -uird, s.m. Word. 2 Syllable. 3 Hum, 
buzz. 4** Muttering. 5** Sullenness. 6 ff 
Sound. 

——, v.a. Hum, buzz. 2 Mutter. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Syllabic. 

— ail, -e, s.f. Murmuring, grumbling. 2 Coo- 
ing. 2 The cushat’s note. 4 The black-cock’s 
note. 5 Querulousness. 6 Buzzing, hum. 
ming, purring. Rid., cooing ; an d. mhùirn- 
each, the pleasant murmur. 

dürdain, gen.sing. of dùrdan. 

dürdalan, (MMcL) s.m. Cockchafer. 


[Prece- 
ded by the art. an.] 





eet, Dürdalan. 


dùrdan, -ain, s.m. Humming, murmur, cooing 
purring. 2**Gibe. 3 Sing-song. 4**Bit o 
dust, mote, atom. 5*Teasing. Coileach-dubh ' 
ri d., a black-cock making a ies oe | noise}, | 
'nuair a bhitheas ni aig a’ chat ni e d., whe 
the cat has got hold of anything it purrs—said 
of those who speak much of their riches. ` 

ach, -aiche, a. Humming. murmurin 
2Querulous. 3**Gibing. 4 Cooing.  51tt 
Abounding in motes or atoms. 6 Covered or 
sullied with dust. An calman d., the cooing 
pigeon. 
— —— ——Aajich, s.f. see dùrdail. 
dür-fheur-fairge,$ s.f. Sea hard-grass—lepturus 
filiformis. 
dùr-fhoghar, (CR) s.m. Dog- 
days.— Suth’ d. 

durga, a. Surly, sour, for- 
bidding, repulsive, grim. 
2++Grumbling. 

nta, @. see durga. 

———ntachd, s.f. Surliness, 
moroseness, grimness. 

dur-lus,$ -luis, s.m, Water- 
cress, especially nasturti- 
um officinalis, but applied 
to all cresses, see biolair, 

durn, -uirn, see dorn. = 

dürradan, see dùradan. 285. Dür-fheur- 

-.—— ———&ach, see duradanach. fairge. 

durradh ! durradh !* int. Call to à pig—Argyll. 

durradh, s.m. see durraidh. 

durrag, -aige, -an, 8.f. Worm-grub, maggot. 21 
Worm. 3 Little pig. Fùdar nan d., worm- 
powders. 


^ 


"Ung EE e 


Aa 
n Se 





eee T NAT) 





durragach 


» -aiche,a. W ormy,vermicular,abound- 
ing in worms, like a worm or maggot. 
——-—an, n.pl. of durrag. 
——— -bhracha, s.f. Bound. 
——— -chdmhlaich,(AF) s. f. Door- or house- 


worm. 

——— -fhedla, sf, Flesh-maggot. 

durraghan, -ain, s.m. Grunting of a dog. 

durraidh, -e, s.f. Sow, pork. prov. 

durranta, a. Stiff, rigid. 2 Rigorous. 3 Morose, 
ehurlish. 4 Obstinate. í 

=»———chd, s.f. Moroseness, churlishness. 2 
Bigidness. 3 Obstinateness, stiffness. 4 
Austerity. 

dürrasan,(AF) -ain, s.m. Grasshopper. 

durrasgach, -&iche, a. Quick, nimble. prov. 

durrghail,-e, s.f. Coeing of a dove or back: 
cock. 2 Grunting of a dog, 3 Purring of a 
cat. Tha 'n cata’ d., the cat is purring. 

durrghail, see durdail. 

dursan,** -ain, s.m. Crack, report. 

dursann,-ainn,-an, s.m. Unlucky accident, 
mishap. 2 Unhappiness. 

dar-shnaim, -e,-ean, s.f. Hard knot. 


taartach, s. Church, foundation. 2**Cell, 
¢dur-theach, hut. 2**Pilgrim. 
dur-thuinn, s.pl. Surly waves, short choppy 


wayes that give no chance to a small boat. 


durunta, a. see duranta. 
dus, see gus. 
dus, duis, s.m. Dust. 2* Smithy ashes. 3 


Remains of animals or plants. Neulta duis, 


clouds of dust. 
dus,** -uis, s.m. Fort. 
dusach, see dusail. 
dusachd, s.f. Watchfulness. 
dusail, -ala, a. Dusty. 2** Earthy, 
sair,** s.m. Client. 
flusait,** -ean, s.m. Sanctuary, place of refuge, 


earthlike. 





safety. 

iche,*? s.m. One who takes refuge in a 
sanctuary. i ; 

dùsal, -ail, s.m. see dùiseal. 2 (AC) Quirk. 


3 Dust, dustiness. Rinn iad d., they slept. 
ach, -aiche, a. see duüisealach. i 
dusan, -ain, s.m. Dozen. 2**Certain quantity 
of yarn. 
ach,ff a. In dozens. i 
düsgach, a. Rousing, wakening. 2 Stimulating. 
dùsgadh, -aidh, s.m. Awaking, awakening. 2 
Act of awaking, rousing or arousing.  3* Ex- 
citement, exciting. A’ d—, pr. pt. of dùisg. 
Ni mi cadal gun d., I will sleep without a- 
wakening. j 
dusgairm,s.f. Calling, appellation, 
duslach,-aich, s.m. Dust, earth, ground. 
d thu, thou art dust. 
ail, -ala, a. Dusty. 2 Earthy, like earth. 








Is 





duslaing, $.f. see duslainn. 
duslainn, -e, -ean, s.f. [* givess.m.] Gloomy, 
solitary place. 2 Dark place. 3 Dust. 4 


Thicket. 

each, -iche, a. 
as a house. 3 Dusty. 
trial, made of earth. 

duslann, see duslainn, 

ach, see duslainneach. 

dusluingeach,** a. Bushy, 

dustach, see dusail. 

dustadh, Gaelic form of dusting—W. of Ross. 

dustail, see dusail. 

dut, prep. pron. see duit. 

düth, -a, a. Natural, hereditary, native. 2 
Meet, just, proper, fit, suitable, befitting one’s 
ease. Cha d. dha sin, thatcannot be expected 
of him ;tha e maris d. dha, he is as you would 
expect ; an d. dhomh-sa sin? can thai be ex- 





Gloomy. 2**Deserted, 
4 Earth-like, terres- 


CR 
rn 


375 


dut-sa, 

pected of one situated as I am ; is d. dha gu 'm 

bheil e mar sin, it is befitiing his case that he 
should be so. 

,S" s.m. Complement, proportion, equitable 
share, proportionate quantity or number. 
Tha mo dh. féin azam-sa, Z have wy own 
proportion ` clach ime le à d, de chàis., a 
stone of butter wiih its complement oy ese ; 
na'm faighinn mo dh. fém, were I to get iny 
own equitable share; tha a dh. sia a dhìth orm, 
I want a proportionate share of that, the eguiva- 
lent of that is lacking; Gaidbeald’ an d.baaich, 
a Gael whose due is victory. 

dùthaich, dùthcha, dùthchannan, s.f. Country, 
land, native-land, district, territory. Air an 
d., in the country ; muinntir mo dbuthcha,my 
country-folk. 

duthaien, -e,-ean, s.f. The greet gut. 2 
Sausage. 3*The anus. 

du, bail, (AF) s. f. see dubhthuil. 

duthail,* a. Hereditary. 2 Giving just grounds 
to anticipate or expect. 3 Quite natural,rea- 
souable. Isd. dùtbchas im ur a bhith air 
blàthaich, it is quite natural that new-churned 
milk should produce fresh butter. 

dutnainn, (AC) «adv. For evermore. 

tduthamhail, a. Of a good family. 

tduthan, s.m. Nation. 

duthar, -aire, a. Grim, stern, rough. 

dùthcha, gen.sing. of düthaich. 








—— —— il, a. Rural. 2**National. 3 Of good 
family. 
—lachd, see düthchasachd. 


nna, pl. of dùthaich. 
— ———nnaibh, dat. pl. of dùthaich. 
nnan, pl. otdüthaich. 
dùthchas, -ais, s.?2^. Place of one's birth. 9 He- 
redity, native or hereditary temper, spirit or 
blood. 3**Visage, countenance. 4 Heredi- 
tary right. Théid d. an aghaidh nan creag 
hereditary tendencies go against rocks, i. e. a- 
gainst all obstacles, ‘‘ birth tells’; cha bhi 
d. aig mnaoi no sagart, women and priests 
have no birth-tie,—i. e. the woman that mar- 
ries takes her husband's settlement, the 
priest's must be where the Church bids. 
—ach, -aiche, @. Of one’s country. 2 
Native, natural, indigenous. 3 Hereditary. 
4 Natural to one’s family. 5**Patriotic, fond 
of one’s native land. Bud. sin dha, that was 
hereditary in his family. 
————-—ach, -aich, s.m. [& f.] Native. 2 Ab- 
original. 'Nuair à thréigeas na düthchasaich 
Ile, beannachd le sith na h-Alba, when the na 
e forsake Islay, farewell to the peace of Scot- 
and. 
-—achd, s.f.ind. Nativity, natality, na- 
tionalness. 2 Circumstance of being here- 
ditary. 3*Hereditary right, privilege or fail- 


ing. 
düthrachd, -an, s.f. see dürachd. M 
——ach, -aiche, a. see dùrachdach. ` 
du-thràth, see dubh-thràth. 

duthuil,-e, see dubhthuil. 

dut-sa, (for duit-sa) emphatic form of duit. 








E e 


Eadha, the aspen, the old name of the fifth let- 
ter of the Gaelic alphabet, and one of the 
Small vowels. It has various sounds. 
With the grave accent, (è) it sounds like e iu 
there, as è, he; with the acute accent (é), like 
ai in fail, as, té, a female; cé, the earth. At 
the end of a word, it sounds like e in brother, 
as, duine, a man ; roghnaichte, chosen. 

è! inter. Ay! ay! ; é!él exclamation of sur- 
prise. 

è, pers.pron. He, him, it. Written sé when it 
precedes e, [This is an artificial rule and has 
rarely been followed.] Marbhaidh sé é, he 
will kill him. ** Gu ma h-è dhuit” alone, may 
be used as a threat ; when followed by on 
and a clause, it expresses an earnest hope, as, 
gu ma h-e dha gu 'n tig e, God grant that he 
may come. 

ea the 22nd. letter of the old Gaelic alphabet 

9 according to the Book of Leacan. 

ea-, privative prefix, see eu-. 

eabair, pr.pt. ag eabradh, v.a. Besmear, daub 
with mud. 2* Make slimy, as mud, by con- 
tinual tramping. 3 Rollin the mud. 

eaban, -ain, see eabon. 

eabar, -air, s.m. Mud, puddle, slime, mire, 
sedimet, filth, kennel. 2 see abar. 

ach, -aiche, a. Muddy, miry, filthy. 2 
Grovelling, dirty, wallowing. 3 Prone to wal- 
low. 

exbhadh,$ (eadha) s. Aspen, see critheann. 

eabhall, -aill, s.f. see éibheall. 

——ach, -aiche, see éibhleach. 

eabhlach, -aiche, see éibhleach. 

Teabhron, see iarunn. 

eabon, -oin, s.m. Ebony. 

-ach,ft -aiche, a. Ebony. 

eabrach, -aiche, œ. see eabarach.] 

eabradh, -aidh, s. m. Besmearing with mud, 
wallowing inmire. 2 Grovelling. 3**Ken- 
nel. t4rarely Iron. A chum a h-e. 'san làtb- 
aich, to her wallowing in the mire. Ag e—, 
pr.pt, of eabair. 

eabraich, v.a. Mangle. 

teabron,, -oin, s.m. Pan, caldron. 

Babur, -uir, s.m, Ivory. 

.-——ach, tt -aiche,@. Ivory. 

eacal, -ail, s.m. see eucail. 

feacaoin, see acain. 

eacart, -airt, see eu-ceart. 

feacartha, a. Stupid. 

feacconn, s.m. Rage, madness, want of sense, 

t——--—-ach, -aiche, a. Mad, absurd. 

¢eaccosg, -oisg, -an, 3m. see aogasg. 

teaccosmhuil, -e, a see eu-cosmhuil, 

ea-ceart, -ceirte, a. see eu-ceart. 

ea-ceartas, -ais, see eu-ceartas. 

ea-ceillidh, -e, à. see eu-céillidh. 


t ie 


y 














376 


eachanach 

each, eich, n. pl, eich, dat. pl. eachaibh, s. fF 
Horse, 2* Brute. 

PARTS OF A HORSE (BUILL EICH) ; 


1 Gámüidh, crest. (Muing, mane.) 

2 Slinneanan, withers. 

3 Braman, croup, rump. 

4 Féith-luthaidh, féith-na-h-iosgaid, spéir, 
*spearralach, ham-string. 

5 LIosgaid, hough. 

6 sy lurgainn (hind leg only) cannon, 
Sha. i. 

7 Luighcan-deiridh, fetlock. 

8 Rudan, ruitean, fiarag [fiar, slanting,— 
CR) pastern. 

9 Crubh, ionga, bròg, hoof. 

10 Luighean-toisich, coronet. 

11 Gairdean, arm. 

12 Sgornan, gullet. 

13 Bus, craos, muzzle. 


Caol na coise is between fetlock and hoop; 
ubhal a’ chruachainn or ubhal na cruachainn 
is at upper part of haunch ; lùgh na sléisde at 
top of hind-leg thigh. 
each bàn, a white or cream-colourei horse. 
each beilichte, a muzzled horse. 

Massen a horse with a white spot on the fore 

ead. 

each breac, a piebald horse. 

each buidhe, a crea:n-coloured or dun horse. 

each buidhe-ruadh, a bay horse. 

each buidhe-dhonn, a bay horse. 

each cartach, a cart horse. 

each ceannaich, a post-horse. 

each coimhliongadh, a dromedary, 

each-diollaid, a riding-horse. 

each donn, a brown horse. à 

each donn-dhearg, a bay horse. j 

each féin, a cart-horse. 

each fuadain, a stray horse, 

each geal, a white horse. 

each gearrte, a castrated horse. 

each glas, æ grey horse. 

each gorm, a dapple-grey horse. 

each-iaruinn, œ bicycle. 2 railway-engine. 

each-mara, sea-horse, morse, great walrus. 

each marcachd, a saddle-horse. — 

each meamnach, a metliesome horse. 

each meileige, à muzzled horse. 

each odhar, a dun-coloured horse. 

each-oibre, @ working or broken horse. 

each réidh, a hackney. 

each ruadh, a bay horse. 

each ruith, o roadster. 

each seabhaid or saibhd, a stray horse. each- 
seabhain—Lewis ; each seabhaid— Skye. 

each-shasaid, a riding-horse. 

each sith, a fairy horse, kecpie. 

each spothte, a castrated horse. 

each srathach, œ pack-horse. 

each sréine, @ bridle-horse, courser. 

each-steud, @ race-horse. 

each-trotain, a trotting horse. 

each-uisge, a water-horse. 

Air muin eich, on horse-back ; 'nam each 's 

nam dhiollaid, ready in my saddle. 

teach, see neach. j 

eachach, -aiche, a.Having many horses, 
ing in horses. 

eachail, -ala, a. Horse-like, brutal. 

eachalachd, s.f.ind. Brutality, coarseness. 

eachan, -ain, -an, s.m. Little horse. 2 Instru- 
ment used in winding yarn. 3 *Swifts. 4 
Smooth cockle. 5**Blast. 6 Windle. ` E. 
gaoithe, a blast of whirlwind ; e. tachrais, d 
worsted winder. 

ach,** a. Windy, stormy, blasty. 2tt 

Abounding in little horses, or winding-horses. 


abound- 





Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF 


IO ARIA TLUARSDAICCR 
A A! [A-C HAN EF P | IX 


AT 


LINOLS A 


— 


eachanachd 


eachanachd,** s.f. Windiness. 

each-aodach, -aich, -aichean, s,m. Horse-furni- 
ture, caparison, horse-cloth. 

eacharais, s.f. see eachrais. 

eacharnach, s.f. Park for horses. 

each-bhalach,-aich, s.m. Groom, jockey, stable- 
boy. | 

a — — — an, -ain, see each-bhalach. 

each-chir, e, -ean, s.f. Horse-comb,curry-comb. 

eachd, -a, -an, s.m, see euchd. 

eachda,** a. Clean, neat, spruce, trim, 2 Pure. 
3 Comely, decent. 

eachdail,** a. Conditional. 
comely. Gu h-e., cleanly. 

eachdair, -e, -ean, s.m. History, story, relation. 
2**Historian, recorder, chronicler. [some give 
eachdaire as n. sing.] 

eachd, see eachdraidheachd. 

enchdaran, -ain,s.m. Pen for confining straying 
cattle or sheep, pin-fold. 

eachdarra, s.m. see eachdaran. 

eachdrachail,fi a. Narrative, 

eachdra, see eachdaran. 

eachdradh, see eachdaran. 

eachdraich,* see eachdraidh, 

eachdraiche, -an, sm. Historian. 

eachdraidh, -e, -ean, s.f. History, chronicle, re- 
cord, tale, narrative. 

-——eachd,s.f.ind. History,historiography. 

eachdranach, -aich, s.m. Foreigner, 

——-—,** a. Foreign. 

eachdrath, see eachdaran, 

each-fodair,(AH) s. m. Term applied in deri- 
sion and contempt to a coarse, churlish man. 

each-fuinn, s.m. Calp, herezeld. This, in early 
times, was the symbol of dependance paid by 
the native man to his lord, but in later ages 
it was exacted by the chief from his vassals. 
On the death of a tenant the best horse had 
to be given over. The custom was forbidden 
by law in 1617, but like most Celtic customs it 
survived long after, being still recoguized in 
1710—Clan Donald, iii. [also each-ursainn.] , 

eachlach, -aich, s.m. see each-laoch. 

eachlair,* s.m. Brutish fellow. 2ttHostler. 

—eachd,* see eachalachd. 

Bachlais,* s.f. Passage, entry. 

gach-lann, -ainn, s.m. Stable. 

each-laoch,-laoich, s.m. Groom,jockey, post-boy. 

sachlaraiche, -an, s.m. Unfeeling churl. 

each-lasg, -laisg, -an, s.f. Lash, horse-whip. 

each-léigh, -e, -ean, s.m. Farrier, veterinary. 
2(AF)Horse-leech. 

—— eas, -ghis, s.m. Veterinary art. 

eachliath, -aith, s.f. Horse-rack, manger. 

each-loinn, -e, s.m. Horse-litter, 

each-maide,(Fionn)s.m. Mason's tress, 

Dë -linn, -mhuillnean, s.f. Horse- 
mill. 

eachradh, see eachraidh. 'Nuair a chithear an 
t-eachradh air an raon, when the cavalry are 
seen on the field. 

eachraidh, s.m.pl. Horses, cavalry. 2 Stud of 
horses. Acfhuinn na h-e., the harnesses of 
the stud. 

eachrais, -e,s,f. Confusion, disturbance, bustle, 
mess? 2 Lumber. 13 Fair. 14 Rowing. tō 
Method. 

—each,tt a. Confused, bustling. 
eachrann,§ s.m. Place wbere brambles grow. 2 
Bramble. 8 Impediment, stumbling-block. 

eachras,** s.m. Fair. 2 House. 

eaciruidh, see eachraidh. 

each-saic,* s.m. Sumpter. 

each-seamrag,)AF) s.f. Horse-clover. 

eacb-shlighe, -ean & -eachan, s./, Horse-road, 
borse-path. 





2 Cleanly, neat, 




















Di Lized I y 
NTERNET ARCHIV 


377 


eadar 


each-siamar, see each-seamrag. 
teacht,** s.f. Condition. 
wir cag Kind of bird,—Dean of Lismore’s 


ook. 
eachtradh,** -aidh, s.m. Adventure, enterprise. 
eachtran, see eachtrannach. 

——-——nach, -aiche, a. Foreign. 2 Adventur- 
ous, enterprising. Gu h-e. eadar-bhuaiseach, 
adventurously and victoriously. 

ere -aich, s.m. Foreigner. 2 Adven- 

urer. 

each-uisge, s.m. Water-horse, kelpie (fabulous.) 

each-ursainn, s.m. The best horse on a farm, 
always claimed by a proprietor on the death 
ofa tenant. [see each-fuinn.] 

ea-cinnt, -e, see eu-cinnt. 

—each, -iche, see eu-cinnteach, 

—— —- —ealas, see eu-cinntealas. 

eacnach,** -aich, s.m. Blasphemy. 

ea-cneasda, see eu-cneasda. 

chd, see eu-cneasdachd, 

ea-coir, -corach, -ean, see eucoir, 

ea-conn,-a, see eu-conn. 

ach, -aiche, see eu-connach. 

ea-corach, -aiche, @ see eucorach. 

ea-cordadh, -aidh, see eu-cordadh. 
ea-cosmhuil, -e, see eu-cosmhuil. 
each, see eu-cosmhuil^ach. 

——-eachd, see eu-cosmhalachd, 

ea-cosmhalas, see eu-cosmhalas, 

ea-crionna, a. see eu-crionna. ] 

————chd, see eu-crionnachd. 

@a-crionnta, see eu-crionna. 

—  — —-—chd, see eu-crionnachd. 

ea-cubhaidh, -e, a see eu-cubhaidh, 

: $.m. see eud, 
see teid. 

éadach, -aich, s.m. see aodach. 

éadachadh, -aidh, see eudachadh. 

éadaich, v.a. dn. see eudaich & aodaich, 

eadail, see feudail. 

eadaileach, see feudaileach, 

Eadailis,** s.f. The Italian language. 

ea-daingean, @. see eu-daingean. 

ea-daingneachd, see eu-daingneachd. 

Téadaire, see eudaire. 

feadal, -ail, s. f. Profit, advantage. 2 Prey, 
EU 

eadan 

ron pnt see aodann. 

eadannan, see aodannan. 

eadar,prep. [Governs à substantive in the nom- 
inative. Combined with the personal pro- 
nouns thus :— eadarainn, between us ` eadar- 
aibh, between you ; eatorra, between them.] 1 
Between, betwixt. Eadar thusa is mise, be- 
tween you and me ; eadar long agus laimhrig, 
between the cup and the lip (lit, between the 
ship and the quay); e. feala-dhà is dà-ri- 
readh, between jest and earnest ; e. am bogh’ 
agus an t-sreang, with much ado, making both 
ends meet with much difficulty; e. an dà chuid, 
between the two ; e. chlàr is ursainn, between 
the door and the post ; 'se chaidh e. thu 's do 
rùsg, it has gone between you and your clothes 
(lit.your fleece—you have very much at heart); 
a’ cur e.,causing us to disagree; thainig rud- 
eigin e., we disagreed about something; e. sinne 
agus sibh-se, between us and you ; leig e. sinn 
féin 's na biodagan, let us fight it out with 
dirks, none interfering. 2* Among. Eadar- 
aibh fhéin fhuaradh e, he was found among 
yourselves. 3 Both. [When signifying both, 
it does not admit the article between itself 
and the noun ; but aspirates both its nouns, 
as, eadar cheann is chasan, beth head and 
feet; eadar bheag agus mhór, both eus and 

2 











Di i 











eadar 


378 


eadarrachd 


small ; eadar mhath is ole, both good and bad. | eadar-fhosgladh,Tt s.m. Interstice. 


eadaradh, -aidh, s.m. Division. 2 Interest. 
see eadradh. 

eadaraibh, prep. pron. Between you. 

eadar-aimsir,tt -e, -ean, s.f. Intermission. 

eadarainn, prep. pron. Between us. 

eadar-aisneach,ff -eiche, a. Intercostal. 

eadar-astar,tt -air, -ean, s.m, Interval. 

eadar-bhacain, s. Space between the row-locks 
or thole-pins in a boat. 

eadar-bhalla,tt chan, s.m. Mid-wall. 

eadar-bhuaidh, s.f. Defeat, rout. 2**Victory. 

Teadar-bhuais, s.f. Agony. 2 Dismay, confu- 
sion. 

+eadar-bhuaiseach,**a. Discomferting, routing. 
2 Victorious, 3 Of,or belonging to, a roub or 
defeat. Gu h-eachtrannach e., adventurousty 
and victoriously. 

eadar-chasaideachd, s.f.ind. Discord. 

Teadar-cheanas, s.m. Distance. 

eadar-cheangail, v.a. Interjoin. 

ee Fa ARN -cheirt, s.m. Equal distributive 
right. 

eadar-cheart-fhacal, -ail, s.m. Right interpreta- 
tion. 

eadar-chluich,{t -e, -ean, s.m. Interlude. 

eadar-choimhearsnachd,ft s.f.ind. Intercommu- 


nity. 

eadar-chomhradh,* -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Inter- 
locution. 

eadar-chomunnachadh, -aidh,{s.m. Intercommu- 
nity. 

GE -eiche, a. Intercutaneous, 

eadar-chuir, v.a. Interpose. 

eadar-chur, -chuir, -ean, s.f. Interjection. 2 
Interposition. 

eadar-dhail, -dhalach, -dhalaichean, s.f. Inter- 
val. 2 Interposition. 

eadar-dha-lionn, adv. Between sinking and 
swimming, floundering. 

eadar-dha-shian,(DU) s. (Between two pelts of 
rain) Applied toa fine day following a suc- 
cession of wet ones which are likely to con- 
tinue, hence a. Exceptional.  [pron, “‘ ea- 
darra(th)-shian," the aspirate being very 
slight.] 

eadar-dha-thuinn, Poolewe, &c., for eadar-dha- 
lionn. 

eadar-dhealachadh, -aidh, s.m. Difference, dis- 
tinction. 2 Distance. 8 Separating, act of 
separating, distinguishing, parting, dividing. 
4 Divoreing. 5**Faction. 6fjsedition, Cha'n 
'eil e. ann, there is no difference. | Ag e—, 

r. pt. of eadar-dhealaich. 

eadar-dhealachail,** a. Causing separation. 2 
Causing divorce, 3 Like a separation or di- 
vorce. 

eadar-dhealaich, pr. pt. ag eadar-dhealachadh, 
v.a. Separate, part, divide. 2 Distinguish. 3 
Divorce. 

eadar-dhealaichte, past pt. of eadar-dhealaich. 
Separated, parted, 2 Distinguished. 3 Di- 
vorced. 

eadar-dhealbhadh, -aidh, s.m. Distinction. 

eadar-dhealrach,tt -aiche, a. Interlucent. 

eadar-dhlithaich,tt v.a. Interjoin. 

eadar-dhol,f{ s.m. Transit. 

eadar-dhuilleagaich,t{ v.a. Interleave. 

Teadar-dilgin, s.f. Devastation, ravaging. 

teadar-easga, s.f. Change of the moon, 

leadar-eug, s.j. Change of the moon. 

Teadar-fhas, -fhàis, s.m. Space, distance. 

eadar-fhigh,tt v.a. Interweave. 

eadar-fhigheadh,{tf s.m. Intertexture. 2 Inter- 
weaving. Age—, pr.pt. of eadar-fhigh. 

eadar-fhill,tt v.a. Intervolve. 

eadar-fhonn, s.m. Space, distance. 


Di tizen I 


NTERNET ARCHIV 


8|eadar-fhrasach, -aiche, a. 


I Between showers. 
eadargain, -e, -ean, s.f. see eadraiginn. 
eadargaineach, see eadragainneach. 
eadar-ghaire, see eadar-ghéarradh. 
eadar-ghéarr, v.a. Intersect. 
eadar-ghéarradh, -aidh, s.m. Divorce. 
ation. 3 Intersection. 
eadar-ghéarrtach,tt a. Intersecant. 
eadar-gheanas, -ais, s.m. Distance. 
eadar-ghlacach,ff -aiche, a. Intercipient. 
Teadar-ghlaodh, v.a. Judge, decide. 
eadar-ghnàth, s.m. Ingenuity. 
feadar-ghnàth, v.a, Know, distinguish. 
eadar-ghnathach, -aiche, a. Ingenious. Gu h- 
e., ingeniously. 
eadar-ghuaille, -ghuailne, -ghuailnean, s.f. The 
space between the shoulders. 
eadar-ghuidh,* v.a. Intercede,maketintercession. 
eadar-ghuidhe, s.f. Intercession, mediation. 2 
Supplication. 
eadar-ghuidheach,** a. Intercessory,mediatory. 
eadar-ghuidheadh,-idh, s.f. see eadar-ghuidhe. 
eadar-ghuidhear, -eir, -eirean, s.m. Intercessor, 
mediator. 
eadar-ghuidhearachd,**s.f.ind. Intercessorship. 
eadar-ghrab,1f v.a. Interpose. 4 
eadar-lomlaideach, -eiche, a. Intermutual. 
eadar-ionad, -aid, -an, s.m. Interval. 
eadar-labhair, v.a, Intertalk. 
eadar-labhrach, a. Interlocutory. 
eadar-labhrair, -ean, s.m. Interlocutor. 
eadar-lamh, -làimh, s.f. Temporary happiness. 
eadar-luaths, -luaiths, s.m. Hurly-burly. 
eadar-luighe, s.f.ind. Interjacency. 
eadar-luigheach, a. Interjacent. 
eadar-mhala,** s.m, Distance between the eye- 
brows. 
eadar-mhalairteach,i1t-eiche, a. Intermutual. 
eade acu -oin, s.f. Mediation. 2 Mid- 
e. 
eadar-mheadhonaeh, -aiche, o. Mediatorial,in- 
tereessory. 2 Indifferent, middling. 2 Like 
a go-between. 
eadar-mheadhonaich,* s.f. Middling state. Tha 
e 'san e., he is but very indifferent. 
eadar-mheadhonair, -ean, s.m. Mediator, inter- 
cessor, reconeiler, go-between, arbiter. 2 
Interpreter. 
eadar-mheadhonaireach, -iche, œ. Intercessory, 
mediatorial. 
eadar-mheadhonaireachd, s.f. ind. Mediation, 
intercession, continued mediation, practice of 
intercession. 
eadar-mhineachadh, -aidh, s.m. Interpretation. 
9* Annotation, explanation. 3**Translating. 
Ag e—, pr.pt. of eadar-mhinich. 
eadar-mhineachair, ean, s.m. see eadar-mhin- 
iche. 
eadar-mhinich, pr. pt. ag eadar-mhineachadh, 
v.a. Interpret, translate, 2* Explain. 
eadar-mhiniehe, -an, s.m. Interpreter, transla- 
tor. 2 Explainer. 
eadar-mhinichear, see eadar-mhiniche. 
eadar-mhinichte, a. & past part. of eadar-mhin- 
ich. Interpreted, translated. 
eadar-mhüth, v.a. Alternate. 
eadarnach,** @ Fraudulent, malicious. 
e., fraudulently. 
eadarnaidh,** s.f. 
Malice. 
eadar-phill,off v.n. Intervene. ` 
eadar-phongaich,tt v.a. Interpoint. 
eadar-phós,fl v.n. Intermarry. . 
eadar-phósadh.it s.m. Intermarriage. 
eadarrach,ft-aiche, a. intermediate, 
eadarrachd,t{ s.f. Imterjacency. 


2 Separ- 


Gu h- 


Fraud, double-dealing. 2 


LINGIS ATE 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


eadiar-riazhladh 379 eagal 


 eadar-riaghladh,tt s.an. Interregnum. 

-  eadar-riozhaehd, s.f. Interregnum. 

eadar-ruitheach. t} a. Intercurrent. 

eadar-ruith-fhear,fI s.m. Internuncio. 

eadar-sgàin,** s.f. Interposition, 2 Reconcile- 
ment. 3 Parting. 4 Greeting. 

— enadar-sgaoil,TI v.a. Intersperse. 

` eadar-sgap, v.a. Intersperse. 

eadar-seapadh,1fs.m. & pr.pt. Interspersion. 

eadar-sgar,* v.a. Separate. 2 Divorce. 3 Pull 
asunder. 4 Analyze. 

eadar-sgarach, -aiche, e. Separating, causing 
separation. 2 Divorcing, causing divorce. 3 
Intersectant. 

dainn, -e, -ean, s.f. Separating, 

- . separation. 2 Divorce, divorcing. 3 Analysis. 

| eadar-sgara«dair, s.m. Interpolator. 

eadur-sgaradh,-aidh, s.m.see e— -sgarachdainn, 

eadar-sgriobh, v.a. Interline. 

adh,tf s.m. Interlineation, 

| ta, a. Interlinear, 

ealar-hion, s.m. Pet day (lit between wea- 
thers. 

eadar-shlighe, an, $.f. Intercurrence. 

ach, -eiche, a. Intercurrent, 

eadar-shoillse, see eadar-sholus. 

———ach, -iche, a. Having a glimmer- 

i ing light, as twilight. 

eadar-shoillsieh, pr.pt.ag eadar-shoillseachadh, 
V.n. Glimmer, as in twilight or dawn, 2** 
Dawn. 3 Shine between. 

eadar-sholus, -uis, s.m. Twilight. 2**Dawn. 

| -——ach,** a. Having twilight. 2 

Glimmering, as twilight, 

. eadar-shreathach, -aiche, a. Interlinear, 

X eadar-shreathadh, s.m. Interlineation, 
eadar-shreathaich, v.a. Interline, 

. eadar-shruth,(DC) s.m. Slack tide. 

- eadar-shruthach, a. Interfluent. 

_ eadar-shuidheachadh, s.m. Interlocation. 

| eadar-thamull, -uill, s.m. Interval of time, 2 

' . Interval between two remote distances. 

. eadar-theachd, s.f.ind. Intervention. 

| ail, a. Intervenient, 

: air, s.m. Internuncio. 

| eadar-theangachadh, -aidh, s.m. Interpretation, 

| translation, version, 2 Act of interpreting 

|». or translating. Ag e—, pr.pt. of eadar- 

4^ theangaich. 

| eadar-theangachair, see e— -theangair. 

| eadar-theangachd, s.f. see e— -theangachadh. 

` eadar-theangaich, pr. pt. ag eadar-theangach- 
. adh, v.a. Translate, interpret, 

——te, a. & past pt. of eadar- 

. theangaich. Translated, interpreted. 
eadar-theangaidh,** s.f. Translation. 

| Ee, -ean, s.m. Interpreter, trans- 

ator. 
ee. neangaireachd, s.f. see e— -theangach- 
Ka 


eadaruinn, prep. pron. see eadarainn. 
eadh, adv. It. Used adverbially, as, Seadh (is 
eadh) yes, it isso; an eadh ? is it so ? cha/n 
e., ni h-e., it is not so; an e nach cronaich 
e? is it that he will not rebuke? [not rr an 
eadh nach cronaich e?"' as given by **] 
eadh,fs.m. Space, time. 2 Opportunity. 
eadh,(CR) Suth’d. for feadh, (extent.) 
eadha, s.f. The aspen-tree, old name of the let- 
ter E. 2 The depth. 
eadha, -chan, s.m. see eighe. 
dh, -aidh, -aidhean, see eadha. 
eadhain,* see eadhon. 
eadhal,-ail, s.m. Brand. 2 seeéibheall 3 
(DMy) Udder of a heifer before calving. 
eadhann, -ainn, s.f. Joy. 2 see eidheann. 
eadhon, adv. To wit, namely, even, “ viz, SW 
(videlicet). Bheir mise, e. mise dile air an 
o i I, even I will bring a flood upon the 
earth. 
éadmhor, -oire, see eudmhor. 
acbd, see eudmhorachd, 
éeadnan, see aodann. 
ea-dochas, -ais, see eu-dòchas. 
—ach, see eu-dochasach. 
ea dóchasachd, see eu-ddchasachd. 
éa-lomhain, see eu-domhain. 
teadrad, (for eadar thu.) Eadrad agus mise 
(eadar thus' agus mise) between you and me. 
eadradh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Division cr time, 
2 Morning time of milking, or folding of cows, 
goats, sheep, &c. 3* Noon. 4**Lust, adul- 
very.. 5(DC) Process of milking— Uist. Mu 
e., about noon, [see eadar-thrath. ] 
eadraig. pr.pt. ag eadraiginn, v. o, Interpose, 
separate two combatants. 
eadraiginn, -e,-ean, sf. Act of interposing in 
order to separate two combatants.  2* In- 
terference. Is minic a fhuair fear na h-ead- 
raipinn buille, often has the queller of strife 
been struck, Ag e—, pr.pt. of eadraig. 
—each, @. Interposivg, parting, quiete 
ing, of or pertaining to a reconciliation, like a 
reconciliation. 
éadrom, -uime, @ see aotrom. 
an, -ain, an, see aotroman. 
eadruinn, see eadarainn. 
eadthorras, see eatorras. 
eadtlaith, see eadtlathach. 
eadtlathach, -aiene, a, Courageous, strong, 
undaunted. Gu h-e., courageously. 
eadtreoir, -e, see eudtreoir. 
éag-, priv. prefix, Variously spelt, eug-, ea-, eu-, 
ao-. see eu-. 
eag, eige, -an, s. f. Nick, hack, notch, gap. 2 
Slip. 3**Chap. f4 Moon. [tf gives gen. eig.] 
èag, -a, see eug. [** gives éig for gen.] 
eagach, -aiche, o Notched, indented.  9** 
Deep. Giacag e. nan neòinean, the deep dell 
of the daisies.. 
eagachadh, -aidh, s.m. Hacking, notching. 2 
Act of Hacking or notching. 3**Dovetail. Ag 
e—, pr.pt. of eagaich. 
eagaich, pr.pt. ag eagachadh, v.a. Hack, notch, 
mark with notches, nick, indent. 2* Imbed. 
8**Dovetail. 
— — ——Le, a. & past part. of eagaich. Hacked, 
notched, marked with notches. 2*Dovetailed. 
eagail, gen. sing. of eagal, 
eagair,* oo see eagaraich. 
eagal, -ail, s. m. Fear, timidity, fright, dread, 
terror. 2 Superstition. Dé is eagal duit P 
what harm can happen to you ? ni h-e. leam, I 
am not afraid ; tha eagal orm, (temporary), 
is eagal leam (permanent), I am afraid; is mór 
m’ e, I am much afraid ; có a chuireas e. 
orm ? who shall make me afraid ? SS Peai m’ 
2 













































































—— 


 eadar-thig, v.c. Intervene. 
 eadar-bhireach, -iche, v. Mediterranean. 
 eadar-thoinn, v.a. Intertwine. 
eadar-thràth, -àith, -àithean, s.m. Interval of 
tune, 2**Noon. 3 Mid-day milking. Dómh- 
Dach an eadar-thraith, a certain Sunday in 
May when cows were brought to the milking- 
.. place for the first time in the year. 
eadar-thriath, -an, 8. m. Interregnum. 2 Re- 
gency. 3 Regent. 
 eadar-thuinn, (AH) s. f. Hollow between two 
succeeding waves, 
-eadaruibh, prep. pron. see eadaraibh. 
 eadar-uidhe, s.f. Interval. 
2 ——— —-ach, a. Interstitial. 
 eadar-üine, s.f.ind. Intermission. 
-—àch, €. Intermittent. 


eagal 380 ealachag 


e., Iam not the least afraid ; tha e. a chridh' eaglan,** -ain, s.m. Biting. 

air, he is terrified out of his wits ; an e. domh- teaglasda, e. Ecclesiastical. 

sa do chruth ? am I afraid of your spectre ? | feagma, s.m. Order, arrangement. 

chan e. duit, there is no fear of yow; chuir | eagmhais, see eugmhais. [able. 

an t-e. ås da, superstition deprived him of his | --————each,** a. Famous, great. 2 Admir- 

Senses ; uallach an eagail, the burden of fear ; eachd,** s.f. Admirableness. 

air eagal gu’n tig osag, for fear (or lest) a | teagmin, -ean, s.m. Winding, circuit, meander. 

blast should come; air e. gu'n tuit e, lest he| E. mall, a slow meander, winding of a river. 

fall; e. urramach, reverence; e. tràilleil, | eagna, s.f. Wisdom, prudence. 

slavish fear ; ghabh e e., he took a fright. eagnach,** -aich, s.f.  Blasphemy. 2 Com- 

ach, -aiche, a. Fearful, timid, cowardly.| plaint. 3 Resentment. 4 Cause of grief. _ 

9 Terrible, dreadful. 3 Causing fear. 4* , -aiche, a see eagnaidheach. 

Superstitious. 5**Skittish. Nie, a dreadful d, s.f.ind. Prudence. 2 Cunning. 3 

thing ; duine e., a terrible man, a superstitious | Wisdom. 

person ; thae e, Ae is superstitious ; duine | eagnadh, -aidh, -aidhean, see eagna. 

leth-eagalach, a half-timid or cautious man. eagnaidh, -ean, s.m. Philosopher, wise man. 

achd,* s.f.ind. Terribleness, dreadfulness,| 2**Prudence. 3**Wisdom.  4**Caution, sub= 
apprehensiveness. 2 Superstitiousness. tlety, sharpness. Comhairle o ’n e., counsel 

eagalaich,1i v.a. lntimidate. from the wise. 

eagall, -ail, see eagal. .—————, a, Wise. 2 Prudent. 3 Precise, ac- 

ach, -aiche, see eagalach. curate, punctilious, attentive to nick-nacks, 

eag-amhaire, see eug-sul. extremely careful.  4**Subtle, Gu be, eg- 

eagan, adv. Perhaps, see theagamh. actly, accurately. 

eagan,** -ain, s.m. Gizzard. 2 Depth. 3 Bot-|-————each, -eiche, (@. Wise, prudent. 2 
tom. 4(AF) Salmon. Precise, accurate, punctilious. 3 Subtle. 

eagar, -air, s.m. Order, art, class, row, array.| 4 Sharp. Gu h-e., prudently ; duine e., a prus 
2 Tenor, appointment. 3* Regular building,| deni man. 
as of peats, hewn stone, &c. An cath an|-————eachd, s.f.ind. Wisdom, prudence. 2 
e., the battle in order ; eagar-cath, battle-or-| Punctuality, exactness. 3 Pointedness about 
der. the minute articles of gain. 4 Subtlety,sharp- 
ness. 

feagnaire, s. f. Love. 2 Querulousness. 3 
Complacency. 

eagnuidh, -e, see eagnaidh. 

- — ———eachd,. see eagnaidheachd, 

eagonach,** s.m. Caitiff. 

-———,** q. Foolish. 

éag-samhlachadh, see eug-samhlachadh, 

éag-samhlachd, see eug-samhlachd. 

éag-samhlaich, see eug-samhlaich. 

éag-samblas, -ais, see eug-samhlas. l 

éag-samhluidh, see eug-samhuil. ` 

éag-samhuil, -e, see eug-samhuil. 

—eachd, see eug-samhlachd. 

eag-sul, s.f. Loop. d 

éairleigeach,* a. Urgent. | 

éairleigeadh, -idh, s.m. Temporary want. 2 
Immediate need. 

éairleis, see earlas. 

éairlig, -e, -ean, s.f. Want, poverty. 

éairlin, -e, -ean, s.f. Kelson of a boat, see bata ` 
F9, p.73. 2 Bottom. 3 End or limit of any. 
thing. [tt gives éairlinn.] 

éairneis, -ean, see àirneis. 

each, -iche, see àirneiseach. 

ich, see àirneisich. 

eal,** s. (for neul) Swoon, trance. 

eala, 9 -aidh, ealachan, s.f. Mute swan—cygnus 
olor. [ii gives sylvestris olor, s.m.] .2(AC) 
Pillared stone. 3(AC) Sanetuary. ch 

ealabar, Laggan for earball. 

eala-bhan, -aidh-baine, -chan-bana, sj. Wild ` 
swan, hoopoe—cygnus ferus. 

ot Pheagai sf. Bewick’s swan—cygnus Be- 
WILCE. 

eala-bheag an sgadain, (AF) s.f. Black guille- — 
mot, see calltag. E 

eala-bhuidhe,} sr, Perforated St. John’s wort - 

—hypericum perforatum. Badge of the Mac- | 

kinnons. 2 Common hypericum. [illust.287.] — 

ealach, -aiche, 4. Abounding in swans. Of, | 

or belonging to, à swan. - 

, -aiche, -aichean, s.m. Peg to hang any- — 

thing on, as clothes, arms, &c. 1 S" 

ag, -aige, -an, sf. see ealachainn. This | 

form (ealachag) is always used in Poolewe for 

a. block. or hacking-stock—W .C. . 












































ach, -aiche, a. Systematie, methodical, 

precise, well-ordered, arranged,in ranks, rows, 

oríiles. 2 Digestive. | 

—achadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of arranging,set- 

ting in order. Ag e—, pr.pt. of eagaraich. 

achd, s.f.ind. Correctness. 

eagaradh, s m. Digestion. 

eagaraich, pr.pt. ag eagarachadh, v.d. Digest. 
9 Set in order or rows, arrange. 3 Draw up 
in files, as an army. 4* Build as peats. 

eagarair,** s.m. Digester. 

eagarra, a. Exact, precise, methodical. 2 
Artificial, by rule. 

éag-bhroth,** s.m. Carrion. 

éagcoir, see eu-coir. 

éagcosg,-oisg, see aogasg. 

éas-cosmhuil, see eu-cosmhuil. 

.— ——————eachd, see eu-cosmhuileachd. 

éag-cruaidh,-e, d. see eu-cruaidh. 

éag-cruas, -ais, see eu-cruas. 

éag-cubhaidh, see eu-cubhaidh. 

eagh, see eadha. 

eaglach, -aiche, see eagalach. 

eaglain, s.m. Tag of a lace. 

eaglais, -e, -ean, s.f. Church, temple. Ane. 
chathach, the church militant ; an e. neamh- 
aidh, the celestial church; an e. bhuadhach, the 
church triumphant; an E. Chaitleach, the 
Catholic Church ; an E. Easbuigeach, the Epis- 
copal Church (the term ** E Shasunnach,’’ is 
often applied by Gaelic speakers to the Scots 

| Episcopal Church, which is not eorrect) ; an 
E. Chiéireach, the Presbyterian Church ; an 
E Stéidhichte, the Established Church ; an E. 
Shaor, the Free Church ; an E. Shaor Chléir- 
each, the Free Presbyterian Church ; an E. 
Shaor Aonaichte, the United Free Church ; 
E. Bhaisteach, a Baptist Church ; E. Choimh- 
thionalach, a Congregational Chureh ; e. fhàs, 
[or, more generally, e. bhàn,] a vacant church. 

each,** a. Ecclesiastical. 2 Like a 

church. 

each, -ich,s.m. Ecclesiastic, churchman. 

ear,* s.m. see eaglaiseach. 

eil, -eala, 0, Ecclesiastical. 

iche,** s.m. see eaglaiseach. 

deaglam, -aim, s.m. see greim., 









































E 


| Original from W 
Digitized Dy | IR IVWERSITY Jui re S Ls 
NT ER d ET ARC -] VIE P MI V cn SIT UF ILLI N OIS AT 
CAINE) ATL VE URBANA-CHAMPAIGN = 

KE: 


ar> 





SS ha eege Age A wt e 





b 


KI 


Da Zum LA et Autre A e EE E $ 
~ - E ere 


` ealaidheaend,** sr Creeping softly, 


— ealain, 


sm 


X ealadhantair,** s.m. 


ealachainn 





987. Hala bhuidhe. 288. 


ealachainn, -e, -ean, s.f. Armoury, ward-room, 
keeping-place, repository. 2 Peg, pin, hook, 
crook, bracket. 3 Stand for arms, stand to lay 
a eun upon. 4 Platform in a travelling crane, 
5 Furnace, particularly of a distillery. 6 
Fulcrum. 7* Hearth. 

—each. a. Full of hooks, pegs, &c. 2 

Of, or pertaining to, hooks, pegs, &c. 

ealachd (an), adv. Presently. Is mór an ceò 
a thig as an e., great will be the smoke from it 
presently ; gu’m faic thu ’n traigh ane. ann, 
that you will see the ebb presently—Filidh, 80. 

ealachuinn,(DC) s.f. Disgust, scunner—A rgyll. 

ealadair,* s.m. Prowler. 

ealadh, s.f. prov. for eala. 

éaladh, -aidh, s.m. Creeping, crouching, as to 
get within reach of game. 2**Stepping soft- 
ly. 3**Desertion. 

ealadh, see ealdhain. 

eala-dhà, see feala-dhà. 

ealadhan, see ealdhain. 

-— — ——ach, see ealdhanach. 

ealadhanachadh, -aidh, see oileanachadh. 

ealadhanta, see ealdhantach, 

ealadhantach,** a. see ealiihantach, 

see ealdhantair. 

eala-dhonn,(AF) s.f. Cygnet, (dit. brown swan.) 

oo s.f. Wild swan, see eala- 
bhàn. 

eala-tleadh, s. f. Stinking goose-foot—chen- 
opodium vulvaria or olidum. [illust. 288.] 

ealag, -aige, -an, s.f. Little swan. 2 Block, 
hacking-stock. 3** Bracket. Is math an 
e. a’ chlach gus an ruigear i, the stone is a 
good chopping-block till it is reached—N.G.P. 

-——ach,** a. Like a block, 

eala-gheal,(AC) s.f. White swan. 

eala-ghlas,(AC) s.f. Cygnet, grey swan. 

eala-ghual, s.m. Peat-charcoal used of old by 
oe blacksmiths in Gaeldom instead of coal- 

ross, 

ealaidh, -e, -ean, s.f. Ode, song. 2 Music. 3 
Merriment. 4 Art,science. 5 Knack. Far 
an greadhnach luchd-e., where the sons of 


Fala fleadh. 


mirth are glad ` seòlta air e., understanding | t 


science, | 

èalaidh, pr.pt. ag èalaidh, & ag èaladh (MMcL) 
v. n. Creep, crawl,skulk, stalk. 2**Watch 
jealously. 3**Steal away, desert, 


. éalaidh (ag) pr. pt. of éalaidh. Creeping, steal- 


ing softly. 

each, -iche, a. Creeping, crawling. 2** 
Stealing softly, sneaking. 3**Jealous, 4** 
Deseiting. Gu h-e., jealously. 

each, Ach, s.m.  Deserter, revolter. 





- 





2 Propensity to jealousy. 

see ealdhain. 

—each, -iche, see ealdhanach. 2++Musical. 
ealainn, s. Ditty, song.—Dàin I. Ghobha. 
ealamh, -aimhe, @. Quick, nimble, ready. 2 





Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


381 


sneaking, | İ 





eallamh 
Expert. 
ealamhachd, s.f.ind. Alertness, quickness. 2 
Acumen. 38*Expertness. An e., soon, quickly. 


[see ealaehd.] 
ealan, see ealdhain. 
ach, see ealdnanach. 
achd, see ealdhanaehd. 
fealang, -aing, -an, s.f. Fault, flaw. 
ealanta, see ealdhanach. 

chd, see ealdhantachd. 
—s, see ealdhantaehd. 
fealar, air, s.m. Sait, 











ealbh,] s. Bit, tittle. 
-——,(AF) s. m. Herd or drove of cattle. 
-——a, See ealbh. 


ealbhar,t s.m. Good-for-nothing fellow—Suth’d. 

ealbhuidhe,$ see eala-bhuidhe. 

eale,** a. Malicious, envious, spiteful. 

ealchadh, -aidh, s.m, Grain pounded in the 
corn-pounder, previous to being gronnad—tne 
pounding makes it easier to grind on the 
quern—DC. Ma’s ealchadha th’ agad no 
gradan, whether you have pounded or parched 
grain. 

ealchainn, -ean, see ealachainn.  2]fArm-pit. 

ealemhor,** y, Malicious, spiteful, envious. 2 
Lazy, sluggish. 

ealdhain, -e, -ean, s.f. Learning, art, science. 
2 Skill, ingenuity. 3 Poesy.  4*Trade, pro- 
fession, occupation. 5**School, academy. 6 
Trickery—Gairloch. [spelt eallainn here, the 
liquid ( and not the ea being long—DU.] Dé 
‘ne. a tha e a’ leantainn? (or a th’ aige) 
whatis his occupation ? a réir ealdhain an 
léigh, according to the apothecary’s art ; fear 
e., an artist, a mechanic. 

- -chéirde,fł s.f. Mechanics. 

-—— -ghluasadachd,ft sr, Mechanism. 

-———— -sgriobhaidh,{f{ s.f. Orthography. 

ealdhanach, -aiche, a.[ngenious, expert, clever. 
2 Alert. 3 Technical, scientific. 4 Artificial. 
5 Curious. 

ealdhanta,** a. Same meanings as ealdhanach. 

—————ch, see ealdhanach. 

—— ———ehd,** s, f. Ingenuity, 
cleverness. 2 Quickness. 

ealdhantair, s.m.  Artificer. 


expertness, 


ealdhantas, ais, s.m. Same meanings as ealdh- 


antachd. 

tealg, eilge, a. Noble, excellent. 2* Expert. 

eal-ghris, -e, s.f. Horror. 2 Deadly paleness. 

eall,** s.n. Essay, trial, proof. 

ealla, adv. Nothing ado. Gabh e. ris, have 
nothing ado with him; modh na crice, gabh- 
aile. rithe, hen politeness, letting her alone ; 
S (MMeL) Gabh e. ris, take stock of him, watch 

im. 

eallaban, -ain, see allaban. 

teallabhair, -e, s.f. Vast number. 2 Multitude. 
eallach, -aich, s.m. see meadhon. 

—— ———, -aiche, a. Gregarious. 

eallach, -a, pl. -an & eallaichean, s. f. [Always 
m. in W. of Ross-shire—WC.] Burden, armful, 
load. 2 Trick. 3 Battle, charge. 4**Bracket. 
5(CR) Herd. 6(AH)Cattle given as tocher or 
dot. i 

ail,* a. Hard, grievous. 2ftfCumber- 
some. 

eallag, -aig, see ealag. 

eallaiche,** s.f. Household stuff, furniture. 

eallaidh, s.m. Cattle. 

e, a. White. 

-———— -méithe,(A PF) san, Fat cattle. 

feallaighe, s.f. see eallaiche. 

eallainn, Gairloch for ealdhain. 

eallamh,** -aimh, s.m. see eallach 6. 2 Wonder, 


astonishment. 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


eallan 382 eanraich 
eallan, -ain, s.m. Elecampane. the brain. 2Ingenious. 3 Bold, impudent. 
eallbha, see ealbh. ] 4**Olear-headed. 5** Cerebral. Gu h-e., in- 
eallsg, -an, s.f. "Termagant, scolding female. gentously. d 





ealp, -an, s.f. Chip from an axe. 

ealpadh, a. Notehed. 

ealpait(AF) s.f. Monster. 

ealt,-a, ealtan, s.f. Covey or flight of birds; 
number of quadrupeds, as drove of cattle, trip 
of goats, rout of wolves, pace of asses, sound- 
er of swine, E. eun, covey of birds ; e. asal, a 

pace of asses. 

Jealt, s.m. Repentance, 

—a, see ealt. 

——aách,-aiche, a Gregarious. 2**Flighty, as 
a flight of birds. 

ealtag, see ialtag. 

-leathraich,(CR) Arran for ialtag. 

-leuthraigh (AF) s.f. Bat. 

ealtain, s. The bird world, 

ealtainn, -e, -ean, s.f. see ealt. 2 see ealtuinn. 
In ealtainn eun, the noise of œ fight of 

irds. 








each, -iche, a. In flights, as birds. 

ealtar, -air, s.f. Drove. 

ealtraidh,(AC) s. Mischance. 

ealtuinn, -e, -ean, S. f. Razor. 
edged instrument. 3 see ealt, 
like a sharp razor. 

—— ——each, -aiche, a. Like a razor. 
3 see ealtainneach. 

ealuidh, see ealaidh. 

eaman, see feaman. 

feamhainse, s.f. Wisdom. 

Teamhan, -ain, s.f. see dias. 

eamhanta,** a. Double. 

jeamhuadh, -aidh, s.m. The connection of two 
things inseparable. 

éan, see eun, 

Q1éan,s. Water. 

eanach, -aich, s.f. Dandriff. 2 Bounty. 3 Praise, 
renown. 4* Hat. 5 Scarf. 6 Seuri between 
the bark and trunk of a tree. 7 Down, wool. 

msn -aich,§ s.f. The plant nardus stricta. 





2 Any sharp- 
Mar e. ghéir, 


2 Sharp. 


a. One. 





289. Eanach. 


eanachaill,** s.f. see eanchainn. 
eanach-garaidh, -aiche-, s.f. Endive,—cichorium 
endiva. 


eanag,(AF) s.f. Plover. 
éanaidh, Suth’d (Rob Donn) for ainmhidh— 
heifer. 


eanaraich, see eanraich. 

eanasg, -aisg, -an, s.m. Tie, engagement. 

eanbhruith, -e, see eanraich. 

eanchaill, see eanchainn. Chaidh an t-e. as, 
he was brained ; ceanna gun e, @ brainless 
jellow—Gairloch. 

eanchainn, -e, -ean, s.f. Brains, the brain. 2 
*Impudence, audacity. 3 Ingenuity, genius, 
capacity. Dh’fhagadh e "e, he would leave 
his brains. 

————each, -iche, a. Of, or belonging to, 


D 


[ 
ATEBNMET ADB/^LIW/E 
Yi GINE DND VE 


ail, -ala, a. Scolding. 2 Inclined to seold.|eanchainneachd,** s.f. Ingeniousness. 


Teanda, s.m. Simple in medicine. 

eandag, see deanntag. 

———ach, see deanntagach. 

ean-dealbhach, -aiche, see eun-dealbhach. | 

eang, -a,-an, $.f, Leg, foot, hoof. 2 Track, 
footstep. 3 Point of land. 4 Skirt, nook,,cor- 
ner, 5 Small portion. 6 Mark on an ar- 
cher’s bow, to guide the aim, also applied to 
the whole strength of the weapon. 7 The 
twelfth of an inch. 8 Gusset. 
rarely Year. 11¢(AH) Muscle. 12 (DU) Any 
organ of the body. Cha ghluais e eanga, he 
cannot move a limb; ghabh e a rithisd gu 
gluasad nan eang, he betook himself again to 
exercise at running; leum nan ceithir eang, an 
agile standing leap, in which the whole pow- 
ers of a man’s body were exercised. Some- 
times used for ionga. 13* Mesh of anet. 

eangach, -aiche, a. Hooked. 2 Nailed. 3 Nim- 
ble-footed. 4**Having a gusset. 5**Having 
headlands. 6**F ull of footsteps. 7**Talkative, 
8 see iongach. 

, -aich, -an, s.f. Fetter, snare. 2 
Train of herring- or salmon-uets. 3 Drag-net. 
4**Large fishing net. 5 Net-bladder. 6 Tuck. 
7**Babbler. Eangaich bàis, the agony of death. 

eomgag, -aige, -an, s.f. Little foot. 2 Slender 

eg. 

eangaich-bais, s. Agony. 

eangan, pl. A, s.m. Mesh—Dàin I. Ghobha. 

eangarra, 4. Nimble, agile, quick. 2 Spirited, 
lively. 3 Stout, 4 Persevering. 5 Well- 
hoofed. 6 Cross-tempered, fretful,ill-natured. 

.— — —chd, s.f. ind. Nimbleness, agility. 2 
Ill-nature. 

eangbhaidh, -e, a. High-mettled, hard to tame. 

eanghach,** -aich, s.m. **Bladder. T2 Babbler. 

ean-ghabhrag, -aige, -an, 8.f. Snipe, so call- 
ed from its habit when mounting in the air 
of making sounds with its wings resembling 


the bleating of a goat. 

eanghlas, -aise, s.f. Gruel. 2**Any weak drink. 
2**Milk and water, Deoch eanghlais, o 
drink of milk, meal and water. 

eanghnamh,** s. Liberality. 





eanghnath,** s.m, Prudence. 2 Dexterity, 
cleverness, 3 Generosity. 

—ach,** a. Prudent. 2 Dexterous, 

clever. 8 Generous. Gu h-e., prudently. 


eangla,** s. Anniversary feast. 

eangladh, -aidh, s.m. Entanglement. 
air e., it is entangled. 

eang-ladhrach, -aiche, @. Well-hoofed. 

eanlair, see eunlair. 

eanlaith, see eunlaith. 

eannach,** -aich, s.f. Innocence, spotlessness. 

—,**q@, Innocent, 

eannraidh,(AF) s. Heifer—Suth' d. 

eannsaich, prov. for ionnsaich. 

eanntag, -aige, see deanntag. 

—  —— Ach, -aich, s.f. see deanntagach. 

ach, @ see deanntagach. SC? 

eanraich, -ean, s.f. Kind of soup, flesh-juice, 
broth, gravy. Am fear a dh’itheas a shean- 
mhair, faodaidh ea h-e. ol, he that eats his 
grandmother, may sup her broth. When Fear- 
char lighiche had tasted the bree of the ser- 
pent, his master, who knew that his appren- 
tice now had his eyes opened to see the se- 
crets of nature, and his ears to understand 
the language of birds, threw the pan at him 
in wrath saying, Ma dh’ òl thu an sùgh, ith 
an fheòil, if you have supped the juice, eat the 


Tha e 








9**Nail. 10 


DM om. cue Parma Mos om 


em œ 


mnr 


f 


— wc 


n d 


XOU. a a a gc m 


umm 


= 


—_..._ €ararais, 


|. on 


eanraich 


fesh—N.G.P. — 

eanruic, see ionraic. 

ean-ruith,* see eun-bhrigh. 

Teantar, see eadar. 

eantog, see deanntag. 

feanuair, s.f. Bad weather. 2 Ill-luck. 

ear, s./.ind. The East, eastward. O ’n ear, 
from the Hast ; an ear-thuath, the North-East; 
an ear-dheas [in Gairloch & Lewis an earra- 
dheas,] the South-East ; gaoth an ear, the 
East wind ; an ear ’s aniar, on every side. 


fear, s.m, Head. 


ear, It a. Basterly, 

earabhruich,** a. & past part. Parboiled. 2 
.N'omented. 

, past pt. earabhruich, v.a. Parboil, 

2 Foment, 

——te,** past part. see earabhruich. 
earacais,( MMcL) s.f. Strait, Nie ’chuis an e., 
it will do for a shift. 

earach,** &, Feignued. 

ainn,(CR) Reay country for eanchainn. 
earachall, see earchall, 

earadh, see euradh. 2 see earradh. 

ain,** s. f. Bit, bridle. E. sréine, the 


reins of a bridle. 
earag, s.f. Suth’d. for adharc. 2(AF)Squirrel. 


(Wt — —— 














earail, earalach, earalaichean, s.f. Exhortation, 


urging. 2 Importunacy. 
4 Provision, 5* Guard. 6**Reproof. 7 Bid- 
diug.  Rinn e ro-earail, he urged. 

-——-, 9.0, See earalaich, 

*———each, see earailteach. 

-———ich, see earalaich. 

earailt,* see earail. 

, “iche, a. Cautious, circumspect. 2 
Ready to exhort, exhorting. 3 Cautioning, 
warning. 4 Importunate. 5 Providing, pro- 
vident, foreseeing, 

———eachd,* s.f. Cautiousness. 2**Exhorta- 
tion. 3 Importunacy. 4**Warning. 

earair,tt pr.pt. ag eararadh, [pron. uraradh in 
Gairloch.]| v.a. Parch or dry corn. 

fearais, s.f. End, conclusion. 2 Tail, 

earal, -ail, see earail. 

-—ach, -aiche, see earailteach. . Gu h-e., im- 
portunately. 

-——achadh, -aidh, s.m. Exhorting, act of ex- 
horting. 2*Putting oneon one’s guard, war- 
ning. 3**Importunacy. Ag e—, pr.pt. of ear- 
alaich. 

earaladh,** -aidh s.m. Cautioning, 2 Impor- 
tunacy. 3 Exhortation. 

earalaich, pr.pt. ag earalachadh, «v.a, Exhort, 
urge, press. 2 Caution, warn. 3 Entreat. 
Dh’ e. mi air, I cautioned him. 

———e, -an, s.m.  Exhorter. 

idh, fut. aff. a. of earalaich. 

te, past pt. of earalaich. 

earalas, -ais, s.m. Foresight, precaution. 2 Sa- 
gacity. 3 Provision. 4 Caution. 5 Exhort- 
ation, 

———ach, -aiche, a. Cautious, circumspect. 

earar, adv, (an earar) The day after to-morrow. 

eararach, a. Eastern—Islay. 

-——-——, -aich, s.m. see eararadh 4. 

eararadh, -aidh, s. m. Seeking, searching, 2 
Night watching of the dead. 3 Parching of 
corn for the quern, by putting it in a pot over 
the fire, 4 Corn so prepared, Ag e—, pr. pt. 
of earair, Air eararadh, on the search ; e. 
maidne, morning search ; e. chloimh, wool- 
search ` e, dhaoine, seeking people, 

(an eararais) which see. 

earas,** -ais, sm. End, conclusion. 2**Con- 
sequence. 


3 Caution, warning. 











earasaid, -e, Gan, s.f. Square of cloth, usually | 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 





290. Earasaid, 


tartan, worn over the shoulders of females, 
and fastened before with a brooch, female 


robe. 2 Ornament. 3 Petticsat. 4 Si- 
mar, 5 Hoop. [** says the e. covered the 
whole body, and was worn without any under- 
clothing.] Cha choisinn balbhaa e.,’s cha’n 
fhaigh amadan oighreaehd, a dummy wont 
win a mantie, nor & fool get an inheritance. 
The use of the word earasaid here is peculiar, 
the article of dress it denotes beiug known to 
us only asfeminine. The second half of the 
proverb means that no fool can win a fortune 

ear-astar,ti air, s.m. Longitude. 

earb, pr.pt. ag earbsadh, v.a. & n. Trust, con- 
fide, hope, rely. 2 Bid, command. 38**rarely 
Tell, relate, Earbam ris, I confide in him; 
earbam riut, I confide in you; na h-earb as a 
sin, do not depend on that; earbaibh 4 Dia, 
irust ye in God. 

earb, -a, pl. -aichean, IFE an, Roe. 2**rurely 
Command. 3 Offer. 4 Employment.  Mhos- 
gail an e., the roe awoke. 

-——ach,* a. Bull of, or like roes. 2 Of, or be- 

Young roe. 2 Little 


longing to, a roe. 

earbag, -aige, -an, s. f. : 
roe. Ane. æ clisgeadh a leabaidh, the young 
roe starting from its bed. 

ach,tt a. Abounding in little roes. 2 

Like little roes. 

earbaidh, fut.aff.a. of earb. 

earbail,-e, s.f. Trust. 

earbais, -e, -ean, s.f. Inhibition, command. 

earball, -aill, s.m. Tail. 2* Ludicrous name 
for the train of a dress. E an eich, paddock- 
pipe, horse-tail ; bun an earbaill, the rump;e. 
sguabach, a bushy tau, 

ach,**-aiche, a. Long-tailed. 2 Likea 
tail. 3 Of, or belonging to, the tail. 

—-—-eich,3 Plants of the order equisetacece 
growing in the drier places. 

-iasaid,tf s.m.  Afüx. [euil. 

righ,§ s.m. The herb Robert, see rigneal 

earbar, fut.pass. of earb. 

earbchean, ( for earbaichean) n.pl. of earb. 

earbsa, s.f. Confidence, hope, trust, reliance. 
Na cuir e. ann, do not trust him. 

earbsach, -aiche, a. Contident, relying, trust- 
ing. 2 Accredited. E. ’na casaibh, trusting 
to her legs (swifiness.) [Unis ex. given by ** 
is not a Gaelic idiom, but only a translation 














earbsach 


from English.] 

earbsachd,* see earbsalachd. 

earbsach, -aidh, s.f. see earbsa. 

earbsadh, see earbsa. 

earbsail, -ala, o Trusty, confident. 

earbsalachd, s.f.ind. Complete confidence, full- 
est assurance, trust. 

earbull, see earball. 

ach, see earballach. 

learc, s.f. Cow. 2(AF) Heifer. 3 (AF)Trout. 
4**Bee. 5**Honey. 6**Dew. 7**Salmon. 8 
**Tax. 9**Heaven. 

$—, a. Speckled, 2**Red. 

earcail,** qœ. Pleasant, sweet, agreeable. 

fearca-iucna, s.pl. White cows with red ears, 
notched eattle, fairy cattle. 

fearcan, s.pl. Sweets, dainties, delicacies. 

fearcdhath, a. Coloured red. 

earc-dhruchd,** s.f. Mildew. Ma bhitheas e. 
ann, if there be mildew. 

earchaill,** s.f. Prop, post, pillar. 2 Barring, 
hinderance. 

earchall,** a. Evil. 

earchall, -aill, s.m. Misfortune. 2 Loss by 
death of cattle. 3(DU) Sudden and unexpect- 
ed loss of cattle, 4**Detriment. 5** Mischief. 
6**Suffering, Is fad’ a lean e. ris, long has 
misyortune pursued him. 

ach, -aiche, a. Subject to loss by 
death of cattle. 2**Calamitous, unfortunate. 

earcbanaich, v.n. Reflect. 

tearchaomh, a. Noble. 

earc-iucna, see earca-iucna. 

earc-luachrach, see dearc-luachrach. 

feardach, -aich, s.j. Feast, solemnity. 

eardanal,** -ail, s.m. Piper. 2 Trumpeter. 

ear-dheas (an), adv. The South-East. 

earfhitheach, s. Glede—Dean of Lismore. 

ear-fhlaitheachd,** s.f. see iarlachd. 

ear-fhlath, s.m. see iarla, 

Jearg, v.a, Build, frame, make up. 

ear-ghabh,** v.a. Arrest, apprehend, make 
prisoner. 

—ail,** sf. Miserable captivity. 

earghair,** s.f. Embargo, prohibition. 

-—,** v.a. Congratulate. 2 Forbid, tro-: 
hibit. 

earghalan,** -ain, s.m. Piper. 

—,** g, Noisy, clamorous. 

earghalt,(CR) s.m. Arable land. 

fearghlais, -ean, s.f. Horror. 

yearghlaiseach, -eiche, a. Horrible,nauseous. 




















ear-ghébhlach, see earr-ghóbhlach. 
eargnachadh,-aidh, s. m. Irritation, painful 
swelling, Ag e—, pr. pt. of eargnaich. 


eargnadh,** -aidh, s.m. Conception, quickness 
of apprehension. 2**Devastation destruction. 

eargnaich, pr. pt. ag eargnachadh, v.a. & m. 
Infame, enrage, cause or feel rage. 

earghnaidh, a. Magnificent. 2 Worthy. 3 
Virtuous, 4**Munificent. 

——,** s.f. Munificence. 

feargnamh, s.f. see aithne. 

*——————, a@. see uasal. 

feargnumh, see gnìomh. 

earlach,** æ. Diffusive. 

earlachadh, -aidh, s.m. Preparing of food, i.e. 
the culinary preparations, and not the same 
as the southern word deasachadh—Suth’d. 

èarlaid, -e, -ean, s. f. Expectation, hope. 2 De- 
pendence, trust, confidence. 3ttLand. 4(AH) 
The right sometimes sold by an outgoing to 
an incoming tenant to enter into possession 
of the arable land early in spring—the incom- 
er doing the ploughing, sowing and planting, 
and subsequently claiming the resulting crop. 





284 


earra-ghlòir 


3 day is the removal term for farmers. 

éarlaideach,** a. Expectant. 2 Dopendent, 
confident. 

fearlamh, a. Noble, grand, august. 

éarlas, -ais, see àirleas. 

fearmadh, see arm. 

earn,| see iolair-mhara. 

Tearn, see eorna. | j^ 

earna,(AC)s. Invocation. E. Mhoire, an into- 
cation to the Virgin Mary. 

Tearnach,fI-aich, s.m. Iron, 

éarnach, -aich, s.f. Red-water in cattle. 2° 
Murrain, bloody-flux. 

— -dhearg, (AC) s.f. Red murrain. 

— -dhubh,(AC) s.f. Black murrain. 

earnadh,( AF )s.m.Black spawl,disease of cattle. 








earnadh,** -aidh, s.m. Payment. 2 Assess- 
ment. 3 Promulgation, 4**Extension. 5 
Prophecy. 
earna-dhearg, see éarnach-dhearg. 

-dhubh, see éarnach-dhubh. 





éarnag, -aig, see airneag. 

ach, a. see àirneagach. 

earnaid,(AC) s.f. Fairy wort. 

-shith, see earnaid. 

earnail,** s.f. Part, share. í 

earnail,** s.f. Endowment. 2 Department of 
any science. 

earnais, see àirneis. 

tearnbhas, Ais, s.m. Death by steel. 

éaroch, see under beart-fhigheadaireachd. 

éarr,** v.a. Clothe, array. 

èarr, -a,-an, Sam, [f. in Badenoch.] End, con- 
clusion, 2 Extremity, limit, boundary, bot- 
tom, 3 Tail, as of salmon. t4 Champion. 6 
ttHeroism. 6 see earran-geal. 7(AH)Dead- 
wood in stern of a boat, see O 3, p.73. 8* Ex- 
tremity of a barrel. 9 (DMy) Chimb of a tub 
or barrel. 10(DMy) Rock submerged on à 
promontory. 11 (AH) Butt of a gun. Gu'm 
bu tapaidh thu féin air èarr a’ ghunna- 
ghlaic, how expert you were at the butt of the 








gun ! 
féarr,** a. Noble, grand. 


i —ach, -aiche, s.f. Bottom of a dish. 2 Low- 


er extremity. 3* Chimb of a tubor cask. ` 

——-uch,** a. Tailed. 2 Having a long tail. 8 
Limited, bounded. Am bradan e., the long- 
tailed salmon. 

Earrach, -aich, s.m. Spring (season.) [Among 
the old Gaels it was divided into two parts, 
E. Geamhraidh and E. Samhraidh. 

Earrachail,* a. Spring-like. 

earrachail,* s.m. Loss of cattle inSpring-—Skye. 

éarr-a/-chridhe, s.f. Kind of creeping plant. ` 

earradh, aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Dress, habit, 
clothing. 2 Armour, accoutrements. 3 Wares, 
goods, commodities. 4**Tail. 5**Conclusion. 
6**Limit, border. œF. righ. a king's robe; e. 
stata, a robe of state. 

———-, see earradhubh. 

earradhris,§ -e, -ean, s.f. Dog-brier, see ros-nan- 


con. 

earradhubh, -uibh, s.m. Wane. 2 The waning 
moon. 'San e., on the wane. 

.-——,** a. Waning. A’ ghealach e., the 
waning moon. 

earrag, -aige, -an, s.f. Taunt. Zi Blow. 3 see 
earag. 41 Shift, refuge, attempt. E. chéilidh, 
a gossiping stroke—said of a hurt received by 
one when visiting. 

earragach, -aiche, a. Taunting. 

éarragheall,* see éarr-gheal. 

éarra-ghlan, à. Shapely-tailed. Thig bradan 
iteach, è., a finned and shapely-tailed salmon 
shall come. 





Bt is in vogue only in places where Whitsun-, earra-ghlòir, -e, s.f. Bold or taunting, language. 


l 
ENEE - 
V LL! V = 1 f L d 

a A d | m [ 
= d L— el 4 E OI 


-> wä wn 


er Lm Di au Mantan AT ^ 


on 








earra-ghloir 385 easargain 
9*Gibberish. 3f Vain glory. [also fearra-| adh-na-fola. 
































ghlòir. fearsail, s.m. Song. 
—— —each, a. Foolishly talkative. 2 Vain- | eartnrath. adv. for an earar. 
glorious. ear-thuath, s.f. The North-East. [Ear-thróth 


earra-ghobhlach, see éarr-ghobhlach. 

éarraich, a. Bottom-most. Thilg e ’n cearcal 
à., he has cast the bottom hoop—said of one 
losing his chief support or honour. 

earraid, -ean, s.m. [s.f. in W. Ross-shire. Tip- 
staff, officer of the law, 2 King'sunessenger. 
3 Notary public, 4 Sheriff-officer, +5** Mis- 
take, fault. 

-—-—_each, -iche, a. Pertaining to messengers. 
2 Quarrelsome. 3**Krroneous. 

earraig, -e, -ean, s.f. Shift. 2 The last shift, 
great deal ado, greatest strait, 

each, -iche, a. Ingenious. 2*Straitened. 

«cab: A -ean, s.m. Captain, commander. 

earrailteach,** o, Hospitable. 

earran-gheal,(AF) s.m. Gazelle (Ut. white tail.) 
earrann, -ainn, -an, s.f. Share, portion, section 
of land, division. 2 Province. 3 Paragraph, 
clause. Ceithir earrannan, four paris. [Earr- 
ainn is used as nom. in Gatrloch.] 
earrannach,* s.j. Fleece, wool. 

——adh, -aidh, s.m. Division. 2 Act 
of dividing, or making into shares. Ag e—, 
pr.pt. of earrannaich. 

earrannaich, pr. pt. ag earrannachadh, v.a. 
Share, divide. 

—— —— ——-e, -àn, s.m. Sharer, divider. 

earraradh, see eararadh. 

earras, -ais, An, s.m. Wealth, treasure, rich- 
ness, property, goods, portion. 2 Provision, 
precaution. 3 The person secured or the 
principal. Théid Eilidh 'sa h-earras dhach- 
aidh, Helen and her marriage-portion shall go 
home ; chan fhèarr an t-urras na’n t-earras, 
the security is not a whit better than the prin- 
cipal (the one secured) ; gun or, gun e., penni- 
less and without property. 

earrasach, -aiche, a, Rich, wealthy. 2**Hav- 
ing goods or commodities. 3**Of, or pertain- 
ing to goods or commodities, 

earrasaid, s.f. see earasaid. 

earrasgaidh, s.f. Superfluity. 

éarr-bhruich, v.a. Stew. 

darr-dhearg,{ s.f. Redpole, see ceann-dearg. 2 
(McL & D)Redstart, see cam-ghlas. 

éarrdhris, s.7, see rós-nan-con. 

éarr-dhubh, see earradhubh. 

énrr-fhighe, -an, s.f. Weaver's tenter. 

aarr-ghainmhich,{s.f. Sandpiper, see luatharan. 

earrghas, s.m., Mainpiece of plough. 

éarr-gheal, -ile, -an-geala, s,f. The bird white- 
tail. 2 The pygarg of Scripture, a kind of an- 
telope. [** gives s.m.] 

earr-ghloir, -e, see earra-ghloir. 

-—each, see earra-ghloireach. 

éarr-ghóbhlach, -aiche, a. Fork-tailed. Na 
bric e., the fork-tailed trout. 

aarr-ite, -an, s.f. Tail-feather. 2(AH) The cau- 
dal (sometimes the anal) fin of a fish. 

aarr-iteach,tt a. Having tail-feathers. 

earrlaich,ff v.a. Kiln-dry. 

earrlain,(AC) see éirlin. 

earrlainn,** s.f. Limit of anything.“2 End,con- 
clusion, close. 

earrlait,(AC) st Rich soil, ground manured 
one year and productive the next. 2 Product- 
ive animals. 3 Prosperous undertaking. 

éarr-loisgeach, -iche, a. Nipping. 2 Taunting. 

éarr-loisgidh, (AH) a. Pleasant. 2 Shrewd, 
quick of apprehension, discerning, perspica- 
cious. [Applied to persons.) 

éarrnag, -aige, -an, see àirneag. 

éarr-thalmhuinn,$ s.f. Yarrow, see lus-chosg- 


in Gairloch, the o being full like English, but 
short, as in bow, low.] 

eas,-a,-an, s.m. Waterfall, cataract. 2 Cas- 
cade. 3**Stream with high precipitous banks. 
Gach coille, gach doire’s gach e., every wood, 
grove and waterfall. 

eas,** s.f. see neas. 2(AF) Eel. 

eas-, privative prefix, signifying in-, UN-, AS, eas- 
aonachd, disagreement. 

teas, v.a. Do, make. 

easach, -aich, -achean, s.m. Thin water-gruel. 
9**Panada, bread boiledin water, saps. ` wg 
Dark, deep, rocky stream. 4**Cataract, cas- 
cade. Mar thoirm easaichean, like the roar 
of cataracts. 

, -aiche, a. Abounding in waterfalls. 

,* S.f. see eas, s.m. 

teasadh, -aidh, s.m. Sickness, disease. 

easag, -aige, -an, s.f. Pheasant—phasianus col- 
chicus. 2 Squirrel. 3**see neasag. 4**Shrew- 
mouse. b5(AF) Stoat. 6(AF)Ermine. 

ach,ff a. Abounding in pheasants, squir- 
rels, &c. 

easaich, gen.sing. of easach, 

easaichean, n. pl. of easach. 

easaille,** s.f. Dispraise, disparagement. 

easair,** s.f. Excess. 

easair,(AH) v.a. Roll in mud, bespatter. 

easal,**-ail, s.m. Tail, 

eas-amail, -e, a. Unseasonable. 

easamh, see eis-dhamh. 

easamplair, -ean, see eisimpleir. 

easamplar, air, -airean, see eisimpleir. 

easan, -ain,-an, 8. m. Little waterfall or cas- 
cade. 2 variant of esan. 3(AF) Squirrel. 4(A 
F) Little weasel. 5(AF)Stoat. 6(A F)Ermine. 
1, AF)Launce eel. 8tfThin gruei. Crònan H 
easain srüthlaich, the murmur of thy flowing 
cataracts, 

easaonach, see eas-aontach. 

—d, see eas-aontachd. 

easaont, -a, s.f. Dissention, disagreement. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Dissenting. 2 Disobe- 
dient, rebellious. 3 Guilty, transgressing. 
4** Repugnant. Gu h-e., disobediently. 

— — ——Aachadh, -aidh, s.m. Disagreeing. 2 Ach 
of disagreeing. Ag e—, pr.pt. of eas-aonaich. 

— ————Aachd, s. f. ind. Disagreement, discord, 
schism, factiousness, dissent. 2 Disobedience, 
insubordination, rebellion. 

aich, pr.pt. ag easaontachadh, v.g. Dis- 
agree, discord, secede. 

— —É———Aás, -ais, s.m. Disobedience, transgress- 
ion, trespass, iniquity. 2**Discordance, fac- 
tion. Airson easaontais, on account of trens- 
gression. 

easar,t see eas, s.m. 2 Surface drain in a 

byre or stable to carry away the water. 

adh.(AH) s.m. The having of mud cling- 
ing to all parts of one's attire, bespattering. 

Ag e—, pr.pt. of easair. 

aich, -e, -ean, s.f. The boiling of a pool 
wherea cascade falls. 2 Bustle, tumult, con- 
fusion, noise. 3* State of requiring much at- 
tendance and service without moving from 
your seat. 4(WO) Sportive leap, as of a fish 
playing itself. De an e. a bh' air ! wAat 
sportive leaps it was making ! 

— —— -chasain, s.f. Thoroughfare. 

easard,** -aird, S.M. Quarrel. 2 Cataract. à 
Fowl-house, 

teasarg, -an, sm. & f. Tumult. 

easargain,** St Contrition. 



































easareuin 


easarguin,** sp, Tumult, confusion. 
3 Quarrel. 

easarlaich,** v.g. Philtre. 

easarluidheachd,** s.f. Incantation. 

teasba, sm. Want, scarcity, defect. 2 Vanity. 
3**Idleness. 4**Absence. [easbhuidh.] 

— — -braghad, -aid, s.m. King's evil. 

easbach,(PM) s,m. Iron loop or chain used for 
securing doors or gates. 

easbadh,** -aidh, s.m. Vanity. 2 Idleness. 

-brothach,$ s.m. Ox-eye, see neòinean 






2 Mob. 





mór. 
easbal, see abstol. 
air,* s. m. Trifling, tall, slender, hand- 
some, good-for-nothing fellow, 
easbaloid, -e, s.f. Absolution. 

— ——-each,** a. Pertaining to absolution, 
easba-riaghad, see easba-braghad. 
easbarta, s.pl. Vespers, evening prayers. 
eas-bhacaig,** s.f. Obstacle. 
easbhuidh, e, -ean, s. f. Want, defect. 2 Ne- 

cessity. 8 Caret in writing (A) Dé tha a dh’ e. 

ort ? what do you want ? gun e. gheibh e, he 

will receive without fail. 
——each, -iche, a. Poor, empty, 








needy, 


lacking, wanting, deficient, Duine e., Q needy 
man. 

easbuig, -ean, s.m, Bishop., E. na Ròimhe, the 
Pope. 





= ban,§ bain, s.m. Great ox-eye, see 
neòinean mor. 

—————each, -aiche, a. Episcopal. 
Easbuigeach, the Episcopal church. 

— . —eachd, s. f. ind. Bishopric, seat of a 
bishop. 2 Prelacy, episcopacy. 

———— ich, ff v.a. Bishop. 

teasbul, -uil, see abstol. 

t———achd, see abstolachd. 

Teasc, see uisg. 

feascaieh, s.f. Quagmire, fen. 

eascain, -e,-ean, s. f. *Imprecation, cursing, 
blasphemy, envy, slander. 42 see ascaoin. Le 
h-e.'s le mallachadh,vith slander and cursing, 
[eascainnt in Uist—PM.] 

eascair,** s.f. Storm, blustering wind. 2 Sur. 


An eaglais 





prise. 3 Warning. 
deach, -iche, a. Inimical, hostile. 2 
Inveterate. Gn h-e., hostilel. 





dean, n.pl. of eascaraid. 

——deas, -eis, s.m. Enmity,hostility. Luchd 
eascairdeis, private enemies. 

————deil, -e, a. Opponent. 

eascann, see easgann. 

eascaoin, -e, y. see ascaoin. 
grain—Islay. 

eascaoin,* sm. Unscundness, as of mea], grain, 
&c.—Islay. 2 for ascaoin. 

—— ——-each,** a. Malignant, malicious, envi- 
ous. Gu h-e., malignantly. 

eachd,** s.f, Malignity, maliciousness, 
enviousness. 

Teascar, s.m. Fall. 
rishing. 

eascar, -air, s.m. see; eascaraid. Cia an t-e.? 
who is the enemy ? 

eascara, -an, see eascaraid. 

eascaraid, -cairdean, s.m. Adversary, enemy. 
Pog e., an enemy’s kiss. 

eascard, -aird, see ascart. 

eas-chridheach, -iche, a. DPiscordant. 

——4, s.f.ind. Disagreement, 

eascnadh, -aidh, see asgnadh. 

eascoin, see easeaoin. 

each, see eascaoineach. 

eachd, see eascaoineachd. 

eas-comain, -e, -ean, s.f. Ill-requiting, ungrate- 
ful return. 


2* -Unsound, as 





2 Shooting into ears, flou- 














Digit 


AIT oo = oa A D i i f 
A — m LTU m H i LS M 


386 

















ea-sith 
teascoman, a, Dirty, nasty, filthy. 
teasconn, -oinn, s.f. Moon. 2 Old man. 
Teascra, s.m. Cup, drinking vessel. 
Teascradh, -aidh, $.m. Waiking, stepping,march- 
ing. 
feascu, s.f. Eel. [ for easgann.] 
easdradh,* sm. see easradh. 
easg,* -a, -an, &f. Ditch formed by nature. 9 
Fen. 3 Bog. 4 see easgann. 5 see easga, 
teasga, sf. The Moon. [This word was in use ` 
in Braemar in the 18th. century.] 
easgach,* a, Full of ditches, 2**Like an eel. 
2**A bounding in eels, 
easgaid, -e, -ean, see iosgaid. 2 see neasgaid. 
each,* -iche, a. see iosgaideach, a. 
each,” Ach, s. see iosgaideach, s. 
easgaidh,** sf. Quagmire. 
easgaidh, €, &. Ready, nimble, active. 2 Will- 
ing to oblige. 3*Officious. 4 Nimble to doa 
thing youdo not need to do, but neglectful 
of duty. 5**Obsequious. 6 Laborious, Is e. 
an droch ghille air chuairt, the lazy servant is 
active from heme. 
eachd, s.f.ind. Nimbleness. 2 Readi- 
ness to oblige. 3* Officiousness, excessive 
readiness of a lazy person to do what he does 
not need to do. 
easgainn, see easgaidh. 
easgairc,** s.f. Quagmire, bog, fen. 
easgall,** -aill, s.m. Storm, blustering wind. 
2 Wave. 8 Noise. 
ach,** a, Stormy, 
3 Noisy. 
easgan, n.pl. of easg. 2 see iosgaid. 
easgann, -ainne, -an, s. f. Eel 2 Grig. 3 
Merry creature. 4 Anything ‘below natural 
age. 5 see iosgaid, La fhéill Mo Cheasaig 
bithidh gach e. torrach, on St. Kessock's day 
every eel is pregnant. In a MS. collection of 
proverbs easan is substituted for easgann. 
This is intelligible, though the use of the. word 
torrach as applied to water is anomalous, the 
reference to eels is more singular, that fish 
being of ill-repute in Gaeldom—N.G.P. [A 
** band ” of eels is 250, a “ stick ” 25.] 
ach, -aiche, a. Lively, supple or slip- 
pery asan eel. 2 Anguliform. 3 Wanton. 
easgann-bheag, (AF) s.f. Grig. 
— -bhreac,(AF) s.f. Lamprey. 
— -faragaidh,(AF) s.f. Eel. 
— ——— -mhara,(AF) s.f. Conger eel. 
feasgar, -air, s.m. The plague. 2 Grain of corn. 
3 Kernel. 
easgar,** s. Fall. 
teasg-bhaineach, -eiche, a. Lunatic. 
easg-bheag,(AF) see easgann bheag. 
—— -bhreae, see easgann bhreac. 
eas-ghleusadh, -aidh, s.m. Confusion. 
easg-mhara, see easgann-mhara. 
easgonnach, -aiche, see easgannach. 
teasgradh, -aidh, s.m. Cup, drinking vessel. 2 
Grain of corn. 3 The plague. 
easgraich, -e, -ean, s. m. Torrent. 
mixture. 
easg-shüileach,** st Conger eel. 
easguid, -e, -eam, see iosgaid. 
— — ——e&ch, see iosgaideach, 
easguidh,** see asgaidh. f 
Teasguinn, -e, a. see easgaidh, 
easgull, see easgall. 
easgunn, see easgann. 
feas-idhe, a. Conspicuous. : 
eas-ionraic, -e, a. Dishonest. 2**Faithless. 3 
**Wicked. í 
2 Faith- 


eas-ionracas, -ais, s.m. Dishonesty. 
ea-sith,** 5.7, Mischief. 2 Disturbance. 

















blustering. 2 Billowy. 








2 Coarse 


lessuess. 3**Wickedness. 


Original from 


U N V E H 5 TY O E 


LI L ell 
pen Bers A EUN 
rm A A Ñ d A LA EJ fh al ' 
| | DN E) H I d CN r L ri e i ' L ke E 


NOISY 


æ. LAS 


-— JA 


"uc LP mu re, de M we e 


` easlabhra 387 


eas-umblaich, v.a. Disobey. 
eas-urram, -aim, 


easlabhra,** s.m. Bounty, courtesy, affability. 

easlacn, see easloch. 

easlain, see easlan. 

ea-slaine, s.f. see easlaint. 

easlaint, -e, -ean, $.f. Intirmity, ill-health, sick- 
ness. Luchi-easlainte, invalids, sick people. 

-— ——— each, -iche, a. Invalid, sickly, infirm. 
Gu h-e., unhealthy. : 

eachd. s.f.ind. Morbidness, sickliness, 

inirmity. 5 Unwholesomeness. 

ich, v.a. Indispose, 

ea-slainnt, see easlaint. 

easlan, -aine, a. Infirm, sick, not healthy. Bha 
mie, J was sick. 

eas-leine, -léintean, s.f. Shroud, winding-sheet. 
[see eislinn.] 

easloch, sm. Lake, pool. 

easmaidh,** s.f. Lath. 2 Spear. 

easmail,-malach, see eisimeil. +2 Reproach, 
reproof. 

teach, Ach, s.m. see eismeilteach. 

easanadh,** -aidh, s.m. Time. 2 Music, melody. 
3 Song. 

teasmoid, -e, s.f. Disrespect, dishonour. 

—each, -eiche, a. Disrespectful. 

easmunn, see easgann, 

ea-snath,** -snaith, sm, Want of sufficient web 
for the loom. 

easomaid,** s.f. Disrespect, dishonour. 

—each,** a. Disrespectful, disobedient. 

easoman,** -ain, s.m. Welcome. 

eas-onoir, -e, s. f. Dishonour, abuse. 2**Dis- 























grace. 3**Reproach. 4**Dishonesty. 
eas-onorach, -aiche, a. Dishonourable. 2 
Abusive. 3 Illl-bred.  4**Disgraceful. 6** 
Reproachful. 6**Dishonest. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Dishonouring. 2 
Disgrace. 3 Abuse. 4 Act of dishonouring 


or disgracing. Ag e—, pr.pt. of eas-onoraich. 
eas-onoraich, pr. pt. ag eas-onorachadh, v.a. 
Dishonour, abuse. Z**Disgrace. 
te, a. & past pt, Dishonoured, 








abused. 

feasontach, -aiche, a. Rude, guilty. 

easontachd, see easaontachd. 

eas-ordach, -aich, 4. Factious, unruly. 2** 
Irregular. 

eas-orduchadh, -aidh, s.m. Disarranging, disor- 
dering. 2 Act of disordering or confusing. 3 
Disorder, confusion, disarrangement,anarchy. 
Ag e—, pr.pt. of eas-orduich. 

eas-ordugh, -uigh, -uighean, s.m. Disorder, an- 
archy, confusion, irregularity ,unruliness, ado. 

eas-orduich, pr. pt. ag eas-orduchadh, v.a. Dis- 
arrange, confuse. 

easorgain,** s.f. Contrition. 

teasorgnadh, -aidh, s.m. Squeezing, crushing. 

easpuig, see easbuig. 

—— — each, see easbuigeach. 

———-eachd, see easbuigeachd. 


easradh, -aidh, s.m. Ferns or heather to litter 


cattle. 
easraich, -e, -ean, s.f. see easaraich. 2 Sowens 
—Arran. 
easran, -ain, s.m, Dispersion. 
f¢easrannachadh,-aidh,s.m. Decaying substance. 
eastarruing, -e, -ean, see as-tharruing. 
teastraloch,-oich, s.m. Astrologer, 
easuain,** v.a. Scum, skim, 
eas-umbail, -ala, a. 
subordinate, rebellious. 2 Irreverent. 


do pharantan, disobedient to parents ; gu h-e., 


disobediently, 


eas-ùmhlachd, s.f.ind. Disobedience, contum- 
acy, Obstinacy, reballiousness, insubordina- 
Luchd 


tion. 2 Disloyalty. 3 Irreverence. 
na h-e,, the insubordinate. 








feathla, s.pl. 





Disobedient, stubborn,in- 
E 


echt 


s.m. Disrespect, contumacy, 
dishonour, disgrace, reproach, 

ach, -aiche, @. Disrespectful, con- 
temptuous. 2 Stubborn. 3 Dishonourable, 
disgraceful, causing dishonour or disrespect. 





—-—————achadh, -aidh, s.m. Disobedience, act 


of disobeying or rebelling. 2**Degrading,dis- 
gracing or treating contemptuousiy. Ag e—, 
pr.pt. of eas-urramaich. 
— acad, s.f.ind. Contumacy, stubborn- 
ness. 2łtłDishonour, disrespect. 

—aich, pr.pt. ag eas-urramachadh, v.a. 
Condemn. 2** Dishonour, treat with contempt, 
degrade, despise. 


teata, a. Old, agcient, antique. 
teatach, -aich, 
teatal, -ail, s.m. Flight. 2 World. 3 Pleasure, 


sm. Elderly person. 2 Elder. 


dclight. 


teatha, s.f. Cattle. 2 s.m. Corn. 
eathaidh,(AF) s.pl. 


Birds. 

eathar, -air, -thraichean, s. m. [Always f. in 
Gairloch, and the gen. sing. frequently eath- 
rach— DU.] Generally used as the name for 
a small fishing-boat in W. of Ross-shire, the 
word rr bàta " being seldom heard there. 2 
**Skiffo barge, vessel. 3**Cup. E. iasgaich, 
a buss ;e. ur is seana chreagan, a@ new boat 
and old rocks—sugyestive of a thousand trage- 
dies beyond the were literal translation, Both 
rock aud boat are personitications ; the rock 
is old and cunning and unscrupulous, the boat 
is young and simple and unsuspicious, and 
whea the two come into collision,the boat goes 
down. 

———— -aile,** s.m. Balloon. 

-trithinu, WC) s.m. Boat on hire which 
is paid for with a share of the fish caught— 
Poolewe, cc. 

Prayers. 

eathlamh, -aimhe, see ealamh. 

——--——achd, see ealamhachd. 

eathrach, gen. sing. of eathar, in Gairloch. 

eathraichean, n.pl. of eathar. 

featla, s.m. Boldness. 2 Sadness, 

eatlathach,** v. Bold, intrepid. 2 Sad. Gu h- 
e., eugmhaiseach, in a bold and singular man- 
ner. 

——— —.—d,** s. f. Boldness, intrepidity. 2 
SadnosJ. 

eatorra, prep. pron. Between them. 2 Among 
them. E. fhéin, among themselves; thàinig e., 
they quarrelled. 

éa-torrach, a. see neo-thorrach. 

eatorras, -ais, s.m. Mediocrity. 2*Middle state 
of health. Tha mian e., I am tolerably well, 
in tolerable health. 

éa-trathach, -aiche, see eu-trathach. 

ea-treoir, see eu-treoir. 

éa-tredrach, -aiche, a. see eu-treórach. 

éa-treun, -éine, see eu-treun. 

éa-trocair, see eu-trócair. 

——-— —--each, -iche, see eu-trocaireach. 

éa-trom, -truime, see aotrom. 

achadh, see aotromachadh, 

aich, see aotromaich. Hs 

aichte, see aotromaichte. 

- ———àn, see eutroman. 

--———uich, see aotromaich. 

ea-truime, see aotruime. 

—ad, see aotruimead. 

teatuaithcheall, s.f. Imprudence, folly, 

yeatualaing, -e, -ean, sf. Injury. i 

ebeir, see eabar. 

teeconta, a. Silly, unwise, see eu-connta.- 

ieccnionne, see ecconta. 

techt, s.m, Death, murder. 2 Exploit. [euchd.] 














echtge 


Techtge,(P) (AF)s. Cow, cattle. 

Tfecmaeht,l a. impotent. 

Teconn,l s.m. Lunatic, idiot. 

Tecsidhe, a. Apparent, clear. 

ted, see feudail. 2 see eit. 3 see eid. 

Ted, v. Make. 2 Receive, 3 Handle. 

tedal, s.f. see feudail. [eudal.] 

tedearbh, a. Uncertain, 

fedeignneach,(Al’) s.m. Gelded horse. 

tedido, -e, see eitigh. 

tedir, see eadar. 

Tedire, s.pl. Hostages. 

ei-, see eu-, 

eibeantach, a. Faulty, inferior, 
washy—ob Donn. 

éibh, see éigh. 

eibheadh, -idh, s.f. seeeadha. 

éibheall, -bhle & -bhill, pl. -bhlean, 
Gairloch eibhill— 


[euconn.] 


òh silent.] s. f. Live coal. 


2** Flame. 3**Hearth-fire. Mar é. 'sa bheal- 


ach, like a fire in the pass. 
eibheis, see aibheis, 
éibhinn, -e, d. Odd, curious, 
3 Delightful. 4(PM) Jolly and witty— Uist. 
, sf. see aoibhinn. 





is é. an gill’ thu, what a funny fellow you are! 





each, -iche, see aoibhneach. 

— ————eaeüud, see aoibhneas. 

eibhir, s.7. Granite. 

eibhle,* see éibheall. 

éibhleach, 
coals. 

éibhicad, see éighlead. 

—— —— ——aách, see éighleadach. 

éibhleadh, -idh, see féileadh. 

éibhleag, -eige, -an, s.f. Burning coal. 2 Little 
fire. 3fr3mallember, Mhüch iad m’ é., they 
have quenched my fire. 

éibhieagach, -aiche, a. Of or belonging to 
burning coal, like a burning coal. 

éibhlean, n.pl. of éibheail. 

éibhlich,** v.n. Sparkle, kindle, flame. 

Téibhlieh, v.n. Sparkle. 

Teibhligh, see eibhlich. 

Teibhling, v.n. Spring off or on. 

éibhlisg CR) s.f. Slow or stupid woman—W. 
of Koss. 

éibhneach, -iche, see aoibhneach. 

— ———d,tt s.f. Joyfulness. 

éibhneas, -eis, see aoibhneas. 

éibhrionn,* see eibhrionnach. 

eibhrionnach, -aich, s.m. Castrated 
ther goat. 

eibhrionta, see eibhrionnach. 

Teibir, -e, -ean, 8./. Report, character, 

eiblit,** s.f. Interjection. 

Teibteadh, for ràdh. 

feicceas, -eis, s.m. Art, science, 

eiceart, -ceirte, see eu-ceart. 

—-—as, see eu-ceartas. 

eich, gen.sing. & n. pl. of each. 

éich, see éigh. 

Teiesidhe, a. Apparent, manifest. 

teid,** int. Word used on discovery of any ani- 
mal of prey, or game, meant to give notice to 
the hunting companion to be in readiness to 
seize the animal. 

teid, -e, s.f. Tribute, tax, subsidy. 2 see feudail. 

éid, v.a. Clothe, dress. 2 Accoutre, put ona 
uniform. 3 Mount, as with silver. 4 Mount, 
as swingles. "Ga éideadh féin, putting on his 
accoutrements, dressing ; ged éid thu thu féin 
le corcur, though thou clothe thyself with crim- 
son. pr.pt. ag éideadh. 

eid-bheann,* Clough. 

éide, see éideadh. 

——ach, -iche, a. Clothed, harnessed, accou- 


goat, we- 


388 











faint, wishy- 


[nom. in 


2 see aoibhinn. 


-iche, a. Of, or abounding in live 






eidimhin 





tred, armed. 


Act of clothing. 3 Armour, 
5*Uniform. 6 The garb of the 
7**Dressing. 8**see cige. 


mour of light ; ar n-é. cuirp, 


*nuair a rachadh tu 

yourself in all your panoply ; 

ves ; é uchd, a breast-plate; 
. ing dress; é. muineil, gorget ; 


amhaich, cravat. Ag é—, 
éideag, s.f. White pebble. 
quartz—A rgyt. 
ach, -aiche, a. Pebbly. 
éideam, Ist. sing. pr. aff. of éid. 1 clothe. 


pr.pt. of éid. 





2 Ist. sing. imp. of éid. Let me clothe, 
éididh mi) 4 will clothe, 
eidean,** s.m. Receptacle, 
n,Tf -inn, -an, s.f. Suit, equipment, 
eidear, see eadar. 
Teidearbh, -a, a. False. 





éideadh, -idh, -ean, s.m. Clothing, apparel. 2 
4 Act of arming. 
Scottish Gael, 
. anairt, a web 
of linen ; é. thuilinn, a web of twilled (inen ; é. 
làimhe, o gauntlet ; ’na é. soillse, in his ar- 
our body gariments; 
gun é. gun each, without horse or armour ; 
'd é., when you arrayed 
é. calpa, grea- 
é. bròin, mourn- 
é. Gàidhealach, 
the garb of the Gael ; é. droma, back-piece ; é. 


2 (Fionn) White 


E. 
na nèamha, J clothe the heavens. [Irish form.) 


8 ( for 


eidh, v.n, Go—Suth’d. Dh'eidhinn, Z would go. 


eidhe, see deigh. 

eidheachail, see deigheach. 

eidhean, -eidhne, see eidheann. 

ach, -aiche, a. see eidheannach. 

an, &.m., dim. of eidheann. Ivy bush, 











291. Eidheann. 


eidheann, -eidhne, s.f. [* gives m.] Ivy—hedera 
heüz. Badge of the Gordons. Spion an e. 
bho [or bharr] a craoibh, tear the ivy from its 


twigs. 
Of, or belonging to 


ach, -aiche, a. 
ivy, ivied, 

ach, -aich, s.f. Ivy—Arran &Argylish. 
2 Ice—Isiay. 
ag, -aige, s.f. Ivy branch or bough. 
— —— -thalmhainn,$ s. f. Ground-ivy, see 
iadh-shlat-thalmhainn. 
eidheinean, see eidheanan, 
eidhionn, see eidheann. 
—- -mu-chrann,(AC) see eidheann. 
eidhneach, a. see eidheannach. 
eidhnean,** ein, s.m. Bough or branch of ivy. 
2 Young ivy. 
———— -thalmhuinn, 
iadh-shlat-thalmhuinn. 
eidhre, s.f.ind. see eighre. 2** Burden. 
eidhreadhail, a. see eighreadail. 
eidhreannach, -aich, s.f. Icicle. 
eidhreanta, a. see eighreadail. 
eidh-shlat, see iadh-shlat. 
eididh, Perthsk. for eidhreannach. 
PAN. see éideadh. 2 see eige. Sa. see 

itigh. 
teidimhin, ø. Doubtful, uncertain. 2 Fluctuat- 
ing, changeable. 











s.f. Ground ivy, see 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 


URBANA-CHAMP 


Aj 


Fi 


^ ^ us me 


j 
hs axe : 
"t mo pi mu m, Parma AS om. nm 


e oan n A 





VIGN $ 


389 éignich 


el 


eidir 


SE = avr Tt. = 


p. 


TU 


- 


E CLAU oy ES 


EE SEENEN 
teidir, v. impers. Ni h-eidir (leis, ] [ke] cannot. Kaes -imh, prov. for éigheach. 


see eadar. 
s.m. Captive, hostage. 
-cheirt, s. m. Equal distribu- 


feidir, 

teidir, pl. -e, 

eidir-cheart,** 
tion. À 

éifeachd, s.f.ind. Effect, avail, consequence, 
efficacy. Gun e., without effect. 

éifeachdach, -aiche, d. Effectual, efficient, of 

- avail, A’ ghairme., efectual calling; gu h-e., 
effectually. 

éifeachdail, see éifeachdach. 

éifeasach, a. Serious. 

eig, dat. of eag. — TZ see easg. 

éig, gen.sing. of eug, 

feigeneasda, a see eu-cneasda. 

eige, gen. sing. of eag. 

eige,” -achan, $.f. Web. E. de chlò, a web of 

omespun ` pinne na garmain agus an e., the 

pin of the beam and the web. 

eigeach,* s.f. Abb. 

‘feigeal, s.m. see torran, 2 Furrowed rock or 
eminence. 

éigean, see éiginn. ‘ 

eigean,** a. Lawful, rightful, just. 

éigeannach,* see éivinneach. 

-.—adh, see eigneachadh. 

éigeanntach," a. see éiginneach. 

h. san. see éigneachadh. 


éigeantach, -aiche, @ see éiginneach. ` 

éigeantas,-ais, 8. M. Necessity. 2*Miserable 

shifts. 3 State of requiring every kind of shift. 

s.m. Bard, learned man. 

ag éigheach, v. a.d n. Call, shriek. 
shout, ery in à Slow, swelling manner. 2** 
Proclaim. 3**Sound. Highibh caismeachd, 
sound an alarm ; chan éighear cath, battle 
shall not be called—they shall not call battle. 

éigh, -e,-ean & -eachan, s. f. Cry. 2* The 
death-watch, a tingling noise in the ear, sup- 
posed to portend news of death. 3 Long con- 
tinued swelling cry, as of women when hear- 
ing of some disastrous catastrophe. Is fhad’ 
an é. o Loch Odha, it is a far cry from L.Awe 
—expressive of its remoteness ;tha 'né. nam 
chluais, gun gleidheadh Dia na’s caomh 
leam, the death-watch is in my ear, may God 
keep all that are dear to me ; é. nam ban Muil- 
each, ’s iad a’ caoineadh ’s a’ tuireadh, the 
lamentation of the Mull women, mourning and 
lamenting, [this is given by * under éibh, but 
the correct form of the saying is *' gaoir nam 
ban Muileach " &c.]; 6. a’ bhàis, the lam- 
entable cry of death ` thoir an éigh ** shiod 
thu," shout out *' that's you"! ; é. còmhraig, 
war-cry, shout of battle. 

eigh, -e, -ean -eachan & -eannan, 8.f. Jee 2 
(AF) Roe. 

eigh-bheinn,(WC) s.f. Ice-berg. 

éigh-comhraig,"* s.f. War-cry. 

eighe, -achan, s.f. File, especially a 3-corner 
one, 2ttłPeat-cutter. Bha e. aca, they had 

























teizeas, 
éigh, pr. pt. 


a file. 

éigheach, -ich, -ichean, s.f. Cry, earnest en- 
treaty. 2**Proclamation.  3**Shout. e 
Wail. 5**Loud voice. 6**Act of crying, call- 
ing, shouting, bawling or proclaiming. Ag 
e—, pr. pl. of éigh. 2 pr.pt. of éighich. É. 
mhór, great wailing; is aithne dhoibh t’ é., they 
know thy call. 

, iche, a, Clamorous, vociferous, noisy. 
2**Orying, shrieking, shouting, bawling. 

eigheach, tt eich, a. see deigheach. 





éizheachd,t{ s.. find. Proclamation. 2 (DU) 


Shouting, clamour. 
eigheadail, -ala, a. 

E Ice-built. 4 Glacial. 
éi;headair,** s.m. Crier, proclaimer. 


eighean-làir, $. 
eigheann, 


éighneachair,** s.m. 
eigh-mhoine, (CR) 








Icy. 2 Abounding in ice. 


eigheanach, -aich, s.m. Icicle. 


Gill. 
see eidhe^ nn. 


ach, see eidheannach. 


teighi, s.f. Science. 
éighich, pr.pt. ag éigheach, v.n. Call, cry,shout, 


shriek, bawl. 2 Proclaim. 


éighlead,** -eid, s.m. Interjection. 


ach,** a. Interjectional. 
see éigneachair. 
s. 5. Peat-cutting spade— 


Perthsh. 
eighneadh, see deigh. 
eighre,tt s.f. Ice, 2 Frost. see deigh. 
eighreach, see deigheach. 
eighreadail, see deigheach, 
eighreadh, see deigh. 


eighreag,t see oighreag. 
eigh-thogte.ff a. 
éigin, see éiginn. 
éigineach, 
eiginn,pron.indef.sing. & pl. Some. Cuid-eiginn, 


Ice-built. 


-iche, a, see éiginneach. 

some person ; fear-eiginn, some man ; rud-e., 
something ; té-e., some female or woman. In 
all such compounds the e of this word is 
hardly sounded, thus cuid'eiginn, not cuid- 
éigi nn. [We could say fear-éiginn, &c. with 
the same meanings. | 


éiginn, s.f. Force, violence, compulsion. 2 


Straits, hardship. 3 Difficulty. 4 Necessity, 
distress. 5 Rape. 6 Oppression. 7 (TS) Steep 
hillside nearly impassable. Thug e a h-é., he 
committed rape, he violated her ; tha e 'na é., 
he is distressed; thog e air é. à shüil, he raised 
his eye with difficulty ; beo air é., just alive 
and that is all ; air e., with much ado, scarce- 
ly, with difficulty; 'nuair is é., when it is ne- 
cessary ; tem -éiginn, forced fire, [for particu- 
lars see under tein’-éiginn] ; bu rabhadh na 
h-é. e, it was an emergency warning ; an rud à 
chuir an earb air an loch—an e., what made 
the hart take to the loch—necessity. 
-fhuail, s.f. Dysury. 
each, a. Necessary, indispensable, requir- 
ing every kind of shifts. 2 Oppressive. 3 
Needy, needful, poor. 4** Indisputable, 
6** Ravishing, 








certain, 5** Compulsive. 
foreing. 7**Critical. 8 (AH)Niggardly, par- 
simonious. 
eas,** -eis, s.m. Force, violence. 2 Ne- 
cessity, need. 3 Compulsion. 4 Rape. 
teach, see éiginneach. 
éigiontach, -aiche, see éiginneach. 
eigir,(AC)a. Small, insignificant. Iasg e., € 
dwarf fish ; iasgach e., a poor jishing—Arran; 


ugh e., a small egg ; uighean e., the eggs of the 
smallest birds—Barra; teom e., a small dole ; 
deire e., miserable alms ; tiodhlac e., an illib- 
eral religious oblation. 

——, -ean, s.m. Small insignificant person. 2 
(AF) Small gull, kittiwake, see seagair. E. 
giollain, a puny boy ; e. bodaich, a miserable 
carle ; e. duine, 0 mean, miserable man. 

eiglidh,** a. Mean, abject, feeble. 

eachd, s.f.ind. Abjectness, feebleness. 

eigne,( AF) s. Salmon. 

éigneach, -iche, @. see éiginneach. 

—, -ich, s.m. Oppressor. 2 Compeller. 

—adh, -aidh, s.m. Forcing, compelling, 

constraining. 2 Ravishing, compulsion, rape. 

3 Act of forcing, compelling, or ravishing, 

rape. Ag e--, pr.pt.of éignich. 

—air,** -ean, s.m. Oppressor. 2**Ravish- 
er, constrainer, compeller. 

éignich, pr. pt. ag éigneachadh, v. a. Compel, 
force, constrain. 2 Ravish.  3** Oppress. 














Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


. URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


Digitized by 
| i 


he INTERNET ARCHIVE 


éignich 


4** Take by force. 

aich Clann Dain, and the A morites forced the 

children of Dan ; -dh' e thu mo chridhe, you 
have ravished my heart. 

ear, fut. pass. of éignich. Shall be ra- 

vished. 

te, a. & past pt. of éignich. Forced,con- 
strained, compelled. 2 Ravished. 

eignidh, see eagnaidh. 

eigse,** s.f. Art, science. 2 Knowledge. 

--—ach,** -aich, s.f. School, study. 

éil,(AC) for éill, gen. of iall, 

"eil, ( for bheil) see bi, v. 

teil, v.a. see eilc. 

teilc, v.a. Rob, spoil. 

Gilde, gen. of eilid. 

-——ach, -iche, a. Abounding in hinds. 2 Of, 
or belonging to hinds. Gleann é., the valley 
of hinds. 

éildeag, -eige, -an, s.f. Young hind or roe. (fe- 
male of stag or red-deer.) [The doe is the fe- 
male of the fallow-deer.] 

ach,tt a. Abounding in young hinds or 











roes. 

éild, Harris for eilid. 

éildear -an, s.m. Gaelic spelling of elder. 

———--achd, s.f. Office of an elder. 

éile, Skye, Badenoch & N. Argyll for féileadh. 

eile, pron.indef. Other, another. 2 The other 
of two. see dara.  3**Else. Duin’ eile, an- 
other person ; ni e., another thing ; neach e., 
another individual; agus rud e. dheth, and 
more than that, (another thing of it); có e.? 
who else ? 

teile, s.f. Prayer, entreaty. 2 Oration, 3 
Lowing of deer. e 

feileabair, s.f. Hellebore. 

eilea3banachd,(MMcL) s.f. Mockery, making a 
fool of anyone, 

eileach, Ach, -ichean, s.m. [** gives s.f.] Mill- 
dam. 2 Mound, bank. 3ttRock. 4(CR) Weir, 
bank of stones to guide fish into a cabAuil or 
bag-net. 5(CR) Any place where water can 
be crossed on stones. [Last two meanings 
both W. of Ross.] E. na muilne, the channel 
bringing the water to the mill. 

feileachadh,** -aidh, s.m. Accusing,accusation. 

eileachair,** s.m. Impeacher. 

éileachanaichte,** o Numb. 

éileadh, Skye & N. Argyll for féileadh. 

éileadh, -idh, -idhean, s.m. Folding, plaiting. 

éileag, -eige, -an, sf. seeéibhleag. T2 V-shap- 
ed structure, wide at one end and narrow at 
the other, into which deer were driven and 
shot with arrows as they came out. 

—— —Ach,-aiche, a see éibhleagach. 

eilean, -ein, -an [pron. eilea'an in Suth’d, &c.] 
s.m. Island, isle, islet. 2 see oilean. E. àr- 
aidh, a certain island ; a null do na h-eilean- 
an, away to the isles ; e. lon, a mud island— 
Arran. 

, see oilean. 

ach, -aich, s.m. Islander, inhabitant or 

native of an island, especially one of the Heb- 

rides. 2 Generous man. Ban-e., an Hebri- 

dea; woman. 

ach,-aiche, a. Abounding in islands, in- 
sular. 2 Like an island. 3 Peninsular, 4 
Generous, liberal, munificent. 

——achd,* s.f.ind. Generosity, liberality, mu- 
nificence. 2 Insularity. 

eilear,* see eilthir. 2 **Deer’s walk. 

eilear,f s. m. Crose, notch on the staves of a 
cask where the bottom is fixed. 

eileineach, -ich, see eileanach. 

eileinich, v. n. see oileinich. 2 (PM) Abuse, 
thoroughly villify, also often applied to phy- 











390 
Agus dh'é. na h-Amor- 


ei-neart 





sical punishment— Uist. 

eileir, -ean, see eilthir. 

eilgheadh, -idh, sm. Levelling a field for sow- 
ing. 2 Fallow ground. 3 First ploughing of 
land that requires a second to prepare it for 
seed. 4 Ploughing of stubble—W. of Ross-sh. 
5** Burial, interment. 

——— ——,ttv.a. Plough for a second ploughing. 

eile-trom,(DC) 8. m. see eilitriom. 

eile-trium, Lewis for eilitriom. 

eilibear,** s,f. Hellebore. 

eilich,** v.a, Accuse, charge, call to account, 

eilid, éilde, éildean, s.f. Hind, female of the red 
deer, roe. Laidh an e, air an fhuaran, the 
hind lay at the spring well ; e. ag iarraidh a h- 
annsachd, a hind in search of its mate. 

——each, -iche, a, Full of hinds. 2 Of, or rela- 
ting to hinds. 

eilidh,** s. Fallow ground. 

eilig,t -e, s.f. Willow herb, see seileachan. 

Teilightheoir, -e, -ean, s.m. Creditor, 2 Accu- 


ser. 

eilitriom, -an, s.m. Plank or board on which 
„a dead body is placed— Uist. 2tt Hearse. 

eill,** s.f. Precipice. 2 Advantage. 3 Flock. 

eillbhuinn, -e, s.f. Sensation of burning, as of 
a barefooted person treading on a live coal. 
Cuspach is gag is e., 's mairg an spag air am 
beireadh iad, kibe and crack and burning heel, 
pity the foot they come on—these are only ex- 
_perienced by those who go barefooted. 

éille, gen. of iall. 

eillimh,** s, Plea. 

feiligheadh, s.m. Burial. 

eillteil, -eala, see oillteil. 

eilltich, see oilltich. 

teilminte, Gaelic form of element. 

eilne,** s,f. Uncleanness, pollution. 

eilnich,** v.a. Corrupt. 2 Soil. 3 Violate. 

teilnighte, a. & past pt. Corrupted. 

eilteachadh, -aidh, s. m. Rejoicing, gladness, 
act of rejoicing. Ag e—, pr. pt. of eiltich. 

eilteir, -ean, see éildear. 

eilthir,(AG) Reay country for oirthir. 

eil-thir, -ean, s.m. Sequestered region or dis- 
trict. 2 Coast, sea-coast. 38**Forcign land, 
strange country. 4*Desert. 5**Pilgrim. 

eilthire, see eilthireachd. 

eilthireach, Ach, s.m. Pilgrim, stranger,sojourn- 
er, alien, foreigner, 

——,-eiche, a. Foreign, strange, 2 Of, 
or belonging to, a pilgrim. 

eilthireachd, s.f.ind. Pilgrimage, sojourning. 

eiltich, v.a. Rejoice, be glad. 2 Exult. 

teim, s.m. see im. 

eimh,** o Quick, active, brisk. 2 Gairloch 
pron. of amb, raw. 

Teimh, e, s.f. Haft. 2' Tail. 8 Sanctuary. 

leimhe, see éighe. 

eimheach,** a. Nimble, swift. 

eimheachd,** s.f. Obedience, compliance. 

teimhidhe, -an, s.f. Proclamation. 

eimhilt,** o, Slow, tedious, 

éimhleag, see éibhleag. 

fein, see aon. 

ein,(AC)s. Sap. Mar e. nan sugh, as the sap of 
strawberries. 

feinchineadh, (for aon chineadh) One family. 

eineach -ich, 8.m. Bounty, goodness, courtesy. 
2 Affability. 3** Truce, armistice. 4**Shirt. 
5**Smock. 6 Fine countenance. 7 Face. 8 
Any body. (Irish form of aon neach.) 

éineach,(MMcL) s.m. Stalks of heather. 

eineachas, -ais, see eineach. 

eineach-lann, -lainn, s.f. Protection, defence, 
safeguard. 2 Attribute. 

fei-neart, -neirt, sm, Weakness, 








eing 391 eirt 


teing, gen. sing. of eang. 
eingeal, see aingeal. 
teinghin, for aon-ghin, 
ich,* v.a. Benumb. 
feinmh:id, a. Of equal size. (aon mheud.) 
einnid, sf. Generosity. 
eintridh, Gaelic spelling of entry. 
eipistil, ** Gaelic spelling of APA see litir. 
Téir,** v.a. Rise, mount, ascend. 
teirb, s.f. Quickness. 
feirbhe, s.f. Fence, wall. Camus na h-eirbhe, 
lace name near Callart. 
o ege ** s.f. Wasp. 2 Hornet. 
feirbhearn, v.a. Transgress, break. 
eirbheirt, -e, s.f. Moving, stirring. 2 Power of 
motion. 3 Endeavour. 4**Burden. 5tłAc- 
ity. 'fha comas eirbheirt aice, she is able 
to move about. 


———, v.a. £ n. Move. 2 Carry. 


eirbhir,* pr .pt. ag eirbhir, [* eirbhirt,] v. n. 

Seek in an in direct way. tha ag cirbhir 
sin ort ? who asks that of you, or who insinua- 

tre that ? 

eirbhir, -e, s.f. Act of asking or blaming indi- 
recily, Ag e—, pr.pt. of eirbhir. Bha e. nan 
corp air à cheann, he was indirectly blamed 
Jor the dead bedies—for their being dead bodies 
—Call Ghaig. 

————each, -ich, s.m. Person that questions or 
blames indirectly. 

eirbhirt, pr. pt. of eirbhir, 

eirbhrith, s.f. Drying by fire. 

eirbieach, a. Decrepit, infirm, crippled. 

eirbleach, (PM) s.m. Decrepit man or beast— 
Uist. Cha'n fhac’’ thu e, riamh ach e, you 
mever saw a more miserable object. 

@Gircbheach, see eirbheach, 

eirc-chomhla, s.m, Porteullis, 

eirceaeh, see eiriceach. 

eirceachd, see eiriceachd. 

éire, s.f. ‘Burden, 2 for eighreadh, see deigh. 
Is e. mo sgiath, my shield is a burden ; och 
agus ochain nan och éire ! alas ! alas ! bith- 
idh mi an e. sin ri m’ bheò, I shall feel the 
effects of that as long as 1 live. 3 Effect. 

éireach, -iche, o. Burdensome, heavy, 

eireachd, an, s.f. Assembly, meeting, 2 Con- 
gregation. 3 Heresy. 4ttEKlegance, beauty. 


——-——ail, -ala, a. Handsome, beauteous,come- 
ly, seemly, graceful, fair, 9 Decent becoming, 
proper, as dress. 3**Specious. 

eireachdas, -ais, s.m. Handsomeness, showi- 
ness, good appearanee. 2 Good breeding. 3 
Congregation. 4*Decency, suitableness to ap- 
pear in company with. A’ dol a dh’ e. leis, 
becoming quite handsome with it, cutting a 
dash with 1t ; gleann air an robh e, thar gach 
gleann, a glen that was beauteous beyond ail 

. Others. 

éireadail,t¢ a. Burdensome. 

eireadail, -ala, a. Frosty, pinching, severely 
cold, see deigheach. 

éireadh, 3rd. sing. & pl. imper. of éirich. Be 
let him arise. 

éireadh, see éire. 

éireag, see oighreag. 

eireag, -eige, -an, s.f. Young hen, pullet, 


———ach, a. +¢Abounding i in pullets. 


éireagach, see oighreagach. 
eireallaci, -aich, s.m. Clumsy old man, 2 Mon- 
f: 


eireannach,(CR) s.m. Pluuger churn—Gairloch. 


eireara:ch, -e, see eararadh. 
téirghe, see éirigh. 
j»rgionnaen, -aich, s.m. Pursuer. 


- éiribh, dat pi. of éire. 


é.ribh, Zud Gan, a. of éirich. Rise ye. 


Digitized ba 
IMTERNET ARCHIV 


n 





| éirie, -e, -ean, s.m. éirig. 

eiriceach, ** -eich, s.m. Heretiic, unbeliever. 

KE -eiche, a. Heretical,, unbelieving. 

KNEES 1 St, Heresy. | 

eiriceil,* a. Heretical. d 

éirich, pr. pt. ag éirigh, v.a. Riise, ascend. 2 
Rise out Of bed. 3** Befall, | happen EN $ 
Rebel. É. tràthail ’sa mhadaşnn, rise early 
in the morning ; dh’ é. e air an o bair, he start- 
ed the work ; é. air, go at it; 'niuair a dh'éir- 
eas maduinn, when morning shall ` rise or dawn; 
is bochd mar a dh’ é. dhuit, sad v s that which, 
has bejalten you ; dh’ leis, he succeeded or 
prospered ; é. air, set to—said, for example, as 
an encouragement to a singer abou t to com- 
mence ; é. ort, arise ; dh'é. Fionn "na comh- 
air, F. rose to meet her; éiridh mi, I sh:all rise. 

———idh, fut.ajf.a. of éirich. [Erroneousl y given 
by ** for éiridh, which is the correct WH 
Shall or will rise. 

eiridh, see deigh. 

éiridn, fut. aff. a. of éirich. 2 Often erroneous sdy 
used for éirigh, pr.pt. X 

eiridinn, s.m. Nursing, attendance on the sic...“ . 
2 Person so attended, patient. 3(MNMceL) 
Medicine, Deoche ,a potion. Ag e—. pr.pt. 
of eiridnich. 

—— ———-, v.a. see eiridnich. 

eiridinneach, see eiridneach. 

eiridneach, -iche, a. Cherishing, affectionate. 

eiridneach,* Ach, s.m. Patient. 

eiridneachadh, -aidh, s.m. Cherishing, nursing. 
Ag e—, pr. pt. of eiridnieh. 

eiridneadh, s.m, see eiridneachadh, 

eiriduich, pr. pt. ag eiridneachadh & ag eirid- 
inn, v.a. Cherish, nurse, foster. 

éirig, -e, -ean, s.f. Ransom, forfeit, reparation, 
amercenient, ine. An é. m’ anama, in ran- 
som for my soul ; an é., a ghràidh, in return 
for his love. [For amounts of éirig accord- 
ing to rank, see under crodh. | 

teirige,** s.f. Command, government. 

éirigeach,* œ As a ransom, 21iPiacular. 

—— — —;,* -ich, s.m. Heretic, captive, bonds- 
man. Duine a tha 'na o., œ man that is a 
heretic. 

feirigeachd, see eirige. 

éirigeil, a. Redemptory. 

éirig-fheumnach, see éirigeach, 

teirigh, -0, -€an, s.m. Viceroy, chief governor. 

éirigh, s.f.ind. Rising, mounting. 2 Rise, 
act of rising, ascension. 3*Rebellion, mutiny. 


Am é., time of rising ; am bheil thu air 6. ? 
have you risen, are you "out of bed ? é. na gréine, 
sunrise ; bha gach ni ag 6. leis, everything 
was prospering with him. Ag 6—, pr. pt. of 
éirich. 

éirigheachd,** sf. Ascension. 

éirionnach, -aich, see éibhrionnach. 

eirirt, s.f. Advancement— Dàin I. Ghobha. 

Teiris, Ze € Era. 2 Friend. 3 Mistrust. 4 
Heresy. 

leirle, s.f. Fragment. 

Teirlioc, -oie, -an, s.f. Flake of ice. 

eirlioch,** s.m. Destruction. 

eirmis, pr. pt. ag eirmeas, v.a. Find out, hit, 
find out by searching. Dh’ e, mi air, I found 
him. 

eirmiseach, -iche, a Quick, expert, good at 
finding, searching or aiming. E. air a thean- 
gaidh, quick in repartee. 

eirmiseachd, s.f. Finding after a search, 

eirneadh,** s.m. Gift 

éirneis, see airneis. 

feirr,** s.f. Shield. 2 End. 3f{Snow. ty 
Lee 5 gen. sing. of earr. 

leirt, -e, sj. Strength. 





— e 


eirthir 


392 


eislis 


Sees e a a nU 
eirthir, -e, -ean, See oitir, Coast, used in place- | eisgeil, -eala, a. Satirical, scurrilous. 2* Flips 


names about (Gairloch, 

eirthireach, see  oitireach. ý 

éis, -e, -ean, s.f. Delay, detention, hindrance. 
2 Rest, respite. 3 Defect, want. 4* Obstruc- 
tion— Lewis. ` 5** Band, troop. 6 Footstep, 
trace. 7 (Fionn) Trouble, annoyance. ` SAM 
McL) End—(Lewis. Bho thus gu é., from be- 
ginning to end; air é. back, backwards; cha’n "eil 
agam da éils sin, I have nought in consequence; 
na bi deandamh é., do not delay ; dé tha cur é. 
ort P what/is annoying you? cha'n'eil e mòine 
'n Uidhist, there's nolack of peats in Uist. 

éis, pr.pt. cig éiseadh, v.a. Hinder, prevent, ob- 
struct. 2 Trace, search. 

éis-bhreitéh, -e, ean, s.f. False judgment. 

eisceach, -eich,** s.m. Exception, exclusion. 

eis-chininealachadh, -aidh, s.m. Degeneracy. 

éiad, ae pt. ag éisdeachd, v.n. Hear. 2 Heark- 
en, isten., 3 Be slow to obey. 4 Take no 
heed. Hisdibh uile shluagh, hearken all ye 
gwople ; éisd ! hist ! be silent ! obey ! a chluas, 
mach é, thu ! (ironical) =what nonsense ; é. do 

/ bheul ! be quick ! 

‘éisdeachd, s.f.ind. Hearing, hearkening. 2 
Act of hearing, hearkening or listening, 3 
Attention. 4**Audience. 5**Auditory. 6t 
Confession. Ag é—, pr.pt. of éisd. Luchd 
é., hearers, audience ; an tia bheir é., he that 
hears or listens; ag é. ri caoirean na coille, 
listening to the murmur of the wood ; thoir é., 
listen ; an t-slabhruidh é., the audience chain, 
—rattled to secure a hearing. [Often pron. 
éisneachd in Gairloch. | 

éisdeam, 1st.sing.imp. of éisd. Let me hear or 
listen. [not for éisdidh mi, fas given by **,— 
that should be éisdim.] 

éisdear, -eir, -ean, s.f. Hearer, hearkener, 

éisdeir, see éisdear. d 

Xe 


eis-dhamh,(AF) s.m. 

éisdich, see éisd. 

éisdim, v. (for éisdidh mi,) Z shall hear. 

eise(AF)s. Fish. 

eiseach,* s. see eisleach. 

éiseach, see éiseil. 

éiseadh,** -ilh, s.m. Seeking, hunting after, 
tracing, research. Ag é—, pr. pt. of éis. 

eiseairt, a. Poor destitute, feeble. 

eiseamplair,* see eisimpleir. 

eisean, prov. for esan. 

eisear,* see eisir. 

eisearach,ff-aiche, v. Destitute. 

eisearadh, -aidhe, a. Poor, destitute. 2 Feeble. 

éiseil, a. Obstruent, hindering, 

eiseimeileachd, see eisimeil. 

eiseirghe, see aiseirigh. 

eiseolach, see aineolach. 

eiseolas, see aineolas. 

éisg, gen, sing. of iasg, 
kind of fish. 

eisg, -e, -ean, s.f. Satirist, lampooner, scurri- 
lous poet. 2 Scold., 3 SutA'd for aisg.  4** 
Lampoon, satire, Ard-eisg nan droch fhil- 
idh ! thou supreme failure of all lampooning 
bards ! [** gives s.f. for 4, and s.m. for 1.] 

eisgeach, a. see eisgeil. 

eisgeach,** s.m. Study. 

eisgeadh,-idh,-idhbean, s.m. Satirizing,censuring. 

eisgealachd, s.f.ind. Scurrility, satire. 

eisgeanta. a. Satirical, scurrilous. 

eisgear, -eir, -eirean, s.m. Satirist, lampooner, 
seurrilous poet. 2 Scold. 

eisgearra,** a. Bitter, satirical, scurrilous. 2 
Unsociable. 

eisgearrachd,** s.f.ind. Bitterness of language, 
scurrility, satire, lampooning. 

Teisgeartha, see eisgearra. 





Gach seòrsa 6., every 


— 


i | 
BORN E V PT LINE f 
WT | 
ITERNET ARCHIV 
— 1 I i 1 T a 


pant, 

éisgin, -e, -ean, see éisglinn. 

eisgir, s, Ridge of mountains. 

éiseliun, -e, -tean, [** gives pl, -linntichean]s Jf. 
Fish-pond, 

feisil, a. Ignorant, rude. 

eisimealach, -aiche, a. Dependent, under obli- 
gation or subjection. 2 Reverent, respectful. 
3 In one’s debt or reverence. 4 ttBiassed. 

eismealachd, s.f.ind. Same meanings as eisi- 
meil. 2* State ot dependence or 3 poverty. 

eisimeil, eisimealach, [eisimeil—N.G.P.] pl. eisi- 
mealaichean, [ff gives gen. eisimeile, n. pi. 
eisimeilean,] s.f. Dependence, reverence, ob- 
ligation. 2 Partiality, bias to one side of 
a question, 3* Power. 4ifCourage. 5(DU) 
Respect, Is diuid fear na h-e., the dependent 
is timid ; cha’n 'eil mi an e. do chuid Beurla, 
I can do very well without your English ; cha 
’n -eil mi 'nad e, I am not in your reverence ; 
gun e. gun ùmhlachd, without reverence or 
obedience ; ni mi e gun e., I can doit witk- 
out being in the reverence of anyone for help; 
chan el mi bonn 'nad e., I am not a whit in 
your reverence ; thoir e., show respect. 

each, see eisimealach. 

eisimeilteach, -ich, s.m. Reproachful person. 

Teisimh, @ Near, close at hand. 

eisimpleir, -ean, s.m. Example, pattern, en- 
sample. 2 Model.  3**Copy. 4**Parable, 
Gu'n robh sibh 'nur n-eisimpleiribh, tAat you 
were examples, 





eisimpleireach, -aiche, a. Exemplary. 2tt 
Precedented. 

eisimpleireiche,** s.m. Copyist. 

eisinn, see eislinn. 


feisinnil,** a. Weak, infirm. 

feisiodhan, a. Unclean. 

eisiomail, see eisimeil. H 

eisiomalach, see eisimealach. 

eisiomlair, see eisimpleir. 

eisiomlaireach, see eisimpleireach. 

eisiomplair, see eisimpleir. 

-—each, see eisimpleireach. 

—— — —-—eiche, see eisimpleiriche. 

eisir, -ean, [(AF) eisiridh, *eisrean,] s.m. Oys- 
ter. [eisire in Gairloch,] 

eisireach, -iche, a. Of oysters, abounding in 
oysters, 

eisirean,** Ain, s.m. Scallop, clam. 2 nom. pl. 
of eisir, 3 dim. of eisir. 

eisireineach, see eisireach. 

eisiridh, see eisir. 

eisith,** s.f. Debate, disagreement. 

eisleach, -ich, -ichean, s.f. Crupper. 2*pL.f(CR) 
Stretchers of withe or cord, from the ends of 
the tail-beam to the corresponding sides of 
the saddle, 

ent -aiche, a. Feeble, weak, unwar- 
ike. 

éislean, -ein, s.m. Grief, sorrow, affliction. 
2 Heaviness, doowsiness, melancholy, dul- 
ness, stupor. 3 Infirmity. 4ffHinderance. 
Làn éislein, full of sorrow. 

éisleineach, -iche, a. Sorrowful, wretched,lan- 
guid, melancholy, sickly, heavy, dull, drowsy, 
distressful, 

eisleir, -ean, gan. Defect, damage, detriment, 

eislig, see eislinn, 

eisling, see eislinn, 

eislinn, -ean, s.f. Plank or couch on which a 
corpse is laid—ArgyW. 2 Shroud, winding. 
sheet. 

——-—each, -eiche, a. Assailable. 

feislis, s.f. Neglect. 2 Mistake. 
ness. 


ba 


3 Forgetful- 


_ full of disease ; tha, droch e. anns an each, the 


eismeach 393 eòlach 


teitig, v.n. Foreswear, abjure. 2 Refuse. 3 

Contradict. 

éitigeach Tt -eiche, q. Consumptive, 

éitigh,-e, a. Fierce, angry. 2 Boisterous, 
stormy. 3 Dreadful. 4 Ugly. 5 Dismal. Tan- 
nasg e., a frightful spectre. 

eitigheach, -ich, s.m. see de-tigheach, 

éitigheachd,** s.f, Dismalness, 2 Frightful- 
ness, ugliness. 

eeu CA) s.m. Gelded horse. 

eitleag, -eig, -an, 1 e 

eitleog, -oig, -an, s.f. seeialtag. 

eitne, gen.sing. of eitean. 

teitre, sef. Trench, furrow, 

eitreach,t s.m. Storm. 2 Sorrow. 

eitreorach, -aiche, o. see eu-treórach, 

eitrich,* see séidrich. 

eitridh,** sr Ditch. 

Tela, see eala. 

Tele, see ole. 

elebor,? s.m. Green hellebor—helleborus viridis. 

elebor geal,3 s.m. White helleborine—epipactis 
latifolia. 


eismeach,** a, Lying, false. 2 Unready. 

eismeil, see eisimeilk. 

cisreachd ** s,/, Orphan. 

eisreadh,** s.n. Research. 

eist, see eiticnach. 

éist, see éisd. 

tisteachd, s.f. Death. 

€iv (AF) s. Cattle. 

eit, s.m. Untinsl.ed ear of corn. 

é.te, sm. see éicaith. 2 s.f. see ite. 3**Piece 
added to a plouughshare when worn. 

eiteach, -ich, s.f. Wings, fins. 

éiteach, -ich, sn. Denial, refusal, 2 Lie. 3 
Root of burnt heath. 4 Asthma. 5ttCon- 
sumption. 6 sce éitig, 

Binion a. Consuiuptive. 2(MMcL) Insigni- 
fic vat. Duine é., an insignijicant pers m 

é.ceachadh, -aidh, son. Denying, refusing. 2 
Act of swearing. 3 Confirmwg. 4 Denial,re- 
fusal. Ag é—, pr. pt. of éitich. Ag é. o ar 
Lordaibh, banishing from our tables. 

éiteachail,-aia, o. "labid, wasting away from 
disease. 

éit-adh, -idh, s.m, Stretching, extending. 

eiteag, see iteag. 

éiteag,-eige,-an, s.f. White pebble, 2 Fair 
mail. 3 (DU) White quartz. 4t Precious 
stone. 

— —üeh,tt a, Abounding in white pebbles or 
fair maids. 

eiteal;ucn, see itealaich. 

feiteamn, -im, s.m. Danger, hazard. 

eitewn, -ein & eitne, -ean, s.m. Kernel, nucleus. 
2**Grain, as of corn. E. chnò, kernel of a 
nut ; e. peasrach, grain of peas, a pea ; e, Deu- 
bair, o p-ppercorn ; e, paidirein, @ bead. 

ach, a. Kernelly. 

eiteodha, s.find. Hemlock. 

feiteog, see iteag. 

eith,f v.n. see eidh. 

eith, see deigh. 2**see eighe. Mar mheall e., 
like a lump of ice. 

eitheach, -ich, s.m. Lie. 2 False oath, perjury. 
3**Mistake. Thug e mionnan eithich, he per- 
jured himself ; luchd eithich, perjurers. 

feitheach,$ s. Oak, see darach. 

eitheadh, see eighe (file.) 

eitheann, -inn, see eidheann. 

-ach, see eidheannach. 
muet, -eir, -thraichean, s.m. see eathar. 9** 
iar. 

eithich,-e, vy. False. 2 Of, or connected with 
perjury. 9**Perverse. Mionnan e., a false 
oath. 


























292. Elebor. 293. Elebor geal. 

elta,(AF) s. see ealt. 

eltlagh,(AF) s.m. Flock, herd. 

enach-gharaidh, see eanach-vharaidh. 

enig, Suth'd.for aing. 2 prov. for eiginn, e, g. 
duin'-einig. 

enigeach, SutA'd. for aingeach, 

enigidh, Suth’d. for aingidh. 

feo,(AF) s. Salmon. 2**Peg. ‘3 Thorn. 4** 
Pin. 5**Grave. 

feo, a. Gocd, worthy. 

teobhrat, -ait, s.m. Head-dress, cap, coif. 

eochair, s.f. Prim, brink, edge. 2 Tongue. 3 
Young plant, sprout. 4 see iuchair. 

eog,(AF) s.a. Salmon. 

feoghunn, s.m. Youth. 

eoilse, see eólas. 

eòin, gen.sing. & n.pl. of eun. 

eòinean, -ein, s.m. Little bird. 2 Gairloch for 
neòinean. 

edin-fhiadhaich, s, pl. Wild fowl, 

eoin-fhiadhachd, ** s. f. Fowling. 

eòin-shealgair,** -ean, s.m. Fowler,bird-catcher, 

~ — -—eachd,** s.f, Fowling, bird-catch- 





, V.n. Lie. 2 Swear falsely, perjure,deny, 

refuse. 

eithichibh, see feudail. 

eithir, see oitir 

eitire, s.f. **Tail of a fish. 2(AF)Salmon, 3 
(AF) Ox, bull, cow. 4**see eighre, 6** Bur- 
den 6**Conclusion, 

———— ach, a. see deigheach. 

———ach,** -rich, s.f. Wilderness. 

-—-—ag, eigo, -an, see oighreag. 

- —BHgach, -aiche, see oighreagach. 

‘eitibh, see feudail. 

eitich, see eiteach. Op see eithich. 

'éitidiü, -e, a. see éitigh. 

eachd, see éitigheachd. 

eitidh, see feudail. 

eitig,(DC) s.f. Fault, flaw—Uist. 9 (DU)Dis- 
Cane, germs of disease, applied to any long 
standing illness in man or beast. Lan eitig, 


ing. 

edin-taigh, -e, -ean, s.m. Hen-house,hen-coop. 

edir,(AC) s. Spell, charm, incantation— Lewis. 

eoisdinn, s. Quietness, 

edisle, an, $. f. see edlas 6. (Metathesis of 
eolas, ) 

eòl, s. m. ind. Knowledge, discernment, 2 
Science. 3 Art, charm. 4**Nostrum. Is eòl 
dhomh, I know. classic. [*seldom used. ] 

teol, a. Expert, knowing. 

eòlach, -aiche, a. Knowing, acquainted, eun- 
ning, skilled, expert, 9* Intelligent. Tha 
mi e. air, I am acquainted with him ; am bheil 
thu eòlach air ? ure you acquainted VS him? 

2 





horse is far from sound. 


Zei "P, -ean, s.f. Consumption. 2 Tendency 
to ecay, 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 


Digitized by " i 


Ax S e SA URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 
INTERNET ARCHIVE i 


H DN | 


f 


J 


8. rege 


A 
La 
1 


eolach 


duine e., a man well acquainted, an intelligent 
man ; rinn mi e, air a chéile iad, Z introduced 
them lo each other ; maor e., maor a's mios' 
a théid an cro, a bailiff acquainted with the 
stock, the worst to send among the flock—NGP. 

edlach, -aich, s.m. Adept, guide. 2 Acquaint- 
ance, 

eòlaiche, comp. of eòlach. 

eòlais, gen.sing. of eòlas. 

eòlan, -ain, S. M. Lamp-oil. 2(DU) Prepara- 
tion of fish-oil, &e., sprinkled on wool before 
carding. 3 Sore with broken skin and raw 
flesh, putrefying sore. 

eòlas, -ais, -a,7s.m. Knowledge. 2* Acquaint- 
ance. 3 Intelligence. 4 Skill,art. 5 Science. 6 
Enchantment,.spell, incantation. Dìth eol- 
ais, ignorance ; an tir m’ eòlais, in my own 
country ; chaidh e air ’e., he strayed to the 
place he knew before—said of cattle; e. nan 
sul, a spell to get free of a mote in the eye ; e.- 
adhair, aerology ` e.-bhithean, ontology ; e.- 
cogaidh, tactics ; e.-daingneaehd, fortification; 
e.-inntinn, metaphysics ` e.-meudachd, geome- 
try ;e.-naduir, physics; e.-sedlaidh, intuition; 
cuir e. air, get acquainted with him. 

eólasair,]I s.m. Necromancer. 

eolchaire,** s.f. Sorrow, grief, mourning, eon- 
cern. 





- ach,** a. Sad, sorrowful. 

Feolgach, -aiche, a. Knowing, skilful, 

eollach, -aich, see eallach. 

feòlmhor, -oire, @. ise. 

eoluidhe, -an, s.m. Guide. 2 Doctor. 

eonadan,** -ain, see eunadan. 

eorlain, s. The three planks on each side of the 
keel of à boat—eorlain na h-eathair. 2 Floor, 
bottom. 3 Lower part of a glen that ‘slopes 
toa narrow compass. 

eorna, s.m.ind. Barley—hordeum distichon. An 
lion ’s an t-e., the flax and the barley ; e. fo 
dhéis, barley in ear ; Eilean iosal an eorna,the 
island of Tiree ; feitheamh fada ri e. na gain- 
mhich,=barley sown in sand comes to nothing; 
æ cur eòrna, sowing barley. 

eornach, -aiche, a. Of, or connected with bar- 
ley, abounding in barley. 

— ——,* s.f. Barley-land. 

eorrlain, see eórlain. 

eorrtha,(DU) s.f. Spell, charm, 

eosag** -aig, -an, S.M, see uiseag. 

teoth, s. Horse. 

eothanachadh, -aidh, s.m. Languishing. 

eothanaich,tt pr.pt.ag eothanachadh, v.n, Lan- 
guish, decay. 

Teothan-bànag,(AF) s.m. 

ter, a. Great, noble. 

tera, s.m. Denial, refusal. 

dere, see earc. 

teribeirt, -e, -ean, 

each, -eiche, 0. 

Terr, see eàrr. 

es,(AF)s. Ox, see is. 

es’, esa, see esan, 

esan, emphat. form of pers.pron, e. 


Weak white animal. 


s.f. Burden. 2 Carriage. 
Burdensome.. 





tess, s.f. Ship, vessel. s.m. Death. 
¢essid, s. Unrest. 

+etenge, a. (eu+teanga) Mute. 

+étrad, s. Lust. 


escung,(AF) s. Fen snake. 
eu-, neg. particle, also eug-, eas, ei-, and. a- 
The following remarks about the distin- 
eu, guishing features between the North and 
South dialects of Scottish Gaelic through the 
occurrence of eu or ia in various words, are 
extracted from an article by Rev. C. M. Rob- 
ertson, in Celtic Review, October, 1906. Most 
Gaelic Grammars and Dictionaries say that 
the North and South dialects of Gaelic are 


Digitized by 


BNET ARCHI 
ERNET ARCHIV 


394 







eu 


distinguishable by their respective uses of ew 
and iain certain words, but no detailed list is. 
ever given.. | 
** Dr, MacBain says the crucial distinction 
between the two main dialects of Gaelie con- 
sists in the different way in which the dialects. 
deal with é derived from compensatory length- 
ening—in the south it is eu, in the north ia. 
Another characteristic of the words in which 
this change is found is that their original 
stems ended in o or a. There are exceptions, . 
drawn in,perhaps, by the infiuence of analogy. 
_ The vowel that changes to iain the north 
is usually written eu, but it occurs also as 
ëm. èi and è. 1n southern pronunciation it 
generally has the sound that is called open e, 
and that resembles, except that it is long, 
that of e in English let. ‘The close sound e 
like that of ein English whey or of ain Eug- 
lish fate, occurs oceasionally in words that 


have ia in the north, but in general is con- 


fined to those words in which diphthongisa- 
tion is not found, as, beum, ceum, treun, 
beud, In contact with nasals diphthongisa- 
tion is found as a rule only in those insvan- 
ces in which the vowel is nasalised in the 
south, e.g. in eun, meur, but noi in beum, 
treun. 

Of the words that have ia in the north, the 
following are fonnd with é in the south— 
Ceudna ‘ceunna,’ ‘ féirseag ' (for feursann), 

geur, reustladh (for reusladh), sleuchd, in 

Arran. 

Deug, feun, geug, leubh, in Arran & Islay. 

Feudail, gleus, reul, in Arran, Islay & Perth. 

Peur (a pear), in Arran, Islay & Glenlyon, 
eud in Arran & East Perth, Seumas in 

Arran & Glenlyon. 

Sgeun (‘sgéan ’) and déabh in Islay, 
in Islay & Perth. 
Céud (first ) and céud ( hundred ) in Mid- 

Argyll. 

Créadhach (eré), in Perth. 

In Strathspey and in Sutherlandshire there 
are fewer instances of é than in Arran. The 
only words showing the change to ia, that 
are not known to have è, in place of é, in some 
district or other, are ceud, ceudna, deug, 
feudail, feun, geuban, peurtag, reul, reusail, 
and reusan, and of these, three are borrowed 
words, while the diphthongisation of at least 
two others, feudail and reul, is local and ex- 
ceptional. i 


geuban 


: The association of the change to 
ia with the open sound èis thus very close. 
The tendency, apparently, when the vowel 
happens to be left undiphthongised in the 
north, is to sound it é, and further, the vo- 
wel is apt in such cases to be é also in Arran 
and Islay, but é in Perth, Strathspey and 
Sutherland. Beurla, e.g. is béurla in Arran. 
Islay, North Argyll, part of Skye, North In- 
verness and West Ross, but béurla in Perth 
and Sutherland ; geug is géug in Arran,Islay, 
part of Skye and Lewis, but géug in Perth, 
Stathspey and Sutherland. 

The vowels that are subject to diphthongi- 
sation are arranged in the following groups to 
show the occurrence of the change in the 
southern dialect, in Arran, Islay and Perth- 
shire, and in the northern dialect in the fol- 
lowing districts in order, North Argyl! (Ap- 
pin and Sunart), Skye (Sleat), North Inver- 
ness-shire(the Aird, south and east of Beauly), 
West Ross-shire, and Lewis. The pronuucia- 
tion given in MacAlpine's Dictionary is, in 
general, that of his native island: and is that 
given here under the name Islay. The ab- 


Original from | 
A LE E53 £71 (8, -— F pj E. a | 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS Am 


r^i m Fi d A am j KR p | pg 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


. deug, brèagh. 


eu 905 
sence of a word from thelist for any particu- 





























lar district does not in all cases imply non- 
diphthongisation of the vowel in that dis- 
trict ; it may mean that there is some other 
alteration on the word, or that the attempt 
to ascertain its pronunciation has not been 
attended with success. Smeuraich, for ex- 
ample, is smeoraich in Sutherland and Lewis. 
Feusgan, mussel; fè, a caim; and muir-téachd, 
& jelly-fish, (LL. iti, below), are not in Dr. Hen- 
derson's list for the Aird, and were unfamili- 
ar as Aird words to an aged farmer from the 
district. Cè, cream, is unknown in several 
districts, uachdar or barr being used instead, 
and smeur, bramble, is unfamiliar in Lewis. 
Geug, branch, no doubt owes its non-diph- 
thongisation in parts of the northern Hebri- 
des to its disuse during a treeless period and 
its subsequent adoption from literature. In 
West Ross-shire, giag was not disused, but was 
degraded during tne treeless period, and now 
means, in part at least of the district, a stalk 
of heather, while a branch of a tree is called 
meur (‘ miar ?). 
Southern Dialect— 

I. Ceud (hundred), ceud (first), Di-ceudaoin, 
ceutach, ceutadh (sense, impression), ceudna, 


North Argyll et seq.— 

Il, i. Beul,breug. deuchainn, deur,dreuchd, 
eudach (jealousy), eulaidh (stalk game, &c.), 
eun, feuch, feur, feusag, freumh, geuban 
(cilaban in Skye and onwards), geur, greus- 
aich, leugach (clammy, &e., leug, leugaire), 
leus (torch, &c.), meud or meudachd, cia 
meud, meur, neul, reub, seud (hero), seun, 
breae-sheunain, sgeul, sgreuch, crè (clay), 
dèan, èasgaidh, gèadh, léad, mèanan, se(six), 
sgiéata, téaruiun, 

North Argyll et seq. except Lewis— 

Il. ii. Beuc, ceus (ham, coarse part of fleece), 
geug, reusail (ill-use),smeur(brauble), smeur- 
aich (grope), speuc, sèap. l 

North Argyll et seq. except Inverness— 

II iii. Feusgan, fè (calm), lèana or lèanag, 
réap (a slattern, réapach adj., réapail verb), 
muir-teachd. | 

Skye et seq.— i 
TIL. Loch-bhléin or dubh-chléin (flank, loin), 
sgoun (fright), smeur or smiür (to smear), 
mèith, séamarlan. 

North Inverness et seq.— 

IV. Feursann( warble), speuclan (spectacles), 
teuchdaidh (viscid, &c., ‘tiachaidh' N. In- 
verness). 


North Inverness &c.— 
V. i. Feunaidh (peat-cart, from feun), peur- 
tag (partridge), cé (cream). 
V. ii. Peuras (a pear), seum or seumaich (en, 
join, &c.), Seumas (James), leubh (read) 
clach-néaraidh (grindstone), tréasg (shrivel.)' 
V. iii. Sleuchd, néarachd. 
Various— 
VI. i. Beurla, eud, m’ fheudail, cal-feurain 
(cives), gleus (trim,&c.), spleuc (stare),teuchd- 
adh (parching,) léabag, piata, tréan-ri-tréan. 
VI. ii. Earlais (arles), reusan (reason). 
Group I. contains words that are diph- 
thongised in the South ; all have Za (or iao) 
in Perthshire, all butthe last in Islay, and 
all but the last three in Arran. MacAlpine 
ives ‘a cheud ' or*achiad.' The diphthong 
is ig in all the instances in Arran, and i» | 


4 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


eu 


Glenlyon in Perthshire ; in East Perthshire 
and in the North generally in those words, 
with the exception of brèagh, it is iao, i.e. 
the second cousvituent of the diphthong is not 
d,,but the Gaelic ao sound. Ceudna varies ; 
* eiaodna ' N. Argyll, ‘cianda’ N. Inverness, 
West Ross, Sutherland,‘ ciaont' Lewis, ‘ ciao- 
dainn' East Perth, Strathspey, ‘ céunna’ 
Arran, ' ciaonna" Skye. MacAlpine gives 
‘cianna’ and apparently * ceudna.’ 

In addition,dreuchd,omitted by MacAlpine, 
has ia in Arran, and éarlais and reusan, 
Group VI. ii., have ia, the former in Arran 
and Islay, and, the latter throughout Argyll 
and in West Perth (‘ riaosan’ in N. Argyll). 
Néaraidh (V, ii.) has ia in Perthshire. 

Groups I. and II. i. have the diphthong in 
N. Argyll, Skye, N. Inverness, W. Ross and 
Lewis; Group II, ii. in N. Argyll et seq., 
except Lewis, and Group II. iii. in N. Argyli 
et seq.. except N, Inverness, Group III. falls 
tobe added to the number in Skye and on- 
wards, aud Group IV. in N. Inverness and 
ouwards. The words in V. i. ii. and iii. all 
have.ia in N. Inveruess, and those in V, ii. in 
West Ross also. Tréasg in N. Argyll, and 
sleuchdin Skye have ia. Néarachd is ‘ niar- 
achd’ in N. Argyll, * miarachd? in Skye, and 
'meurachd ' according to MacAlpine (sub 
néarachd) in Argyll. 

The words of VI, i. have ia as follows :— 
Eud ( and eudinhor, ‘iadar’) cal-feurain, 
spleuc, and lèabag in N. Argyll. 

Spleuc, teuchdadh, lèabag aud tréan-ri- 
trèan (* trianaidii-trian ’) in Skye. 

Beurla CG biaorla’ or ‘ biactia’ so also 
Lochbroom), eud (*iad' in Barra aiso)‘m’fheu- 
dail, gleus, and teuchdaidh in Lewis. 

* Piata’ a puny child, N. Inverness and W. 
Ross, has beeu explained by Dr. Heuderson 
as a by-iorm of peata, English ‘ pet’; in 
Lewis ‘ piatan ' is used affectionately of one 
craving for a drink, 

Eud in the North generally means zeal, 
while jealousy is ‘ iadach ' (in Glenlyon ‘eud- 
ach `). 

Dipüthongisation of the vowel è thus ap- 
pears to be most prevalent in the central 
Highlands, and sumewhat less soin N.Argyll 
aud Lewis. lu has extended strongiy into 
Kannoch which breaks away from the rest 
of Perinshirein this respect, and is sharply 
distinguished froin Gleulyon and the parisu 
of blair-Atholl, bounding it respectively on 
the south and east, and is in tull foree in 
Badenoch aud Stratndearn, its eastern limits, 
On the other hand, Strathspey, which means 
in local usage the part of the valley of the 
Spey below Kvuthiemurchus, and lies in an an- 
gle between Badenoch on the south-west, and 
Strathdearn on the north-west, differs from 
both districts, aud agrees closely with the 
South. Far north Sutherlandshire also, 
with the exception perhaps of the Assynt 
quarterofthe county, claims to stand with 
Strathspey and the south in this matter. The 
wordsin which ig has been found mm Strath- 
Spey are :— 

Ceud, ceud, ceudna, Di-ceudain, 
sgreuch, breagh, sé, ceutach, seun. 

With the exception of the two last, those 
words are diphthongised in $u.heriandsnue 
—Oreich, Kildonan, and Stratuy--and with 
the following list, they exhaust the known 
instances oí (hat vowel change in the south- 

oy SA 20 2 


deug 


— 


Original from 


» irm AC 
| | | d V = EN lie. |j k I 


LINOIS AT 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


eu 396 


east and in the north of that county :— 


Deuchainn, feuch, feusgan, cia meud, reul, ' eubhadair, 


ere. 
Beul, neul, sgeul,‘ cial.’ 


eu-eonn 


eubhach, -aich, -aichean, s.m. see éigheach. 
see éigheadair. 


eucag, -aige, an, s.f. see euchdag. 2 see peu- 


cag. 
Ceutach and feusgan have the diphthong in | eucail, -alach, -ean, s.f. Disease, infirmity, dis- 


Creich, deuchainn and feuch in Creich and 
Kildonan, reul (‘rialt’ or more frequently 
* rialtag ’) in Kildonan, and crè (‘criaodhach’) 
in Kildonan and Strathy, Ceutach and ceut- 
adh apparently are diphthongised by some 
speakers and not by others (‘céutach " and 
céutu ’) in the Strathy district. 

The southern é of beul, neul, and sgeul is 
changed in Sutherland, not into ia, but into 
à, so that the words would be written respect- 
ively, beàl, nyàl, and sgeàl, and are pronoun- 
ced byàl, nyàl, sgyàl Cial, brim of a vessel, 
is also changed into ceàl in Sutherland. 
Though this resembles in the result the change 
in Arran of brèagh, cé cream, crè, gèadh, and 
sé, respectively into breagh (bré or brya, Mac- 
Alpine), cea, crea, geadh, sea (br'à, cya, cr’a, 
gya, sha), itis no doubt to be compared rather 
with the transference in Gaelic generally, of 
the pronunciation from e to æ in such words 
as geal, (‘ gyal,’) seal, (* shal,’) &e. 

A substitution of other sounds for è some- 
times occurs. Léabag is leóbag (*lyóbag ’) in 
N. Inverness, W. Ross, Lewis, and Suther- 
land ; feusag is feosag (fyosag) in Suther- 
land ; and reapach is reopach in N. Inverness. 
'l'euchaidh viscid, in N. Inverness tiachaidh, 
is teaochaidh in Creich, and beurla is beaorla 
in Strathspey, and in parts of Skye and Le- 
wis. The name for the landrail—tréan-ri- 
tréan—istraon in Lewis and, according to 
MacAlpine, in Skye ; in Ireland it is traona, 
{but pronounced £revna, in Uist treona.] 

It is not an unknown thing that à word 
should come to have two pronunciations ac- 
companied by some differentiation in mean- 
ing or usage. In N. Argyll, Skye, N. Inver- 
ness, W. Ross, and Lewis, seud, when it 
means jewel, is ‘séud,’ but when it means 
hero it is ‘ siad.’ The word is everywhere 
in those districts familiar in the latter sense. 
As séud, jewel, it is not at all so frequently 
used, and may have been adopted from litera- 
ture. Meud is undiphthongised throughout 
Sutherland, except in the phrase ' co miad ' 
how much, The phrase is ‘ce miod’ in Skye 
and Lewis, while the word otherwise is both 
* miod " and ‘ miad °’ in Lewis, and ‘ miad- 
achd °’ in Skye, and also in N. Argyll. Mac- 
Alpine gives ‘meud ' and ‘miod.’ The un- 
diphthongised form of deng is kept in Perth, 
Strathspey, W. Ross, and Lewis in ‘da uair 
dhéug,' often preceded by the article and com- 
pressed ‘ an da'r 'éug' the twelve o'clock ; in 
Sutherland ‘an da'r 'iaog. In Irish ‘ dar- 
eug’ means twelve persons. 

Similar diphthongisation is found in Mun- 
ster in such words as ceud, deug, eun, feuch, 
feur, and also in words in which it is un- 
known in Scotland, as breun, eug, treun, and 
even eudochas, eudtrom, light, eugedir, injus- 
tice, eugmhais want, and others. To Scot- 
tish Gaels the diphthongisation of eucoir 
and eugmhais, not to speak of eudochas or 
aotrom (for eutrom), seems a sheer impossibi- 
lity, and yet itis found with us in the word 
èasgaidh, i.e. eu-sgith, of exactly similar for- 
mation.” 

eubarlag, (AH) s.f. Ragged,emaciated creature. 
eubh, -a, -an, s.f. see éigh. 

-—, -aidh, -ean, see eadha. 

-——, DA see éigh. 


Digitized by 


NTERNET ARCHIV 


temper. Neart m’ eucalach, the strength of 
my disease; gach e, 'na aoraibh, every disease 


in his constitution ; aon de na h-eucailibh, 


one of the diseases, 

eucail, -ala, a. see euchdach; 

eucaileach, -iche, og, Diseased, infirm. 2 Caus- 
ing disease. 3 Unhealthy. 4**Infectious. 

—— ————d,* s. f. ind. State of disease or dis- 
temper. 2 Infectiousness. 

eucailich,** v.g. Disease. ` 

eu-càirde, s.f.ind. Enmity. 

eucairdeach, -iche, a. Inimical, hostile. 

eucairdeas, s.f.ind. Enmity, unfriendliness. 

eu-cairdeil,t} og, Uniriendly. 

eucuirteachd, s.f.imd. Unliawfulness. 

eucalach, gen.sing. of eucail. 

eu-ceart, -eirte, a. Unjust, unfair. 
tous. -3 Injurious. 

—————,** -eirt, s.f. Injustice, unfairness. 2 
Iniquity. 

——ach,tt a. Unjust. 

—_—-——as, -ais, $. m. Injustice. 2 Iniquity. 3 
Oppression, Luchd eu-ceartais, unjust people. 

eu-céillidh, -e, a. Mad, insane. 2 Foolish, 
giddy, thoughtless. Gu h-e., foolishly. 

——eachd, s.f.ind. Irrationality. 

euchall, see earchall. 

euchar, see iuchar. 

euchd, -an, s.m. Feat, exploit, achievement. 2 
**Mournful event. 3**Valour. Cuimhne e. 
no treubhantais, œ memory of exploit or a- 
chievement ;iorghail nain mór e., the strife of 
mighty feats. 

ach, -aiche, a. Heroic, valorous, perform- 

ing achievements. 2*Daring, brave. Daoine 

treubhach, e., heroic, chivalrous people ` bas a’ 

ghaisgich euchdaich, the death of the chival- 

rous hero; duisg!a leóghainn euchdaich ! 

wake ! thou bold lion! 

ag, -aige, -an, s.f. Charmer, fair or love- 

ly female. 

ail, -ala, a. see euchdach. 

alachd, s.f.ind. Heroism, bravery, 2 Per- 
formance of feats. 3**Achievement. 

eu-ciall, -céill, see mi-chiall. 

— ———aách, 4. see mi-chialiach. 

eu-cinnt, -e, s.f. Uncertainty, doubt. 

— ———each, -iche, a. Uncertain, doubtful,hesi- 
tating. 

ealas,** Ais, s.m. 

fulness. 

eu-ecneasda, a. Inhuman, cruel. 2 Intemper- 
ate. 3 Rude, impolite. Gu h-e., inhwmanly. 

—chd, s.f.ind. Tnhumanity, cruelty. 2 
Intemperance. 3 Rudeness, 

eucoir, -corach, -ean, s.f. Injury, wrong, injust- 
ice. 2 Guilt. 3 Impropriety. Ris an e., act- 
ing unjustly. 

eu-coireach, -iche, a Innocent, blameless, see 
neo-choireach. 

——_—_—---—d, s.f.ind. Injuriousness, 2fTf Injust- 


2 Iniqui- 

















Uncertainty, doubt- 





ice. 

eu-coirich,** v. Aggrieve. 

eu-coltach, -aiche, a. Unlikely, improbable. 2 
Dissimilar. 3 Inconsistent. 

eu-coltas, -ais, s.m. ,Unlikeliness, improbabil- 
ity. 2 Dissimilarity, unlikeness. 3 Incon- 
sistency. E. a’ ghnothaich sin, the improba- 
bility of that thing. 

eu-comas,(PM) s.m. Inability. 

.————áach,(PM) a. Impossible. 

eu-conn, -à, s.m. Madness, insanity. 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS Æ 


| 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN | 


| 


J:F 


— 


Tp. 


= 


"die. 


Ee T 


- 


eg e > 


TERES 


DETTA IRE 


LUE RD n 


 eud-mheadhonach, -aiche, a. 


euv-connacn 


eu-connach, -aiche, v. Mad, insane. 

eucorach, -aiche, a Unjust, wrong. 
rious. Gu h-e., unjusiiy. 

,-àich, s.m. Unjust, wicked, or evil 
person. 21;Veval. 

eu-cordadh, -aidh, s.m. Dissension, discord, 
disagreement, jarring, quarrel. 

teu-cosy, -visy, -an, see aogasg. 

eu-co.mhail,-e, da. Dissimilar, 2 Improbable. 
o**Unequal. 

eu-cosmhalacn,** a. 
equal. 2 Uniikely. | 

———- d, s.7.ind. Dissimilarity. 

eu-cosmhalas,** ais, s. m. Dissimilarity, 
equality. 2 linprobability, unlikeliuess. 

eu-coswhuil, -e @. Dissimilar. 

eu-crionna, &. Imprudent, thoughtless, foolish. 
2 intemperate, unmoderate, Gu h-e., impru- 
dently. 

————chd, s.fiind. Imprudence. 2 Intem- 
peranee, inteniperateness, immoderaveness. 

eu-crionachd, s.f.;?»d. Vastness, immensity. 

eu-cruaidh, a. Sick, weak, feeble, impotent, 
delicate. z** Soft, not hard. 3**Effeminate. 

,** s.m. Delicate person. 

eu-cruas, -ais, s.m, Sickness, feebleness. 2** 
Softuess, effeminateness. 3**Delicateness. 

eu-euandachd, s.f. Deformity. 

eu-cur.haidh, -e, a, Unfit, improper. 

eud, s.m. Zeal. 2 Jealousy. [E. in the North 
generally means 2ea/, while jealousy is iadach, 
—in Glenlyon eudach.| 3 Grudge. 4*Malice 
at another’s success. Eud do theach-sa, the 
zeal of thine house ; thig tri nithean gun iarr- 
aidh, an t-eagal, an t-iadach (eud) ’s an gaol, 
three things coine without seeking, fear, jealousy, 
and love; e. bean a’ chlarsair, a’ chlarsach 
fhéin, the harper’s wife's jealousy, the harp. 

eudach,** -aiche, æ. Zealous. 2 Jealous. Gu 
h-e., jealously. 

, -aich, s.m. Jealous man. 2* Jealousy 

between man and wite. Age. rithe, accusing 

her of being unfaithful to his bed. 

, "aich, sm. see aodach, 

adh,** -aidh, s.m. Jealous watching. 2 
Stepping or stealing softly. Ag e—, pr. pt. of 
eudaich. 3 see avilachadh. 

s ail,* a. see eudmhor. 

eudaich, gen. sing. of eudach ( for aodach.) 

,* v.a. Watch jealously. [*zealously.] 2 

see aodaich. 

te, past pt, Watched. 

eudail, -ean, s.f. see feudail. 

———each, -iche, d. see feudaileach. 

eu-daingeann, -daingne, ag. Weak, infirm, de- 
fenceless. 

eu-daingneachd, s.f.ind. Weakness, defenceless- 
ness. 2 Nakedness. 

eudainn, gen. sing. of eudann ( for aodainn.) 

ean, n. pl. of eudann (for aodannan.Y 

eudaire, -an, s.m. Jealous person. 

Teudairmeas, -ais, ssm. Act of invention. 

teudal, -ail, see feudail, 

eudanan, -ain, see aodannan. 


eudan, Lem, see aodann. 


eudann, 

ach, -aiche, see aodannach. 

an, -ain, see aodannan. 

Teudaoigh, -e, d. Uncertain. 

eud-fhulang, -ainge, a. Intolerable, 

eu-dion, s.m. Leak. 

ach, a. . Leaky. 

achd, s.f.ind. Leakiness. 2 Leakage. 
Immediate. 


2 Inju- 





Dissimilar, unlike, un- 





in- 





————_ — 

















2 see aodaichte. 

















eudmhoire, comp. of eudmhor. 
—nel.d, see eudmhorachd. 
eudmhor, -oire, a. Zealous. 2 Jealous. 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


397 


eulaich 


eudmhorachd, s f.ind. Zealousness. 2 Jealousy. 

eu-locha, comp. a. Less probable. 

eu-dòchas, -ais, s.m. Despondeucy,despair, mel- 
ancholy, dejection. 2 Distrust. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Despairing, hopeless, 
despondent, melancholy. 
—ach,** -aich, s.m. Person in despair. 

—— ———achd, s.f.ind. Despondency, melan- 
choly, hopelessness, 

eu-domhain, -doimhne, v, Shallow. 

eu-dorcha, -doirche, a. Clear, plain, manifest. 

eudrom, -uime, a. see aotrom. 

eug-,i ney. particle. 

eng, éig, s.m. Death. 2**Ghost, spectre. 
an éig, the sleep of death. 

eug, pr.pt. ag eug & ag eugadh, v.n. Die,perish, 
expire, give up the ghost. 2 Fail, give way. 
oftDecay, Dh’ e. i, she died ; an dòigh "aan 
d' e. 1, the manner in which she died ` eug- 
iadh stri a choidhche, strife shall die away 
for ever. 

eugach,* a, Death-like. 2 Deadly. 3**Ghastly, 
Buille eagalach e., a terrible deadly blow. 

eugaidh,** o Ghastly, spectral, death-like. 
2 Hearse-like. 

— ——, fut.af.a. of eug. Shall or will perish. 

eugail, -e, -ean, see eucail. 

———,"* (y, see aogail. 

eachd, see aogaileachd, 

eugais, see eugmhais. 

eugalachd, $.f.ànd. Ghastliness, 

eugas, -als, -an, see aogas. 

-ach, @ see aogasach. 

-—g, -aisg, -an, see aogas. 

eug-bnoil,** s.f. Deadly wrath. Bi treun 'nad 
e., be strong in thy deadly wrath. 

eug-coir, -e, -eail, see eucoir. 

eug-corach, -aiche, see eucorach. 

eug-eruaidh, -e, a Soft. 

eugh, see éigh. 

-——ach, a. ds, see éigheach. 

eug-lios, -is,-an, s.m. Burying ground, church- 
yard, cemetery. 

eugmhail,(CR) s.f. Harm, evil—Skye. 

eugmhais, s.f. Possession, 2 Presence. 3** 
Privation. 4** rarely Fame. Ase., without, 
deprived of. 

--—————-e, -an, s.f. Defect, blemish. 

-—————-each, -iche, «a. Calamitous. 
ous, remarkable, illustrious, great. 

eugnachadh, -aidh, s.m. Dying. 2 Going tinto 
decay. 3 Becoming pale or ghastly. Ag e—, 
pr.pt. of euguaich. 

eugnaich, pr. pt. ag eugnachadh, v.n. Die, de- 
cay. 2 Make pale or ghastly. 

eugnaidh, -e, o, Death-like, pale, withered. 
2 Going into decay. 3**see eagnaidh. 
————— , a. Insane. 

eugsamhiachadh, -aidh, s.m. Diversifying,vary- 
ing, mixing. 2 Chequering. 3 Diversity, 
variety, Ag e—, pr.pt. of eugsamhlaich. 

eugsamhlachd, s.f.ind. Variety, change, change- 
ableness of appearance, 2 Excellency. 3 
Strangeness. 

eugsamhlaich, pr.pt. ag eugsamhlachadh, v. a. 
Vary, diversify, change. 2 Spot, chequer. 

eugsamhluidh, see eugsamhuil. 

eugsamhuil, -samhla, o Various, manifold, 


Suain 








2 Fam- 


different. 2 Incomparable, mateuless.  3* 
Mournful. 4** Mixed.  5**Chequ.reu. 6** 
Strange. Dathan e., various colours ; ceòl 


e., incomparable music ; duine e., a man whose 
like cannot be found. 

euladh, -aidh, s.m. see èaladh, 

eulag,** -aig, s.f. Escape. 

eulaghadn, -aidh, see;éaladh. 

eulaigh, v.n. see éalaidh. 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


eulaigheach 398 eun-foghladh 
eulaigheach, -ich, see éalaidheach. 
eumhann, -ainn, -an, s.m. Pearl. 2ttJewel. 
eun, eòin, sm. Bird, fowl. 2*Chicken. 37*} 


Pout (fish.) E.-siubhail, æ bird of passage, a} 


straggler. 





294. Buill eóin. 
PARTS OF A BIRD (BUILL EOIN) :— 

Dion cluaise, ear-covert,soft feathers co- 
vering external organ of hearing. 

2 Slinneanaich, scapulars, feathers which 

cover shoulders and shoulder-blades. 

8 Sgiath mhealltach, bastard wing, a num- 
ber of feathers bearing a resemblance to 
the true wing. 

Dion-sgéith beag, lesser wing-coverts. 

Priomh dion-sgéith, greater do. 

(DC) Itean gàirdeanach. (DMy) Priomh 
itean sgéith, itean móra na sgéith, pri- 
maries, or principal quills, (the termin- 
ation of the wings, and the strongest 
feathers on the bird.) 

Dara itean sgéith, secondaries, or second 
quills of the wings. 

8 Treas itean sgéith,tertiaries,or*third quills 
of the wings. 

Priomh itean an earbaill, itean mor’ an 
earbaill, rump feathers and upper tail- 
coverts. 

10 Fo-itean an earbaill, itean beag’ an ear- 

baill, vent feathers and under tail-coverts. 
eunach, -aich, s.m. Fowling, shooting, hunting. 
Cu eunaich, æ pointer. 

, -aiche, œ. Full of birds, 2 Of, or þe- 
longing to, birds. 

——— — —àádh,** -aidh, s.m. Act of hunting, or of 
fowling. 

an, -ain, 

eun a’ chrùbain, T s. m. 
dubh an sgadain. 

eunadair,-ean, s. m. Fowler. 2 Gamekeeper. 
3**Bird-catcher. O lion an e., from the fowl- 
er's snare ; an t-e. mallaichte, the Devil. 

eachd, s.f.ind. Fowling, shooting, oc- 
cupation of a fowler or bird-catcher. 2 Game- 
keeping. 

eunadan, -ain, s.m. Aviary. 2 Cage. E. do 
gach eun, @ cage for every bird. 

eunag,** -aig, s.f. Young bird. 

eunaich,** v.n. Fowl. 

eun aille,(AF) s.m. Guillemot, see eun-dubh-an- 
sgadain. 

eunan,* gen. eòinein, n. pl, edineinean, s. m. 
Humming-bird. 2 dim. of eun, Little bird. 

eunan-dé see dearbadan-dé. 

eunan-àir (AF) s.m. Bird of prey. 

eun-an-sgadain, see eun-dubh-an-sgadain. 

eun-an-t-sneachda, 8 s.m. Snow-bunting—plec- 
trophanes nivalis, 2 Redwing. 


eom» 





see eoinein. 
Guillemot, see eun 








[ 


| f ^ f 
L 
L "F = & pT nope = re 
s k DEE ce d Li L F E 
| ^ d —_ t l H LT, 
i = LE 5 "M E 





295. Eun-an-t-sneachda. 


eunarag, T st see gobhar-adhair. 

eun-ballach-a’-ghart, (AF) Common bunting, 
see gealag-bhuachair. 

eun ban an sgadain, see sulaire. 

eun ban an t-sneachda, (AF) s.m. Ptarmigan, 
see tarmachan. 

eun-Bealltuinn,fJ s. m. 


phoopus. 

eun-bhiadh, -bhidh, s.m. Birds’ meat, bird-seed. 

eun-bhrigh, -e, s. m. Chicken-broth. 2tSoup, 
gravy, see eanraich. 

eun-bhrigheach, eiche, a. Of, or pertaining to, 
chicken-broth. 

eun-bhualadh, -aidh, s.m. Palpitation, flutter- 


Whimbrel—numenius 


ing. 

eun-binn,(AC) s.m. Long-tailed duck. 

eunbhruicn, see eanbhruich. 

eun-bruidhne,(AF) s. m. (lit. speaking bird ) 
Parrot. 

eun-buchainn,§ s.m. Long tailed duck, ** coal 
an’ can’le licht, —fuligula glacialis. 

eun-chridhe,** s.m. Faint heart, chicken-heart. 

—ach, -iche, a. Timid, hen-hearted. 

eun-crom, s.m. Fulmar,—Lewis. 

eun-dealbhach, -aiche, a. Painted with pictures 
of birds. 

eun-druidh,** -ean, s.m. Augur. 

eachd, s.f.ind. Augury. 

eun-dubh,T[ s.m. Blackbird, see lon-dubh, 

eun-dubh-a’-chrubain,{ see eun-dubh-an-sgad- 
ain. 

eun-dubh-an-sgadain,TT s.m. Common guillemot 
—uria troile. (illust. 296.) 2 see coltraiche. 

eun-fionn,T] see clamhan-fionn. 2(WC) Ptarmi- 
gan, see tarmachan. Nach ann air dh' éirich 
an t-ian-fhionn | (eun-fhionn),—said of à 
greedy person doing an unusual act of kind- 
ness, also, nach tua chunnaic an t-ian-fhionn ! 
said to a person who was telling a friend that 
a miserly person gave her (or him) a gift or a 
sum of money—Poolewe, (WC.) 

eun-fhiosachd, s.f.ind. Auspice. 

eun-foghladh,(AF) s.m. Horned owl, see comh 
achag, 


2 Augurer. 





Fe KE ge wech, 


TIENE 


eun-foirthir 





296. Ewun-dubh-an-sgadain. 
eun-foirthir, (AF) s.m. Bird of passage. 
eun-fraoich,T see coileach-fraoich and cearc- 

fhraoich. 
eun-ghobhrag,*[ s.m. 
eun-ghurag, -aig, -an, see gobhar-adhair. 
eun-glas-au-sgadain,(AF) s.m. Great northern 


see gobhar-adhair. 


diver, see bur-bhuachaill. 2 ** Holy Car- 
rara." 

eun-gur-le-güg, (AF) s. m. Storm petrel, see 
luaireag. 


eunlach,( DO) s.m. Fowls about a house,as hens, 
ducks, turkeys, &c. i 

eunlaidh,* v.n. Creep, sneak, asa bird-catch- 
er or fowler, 

eunlainn, spl. see eunlaith. 

eunlaireachd,** s.f. Fowling. 

eunlaith, s.pl. Fowls, birds, all the feathered 
tribes. Ealt e., or sgaoth e., a flight of birds ; 
e. a réir an gnè, fowls after their kind. 

eun-lann, s.m. Aviary. 

eun-leadain,(AF) s.m. War-bird, barnacle-goose. 

eun-liath, (AF) sm, Black grouse. 

eun-lion, -lin, -liontan, s. m. Fowler’s net, 
bird-net. 

eun-mór-an-fhàsaich, s.m. Pelican, see pealag. 

eun-ótrach,(AF) s.m. Barn-door fowl. 

eun-rap,(AT) s.m. Landrail, see tréan-ri-tréan. 

eun-ruadh,(AF) s. m. Grouse, see coileach- 
fraoich & cearc-fhraoich. 

eun-snamh,(AF) s.m. Aquatic bird. 

eun-suamhach,Y s.m. Coot, see lacha-bhlàir. 

eun-uasal, s.m. Foreign bird, rare bird. 

eun-uisge, edin-, sm. Waterfowl. 

leur, a. see uasal. 

eur, pr. pt. ag curadh, v.a. & n. Refuse. 2** 
Deny. Cha d' eur an righ dha, the king refu- 
sed him mot. 

euradh, -aidh, -aidhean, s. m. Refusal, denial. 
2 Refusing, denying. Eadar an t-e. is an t- 
aimbeairt, between denial and want; cha d' 
thug Fionn an t-e. do dhuine riamh, Fionn 
never refused anyone. Ag e—, pr. pt. of eur. 

eurmaireachd,** s.f. Galloping, riding. 

eusaontas, -ais, see easaontas. 

feusgad, -aid, -an, see iosgaid. 

euslaint, see easlaint. 

each, -iche, a. see easlainteach, 

eachd, see easlainteachd. 

eil,** yg, see easlainteach. 

————ich, see easlaintich. 

euslan, see easlan. 

achd, see easlainteachd. 

eusontach,** a. see easaontach. 

eusontas, see easaontas. 

feusploid, -e, s.f. Absolution. 

eu-tairiseaend, s.f.ind. Alienation, ill-will. 

feutlath, -aithe, a. Not tame, courageous. 














Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


399 


fabhda 


t——--—ach, -aiche, a. Not tame, courageous, 

eu-torrach,tt -aiche, a. Barren, unfruitful. 

eu-tràthach, -aiche, a. Late. 2 Tempestuous. 

eu-treoir, -e, $.f. imbecility, weakness, incapa. 
city, pithlessness, 

eu-treorach, -aiehe, a. Irresolute, weak, imbe- 
cile, silly, powerless, feeble. 2 Ungirded, 8 
Unguided. 

eu-treun, -tréine, «. Weak, silly, powerless. 

eu-trocair, s.f. Cruelty, want of mercy, merci- 
lessness. 

—— ———— each, -eiche, o, Cruel, unmerciful, 
unfeeling. Gu h-e., cruelly. 

—eachd, s.f.ind. Unmercifulness, une 

feelingness. 2 Practice of cruelty. 

eutrom, -uime, à, see aotrom, 

achadh, -aidh, s.m. & pr.pt. see aotrom- 
achadh, 

--——-achd, see aotromachd. 

ad, -aid, s.f. see aotromad. 

aich, see aotromaich. 

aichean, see aotromaichean. 

aichidh, see aotromaichidh, 

aichte, past pt. of eutromaich. 

an, see aotroman. 

as, -ais, see aotromas. 

eutruime, s. f. ind. see aotromachd. 

--————-, comp. of eutrom, see aotruime., 





























F f 


F, féarn, the alder, the sixth letter of the Gaelic 
alphabet now in use. It is sounded like fin 
English, but when aspirated , that is, when 
followed by h, itis always silent, except in 
the three words fhathast, fhéin and fhuair, in 
which fh sounds like A in English. 

D" jor Ia or fo. 

fa,** prep. On, upon, above. Fa lar, on the 
ground, omitted, neglected’; fa ’n aobhar ud, on 
that account ; ciod fa "n abradh iad ? where- 
fore should they say ? 

fa, prep. see fo. Used in adverbial expressions. 
Aspirates anindefinite noun, as fa dheireadh, 
at last. Fa ’r casaibh, under our feet ; fa 
sgaoil, at liberty. 

fa, see fàth. 

tfa, v. see bha. 

fabn,* s.m. Thick cake, thick bread. 

-——achd, s.f. see fabh. 

fabhair, pr.pt. a’ tabharadh, v.a. 
fer, oblige. 

(CR) s.m. Faint rumour— Perthshire. 

E, s.f.ind. see fadhairt. 

tfabhal,** -ail, s.m. Fabie, romance, 2 Journey. 

Trabhall, -aill, s.m. Report, account. 

Tíabhaltas, -ais, s.m. Protit, benefit, gain, ad- 
vantage. 

fabhan,( WC) s.m. Hint. Thug e f. dhomh, he 
gave me a gentle hint— Poolewe. 

fàbhar, -air, -an, s.m. Favour, friendship. 2 
Sign, badge, cockade. 3(PM) Hint. 

, v.n. Favour, befriend. 

fabhar, -bhra, -bhran, s.m. Eye-lid. 
fabhra.] 

fàbharach, -aiche, @. Favourable, 
disposed to befriend. 

——(q,** s.f.ind. Favourableness. 
position to befrieud, kindliuess. 

fabhd,* sm. Fault, blame.—Perthsh., Lewis. 

fabnda,** s. Crime. 


Favour, pre- 








[see 
2* Kind, 
2 Dis- 





fabhor 


fàbhor, see fàbhar. 

fabhra, n.pl. -n, -innean & -nnan, Eyebrow. 2 
Eyelid. 3 Veil, curtain. 4 Fringe. 5* 
Flounce. 


, spl, The eye-lids, 2 Hairs of the eye- 





lids. 

tFabhra, s.m. February. 

fabhrach,** æ. Having eye-lids. 2 Having large 
eye-lids. 3 Of, or belonging to, an eyelid, 
ciliary. 

fabhrad, -aid, -an, s.m. see fabhra. 

fabhradh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. see fabhra. 2 
(AC)Swirl, eddy, whirl. F. nimheil na 
gaoithe ’n ear, the venomous swirl of the east 
wind. 

fabhraiche,** s. Blazer. 

fabhraidh, s.pl. see fabhra. 

fabhranta, a. Having large eye-lashes or 

—— — —Ch, eye-lids. 

fabhsadh,(AC) s.m. Eddy. 

fabht, s. Error, flaw,— Däin I. Ghobha. 

fabhtas, Lewis for fabht. 

Tfabhthoirseach, -eiche, a. Negligent. 

fabhunn,** s.m. Surmise, rumour. 

fabhur, see fathann. 

faca, past interr. of faic. 

facachT, s.m. see sgraib. 

facadh, past interr. pass. of faic. 

facain, Suth’d for acain, moaning. 

facal, -ail, pl. -ail & -clan, s.m. Word. 2 Sol- 
emn oath. Thoir t' fh., swear. 

.—-— -aonaidh, s.m. Conjunction. 

-buaidhe, s.m. Epithet. 

-comharraidh, s.m. Countersign, 

-comh-bhoinn, s.m. Conjunction. 

-faicill, s.m. Countersign. 

-fhreumh,** -fhreimh, s.m. see freumh- 

fhacal. 


mom 
6S 
e cM 
© a 


ach,** a. see freumh-fhaclach. 
——-—üaáchd, s.jf.ind. see freumh-fhac- 


-———-—aiche,** s, m. 
laiche. 

facall,-aill, see facal. 

Oe past synthetic of faic ( for chunnaic 
sinn. 

fach,** -aich, 
faochag. 

—ag, see faochag. 











lachd. 
see freumh-fhac- 





S. m. Hole of a lobster. 2 see 





297. Fachach. 
fachach,] -aich, am, Puffin, coulterneb, shear- 


water,—/fratercula arctica. [A small bird 
with a yellow beak, which carries sand-eels 
or small herrings in its mouth to its young 
every morning, having been gathering them 
all night. Thetails of the fishes are hanging 
out on both sides of its bill, and 20 or 30 of 
them vacked in its mouth.] The young is 
called ‘‘ gille bog " soft, fat fellow (DMy.) 2 
(AF). The young. of these and other sea-birds. 


L p En fa, 8. 1 fm rg a m = ; o rgpe 

| A ` i d 

L - n d = i I ei [ H vk 
= 1 - 1 m P EB 


400 


fad 


3(DC) Sand-martin— A rgyll. 4 Mole. 

fachail, -e, s.f. Strife, contention, dispute, 
struggle. 

each, -aiche, a. Litigious, 

tfachaill, a. Full of words. 

fachainnt, -e, s.f. Scoffing, derision, ridicule, 
mockery, sneering. [1 gives fachaint. ] 

a. see fachainnt. 





EE TEE 


-—————e&ach,** œ. Derisive, scoffing, apt to ` 


sneer, 

fachanta, -ainte, a. Insignificant, petty, puny. 

-— — —chd, s.f.ind. Insignificancy, puny ap- 
pearance or size. 

tfachd, s.m. Fight. 

fa cheud, adv. One hundred times. 

fachlas, -ais, s.m. Reward for valour. 
f. is feoil, wine, a prizeand meat. 

fa-choill,** s.f. Thick wood. 

—————,** œ. Full of woods. 

fa chomhair, adv. Opposite to, or before him 
orit(m.) 2In anticipation of, in preparation 


Fion is 


Or. 

fa chùis, adv. By reason of, because. 

fa chùl, adv. Backwards, behind. 
cül, behind them. 

faclach, -aiche, œ. Wordy, full of words. 

— ———aádh, -aidh, s.m. Expressing by words. 
2 Diction. 3 Etymology. A’ f—, pr. pt. of 
faclaich. 

faclaich, pr.pt. a’ faclachadh, v.n. Word, in- 


Fa 'n 


dict, express by words, speak, Cha d' fh. e 
orm, he did not speak to me, 
—— ———e, s.m. Good speaker. 2**Spokesman. 


facladair, ean, s.m. Lexicographer. 

——-.— —eachd, s.f.ind. see faclaireachd. 

faclair, -ean, s.m. Vocabulary, dictionary. 2 
**Lexicographer. 

——eachd, s.f.ind. Lexicography. 

fa comhair, adv. Opposite or before her or it (f.) 

facon,{ -oin, s.m. Gaelic spelling of falcon, 

fad,tt pr.pt. a’ fadail, v.a. Kindle, see fadaidh, 

fad, -aid, fòid. 2(DMy) Furrow of the plough. 
3 Single peat. F. mdineach, a peat. 

fad, s,m.ind. Length. 2*Distance. 3*Tallness. 

prep. During, over. 2 Throughout. 3** 
Altogether, wholly. 4**Longitudinally. 

fada, faide, a. Long, of great length, the 
opposite of short. 2 Of long continuance, for 
a long time. 3* Distant. 

[This is the way fad is treated in the other 
dictionaries, but the different significations 
of the word in different positions are more 
clearly explained by grouping the various ex- 
amples given aecording to the different mean- 
ings of fad, rather than according to its parts 
of speech, thus,] 

(a) Length, longitude— 

Fad is leud an taighe, the length and breadth 
of the house; a’ dol am fad, getting longer ; 
air fhad, lengthwise, longitudinally ; cuir am £., 
lengthen ; rathad fada, a long way. 

(b) Subordinate to Length, longitude— 

Air fad an t-saoghail, throughout the world; 
air fad, altogether, wholly ; fior air fad, just 
wholly. 

(c) Distance— 

Fad as, afar of ; fadair astar, fad air falbh, 
far away, at a great distance; o thir fhada, 
from a distant country ; fada, bhuam, far from 
me; cian fhada, agus fada nan ciaa agus lan 
fhada. 

(d) Time— 

Fad an la, all day long ; fad finn foiueach 
an la, throughout the live-long day ; fad làith- 


ean mo bheatha, throughout my whole life ; is. 


fad’ an là dha-san nach do chuir blas na h- 
oidhche á 'bheul, long is. the day to a hungry 


fad 401 


man, (lit. to him who hasn’t put the taste of 
the night out of his mouth); is fhad’ a dh’ 
fhan thu, you stayed long; cia fhad P how 
long ? am fad, whilst ; ’fhad "aa bhitheas 
mi, as long as I am ; o chionn fada, long ago ; 
cha tig e gu ceann fada, he will not come 
for a long while. Baile fada-gu-la, the township 
of the long night (it.the long-till-day township.) 
The reference is to Paible, N. Uist. Long 
ago a stranger, happening to spend a night in 
the place, some mischievous lads covered up 
his bedroom window from the outside, with 
the result that the night was lengthened by 
many hours. Several times the astonished 
strauger was heard to mutter '' b’ e seo am 
baile fada-gu-la D" what a long-till-day town- 
ship ! 
[Fad is always aspirated in senterces of com- 
parison, but like other adjectives, it is not as- 
pirated by cho, as, air cho fad P how long ? ] 
fadach, a. see foideach. 211A boundiug in peats. 
fadachadh, -aidh, s.m. Lengtheniug, extending. 
2 Act of lengthening, prolonging or stretch- 
ing. A’ f—, pr.pt. of fadaich. | 
fadachd,(CR) s.f. Skye, Uist & W. of Ross for 
fadal. An robh thu 'gabhail fadachd rium ? 
were you wearying for me ? 

fadadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of kindling, lighting or 
inflaming. 2* Blowing into a flame. 3 Fire- 

lace of a kiln. 4 Pan ofa gun. A’ f. geal- 

hain, kindling a fire; a’ f. bhur n-ana-miann- 
na, inflaming your lusts ; f. cluaise, the prim- 
ing of a gun, match; f. cruaidh, part of a rain- 
bow seen by sailors in stormy weather, called 
** æ dog-tooth ’’ ; f. spuing, touchwood, tinder. 
A’ f—, pr.pt. of fadaidh. [Sometimes spelt 
fàdadh.] 

fadaich, pr.pt. a’ fadachadh, v. a. Lengthen, 
extend, stretch out, prolong. 2 Grow long. 

fadaich, v.a. see fadaidh. | 

fadaichear, fut. pass. of fadaich. 

fadaichidh, fut. aff. a. of fadaich. 

fadaichte, a. d past pt. of fadaich. Length- 
ened, extended. 2**Kindled. 

fadaidh, pr.pt. a’ fadadh, v.a. Kindle, asa fire, 
inflame. 2 Blow into a flame. 

fadail, gen.sing. of fadal. 2 pr. pt. of fad. 

fadair,** s.m. Match-maker. 

fadal, -ail, -an, s.m. Delay, tediousness. 2 
Longing, weariness, anxiety, ennui. 3 Prolix- 
ity. 4 Appetite. Na gabh f., do not weary ; 
tha f. orm, I am wearying ; a’ gabhail fadail, 
wearying. 

-——ach, -aiche, a. Tedious, lingering, weari- 
some, late. 2Dreary,slow,tardy. Oidhche- 
chan f., dreary or tedious nights ; tha thu f., 
you are late. 

-——achd, s.f.ind, Prolixity, tediousness. 

fad-altach, -aiche, a. Long-jointed. 

fad-anaileach,-liche & -alaiche, a. Long-winded. 
fad as, adv. Afar off. 

fada-spuinge, see fadadh-spuinge. 

fad-bhuinn,(AC) s.m. (lit. Sole-sod) Door-step. 
The name originated when a grassy turf was, 
as it still occasionally is, the door-step. 2 
Wooden step. 3 (DC) Stick laid across a door- 
way, to close up the space between the door 
and floor, to keep out draughts, rain, &c. 

called a threshold berge.)— Uist. 
fad-chasach,f s. m. Black-winged stilt, see 
luirgneach. i 
fad-cheannach,* a. Long-headed, sagacious, 
shrewd. 

fad-cheum,** s,m. Long step or pace, stride. 

———ach,* a. Striding, bounding,bouncing, 
taking long steps. 

fad-chluasach,* a. Long-eared. 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


|fadhdach,(AC) s.m. Black, blackness. 


fad-sheallach 


jj q chombair, adv. Opposite thee, in front of 

ee. 

fa-déistinn, s.f. see fath-déistinn. 

fad-fnoidhidinn, -e, s.f. Patience, longanimity. 

—— — ———each, see fad-fhoidhidneach. 

fad-fnoidhidneach, -iche, a. Patient, longani- 
mous. 

fad-fhuilingeach, -eiche, see fad-fhulangach. 

fad-fnulang, -aing, s.m.  Long-suffering, for- 
bearing, patience, longanimity. 

————— ach, -aiche, a. Long-suffering, for- 
bearing, patient. Gu f., patiently. 

——achd, s.f.ind. Long-suffering, pa- 
tience. 

-—— — — —— 8, -ais, s.m. Same meanings as fad- 
fhulang. 

fad-gheugach, -aiche, a. Long-branched. 

Tfadh, s.m, Science. 

fadn,t gen. pl. of fà'dh. "Nam bitheadh fios 
nam fàdh agam, had I the gift of prophecy (of 
the prophets.) 

fadh, AF) s.m. see famh. 

fadhadh,( WC) -aidh, s.m. Little handful of any- 
thing, as meal. Crath f. air, shake a little on it, 

fadhail, -dhlach, -dhlaichean, st Extensive 
beach. 2 Hollow in the sand, formed by and 
retajaing water, after the egress of the tide. 
2 Ford, space between islands when rendered 
passable on foot through the tide receding. 
The hollowed out rhines are called digean. 

fadhairt, -e, s.f. The temper of a cutting in- 
strument. 2 Forging, moulding, hammering. 
Gun fh., blunt. 

e, past pt. Tempered. 2 Sharpened. 
each, -iche, a. Tempered, as steel. 2 

Well-tempered. 

———ich,* v.a. Temper. 

fadharsach, -aiche, a. Trifling, paltry, mean, 
of little value, Gu f., in a trifling manner. 

fadharsachd, sf ind. Insignificancy, paltri- 
ness, meanness, 

tfadhbach, see saoghlach. 

ifadhban, -ain, s.m. Mole hillock. 2 Tossing. 

fadhbh,* s.f. see famh. 

fadhbhag, -aige, -an, s.f. 





see faobhag. 

1 2 Con- 
fusion. 

fa dhéigh, adv. see fa dheoigh. 

fa dheire, adv. see fà dheireadh. 

fa CR adv. Atlast, at length, at the 
end. 

fa dheoidh, see fa dheoigh. 

fa dheoigh, adv. At last, finally, after all, at 
length. P. air sgeul, found at last. 

fadhlach,tt -aiche, o Having an extensive 
beach. 

fadhlainn, s.f. Exposed place beside the shore, 
covered with small white stones. 

Tfa dho, adv. Twice. 

fa dhruim,** adv. Backwards. 

fadhtag, see faobhag. 

fad-labhairt,(PM) s.f. Loquacity. Generally 
preceded by the article, as, ’s ann ort a bha 
an fhad-labhairt, how loquacious you were !— 
said to one repeating secrets.—Uist. 

fad-lamhach, -aiche, a. Long-handed, thievish, 
dishonest. Guf., thievishly. 

fad-monadh,f s.m. Little grebe, dabchick, 
see spag-ri-toin. 

fad-seilbh,(AC) s.m. Possession, infeftment. 
2 The sod or handful of earth, given by the 
seller to the buyer of land. 

fad-shaoghalach, -aiche, a. Long-lived. ` Gu 
maf. thu! dong may you live ! 

fad-shaoghalachd, s.f.ind. Longevity. 

fad-sheallach, -aidhe, a. Prospective. 


2 Long 
sighted. 


A ity p B G N 


p mg? 


EE verme po 
Y OF JOIS A 
haat EN ee ee 


fad-tharruing ! 402 
s. f. Dilatoriness, drawling, | fagta, past pt. of fag. Left, abandoned. 


fad-tharruing,* 
procrastination. * 

--——each,* -iche, a. Dilatory, procras- 
tinating. 

fad-theangach, -aiche, a. Long-tongued. 

fafann, -ain, s.m. Gentle breeze. 

fafannach, -aiche, a. Breezy. 

fag, pr.pt. a’ fàgail, v.a. Leave, quit, abandon, 
i0rsake. 2* Relinquish. 3 Outrun, outstrip. 
4 Render, make, effect. 5 Cackle, as a duck, 
Dh’ fhag ei, he forsook her, he abandoned her; 
dh’ fhàg an dara bat’ an té eile,the one boat out- 
stripped the other {when a boat is sailing she 
is femininein Gaelic, thus while rr bata math’’ 
is a good boat, they always say "ris math a 
sheòlas i! " how well she sails ! ; dh’ fhàgadh 
tuam buamastair treubhach,. thou wouldest 
render the blockhead heroic; fàg m’ fhianuis, get 
out of my presence ! fag mis’ am aonar, leave 
me alone, fag an t-àite 's am bheil thu 'nad 
shuidhe, leave your seat—of the same import 
and of similar application to ‘‘ fliuch do 
shuil.?' 

fag, pr.pt. a’ fàgail, v.n. Father upon, accuse 
of, lay to the charge. Dh’ fhàg iad sin air, 
they fathered that upon him, they laid that to 
his charge ; dh’ fhàg iad am pàisd’ air, they fa 
thered the child upon him. 

fagaid,** Gaelic spelling of faggot. 

fagaidh, fut. aff. a. of fag. 

fagail, -e, -ean, s.f. Leaving, quitting, abandon- 
ing, act of leaving. 2* Rendering.  3ffCus- 
tom, habit, failing. A’ f—, pr.pt. of fag. 

fàgail, s.f.ind. Anything left. 2* Curse. 3% 
Fatality,destiny, fate. 4 Bias, disposition— 
Dain I. Ghobha. Tha *fh. féin aig gach neach, 
everyone has his own fate ; is bochd an fh. a 
th’ agad, there is a sad fatality following you. 

fagaire,* an, s.m. Wag, wit, though nothing 
like such. 

fagaireachd,* s.f. Waggery or witticisms of a 
person, from whom nothing of the kind is to 
be expected. 

facalach, -aiche, o Ready to fail or desert. 

fàxam, Ist. per. sing. imp. of fag. Let me leave. 
12 ( for fàgaidh mi) £st. fut, af. a. I will leave. 

fagannta,* a. Slow and drawling, yet witty 
and waggish. 

fàgar, fut.pass. of fag, 

Tfagbhuid, for dh’ fhàg iad. 

fíagha, s.m. Spear. 2 Attempt. 3 Offer. 

faghaid, see foidhidinn. 

faghaid,-e -ean, s. f. Hunting. 2 Game. 3 
Starting of game. 4 Chase, hunt. 5 Hunt: 
ing party. 6 Men who start the game. Tha 
f. a’ bhaile "pa déidh, all the dogs in the vil- 





lage are in pursuit of her ;f. an réidh, the chase | faic ! int. 


of the plain ; f. fàsaich, æ forest hunt. 
-each -eiche, o, Hunting. 2 Connected 
with hunting or game. 3**Carniverous, 
each, s.pl. Carniverous birds. 
faghail, s.f.ind. see faotainn. A’ f—, pr. pt. of 
faigh. A’ f. cuideachd, getting help; a’ f. 
bais, dying, 

faghail, -lach, -laichean, s.f. see fadhail. 

faghainn, s.f.ind. see faighinn., 

faghairt,tt s.f. see fadhairt. 

faghairt,tf v.a. see fadhairtich. 

tfaghal, -ail, s.m. see fadhail. 

fachaltach,** a. Profitable, gainful, lucrative. 
Gu f., profitably, 

fagnaltas,** -ais, s.m. Profit, gain, advantage. 

faghar,tt -air, s.m. see foghar. 

fagharach,tt -aiche, a. see fogharach. 

fagnarsach, a. see fadharsach. 

fagharsachd, s.f. see fadharsachd. 

fagmaid, 1st. pers. pl. inp, of fag. Let us leave. 





Digitized by 


aeuo A S, 
TERNET ARCHIVE 


faiche 


fagus, faisge, a. Near, nigh. 2 Nearly related. 
Fagus orm, fagus dhomh, near me ; am fad "a 
am f., far and near ; f. air à bhi deas, or f. do 
bhi deas, nearly ready ; na’s fhaisge, nearer, 
[Fagus takes the prep. air or do, simple or 
compounded, after it, as, fagus do 'n bhàs, 
near death; ged is fagus ‘‘ duiun,” is faisge 


“ oirnn,” though “near us" be nigh,“ upon 


us" is nigher.) 
fagusach, -ciche, a. Adjacent. 
fagusachd, s.f.ind. Adjacency, nearness. 
fagus air, adv. About, 2 prep. By. 
fapusg, see fagus. 
faibhile, see faidhbnile. 
faic, irreg. v. See,look, behold. 2*Observe. 3 

(CR) Show.—W. of Ross. 

Active Voice— 

IND. past, Chunnaic mi, de, I &c. saw. 

» Jut. Chi mi, &c., I &c. shall see. 

INTERR. & NEG. past, am ? (naeh fn— ? chan 
Íh—,) faca mi, &c. Did I &c. ( not) see ? 

» Jut. am P (nach fh— ? cha’n fh—) faic 
mi, &c., Shall I dc. (not) see ? 

SUBJ. past, (ged) chithinn, (though) I would 
see ; (ged) chitheamaid, (though) we would 
see ; (ged) chitheadh tu, e, i, sibh, iad, 
(though) thou, he, she, you, they would see. 
[Another form after iuterrogative or nega- 
tive particles—am ? (nach fh— ? cha'n fh—, 
mur,) faicinn, would I (not) see ? ] 

ue fut, (wa) chi mi, &e., (if) I &c.shall see. 

IMPER. Ist. per. sing. Faiceam, let me see. 

INFIN. A dh’ fhaicinn, [& à dh’ fhaicsinn] to 
see. 

PRES. PART. A’ faicinn, [& a’ faicsinn] seeing. 
Passive Voice— 

IND. past, chunnacadh mi, &c. I,déc. was seen. 
[Chunnaeas is generaily used in preference 
to chunnacadh. ] 

» fut. chithear mi, &e., I &c. shall be seen, 

INTERR. & NEG. past, am P (nach fn—- ? cha’n 
fh—,) facadh mi, &c. 

A fut. am ? (nach f— ? cha’n fh—) faic- 
ear mi. 

SUBJ. past, (ged) chiteadh mi, &e. (though) I 
dc. would be seen. 

». Jut. (ma) chithear mi, &e. (if) I, «e. 
shall be seen. 

PAST PART. faicte, seen. 

[Parallel passive impersonal forms—o’n chi- 
teadh, since it would be seen ; but, nach faic- 
teadh P would it not be seen 2 

Chi mi dbuit e, I will show it to you; faic 

dhomh e, show me it ; faiceam do phìob, let me 

see your pipe. 

See ! behold ! lo ! 
observe my tears. 

faic, fut. interr. of faic. 

faic, -e,-ean, s.j. Hiding-place, den, hole. 2 
**Sparkle. 

faice, s.f. see aice, 3. 2**Tatter. 

faicealach, -aiche, æ. see faicilleach. 

faiceali, see faicill. 

—— ————aáchd,** see faicilleachd. 

faiceam, Ist. sing. imp. a. of faic. 

faicean,** s.m. Swaddling-band,child’s blanket. 

faiceanaich,** v.a. Swadiile. 

faiceanaichte, past part. of faiceanaich. 

faicear, fut. interr. & neg., and imperf. pass. of 
faic. F. t obair, let thy work be seen ; cha'n 
fh. an ceum na ’s mo (tuilleadh), their ap- 
proach shali no more be seen. 

faiceil,** a. Momentary, in a trice. 

faich, IT -e, -ean, see faiche. 

faichd, -e, -ean, s.f. see faic. 

faiche, -au, s.f. Field, 2 Field where soldiers 


Faic mo dheoir, 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS Ag 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


A4 ums 


ZA oan 


| 
4 





faiche | 403 


are reviewed. 3 Plain, meadow, green, 4 
The burrow of a shell-fish. 5**Forest. 6f 
Green by the house, F. giomaich, a /obster's 
burrow ` f.-bhuill, bowling-green ; saidhe na 
faiche, meadow-hay. 

faicheach, -icue, a. Lawny. 2 Agrarian. 

d,** s.f. Traversing the fields. 2 Field 
sports, 3 Stately gait. 4 Field manoeuvring, 
drilling of soldiers, parading. 

faichealachd, s.f.ind. Showiness. 

fíaicheall, -ill, s.m. Wages, reward, salary. 

- faicheallacn,** sm. Lamp, candle. 

-— a. tLuminous. 

—d, see faicilleachd. 

faichean, see faicean. 

faicheil,** a. Graminivorous, 

faicheil, -eala, a. Stately, trim, showy. 2* 
Tidily and cleanly dressed, as soldiers, and at 
the same time proud of such. 3**Agrestic. 

¢faichiileach, -ich, s.m. Hired servant. 

faichilleach, see faicilleach. 

faichuach,** s.f. seefail-chuach. 

faicibh, 2nd. pl. imp. of faic. See youor ye. 

faicill, -e, s.f. Caution, guard, watchfulness, 
precaution. 2 Care. 3**Attention. 4**Chari- 
ness, circumspection. 5**Kvidence. "Trid f. 
mhaith, by means of great attention; air ’fh., 
on ied guard ; f. ort ! take care! be on your 

ar 

faicill,** a. see faicilleach. 

each, -iche, a. Cautious, wary, watchful, 

observant. 2 Careful. 3**Attentive. 4** 

Evident, manifest, 5i{Provident. Gu f. 

circumspectly, warily ; tha 'n aois f., age is cir- 

cumspect. 
eachd, s.f.ind. Attentiveness. 2 Cau- 

tiousness, circumspection, observance. 3** 
Evidence. 

faicinn, s.f.ind. Seeing, perceiving, act of see- 
ing. 2 Vision. 3**Sight. 4**Observation. 5 
View. 6**Visibilicy. <A’ f—, pr. pt. of faic. 
Leig fhaician dhomh, show me. 

,rreg. past subj. form of faic. 

each, -iche, a. see faicsinneach, 

faicleach, -iche, a. see faicilleach, ! 

faicse,** (faic thusa) v. See thou, behold, ob- 
serve. 

faicsinn, 8.f. see faicinn. 2 A' f—, 

—each, -iche, a. Visible. 

ous. 3**Watehful, observant. 4**Wrathful. 

DtrEvident, manifest. 6*Notorious. An pag- 

lais fh., the visible church ; f. agus neo-fhaic- 

sinneach, visible amd invisible. 

eachd, s.f.ind. Conspicuity, conspicu- 
ousness. 2**Visibleness. 3 Clearness. 

ffaicsiona, s.m. Fashion, form, pattern. 

faicte, past pt. of faic. 

faid, s.m. see fàidh. 

faide, s.f.ind. Length, degree of length. 2 Tall- 
ness of a person. 

-——, comp. of fada. Longer. 2 Longest. A's 
fhaide gu mór, longest by far ; 'sea's fhaid’ 
a mhaireas, he will last the longest; mar a’s fh. 
chi mi, the longer I can see. 

faidead, -eid, s.m. Distance. 2 Length, degree 
of length. 3 Longitude, Air f. bhur saoghal, 
no matter how long yor may live. 

faideag,** -eig, -an, Sef. Lot. 2 Chance. 3 see 
feadag (plover.) 

tfaidear, adv. see fainear, 

faidh, see faigh. 

fàidh, e -ean, s. m. Prophet, seer. 2 Sooth- 
sayer, Tha ’m f. breugach, the prophet vs lying, 
(g«.pl. sometimes fadh—in Gairloch, fath.] 

faidhbhile, an, s.f. Beech-tree. 

faidhbhile dhubh,§ s.f. The black beech-tree 
—fayus sylvatica var. atrorubens. 




































pr.pt. of faic. 
2** Conspicu- 








Digitized by 





faidheachd, see faidhead- 
fàidheadair,** -ean, s. m. 


faidheadaireachd, s. f. ind. 


tididbeambuil, a. Prophet- 
faidheil,* a. Prophetic,like 


faidhidinn, 
faidhion, see faighinn & faidhrean. 
faidhir, -dhreach, -dhrichean, s.f. Fair, mar- 





faidseach, -iche, a. Lumpish. 





faigh 


——ach, -iche,a. Bee- 
chen. 


aireachd. 
Prophet. 


Prophesying, prophecy, 
prediction, divination. 





ic. 2 Critical. 

a prophet. 2**Apt to cri- 
ticise. 3** Happy in ex- 
pression, 4**Witty. 

see foidhidinn, 


298. Faidhbhile 
dhubh. 


ket. 2 Fairing. Là na faidhreach, the mar- 
ket day; f. na feòla, the flesh-market; f. an éisg, 
the fish-market; f. nan luideag, the rag-market, 


2 


faidhneachd, see faighneachd. 
faidhreach, a. Showy, fit for sale or show. 


Of, or pertaining to, a fair. 
-——8il, -ala, a. see faidhreach. 


faidhreag, -eige, -an, see oighreag. 
faidhrean, -ein, s.m. Fairing, present purchas- 


ed ata fair, 


faidhrichean, n.pl. of faidhir. 
faidhrionn, -inn, -an, s.f. 
faidse,* -achan, s.m. Lump of bread, ** piece.” 


see oighreag. 


2** Budge. 3 (MM) Pancake about two inches 
thick, 

2 Clumsy. 

-—,tf -ich, -an, sf. Lumpish girl. 2 Bout, 
hard spell—G@airloch. 


iàidseachd,** s.f. Lumpishness. 
tfaig, 
tfaigean,** s.m. 
faigh,** s.f. Beggiug by licence. 
faigh, irreg. v. 


see fàidh. 
Sheath, scabbard. 2 Vagina. 
2 Thickster. 
Get, obtain, acquire. 2 Find. 
3** Reach. 
Active Voice— 
IND. past, fhuair mi, &c., I, &c. got. 
[ /vair, not aspirated in Suth’d.] 
» fut. gheibh mi, &c., I, &c. shall get. 
INTERR. & NEG. past, (an? nach? cha) d’ 
fhuair mi, &c., did 1, de, (not) get 2 
N fut. am ? (nach? cha’n fh-—,) faigh 
mi, &c., shall I, &c. (not) get. 
SUBJ. past, (ged) gheibhinn, (though) I would 
get; (ged) gheibheamaid, (though) we would 
get ; (ged) gheibheadh tu, e, i, sibh, iad, 
(though) thou, he, she, you, they would get. 
[Another form used after interrog. and neg. 
particles—'nam ? (nach ? cha’n fh—, mur) 
faighinn, (if) I would (not) get, save per- 
sonal terminations, as ‘‘ gheibhinn."' 
id en ma) gheibh mi, &c., (if ) I, e, shall 
e 


get. 
IMPER. Ist. per. sing. faigheam, let me get. 
INFIN. adh’ fhaotainn [a dh’ fhaghail & a 
dh’ fhaighinny+] to get. 
Passive Voice— 
IND. past, fhuaradh or fhuaras mi, &c., I, de, 
was got. 
» Jut. gheibhear mi, &c., I, «&c.'shall be got. 
INTERR. & NEG. past, an? (mach? cha) di 
fhuaradh mi, &c., shall I, &c. (not) be got ? 
SUBJ. pust, (ged) gheibhteadh mi,&c.,(though) 
I, &c. would be got. 
» fut, (ma) gheibhear mi, &c., (ùf ) I, &c. 
shall be got. 
Past PART., faighte, got. 
[Parallel passive impersonal forms—(ged) 
gheibhteadh, (though) it would be got; (mur) 
faighteadh, (Z7 ) i£ would not be got. 


nal TO 
A d V E =! e TY © M 


m *? Lil EA = | LE A A | i 
KE EA P3 Kä Je 1 e LR t 


NOIS / 


d 
Li 
mi 


faigh 404 


fàileag 


[Faigh in its impersonal forms has the mean- | faiibhe, an, for fail, ring. 2(AH)Ring-bolt. 


ing of do, achieve, exert, as, is math a fhuaras 
tu! how much you have achieved; and, is 
math a gheibhear thu, you would do much.) 
Fhuair sinn, we have found ; faigh a mach, 
find out ; faigheam do lorg, let me get thy 
staf ; fhuair iad a mach thu, they found you 
out ; cha d'fhuair mi faighneachd gus a seo, 
I did not get (a chance) to enquire till now ; a’ 
bheairt sin nach fhaighear ach cearr, the loom 
that is awry ; cha mhath a fhuaras Lachlann 
ort, L. treated you badly, or outdid you ; a h- 
uile ole ge 'n d' fhuaras mi, in spite of every 
disadvantage I laboured under; fhuaras i an 
àit’ a fir, she was found in her,husband's place. 

faighbhile, see faidhbhile. 

faighdhe, see faoighe. 

faighe, s.f. see faoighe. 

faigheam, Ist. per. sing. imp. of faigh. Let me 


get. 

faighear, fut. interr. pass. of faigh. Tha e far 
am f. e, it is where it shall be found. 2 imp. 
pass. Faighear mi, let me be found. 

faighean,** s.m. Scabbard. 

faighid, s.f. see foidhidinn, 

inn, s.f. see foidhidinn. 

faighidinneach, a. see foidhidneach. 

faighidneach, æ. see foidhidneach. 

faighileach, -iche, o Acquirable. 

faighinn, s.f.ind. Getting, obtaining, acquiring. 
A' f—, pr. pt. of faigh. 

faighinn, irreg. past subj. of faigh, whieh see. 

faighir, see faidhir. 

tiaighleadh,** -idh, s.m. Ivy. 2 Conversation. 

faighneach, a. Inquisitive. 

faighneachadh,** -aidh, s. m. Enquiring, ask- 
ing. A’ f—, pt. pt. of faighnich. 

faighneachd, pr. part. a’ faighneachd, v.n. Ask, 
enquire, question. This verb takes the prep. 
de, simple or compounded, after it, as, f. de 
om Na enquire of James ; f. dheth, ask of 

im. 

faighneachd, s.f.ind. Asking, questioning. 2 
Inquisitiveness. A’ f—, pr. pt. of faighneachd 
and faighnich. 

—ach, a. see faighneach. 

-ail, -ala, a. see faighneach. 

as, -ais, ssm. Inquisitiveness. 

faighnich, pr. pt. a’ faighneachd & a’ faigh- 
neachadh, v.n. Ask, enquire, question. 

faighreag, see oighreag. 

faiphrean, -ain, see faidhrean. 

faighrichean, see faidhrichean. . 

faighte, past. pt. of faigh. Got. 

adh, past subj. pass. of faigh. 

ear,** see faighear. 

faigse,* s.m. see faisge. 

, a see faisge. 

fail, pr.pt. a’ faileadh, v.a.&n. Corrupt, pu- 
trefy. 2 Make bald or bare. 3 Lousen the 
hair by maceration or putrefaction. 

fail,* adv. see far. 

fail, oo Confine in a sty. 

tfail, -e, -ean, s.f. Sty. 2 Hiccough. 3** Den. 
F.-chon, a dog-kennel ; f.-mhuc, a pig-sty. 

fail, -e, -ean, $.f. Ring, wreath, bracelet. 2 Ear- 
ring. 3*Mark, print, trace. 4 Beautiful col- 
lar— Dain I. Ghobha. 5 rarely Company, so- 
ciety. 6 see fàile. 7* see fal. F. do liimhe, 
the print of your hand ; f. do choise, the print 
of your foot ; mar fh. oir, like @ jewel of gold. 

fail, gen. sing. of fal. 

DA a. Fatal. 2 Generous, liberal. 
fail. 

failbhe, s.f.ind. Emptiness. 2 Exhaustion. 3 
The aérial expanse. A’ snàmh "san fh. mhóir, 
swimming in the great firmament, 





























see Lia 


tfaiibhe,** o, Lively, sprightly. 

failbheadh,** -idh, s.m. Vegetation. 

failbheag, -eige, -an, $.f. Ring, bolt-ring for a 
rope. 2(DU( Curl. 3**Ring of any metal. 
Failbheagan oir, gold rings. 

——-—— ach, -aiche, a. Full of rings. 
ring. s 

failbhean,-ein, see failbheag. 

failbheas,** -eis, s.m. Liveliness, sprightliness. 

failbheig,** gen. sing. of failbheag. ` 

tiailbhich,** v.a. Quicken, enliven. 

failbhisg, a. see failmisg. Dh’ fhogair iad cuid 
gu bas, is cuid gu àitean failbhisg, they com- 
pelled some to go to their death, and some to 
places much exposed to bad weath^r—Joseph 
Mac-Kay’s elegy on John Grant, Reay coun- 
try, speaking of the clearances. 

failc,** e s.f Gap, opening. 2 Hairlip. 3 Bath, 
bathing. 4(AC) Flood, flooding. F. theth, a 
hot bath. 

——, pr.pt. a’ failceadh, v.a. dn Bathe. 

——each,* s.f. see failceadh. 

——each,** a. Like a bath. 

—eadh, -idh, s.m. Bath, bathing. 2 Cleaning 
of the hair by bathing. 3**Lye of potash. F. 
de dh’ iubhar beinne, bath of the juice of the 
juniper—a popular remedy for head-ache. A’ 
f—, pr.pt. of failc. 

failleean,f s.m. Pot-lid. 2 Rotula or whirl 
bone of the knee. - 2 see falman. 

fail-chon, s.f. Dog-kennel. à 

fail-chuach,§ -uaiche, -an, 6 E Sweet violet— 
viola, odorata. 





299. Fail-chuach, 
failein,* s.m. see fa'man, faileean and faircill. 


failcire,* s.m. Bather. 

failcix,** -e, -ean, s.f. Pit. 

failcte, past pt. of faitc. Bathed. 

faile, pl. faileachan, s.m. see aileadh. 

ifaileabadh, -aidh, s.m. Death. 

faileach,* -aiche, og Rank. 

faileach,tt o Aboundiag in styes, 

faileach,tt a. Abounding in rings. 

—an, -ain, s.m. Ear-riug. 

—d,(CR) s.f. Hiding, concealment. Tha 
eairf., he is in concealment,—said e. g. of a 
boy who has been iu mi.chief ant is Keeping 
out of sight, ( from faiach)—W. of it ss-sh. 

fàileadh, s.m. see àile. 2**Putrefying, putre- 
faction. 

faileadh, -idh, s.m. Corrupting, puirefyiag. 2 
++Soddening. 3 Said of a creature that lies 
dead till the hair fails off. 4 (CR) Mouiting. 
Tha na cearcan air f., the hens have moulted— 
W. of Ross. A'f—, pr. pt. of fail. In Poolewe 
—na eaoraich fhailidh, tha iad air faileadh, 
the sheep are scabby, and losing their wool (from 
some disease) ; tha na cearcan fo na h-itean 
gorma, the hens are moulting—WC. | 

faileag. s f. seeaileag. 2**Hump, hillock. 3 
(AC) Little lawn, littl meadow. j 

fàileag, -eize, an, sf. Dog-briar berry. 2 Uist 
for fàireag. 








Original from 


2 Likea 


2 Having a bath. ` 


b --AA€— ond amt 


Ard, unit 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS Al 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


OLOR 


y 


fàilean 405 fàilteachas 





fàilean, -ain, s.m., dim. of! fàl. Little sod. ish in thee ; gun fh., without fail. 

- ach,* -aiche, a. Turfy. 2ttSmelling. faillinneach,** -nich, s.m. Defauiter. 
faileanta, 0. see aileanta. — — — ——, -iche, g. Failing, fallible, liable 
faileantan, s.m. Honeysuckle—4A rran & Lorn. to error, 2 Neglectful. 8**Weak, faint, deli- 


faileas, -cis, -an, s.m. [s.f. in Badenoch.] Shadow. cate, frail. 4 Decaying. 5 Languid, falling 
. Z* Reflected image. 3** Shade. 4**Spectre,| off. 6* Wanting. 
ghost. Mar fh. teichidh tu, as a shadow thou | faillinneachd, s.f.ind. Defectiveness. 2 Falli- 
shalt fiy;mar fh. ar làithean, our days are bility, faintness. 3 Falling off, failing. 
like a shadow ; f. an ré, the reflected image of | faillinneadh, -idb, s.m. Failing. 2 Fainting. 3 
the moon. ‘Tendency to decay. 
faileasach, -aiche, v. Shadowy, causing a sha-|fàillinnich, v.n. Fail. 2 Fall off. 3 Decay. 
dow. 2 Polished, 3 Reflecting. 4**Spectral. e,** s.m. Defaulter. 


7s CONNU a 














5 vwd AR Iuthar f., polished, yew. faillne, see fàillinn. 
faileasachd,** s.f. Shadowiness, 2 State of being | fàillnich, pr.yt. a’ fàillneachadh, see fàillinnich. 

polished. faillseach,** o Sudorific. 
faileasaiche, -an, s.m. Stile or gnomon of a sun- | faillsich,** v.g. Sweat, perspire. 

dial. failm, -e, -ean, s. f. Helm of a boat orfship. 2 
fàileineach, -iche, a. Fragrant. Tiller of a rudder, see rudder 5, p.78. Glac 
faile-raiueach,$ see creidhm-raineach, an fhailm, steer, take your turn at the helm. 
faileus, s.m. see faileas. failmeach,tt æ. Pertaining to a helm. 

ach, o see faileasach. failmean, -ain, see falman. 

failgeach,** a. Poor, necessitous. faiimhe, see failbhe. 
failghe, -an, see fail (ring.) fail-mhuc,** s.f. Pig-sty. 
fail-gleidhte, s.m. Hedge. fail-mhuineil,** s.f. Collar. 

—ach, see fail-gleidhte. failmisg, y. Stormy, as weather. 2 Fierce, as a 
fàil-gleusta, e.m. see fàil-gleidhte. man—both Suth’d. 3 Unprotected, as a place, 
fail-gleuta, see fàil-gleidhte. failmisg,(DMC) sf. Wickedness. F. ort ! may 
failich,(MMcD) v. Lewis for fairtlich. evil take you ! 
tfailidh, a. Gentle, unperceived. failmse,tf -ean, s.f. Mistake, blunder. 2 Skye 
failidh,(WC) a. Scabby and losing the wool, as| for ailmse—Gael. Soc. Inv. xxiii, 80. A f., 

sheep. unawares. 
fàilig, see fàillinn. failmseach,tt o Blundering, mistaking. 
fàilingeach, see fàillinneach. failneach, æ. sec faillinneach. 
failingeachd, see fàillinneachd, failneachadh, -aidh, s.m. Failing, act of failing. 
failing adh, see faillinneadh. 3 Decaying, giving way. A’ {—, pr.pt. of fàil- 
faiiinn, see fàillinn. nich. 


fiaill,** s.f. Opportunity. 2 Advantage. 3/failnich, v.n. see fàillinnich. 
Leisure. 4 Kernel. 5 Precipice, seetaill. 6|failreag,** -eig, s.f. Lump. 2 Hillock. 
Branch, twig, sprout. 7ifHard lumọ of flesh. | fail-shiatan, s.m. Honeysuckle—Arran, 
8 Danger. 9 Decay, Chad’ thug mi f, eag-|fàilt ! int. Bail! 
alach da, I did not give kiin time to get afraid, | fàilte, -an, sf. Salutation, welcome, hail, sa- 
failleach,** a. Braneny, abounding in twigs. 2| lute. Chuirinnjf., Z would hail or salute; cerd 
Sprouty. 3 Like a sprout, branch or twig. 4| f.arigh !a hundred welcomes,O king ! f. shith, 





(DU) Uncomfortabie, not feeling at home. a salutation of peace ; cuir f. air, (oirre,) sa- 
d,(DU; ert Uncomfortableness, feeling) lute him (her) ; f. don la, hail to the day ; f. 

oi not being at home. na maidne dhuit ! good morning to you ; f. na 
failleadn,** -eidh, s.m. Neglect,omission,failure.| Nollaige ort ! Gaelic form of ** a merry Christ- 
failleagan,t s.m. see faillean. mas to you; f. na Bealltainn ort ! may also 


faillean, -ein, an, s.m. Sucker of a tree, 2 Bud. | be heard. 
3 Young branch, twig. 4 Root of the ear. 5 fàilteach, -iche, o Welcoming, saluting. 2 
"Drum ofthe ear. A’ chluaso’nfh., the ear| Receiving kindly.  3**Hospitable. 4**Wel- 
From the root. come. ` e | 

failleanach, -aiche, a. Full of young suckers or | failteachadh, -aidh, s.m. Saluting, greeting, act 


branches. 2 Likea twig. 3 Sprouting. of saluting. 2 Welcoming, hailing. 3 Salute; 

———d,** s. f. Branchiness. 2 State of welcome, kind reception. A’ f—, pr.pt. of fàil- 
sprouting. 3 Tendency to sprout. tich. ` 

failleauaich, pr.pt. a’ failleanachadh, v.n. Ger- | failteachail, -ala, a. Prone to salute. 2 Ready 
minate, to welcome, hospitable. 

faillein, see faillean, | failteachas,*s.m.Same meanings as fàilteachadh. 


faillich,** v.n. Fail, neglect, decay. 
ifailidheach,** o. Drowsy. 
faitlig, pr.pt. a’ fàilligeadh, v.n. see fàillinnich, 
[Failiig isthe form always used in Lewis.] 
-——-each, see failiinneach. Duine f., a phy- 
sically weak or frail man—Uist. 
--——eadh,(PM) s.m. Mental ‘deficiency—Uist, 
AT f—, pr.pt. of fàillig. Bha f. mór anns an 
duine, the man was very mentally deficient. 
failling, -e, -ean, see fàillinn. 
——-—each, -iche, a. see faillinneach. 
fiillingich, see fàillinnich. 
fàillinn, e, -ean, s. f. Failing. 2 Fainting-fit. 
8** Falling oif. 4**Lack. 5**Blemish, fault. 
Thàinig f. air, he fainted ; thig ort f. tuigse, a 
~ — failing of judgment shall come over thee ; gun 
|». «fb. truacantachd, without lack of compassion ; 
cha d" aithnich mif. ort, J never knew a blem- 800. Failtean-fionn. 





Original fram 
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


INTERNET AR C HIVE URBAMA-CHAMPAIGh 


failtean,** -ein, -teana, s.m. Heal-band. Na 
failteana, the head-dress. 

failteaa-fiono,§ s.m.  Maidenhair fern—adian- 
tum capillus veneris. (see illust. 3800) | [Often 
erroneously applied to trichomanes (dubh- 
chasach.)] 

fàiltich, pr. pt. a’ fàilteachadh, v.a. & n. Greet, 
welcome, salute, hail. Le 'r n-ait hosanna 
failtichidh sinn e, with our glad hosannas we 
shail welcome him. 

faim, s. d v. see fàitheam. 

Gear, ja. see faitheamachail, 

faimear, see faitheamar. 

iaince, 


failtean | 406 


fainche, (AF) s.m. Fox. 
fain-chu, 
faine, s.f. see fàinne. 


fàine, (CR) a. Lower—Suth’d. 

faineachadh, -aidh, see aithneachadh. 

faineachas, ais, see aithneachas. 

fainear, adv.(fo 'n air’) Under consideration,into 
consideration. 2**Under observation, abten- 
tion, heed, or notice. Bha ’n t-ole f. dhaibh, 
they had evil intentions ; mise f. dha sin, J 
brought that about. 

faiug, gen.sing. of fang. [Used in Gairloch as 
nom. | 


fainich v. see aithnich & fairich. 


fainleay, -aige, -an,is.f. Swallow, see gobhlan- 


gaoithe. 2 (AF) Storm petrel, see luaireag. 

fàinne, pl. -achan A an, s.f. Ring, circle. Thug 
iad leo fàinneachan, they brought rings ; £.-pos- 
aidh, a wedding-ring. [m.in many places, e. 
g.,f.mór,in Argyll. Fàinnte in Gairloch. | 

fainne, s.f.ind. Weakness, weakening. 2 Lan- 
guishment, Janguor. 3 Debility. t4 Ignor- 
ance. 

fàinneach, -iche; q. 
rings or ringlets, curled. 
locks. 

ifainneadh, see fionnadh. 

fàinneag, -eige, -an, S.f., dim. of fàinne, Little 
ring, ringlet, annulet. 

fainneagach, -aiche, @. In ringlets. 

fainieal, -eil, s.m. Ignorance. 2 State of being 
astray. 3 Bewilderment. 4**Fannel, handful 
of straw used in thatching. Air f., astray, 
bewildered. 

fainneamh, Gairloch for fannadh. 

faiuneil,** a. Annular. 

fuinnich, pr.pt. a’ fainneachadh, v.a. Curl, ring. 

fainnte, pl, fainntichean, Gairloch for fàinne. 

fair, pr.pt. a’ faireadh, v.def. Give me, bring. F. 
a nall an t-searrag, hand over the bottle, 

fair,t see fair. 

fair, s. f. Ladder—Dain I. Ghobha. 

fàir, -e, sf. see faire. 

fair, -e,-ean, s.f. Dawn. 2(AC) Horizon. 3 
sky-line. 4 Height, hill, ridge. Briseadh 
na f., the dawn; tha "pn fhair’ a’ briseadh, 
the dawn ts breaking ; fhuair mi f. orra, Z spot- 
ted them on the horizon ; is luath fear air f. ri 
là fuar earraich, swift moves aman over the 
mountain ridge on a cold spring day. 

fair-aàjuim,* see for-ainm. 

fiirbheach,** s.m. see foirfeach. 

íairbhiteach,(DC) s. m. Township constable, 
bailitf in charge of social arrangements under 
the estate factor. 

¢fairbre, sf. Notch, impression. 2 Fault. 3 
Stain. 

faire, s.f. Links, land sometimes covered by 


Inrings. 2 Aboundingin 
A cul f., her curled 


the sea. 2 Hole—Bute. 3 Rammer. 4** 
Hammer. 
fairc, see failc. 


fairce, -an, s.m. see fairche, 12 Extent. 


E E 
JTERNET ARCHIV 





faireil 
fairceadh, -idh, see failceadh. 
fairceall, -ill, -an, 8m. Reward, 2**see faircill. 
ach, see faircilleach. 

fairche, an, sem. Hammer, beetle, mallet, 2 
Diocese. 3 Parish. 4**Choice. DA: Death, 
watch beetle. F.-chiach, a rammer. 

faireheach,tt a. Abeunding in mallets, 
taining to a mallet. 

faircheadh, -idh, s.m, Beating with a mallet. 

fairchean, s.m. see fairche. ` 

fairehil, see farch-chuil. 

ion -ean & fairclean, s.m. Lid of a cask or 
pot. 

faircilleach,** a. Having a lid. 

faircle,** s.f. The uppermost. 2 Extremity. 8 
Choice. s 

faircte, see failcte. 

fairdeach, -iche, a. see farraideach. 

fairdeadh, see farraideadh. 

fàirdean, -ein, -deinean, 8.m. see feòirling. 

ach, a. Abounding in farthings. 

fairdhris, see fearra-dhris. 

fairdinn, see feòirling. 

faire, v.n. Properly fairich or dean faire. 

faire, s. f. Watching, watchfulness. 2 Watch 
(division of time.) 3 Watch, sentinel, guard. 
4* Attention, circumspection. 5**Watch-hill. 
6 see fàir. 7(PM) Wake—Uist, Cuir f. air, 
set a watch or guard on it ; cnoc-f., a watch- 
knoll ; taigh na f., the wake-house ; f. chliadh, 
a churchyard watch ; dé a th’ air t fhaire ? 
what do you mean ? thoir an fn., take care, be 
circumspect, be upon the watch; cum fair’ air 
sin, attend to that ; ‘se sin a bh’ air w’ aire, 
that is what I had V» view ; a’ deanamh f. na 
h-oidhche, watching by night. 

faire, s.m.ind. see fair. 

faire ! faire! int. Aye !aye! so!so! heyday ! 
what! pronounced in a tone of anger and 
surprise. 2(DU) as applause, Well done ! hear, 
hear ! 

faireach, -iche, qd. 

i , see faireachadh. 

faireachadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Waking, a- 
wakening, 2 Watcuing. 8 Sitting v 4 
Feeling. 5 Warning, alarm. Am bheil tha 
'nad fh., are you awake ? eadar cadalagusf., 
between sleeping and waking. A’ f—, pr. pt. of 
fairich. 

faircachail, -ala, a. Given to watching. 2 Feel- 
ing. 8 That has feeling. 4**Watchful, obser- 
vant, attentive. Gu f., watchfully. 

tfaireachas, -ais, s.m. Watehing. 





see faireil. 


faireachdainn, -e, -ean, sf. Feeling, perception. 


2 Act of feeling, <A’ f—, pr. pt. of fairich. 

faireadh,** -ridh, s.m. Watching. 2 Watchful- 
ness, attention. 3 Sentinel. 4see faire. Ri 
f., keeping watch ; fear-fairidh, watchman, sen- 
tinel. A’ f—, pr. pt. of fair. 

faire-claidh,** s.f. Spectre’s watch over a grave. 

faire-druim, -droma -ean, s.m. Saddle-back. 

fàireag, -eig, -an, s.f. Gland, hard lump between 
flesh and skin, 2 Wax-kernel 3**Hump. 4 
** Hillock. 5 (DMy) What the plough or 
spade would leave unturned of the furrow 
when it had too broa/l a piece to turn. 6(DU) 
Sod. F. am bun na teanga, almonds of the 
throat or tongue ; Màiccagan, Swollen glands. 

faireag, T s.f. Kittiwake, see seagair. 2 Lap- 
wing, see aibarcan-luachrach. 

fàireagach, a. Glandular. 2**Kernelly. 

faireagaicn,** v.a. Kernel. 

faireagan ! int. Bravo! F. a Mhéraig; bravo 
Morag ! 

faireamh, -eimh, -an, s.m. see faire, 

faireil, -eala, @ Watchful, cireumspect. 2 
Wakeful. 


2 Per- 


= e 


fairge ` ` 407 fàisnich 








—————À — 


fairge, pl. -achan & -annan,s.f. Sea, the sea, 2 Conquest. A’ f—, pr. pt. of fairtlicn. 
"Oe an. 9$ *Wave. 4ftSwelling of the sea, fairtieachair,** sm.  Baffüler. 
storminess. 6 (CR) Angry sea--W. of Ross. tairtl: eh, pr.pt. a’ fairtleachadh, v.a. Overcome, 
Tha 'n fh, mor, the sva is rough ; tha f. air al overmaich. 2% Dcfy. 8 Worst, bafle. Dh’fh, 
Chiaiavit, thee is d sea on the beach ; ^sau fii., e orm, he or it vejied me, or worsted me. [rakes 





| Vn the sa; tnar f., across the sea; annradh f.,| the prep. air af.erit, simple or compounded. 
f Q storm atsa; au fh. mhór, the great ocean. Spelt failich in Uist.] 
i L* gives pl. fairgeachan.] ! }fais-bheo, s.p. Vegetative tribes. 
fairgeacn, -aiche, a. Marine. 2 Pelagic, in- | fai-cre,** s,f, Compulsion, violence, force. 
having the deep sea. tiaisdine, -an, see faisneachd. 

—-an, n.pl of fairge. fàáiseach,(CR) a. Easy—W. of Ross, Cha’n 'eil 
fairgean,* s.m. Mallet. sin f., that is not easy (to do or bear.) In 
fairgear, an, s.m. Sailor, seaman. Gairloch ** cha b’ e sin a faiseach," is the form 

ach, a. Of, or pertaining to, seamen. used, making f. a substantive.—DU. 

achd,tt s.f. Seamanship. faiseachail, -ala, a. Mitigant. 

. fairgeir, s.m. see fairgear, fais, a. see fas. Feadaireachd mu ’n bhuaile fh., 
| fairgucadh, -idh, s.m. ilacking. 2ttSacking. is gàradh mu ’n chnamhag, whistling round 
tiairgneaiwh, -imh, s,m. Building. the empty fold, and wall round the refuse corn. 
fairic, see taile, fàisg, pr. pt. a’ fàsgadh, v. a. Squeeze, wring, 


fairicu, pr. pt. a’ faireachadh & faireachduinn,| compress, press, squeeze by twisting, as wa- 
{ia reachdain in Suth’d.] v.n. Feel 2 Per-| ter out of cloth. /Ga fhasgadh eadar a lamh- 
ceive, observe. 3 Watch. 4**Awake, arouse, an, compressing it between his hands ; faisgidh 
bestir. 5**3m»ll "Dé a dh’ fhairich thu ?| iad oladh, they shall squeeze (make) oil; a 
whut did you Jeel ? what do you mean ? what| | dneasgann fàisgidh daoine daoi, the wicked 
ails you ? f. as do shuain, awake from vour| shall wring its dregs. 
profound steep ; teich no f, m’ fhearg, flee or | faisg,* s.m. Cheese-press, chesit. 2**Penfold, 
Jeel my wrath ; da’ fh. e boladh, he smelied| 3**Band. 4**Tie. 














a smell ; dn’ fh, mo chridhe, my heart felt. tfaisg, -e, -ean, see faisgeadh. 
fairich,* s.f. see fairche. faisg, pr.pt. a’ fasgaidh, v.n. Pick off vermin. 
ear, fut.pass. of fairich. faisg,-e, œ. see fagus. Chunnaic iad i a’ tigh- 
idh, fut. af. a. of fairich. inn f, orra, they saw her coming near them. 
| te, past pt. of fairich. faisge, s.f. Nearness, proximity. "Fh. air a’ 
fairig,* oo see failc. bhaile, his nearness to the town. 
-———,(AU) s.f. Dead bird, dead fish, any dead | faisge,** s.f. Cheese, 2 Pressure. 3 Violence, 
creature found on the sea or shore. 4 Extortion. ' 
--——ean, int. see faireagan. faisge, comp. of fagus. Nearer, nearest. Ís esan 
fairir,(AC) s.f. Border, coast. see oirthir, a’s fhaisge, he is nearest. 
fairis, see thairis. faisgeach,* see faisgean. Ae 
fairisgneadh, s.m. Peeling. faisgeachd, s.f.ind. Nearness, proximity. 
fairleag,** og, s.f. see adharcan-luachrach. | faisgead, -eid, s.m. see faisgeachd. 
2 Swallow. fài-geadair, -ean, s.m., Presser. 
ach,** o Abounding in lapwings or |taisgeadh, -gidh, -gidhean s.m. see fasgadh & 
swallows, 2 Like a lapwing or swallow. fàsgadh. 
fàirleas, -eois, an, s.m. Object seen on an emi- | fàisgean, -an, s.m. Cheese-press. 2 Sponge. 
nence in contact with the sky, ———ach,** a. Spongy. 2 Fungous. 


fairleus, s. m. Smoke-hole in the ridge of a| faisgear,** fut.pass. of fàisg. 
house, for egress of smoke and ingress of|faisgeil, a. Flat, compressed, 











hight. ` fàisgidh, fut.af.a. of fàisg. à 
fairmeil, a. Noisy, merry—Ddin I, Ghobha. faisgneach, -ich, -an, s.f. Cathartic. 
fairneachd,** s.f. Meeting. faisgre,** s.f, Cheese. 2 see faisge. 
fairneag, -eige, -an, s.f. see airne, faisgte, past pt. of faisg. Squeezed, wrung,com- 
Tíairnie,** v.a. Get, obtain. 2 Invest. 3 De-| pressed. 
vise, contrive. faisinneachd, see fàisneachd. 
Tfairrigeoir, -e, -ean, see fairgear, fàisinniche, -an, see faisniche. 
fairsbeag,** -eig, -an, s.f. Large gull. faisne,||-an, Sr Wheal, pimple. 2 Measles. 
- ach,** y. Abounding in large gulls. |faisneach,** see fàisneachail. 8 l 
tfairsgin, a. Viewing, espying. fàisneachadh,** -aidh, sm. Prophesying, di- 
fairsing,f a. see farsuing. vining. 2 Prophecy, divination. A’ f—, pr.pt. 
fairsing, v.a@. see farsuingich. of faisnich. A’ f. aislingean bréige, prophesy- 
each,ff -eiche, «, see farsuingeach. ing false dreams. dpud MP ' 
—— ——eachadh, -aidh, s,m. see faisuingeach-|fàisneachail, -ala, œ. Prophetic, divining, omi- 
adh. | nous, j| 
eachd, s.f.ind. see farsuingeachd. faisneachd, s.f.ind. Prophecy. 2 Soothsaying. 
ead, see farsuingeachd. 3 Omen. Droch fh., a bad omen. 





ich, pr.pt. a’ fairsingeachadh, v. a, see | faisneag,** -eig, -an, s.f. Pimple. 











farsuingich. —ach, a. Pimply. 
fairsinn, see farsuing. faisnear,** -ir, s.m. Prophet, soothsayer, 
fairsleachadh, see fairtleachadh. faisneas, see faisneis. 
fairsleag, sf. Large gull. faisneigh, v. see fàisnich. 
fairslich, v.a. see fairtlich. faisneis,** v.n. Detect. f 
fairsneachd, see farsuingeachd. - , S-J.ind. Speaking, whispering. 2 Small 
fairsnich, pr.pt. a’ fuirsneachadh, v.g. see far-| talk. 3 Friendly or secret hint. 4**Intelli- 
suiugien. ; " gence. 5 doar avian relation. [* gives fais- 
airspeag, -eig, -an, see farspach. neas, s.m. 
Cohan teu f EC j i ** a. Speakable, utterable. 





— fairdeachadh, -aidh, s. m. Overcoming, over-|fàisnich, pr.pt. a’ fàisneachadh, v.n. Prophesy, 
| powerng, act of overcoming. 2 Conqueriug,| foretell, divine, forebode, 2**Certify. 3** 


Original from 
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


A 


INTERNET ARCHIVE URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


m e 


fàisnich 


Tell. 4**Prove. 5**Abide. 

fàisniche, -an, s. m. Prophet, soothsayer. 
Wizard. 

fàisnichidh, fut.aff.a. of fàisnich. 

iisnis, see faisneis. 

Tíaisteangir, -ean, sm. Soothsayer, prophet. 

faistinn, -e, -ean, s.f. Prophecy, omen. Luchd 
faistinne, wizards ; droch fh., a bad omen. 

each, -iche, a. Prophetic. 2 Ominous. 

— ——— each, -ich, sm. Wizard, prophet, di- 
viner. 2 Augur. 

——-— —eachd, s.f.ind. 
2 Ominousness. 

— ————ear,** sm. Augur. 

faitcheas, -is, see faiteas. 

-—ach, see faiteasach. 

faitchios, see faiteas. 

faite, -ichean, s.f. Smile. 2 Timidity, shyness. 
[In W. of Ross f.-gàire is @ smile, f. alone 
never being used there in the sense of smile. | 

--——ach, -iche, a. Fearful, timorous, shy, diffi- 
dent. 2 Smiling. 3 Delicate, Gu f., timidly. 

faiteachas, -ais, see faiteas. 

faiteal, -eil,-an, s.m. see aiteal. 

——--ach, see aitealach, 

achd, see aitealachd. 

faiteachan, s.m. Timid person. ?2[[see aiteal. 

faiteas, eis, s.m. Fear. 2 Bashfulness, deli- 
cacy of sentiment, shyness. 3**Reluctance. 
Cha ruig thu leas f. sam bith a bhiort, you 
need not feel the least bashful. 

——-—ach,** v. Apprehensive, timid. 

faitgheas, -eis, see faiteas. 

tfaith, v.a. Clothe. 

tfaith, s.f. Heat, warmth. 2 Apparel. 3 Field. 

tfaith-bheadh, see fiamh. 

Tfaithche, see faiche. 

faithche, s. Lawn—W, of Ross-shire. 

tfaithe, see faitheam. 

tfaitheach, s.m. see athach. 

faitheam, -eim, -an, s.m. Hem or border of a 
garment. 2 Seam. 3 Circumspection. Cuir 
f. air do theanga, be circumspect in what you 
say. 

-—————, v.&. Hem, as a garment. 2 Surround. 
A’ faitheamadh ’aodaich, hemming his gar- 
ments. 

-—— ——achail, -ala, a. That which surrounds 
orhemsin. 2 Hemmed, as a garment. 2 
Hemming. 4 Surrouading. 

-— ———— ar, fut.pass. of faitheam. 

—te, past pt. Edged. 

faithiltear,* s.m. Broker. 

faithir, s. The shelving slope between an old 
raised beach or other plateau, and the pre- 
sent beach—W. of Ross-shire. 

faithirleag, (AF) s.f. Green plover, see feadag. 

faithleagh,$ see eidheann. 

tfaith-lios,** -an, ssm. Wardrobe. 

fàithn, Suth’d & Badenoch for àithne. 

faithne, -an, s.m. see foinne, 

faithnich, Skye for aithnich. 

faitichean, p/. faite, Smiles, 

tTfaitigheas, s.m. Reluctance. 

tfaitse, s.f. The South, South point. 

ach, o. Southward, southern. 

fal, -ail, s. m.  Pen-fold for strayed cattle or 
sheep. 2 Circle, 3 Wall, hedge, dike. 4 
Divot, sod. 65 Scythe. 6 Spade. 7*Bow. 8 


Peat-spade. 9*Bow. 

ffal, s.m. Noble. 2 King. 3 Plenty. 4 Mal- 
ice. 5 Trifle. 6f{Guarding. 

fal, v.a. Scythe, mow. 2 Cut peats. 3 En- 
close, hedge. 4**Cover with turfs. 

fal,** o Ominous. 

fala, see fola. see faladh. 

falach, -aich, Sm 


Qt 


Prophecy, divination. 





2 Influence. 











Digitized by 


NTERNET ARCHIV 


408 
2 Hiding, secreting, concealment. 3*Place of 


falaisgeadh 


concealment. 4**Garment. 5**Military col- 

ours. 6{{What remains in a milked cow’s ud- 

der, afterings. 7 Emptying. A’ f—,pr. pt. 

of falaich. Tha e am f., he is concealed ; f. 

fead, bo-peep, hide and seek. 

adn, -aidh, s.m. Hiding,concealing,cover- 

ing. 2 Cover. 3 Concealment. 4ttEmptying, 

A’ f—, pr.pt. of falaich. 1 

aidh,tf o Hiding, secret. 

air,** s. m. One who conceals*or hides. 

an, -ain, -an,s.m. Hidden treasure. 2 

Concealment. . 3 Place where treasure is 

hidden. 

-cuain, s.m. Marooning. 2 Outdistan- 

cing. When one boat under sail outdistances 

another so as to lose sight of her, they say 

* rinn i falach-cuain oirre,” (lit. ske made s: D. 

hiding with her)—an expressive way of des- 

cribing a thorough beating. 

d,-an, sf. see folachd., 

falachd,(DMC) s.f. Rise and fall of a person ri- 
ding on horseback. 2 Limping. | 

falachdach,** o Feudal. 2 Grudging. 3 Apt 
to grudge. 4 Causing feud. 5 Prone to feud. 

falach-fead, s.m. The game of hide and seek, 
** high-spy’’. 

falach-fuinn,(AC) s.m. Land-hiding. Thàinig 
ceo draogh air na fearaibh, agus rinn iad f., 
og magic mist came over the men, and they 
made land-hiding—taking advantage of every 
natural feature in the landscape to hide 
themselves. 

fàladair, -ean, s.m. Scythe. 2 Mower. 3 Orts, 
4 Bare pasture. larunn f., o scythe. 

-— ————eaàch, -riche, a. Of, or belonging to, 
scythes. 2ffArmed with seythes. 

— — —eachd, s.f.ind. Operation of mowing or 

Ris an fh., (at the) 

















working with a scythe. 
mowing (of) grass. 

faladas, -ais, s.m. see foladas. 

faladh, -aidh, s.m. Enclosing or covering with 
turf. 2 see foladh. 

fala-dhà, see feala-dha. 

falaich, pr.pt. a’ falach & a’ falachadh, v.a.dén. 
Hide, conceal, cover, veil, 2 Keep secret. 3 
Lewis for fairtlich. 

te, past part. of falaich, Hidden. 

falaid, s.f. Reaping-hook—Dain I. Ghobha, 

falaid, -e, -ean, s. m Varnish, gloss, polish. 2 
**Veil. 3 seefallaid. 4(DU) Mockery, de- 
rision. A’ falaid, mocking. 

ich, v.a. Varnish. 

iche, s.m. Varnisher. 

falaigheach, -iche, a. Secret. 

— ——— ——d,** s.f. Secrecy. 2 Skulking. 

falaimhe, comp. of falamh. More or most einpty. 

-— ————aàd,-id, s.f. Emptiness, 

falain,** e -ean, sf. Whale. 

falair, -e, -ean, sj. Interment, funeral enter- 
tainment. 

falair, -e,-ean, s.m. Ambler, pacer (of a horse 
or mare.) 

falaireach,ff a. Pranciug. 

——d, s.f.ind. Ambling, pacing, curvet- 
ting,stately motions of a war-horse, prancing. 
2 Canter. 

falairich, v.g. Amble. 

falairidh,(PM) sf. Uist for falair (funeral en- 
tertainment.) 

falaisg, -e, -ean, s. f. Moor-burning, heath- 
burning. 2 Mountain conflagration, 3 Fes- 
tive fire. A’ leum o fh. an aonaich, bounding 
from the heath-burning. 

—each, a. Of, or pertaining to, heath- 

burning. 

















Veil, covering, case, caul, | ——~——eadh, -idh, s.m. Heath-burning. 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF 


La v - E 4 Gm CW Ge 
H NET EE EE ee D $ 





ILLINOIS I 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


1 


falamair 


fulamair, see falmair. 
falaman, see falman. 
falamh, -aimhe, a. Empty, void. 2 Poor. 
in want. 4 Unoecupied. 5 Wanting subs- 
tance. 6 Vain. Taigh f., an wnoecupied 
house ` soitheach f., an empty dish ; air dite 
f., in a void space ; is fhèarr fuine thana na 
bnith uile f., o thin batch is better than to 
want bread altogether, 
achd, s.7.ind. Emptiness, voidness, va- 
cancy. 2**Void, gap. 3fiPenury, poverty. 
-————alch, v.a. Empty, make void. Dh’ fh. 
i a soitheach, she emptied her vessel, 
aichte,** past pt. of falmhaich. 
falanach, a. Pertaining to blood. Is orra path- 
adh f., and the thirst of blood on them. 
falavisge, see falaisg. 
falar, -air, -an, see falair. 
—achd, see falaireachd. 
-———aàüich, see falairich. 
~as, als, s. m. Pacing, ambling. 2 Horse- 
mnanship. 
falasg, see falaisg. 
falatas,** s.m. Chastisement. 
faibh, pr.pt. a’ falbh, v. a. Go, begone, walk. 
2 Depart. 3 Retire. 4 Perish. F. romhad ! 
go &bout your business ; caoidh an t-sionnaich 
air a’ chaora mhairbh, nach d’ rug i ’n t-uan 
mu'n d fhalbh i, why the fox lamenis the 
dead sheep, because she did not drop her lamb 
before she died. 
falbh ! int. Away with you! 
falbh, s.m. Motion, going, departing, walking. 
2 Act of departing or walking. 3**Withdraw- 
ing, 4**Gait, air. A’ f—, pr. pt. of falbh. 
F. nam fear crodha,the departure of the brave; 
cia mórdha a f.! how majestic her gait !; fad’ 
air f., fur away ; tonnan a’ briseadh 's a’ n 
waves breaking and retiring. 
falbnach, -aiche, o. Moving, walking, travel. 
ling. Is éiginn do 'n fheumach a bhi f., the 
needy must be moving. 
ege ET -aich, E.m. Body, earcase. 2 One 
troubled with hiecough. 
falbhadair, -ean, s.m. Walker, ambulator. 2tt 
Rudder. 
falbuag, Arran for failbheag. 
, aige, 8f. Sand-swallow, sea-swallow. 
anhara,(AT) s. f. Sea-swallow. 2 
_ Storni-petrel, see luaireag. 
SE) 8. pl. (f. restless ones) Swal- 
| OWS. 
falbtiaiche, s.m. see falbhadair. 
falbnaidh, fut.ag.a. of falbh. 
falbhair, -can, s.m. Young of cattle, follower, as 
calf, foal, &c. 2 Wanderer, mover, follower, 
creeper. 
falbhaiteach, -eiche, a. Moving from place to 
place. Ma gheibh duine idir rud, 's e firionn- 
ach f., if anybody can get anything, it's the 
man that keeps moving. 
fal-bhalaeh,(DMy) s.m. Lad undeveloped into 


a man. 
falbhan, -ain, s.m., dim. of falbh. Moving a- 
bout, easy walking, habit of walking, motion, 
agitation, locomotion,creeping, continual mo- 
tion. F, a chiabh,the agitation of his Locks; tha 
he is able to get about, he walks about. 


3 

















e air f., 
—— —-àeh, -aiche, o, Ambulatory, in motion, 
—  ——aàeh, -aich, s.m. Wanderer, mendicant. 
—— —dàchd, s.f.ind. "Travelling. 2 Habit of 

travelling or wandering, 3 Motion, ambula- 

_toriness, locomotion. 4**Struggling. 
fal-bheart, -bheirt, -an, s,f. see feail-bheart. 
—ach,tft a. see feall-bheartach. 


—. fale,* V. See failc. 
— faic,i-aichean, s, Hebrides for faleag. 2(AC) 





Digitized by 
INTERNET ARCHIVE 


409 


fallain 


Razorbill, 3(AC) Guillemot, 
Hale, -aile, s. f. Flood. 2 Frost. 3 Barren- 


ness from drought. 

t——. a. Sterile, barren. 2 Parched, as ground 
through heat. 

falcaith, -aidh, s.m. & pr. pt. see failceadh. 

falcag, -aige, -an, s.f. Common auk. 

falcair,$ s.m. Pimpernel or poor man’s wea- 
ther-glass—angallis arvensis. 





301. Falceair. 

see failcire. 2**Scoffer. 
Cheat. 4(AF) Horse. 5(AF) Mole. 

faleaireachd,** s.f.ind. Scoffing. 2 Cheating, 

falcair-fiadhain, s.m. see faleair. 

faicair-fuar, see falcair. 

faleanaeh, -aiche, a. Foamy. 
Gael. Soc. Iny. xv, 52. 

faicanaich, s.f. Dashing, splashing. 

faleas, -ais, sm. Shade, shadow. 

falchaidh, -e, a. Lurking, concealing, dissem- 
bling. 2 Secret, concealed. 

falchaig, s.f. Work from which profit directly 
results, e.g. harvest, seaware gathering, dig- 
ging potatoes, and the like. A special use of 
the word is æ raid or foraging expedition, still 
used in falchaig chnò, a nutting expedition, 
2(DMC) Small point of land projecting into 
the sea. Bha gach duin’ a mach air fal- 
chaig, every mun was out a-gathering,—Duan- 
dure, 151. 

fal-cheumnaich, oo, March. 

Tfaleus, -uis, -an, sve faileas. 

fal-dhà, see feala-dhà. 

fal-dhos, -ois, s.m. Thorn-hedge. 

fal-diuine,DMy) sm. Unmauly man. 

fal-dos, -ois, see fal-dhos, 

fa leath, see fa leth. 

fa leith, see ta leth. 

fa leth, adv. Individually, apart, one by one, 
separately. 

fal-fuinn, -ail-, s.m. Hoe. | 

fal-gleuta, -àil-, 6.2m. see fàil-gleidhte. 

tfalladh, -aidh, s.m. Dominion, power, rule, 

fallag,{ s.f. Sand-martin, see gobhian-gain- 
mhiche. 1 

fallaid, -e, -ean, s.f. (WC)Light shake or dip 
of anything. 2 Dry meal put on cakes when 
being fired.  Fallaid is the refuse of meal 
left on the baking-board after a batch of 
bread has been baked. An interesting cus- 
tom prevails in the Outer Hebrides, auy re- 
mains of meal on the board being made into 
a cake in the palm of the hand, and set to fire 
among the other and larger cakes. The cus- 
tom has its origin in a superstitious belief, 
that doing thus with the remains keeps the 
store of meal from wasting. No thrifty wife 
would think of dusting the baking-board into 
the meal girnel.—DC. 

——-—each,ff a. Pertaining to dry meal pub 
on cakes, 

faliain, -e, a Sound, healthy. 2 Wholesome. 
3**Salubrivus. Duine £, o estos MAR 5 


faleaire, s.m. g»e 


2 Bristling— 


Original from 
j L ^] | V - R E | = WM C) E 


URBANA-CHAMP 


LINOIS 


AIGN 


Hh = 


DN 


fallain 


biadh f., wholesome food ; àileadh f., salubri- 
ous air; eridhe f., a sound heart ; teanga f., a 
wholesome tongue ; gu slàn f., sound and heal- 
thy. 

fa!laine, comp. of  fallain. 
healthy or wholesome. 
the most healthy. 

-———.———, &Jf.ind. see fallaineachd. 

fallaineachd, s.f.ind. Healthiness, soundness, 
wholesomeness, 2 Salubriousness. F. ’nam 
fheòil, soundness in my flesh; f. inntinn,sound- 
ness of mind. 

fallaineas, -ais, sm. see fallaineachd, 

fallainn, see falluing. 

ifallamhnaehd, s.f. Rule, dominion. 

tfallamhnas, ais, s. Kingdom, dominion. 

fallan,* a. (fo--sianf) The correct form ac- 
cording to its etymology of the adjective gen- 
erally spelt fallain, 

fal-loisg, -e, -ean, see falaisg. 

—— - ——each, -iche, o. Combustible. 

fal-losgadh, -aidh,s.m. Setting on fire, burning, 
combustion. 2 Heath-burning.  3**Fire of 
joy or triumph. 

fallsa, o. False, deceitful, treacherous, sham, 
Am measg bhràithrean f., among false breth- 
ren. 

e——chd, s.f.ind. Deceitfulness, fallaciousness, 
falsity. 2**Treacherousness, falsehood, trea- 
chery. 3** False philosophy. 4t{Sloth, slug- 
gishness. 

fallsail, o. see fallsa. Gu f., falsely. 

fallsaire, -an, s.m. Sophist, false philosopher. 2 
**falsifier. 3**Liar, deceiver, traitor. 

——achd,* s.f.ind. see fallsachd 3. 

fallsan, -ain, -an & -ain, s.m. Sluggard. 

falisanach,* -aich, see fallsair. 

fallsanachd, see fallsachd. 

falluing, -e, -ean, s.f. Mantle, garment, robe. 2 
**Hood. 3$ Alpine lady's mantle (plant) see 
trusgan. Sliabh na falluinge duirche, the dark 
mantied hill ; f. an fhir, the man’s mantle. 

——- ——each, -iche, a. Mantled, cloaked. 2 
Furnished with mantles, cloaks or garments. 
3*Like a mantle or garment, 

falluing Muire,§ s.f. Common lady's mantle, 
see copan an driuchd. 

falluinn, see falluing. 

————each, see falluingeach. 

fallus, -uis, s.m. Sweat, perspiration. Tha mi 
‘nam lan fh., I am covered with perspiration ; 
f. do ghnüis, the sweat of thy brow ; tha mi 'm 
fhliuch fh., lam perspiring all over; cuir f. 
dhiot, perspire. 

fallusach, -aiche, q. Sudorific, sweaty, 
able, perspiring. 

fallusaich,** v.n. Perspire, sweat. 2 Cause to 
perspire. 

faliusail,* o see fallusach. 

falm,* s.m. see alm. 

falm,* s.f. Elm-tree, see leamhan. 2 see failm. 
Mucagan failm, elm-berries. 

falmach, see almach, 

falmadair, -ean,s.m. Rudder, helm. 2 Tiller. 
2 see fulmair. Cha robh f. gun sgoltadh,there 
was not a rudder unsplit. 

falmadaireach,tt a. Having helms or rudders. 

falmair, -ean, s.m. Hake—merluccius vulgaris. 

faiman, -ain, -an, s. m, The knee-pan. 2** 
Whirlbone of the knee. 3**Lid. 

falmanta,** o. Aluminious. 

falmhachadh, -aidh, s.m. Emptying, pouring 
ene act of emptying. A’ f—, pr.pt. of falmh- 
aich. 

fal-mhagadh, -aidh, -aidhean, 
sneering. 

falmhaich, see falamhaieh & falbhaich. 


More or most 
Is esan a’s f., he is 





perspir- 


s. m. Mockery, 


Digitized E 


NTERNET ARCHIVE 


410 


fanadh 


falmhaichte, see falamhaichte, 

falmhuich, see falamhaich. 

falmhuichte, see falamhaichte. 

fal-moine, s.m. Peat-spade. 

fàl-mónadh, see fàl-moine. 

fàl-ni,** s.m. Trifle, trifling matter. Air f. Dä 
ée do chuid, do not waste thy substance on 
rifles. 

faloisg, see falaisg. 

faloisge, see falaisg. $ 

faloisgeach,** œ. Combustible. 

falosgadh, -aidh, s.m. Combustion. 

fal-rireadh,** s.m. Earnest, anything but jest. 

falsachd, see fallsachd, 

fait, failt, fuiitean, s.f. Human hair. 2 Locks, 
ringlets. 3 Tail. "bh. òr-bhuidhe, his golden 
locks ; cuach fh., curled hair. [The hair of 
any part of the human body other than the 
head is gaoiseid, fonnadh or róinnean.] 

faltach, -aiche, a. Hairy. 

faltag, -aize, -an, s.f. Tendon. prov. 

faltan, -ain, an, e m. Tendon. 2 Welt, belt. 
3 Ribbon. 4*Snood, hair-belt. 

faltanach,tt a. Welted. 2 Having ribbons, 

faltanach, -aich, s.f. Mountain bulrush, prov. 

faltanas,** ais, s. m. Occasion, pretence. 2 
Quarrel, 3 Enmity. 

faltan-fionn, s.m. Tendon. 

falt-dhealg, -dheilge, s.f. Hairpin. 

falthunn, s.m. Talk. 

faltraich, see fartlaich. 

faluing, see falluing. 

faluisg, see falasg. 

fa m' ( for fo mo) Under my. 2 Upon my. 

fa m’ chomhair, adv. Opposite to me. ` Finea- 
mhain fa m' chomhair, @ vineyard opposite me. 

fàman,(W OC) s.m, Gentle breeze, e.g. F. gaoithe, 

famh, -aimh s. f. Mole. 2(AC) Man addicted 
to burrowing underground. 

famhair, -ean, s.m. Giant. 2 Champion. 3 
Mole-catcher. 4 (DO) Bogle.—Uist. [Fuamh 
is a giant in Uist.j Ban-fhamhair, a giantess. 

famhaireach,** æ. Gigantic. 

famtiaireachd,* s.f. Giganticness, 2 Prowess of 
a giant. 

famhalan, (AF) s. m. Water-vole. 2 Earth- 
mole. 

famh-bhual, (AC) s.f. Water-vole. 2 Mole. 3 
Shrewmouse. 

famh-fhual, see famh-bhual. 

famhlag,(AF) s.f. see falbhav. 

famhlagan, (AF) s.pl. for falbhagan. 

famhlag-mhara, (AF) see falbhag-mhara and 
luaireag. 

famh-thalmhainn, s.f. Ground-mole. 

famh-thórr, -a, -an, s.m. Mole-hill. 

famh-uir,(AC) s.f. Earth-mole. 

fan, pr.pt. a’ fantuinn [a’ fanaehd & a’ fan- 
ailt,] v.n. Stay, wait. 2*Stop. 3 Continue. 
4 Remain. 5 Endure. 6 Recognize. P. an 
seo, wait here ; f. ort, stop, wait æ little ; f. ris 
or air, wait for him ; dh’ fh. sinn, we stayed; 
fanaidh bhur mnathan, your wives shall stay , 
fanaibh-se an seo, tarry ye here; f. agad fhéin, 
keep by yourself, keep your distance. 

fan, fàine, a Low. An rum a’s fhàine fo ’n ùir, 
the lowest room underground—the grave—Rob 
Donn. 

fa ’n, Under the. 2 Upon the. 

tfian,** s.m. Declivity, steep inclination, 2 Le 
vel plain, gentle slope. 

Tfan,** -ain, s.m. Temple, chapel. 

tfan, s.m. Wandering, peregrination. 

fan, o Prone,—Suth’d. 2 Propense. 

fan,** o Headlong. 2 Steep. 

fanachd, s/.ind. & pr.pt. see fantainn, 

fanadh, see fan. 


Original from 


LU N V E R E | T W O E 


ILLINOIS AE 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


fanaich 


Place of the flat. 


Pm cmd 
fAuaich, sS. i 
a. Mad, frantic. 


tfanaictheach, -eiche, 
atic. 

fanaid, v.a. see fanaidich. 

fanaid, -e, s.f. Mockery, ridicule, derision, scoff- 
ing, scorn. Ri f., mocking ; dvan f., mock. 

fanaideach, -iche, a. Deriding, mocking, rid- 
iculing, scoffing. 

fanaidh, fut.af.a. of fan. 

fanaidich, v.g. Mock, deceive, deride, ridicule. 

fanaidiche, -an, s.m. Mocker, scoffer. 2 Lam- 
pooner. 3 Mimic. 

fanaigse, -an, s.f. Dog-violet. 

fanaiit, -e, see fantuinn. 

fanaiseach, a. Mocking—Arran. 

fanam, Ist. sing. imp. of fan. Let me stay. 2 
for fanaidh mi, 1st. sing. fut. aff.a. of fan. I 
shall stay. 

fànas, -ais, s.m. Void space. 2* Opportunity. 
3 Sly kind of undue advantage. 4 (DMy) 
Rent in à wall. 

fa ’n comhair, Opposite them, before them, in 
front of them. 

fanear, see fainear. 

fang, -ainge, An, s.f. Sheep pen, fold or fank. 
2 Poind-fold. 3**Place for catching cattle. 4 
Confinement. 5 Strait, difficulty, hardship. 6 


2 Fan- 


Irish coin. 7** Gold-leaf, silver-leaf. ` St 
Prison. Ann an fh., in custody. [tt gives 
s.m.) 

fang, v. see fangaich. 

fang, -ainge, -an, sf. Vulture. 2**Raven. 

——ach,** a. Like a vulture. 2 Rapacious, 


3 Full of folds or pens. 4 Like a 
5 Of, or belonging to, vultures, 


ravenous. 
fold or pen. 
folds or pens. 

fangachadh, -aidh, s. m. Penning of cattle or 
sheep. 2 Driving into a fold. A’ f—, pr. pt. 
of fangaich. 

fangadh, -aidh, see fangachadh. 

fangaich, pr. pt. a fangachadh, v.g. Enclose, 
pen, fold. 

ear, 


fut. pass. of fangaich, Shall be 





ent. 

i te, past pt. of fangaich. Pent, enclo- 

sed, as sheep, folded. 

fanlag s.f. Sea-swallow, see luaireag. 

fanlanta,** a. Slender, small. 

fan-leac, -lic, s. f. Altar of rude stones. 2 
Stone in an inclined position. 

fann, -a & fainne, a. Faint, languid, weak, 
feeble. 2 Infirm. 3**Helpless. Duine f., o 
feeble person ` is f. do ghuth, languid is thy 
voice ; cridhe f. is com gun treòir, d faint 
heart and. pithless frame. 

fann,* v.a. Fish while boat is being rowed slow- 
ly—Isluy. 2 while stationary—Skye. A’ fann- 
adh, fishing with the artificial fly, or playing 
a fish on the line, while the boat proceeds 
slowly ; when under great weigh is siobladh. 
[In Lismore siobladh—fishing with a fly when 
the boat is under sail.—DC 

fannachadh, -aidh, s.m. Faint, act of fainting. 
2 Circumstance of becoming weary, languid 
or faint. 8**Giving up through fatigue. Tha 
e airf., he isworn out with fatigue ; tha e a’ 
f., he is getting more feeble, or making more 
feeble. A’ î—, pr. pt. of fannaich. 

fannachail,** a. Laborious. 

fannachdas, -ais, s.m. Imbecility. 

fannad,** -aid, sm. Weakness, langour. 

fannadh, -aidh, s.m. Faintness, weakness, lan- 

our. 2 Fishing witha feathered hook. 3 

Mode of rowing by which a boat is kept al- 
most stationary when fishing. [fainneamh in 
Gairloch—DU. In Lewis—a’ f. an t-sruth, 
rowing strongly enough to keep the boat over 















fannan, -ain,-an, s.m. Gentle breeze. 


faobh 


the same ground ; a’ f. nan lion, rowing the 
boat as fast as the lines are hauled.] 4**Slack- 
ening, relaxing of exertion. 5**Remission. 6 
**Intermission. 7 Fainting. A’ —. pr.pt. 
of fann. Cha robh f. air a’ chomhraig, the 
battle continued without intermission. 

fannaich, pr.pt. a’ fannachadh, v.a. & n. Faint, 
become weak. 2 Make weak or faint. 3** 
Give up with fatigue. 4** Grow weary. Fann- 
aichidh spiorad na h-Eiphit, the spirit of (the 
people of ) Egypt shall fail. 

—— ——ke, past pt. of fannaich. 





F. de 
ghaoith 'n ear leannan an t-sealgair, a breeze 
from the East is the sportsman’s favourite [lite 
sweetheart—not feast as given by **.] 

ta, a Faintish, weakish, infirm. 
fann-ghaoth, -ghaoithe, s.f. Soft breeze, 





fann-gheal, -ghile, a. Pale, whitish. 
fann-ghlaodh,Tf -aoidh, -aoidhean, s.m. 


Faint 


cr 


y. 
fann-ghuth, -an, s.m. Faint voice, weak note. 


Fhreagair e le f.. he replied with a faint voice, 


fannlag,** a. Weak, languid. 2 Fatigued. 
fannlanta, -ainte, a. Slender, weak. 
fannlas, -ais, s.m. Fatigue, wearying, 2 Worry- 


ing. 
battle. 


3 Destroying. F. chorp, carnage in 


fann-leisgeul, eil, -an, ëm. Pretext. 


fann-shealladh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Glimmer- 
ing. 

fann-sholus, -uis, -an, s.m. Glimpse. 2t+Weak 
or dim light. 

fanntais, -e, $f. Weakness, faintness. 
guishing. 

ae -aiche, s. f. Faintish, inclined to 
aint. 

fanntas, see fanntais, 

ach,** a. Weak. 2 Causing weakness. 

ffannuigh, v.a. see fannaich, 

fanoid, -e, s.f. see fanaid. 

,v.a. see fanaidich. 

each, -iche, a. see fanaideach, 

ich, v.a. see fanaidich. 

iche, see fanaidiche. 

fantalach, -aiche, a. Waiting, resting, 2 In- 
clined to wait or rest. 3 Permanent, stable, 

. Jasting, durable. 4 Steady. 5 Persevering. 
6* Dilatory. 

d,** s.f. Permanence, stability, dur- 

ableness. 

fantuinn, sf.ind, Staying, delaying. 2 Re- 
maining, abiding, continuing, lasting, wait- 
ing, tarrying. A’ f—, pr.pt. of fan. 

Lëänus, -uis, s.m. Descent, declivity, 

fanus, -uis, s.m. The sky-line—Zs/ay. Am fosg- 
ae os ceann nam f., the space above the sky- 
ine. 

faob, faoib,-an, s.m. Excrescence, lump. 2 Knot 
on a tree-branch. 3 Acorn. 4 Large one. 
5**Any round lumpy substance, as a potato. 

ach, -aiche, a. Tuberous. 2 Knotty. 3 
Lumpy. 

— aire, -an, sm. see faobairneach. 

—airneach, Ach, s.m. Lump, as a large-sized 
turnip or potato. 2 Large-boned person. 3tt 
Anything large or lumpy. 

——an, -ain, -an, s.m., dim. of faob. Little knob 
or excrescence. 

faobanach, -aiche, a. Tuberculous. 

faob-cheann, -chinn, s.m. Jolt-head, lump-head. 

—___———— ach, -aiche, a. Jolt-headed. 

faobh, -oibh, s.m. Spoil, booty. 2**Conquest. 
2**Dead men’s clothes. 4**Carcase. 5 (OR) 
Windfall, any unlooked-for good fortune.— W. 
of Ross. Triath nam f., the chieftain of spoils 
or victories; faoibh nan nàmhaid, es? ca caaes 

2, 


2 Lan- 




















faobh 


of the enemies. 
faobh,** v.n. Shout, cry aloud, proclaim. 
faobhach, -aiche, a. Abounding in spoil. 2 
Victorious, 3** Braye. 4 Plundering, spoil- 


ing. 

faobhachadh, -aidh, s.m. Spoiling, plundering. 
2 Robbery, plunder. 3t{t{Stripping the slain. 
A’ f—, pr.pt. of faobhaich. 

faobhadh,(AC) s.m. Swirl. 

faobhag, -aige, -an, s.f. Common cuttle-fish. 

faobhaich, pr.pt. a’ faobhachadh, v.a. Despoil. 

2 Strip, disrobe. 3 Plunder. 4 Strip by force. 

5**Lay waste. Dh’ fh. iad e, they stripped him. 

———te, past pt. of faobhaich. Despoiled. 

3 Disrobed, stripped. 

faobhair, see famhair, 

faobhairt, -e, -ean, s.f. see fadhairt. 

e, past pt. see fadhairte, 

each,** o see fadhairteach. 

faobhar, :-air, -an, s.m. Edge. 2 Edge, as 
of a sword or cutting instrument, 3 ** Ridge 
ofa hill.  4**Edge or brink of a precipice. 
5**Surface. 6 see famhair. Air fh., edge- 


wise ; le f. a’ chlaidheimh, with the edge of 


the sword ; air f. bheann, on a ridge of mount- 

ains ; f. a’ chuain, the surface of the sea; air 

bheag f., blunt ; f. nan neul, the edge of the 

clouds. 

ach, -aiche, a. Edged, sharp. 2 Keen, 
earnest. 3 **Satirical, pointed. 4** Active, 
nimble. 

— ———&chadh, -aidh, s.m. Sharpening, act of 
sharpening. A’ f—, pr.pt. of faobharaich. 





————aich, pr. pt. a’ faobharachadh, v. a. 
Sharpen, whet, set, as a razor, hone. F. an 
sgian, sharpen or whet the knife. 

— ————àichte, past pt. of faobharaich, Whet- 


ted, sharpened. 1 
faobh-bhleoghainn, sr Stealing the milk out 

of the udder of à cow or goat. 
faobhluinn,(DC) a. Mock, pretended. Saor f., 

a would-be joiner ; dotair f., a mock doctor— 


Uist. 

— (PM) s.m. Novice, man devoid of 
qualifications for his work. Cha’n ’eil ann ach 
am f., he is only a novice, Generally used as 
@ noun. 

taobhraich, 1 
laoch, -aoiche, s.f. 2**Field. 3 
(AC) Curve. 

ach,** o Abounding in shellfish. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Uist for faothachadh. j 
ag, -aig, -an, s. f., dim. of faoch. Peri- 
winkle (fish. 2 Whelk. 3 Any small shell- 
fish. 4 Eye. 5 Whirlpool 6 Eddy or curl 
on the surface of a running stream. 7(DU) 
Arrangement of the hair on the top of the 
head, so called from being in the shape of a 
spiral. 8* Weaver’s thrum. 2 Periwinkle 
(plant)—vinca minor. [Badge of the MacLach- 
Jans. ] Tràigh nam f., the shore of the shell- 
fish ; oitir fhaochag, a whelk reach ; “ na 
faochagan,” nickname for the natives of the 





see faobharaich. 
see faochag. 














302. Faochag. 


MITERBNIET A Li Ü 1 ] 
^ e rn L. I Nk. Y 


412 


faoighe 


Mackinnons’ country—Strath in Skye ;f. an 
t-sruith, the vortex of the stream ; t. mhullach 
a’ chinn, the top of the head; f. na sula, the 
round of the eye ; a’ dol air fh., facing danger; 
f. thuaichill, an eddy, à, small whirlpool. 

faochagach, -aiche, a. Abounding in periwinkles, 
like a periwinkle. 2 Full of eddies. 3 Of, or 
belonging to, any small shellfish. 

faochag-bhàn, s.f. Pale whelk. 

-chuairtein, s.f. Whirlpool. 

-dhubh, s.f. Blaek whelk, 

-mhor, s.f. Whelk. 

-nan-gille-fuinnbrinn, see faochag. . 

-smeoraich, s.f. The smallest kind of 
whelk, usually found above high-water mark. 

faochainn,* «v.g. Entreat most earnestly, urge. 
2 tftStruggle, strive. 

faochaire,(AC) s.m. see faoch. 2 Knave, be- 
trayer, perjurer. 

faochan, see faochag. 

— — —üàieh, s.n. Ripple. 

faoch-mór,(AF) s.m. Loon, roaring buckie. 

faochnach,* a. Earnest, urgent in requesting. 
Ni f., an urgent affair. 

faochnadh,* -aidh, s.m Most earnest request 
or petition. 2 Urging. 3 Persistent effort, 

’ Í—, pr.pt. of faochainn, A’ f, orm dol leis, 

vehemently urging me to go with him. 

faochnaich,* v.a. Urge, entreat perseveringly, be 
not refused. 

faod, v.aux. May,can. 2**Must. Faodaidh mi an 
t-each a reic, I may sell the horse ; dh’ fhaod- 
ainn an t-each a reic, I might have sold the 
horse ; am f. mi bhi ? may I be? ; cha’n fh. 
mi bhi, I may not be; am f. mifalbh ? faod- 
aidh, may Igo ? yes (you may.) 

——aidh, fut.aff.a. of faod. oo 

——ail, -ala, -alach, s.f. Goods found by chance. 
2 Thing found. 8 Stray treasure. 4 Waif. 
Spealtaidh e an fh. le 'ghial, he will tear she 
treasure-trove with his jaw—i.e. in his eager- 
ness to get it; cha’n e sealbh na faodalach 
a faotainn, the advantage of the treasure-trove 
does not consist in the getting of it—to find goods 
is not to own them. 

faodailiche, -an, s.m. see faodalach. 

faodalach, -aich, s.m. Foundling. 2 Anything 
found. 

Tfaodh, 

















-oidh, s.m. Voice, 

en gen. sing. of faodail. 

faodhail, -alach, -alaichean s.f. see fadhail. 

tfaogh, -oigh, sm. Punishment. 

faoghailt, -e -ean, see faghaid. 

faoghaid, -e, -ean, s.f. see faghaid. 

faoghaid, e s.f. prov. forfoidhidinn. 

fagohaideach, -iche, a. & s. see faigheadach. 

faoghaidiche, see faghaideach. 

faoghail, -alaichean, s.f. see fadhail. 

— — —-t, -e, -ean, see faghaid. 

faoghal, s.m. Uist for fadhail. 

faoghar, -air, s.m. see foghair. 

faoghluimte, see foghluimte. 

faoghlumaich, v.g. see foghlumaich, 

tfaoi, prep. see fuidh. 

tfaoi, s. Noisy stream. 

faoibh, gen. sing. & n pl. of faobh. 

faoich, gen. sing. of faoch. 

tfaoidh, -e, -ean, s.f. Noise, sound. 2 Voice, 

faoidh,** s.m. Messenger, express, 2 Courser. 
9 Departure, 4 see faoighe. 

tiaoidh, v.n. Go. 2 Send. 3 Sleep, rest. 

faoidhe, see faidhe. 

tfaoidheamh, -imh, s.m. Messenger. 

faoidhreag, s.f. see oighreag. 

faoighe, s.f.ind. Asking for aid in shape of corn, 
wool, aud sometimes cattle, a custo" once 
very common. 2 Gift. 3 Generosity. Chan 


faoighe 


fh. e, it is not a thigging ; f. eorna, barley thig- 
ging ; f. chruidh, cattle thigging ; f. do Mhac- 
Griogair, is leig leis fhéin a togail, give a 
gift to a MacGregor, and let him help himself 
to it,—i. e. he will not be bashful in doing 
80; f. fir gun chaoraich, the generosity of a 
man who has nothing to give; air f. nam ban- 
nag, going about begging for bannocks ; cha’n e 
rogha nam mue a gheibh fear na faoighe, it is 
not th? pick of the swine that the beggar gets. 
[N.G.P. says ‘t The practice of going ‘ air 
faoighe' was common in the Highlands, and 
was also known in the Lowlands of Scotland. 
In the ‘ good old times,’ when dearth was as 
common as a bad season, it was not consider- 
ed degrading for respectable people to go for- 
aging among their friends for grain, wool, &c. 
'This kind of begging was also practised by or 
for young couples about to marry or newly 
married, to help them in setting up house, 
The custom is now (1880), I think, obsolete, 
lt was still partially practised in 1830,"'] 
tfaoighle, s.pl. Words, expression. 

faoighleanu, -leinn, -an, see faoileann. 

favighreadh, s.m. Gift gathering, genteel beg- 
ging— Dàin I. Ghobha. 

faoil, -e, a. see faoilidh. 

, -e, SE Hospitality. [* gives profuse hos- 
pitality.] 2 Generosity. 3**Mildness, kind- 
ness. 4 Welcome, afiability. [** gives faoile 
as n. sing.) 

——,-e, sf. Gull, poetical— Gairloch. 

——e, a. see faoilidh. 

—-each, -iche, a. Glad, joyful, cheerful, 
Generous. 3 Thankful. 

—each,** s.f. Holidays, feastdays, carnival. 
*2 Supplement, 

Faoieach, Gairloch for Faoilteach.] 

faoileachd,** et Gladness, joyfulness, thank- 
fulness. 2 Generosity, kindness. 

faoileag, (WC) s.f. White crest on the waves— 
Poolewe. Tha f. air a’ mhuir, there are white 
crests on the waves, 


=- 


2 





3U3, Faoileag. 
T -eige, -an, s.f. Black-headed gull— 





larus ridibundus. F. an droch chladaich, the 

gull of the bad shore—applied to poor creatures 

still preferring their wretched home. 

ach,t+ a. Abounding in gulls. 

-bheag,§ st Little gull, see crann- 

fhaoileag. 

bheag, see sgaireag. 

-dubh-cheannach,@ see faoileag. 

-anhór,4 s,f. Glaucous or great white 
RE or burgomaster—larus glaucus. (illust. 
301. 

faoileann, T -inn, -an, s.f. Common white gull,— 
larus canus. (illust. 305.) 2* Mew. 3(AF) see 
fadhlainn. 

s Ach, ** a. 2 Abound- 
ing in sea-Mews 











Like a sea-mew. 


Digitized by 


ET A mi 6 -] (EI r 
p" it 
= v 


IM TER AR 
| I I 1 
WI 5 (e AW 


413 


Faoilteach 





304. Faoileag mhór. 
faoileag-mhór,T| see farspach. 





faoilich, v. @.& n. Rejoice, be merry. 2 En- 
tertain. 

faoilidh, -e, a Hospitable, generous, 2 Mild, 
3 Glad, joyful, cheerful. 4* Profusely liberal. 
Coire f., an inviting dell ; gu f., mildly. 

eachd, s.f.ind. Hospitality. 2 Affability, 
3**Gladness. 4**Thankfulness, 5**Generouse 
ness. 6**Mildness.  7**Kindness. 

tíaoiligh, v.n. Rejoice, be glad. 

faoilinneach, see faoileannach. 

tfaoill, see foill. 

Faoilleach, see Faoilteach. Faoilleach in Le- 
wis begins on the Friday nearest three weeks 
before the end of January, and ends on the 
Tuesday nearest the end of the third week of 
February—Di-haoine a thig ’s Di-mairt a dh’ 
fhalbhas, comes on Friday and goes on Tues- 
day—three weeks of Winter, and three weeks 
of Spring—(DMy.) 

faoilt, see faoilte. 

faoilte, s.f. Delight. 2 Cheerfulness, 3 Joy- 
ful salutation at meeting. 4 Welcome, wel- 
coming. 5**Invitation toa feast. 6**Hospi- 
tality. 

Faoilteach, -tich, s.m. The last fortnight of win- 
ter and first fortnight of spring (Old Style), 
proverbialifor variableness.—McL & D. Sea- 
son of the wolí-ravageil. It corresponded 
roughly to the present month of February. 
Sometimes the first half was called ** Am F. 
Geamhraidh " and the second half * Am F. 
Earraich." Is còir 'san Fh. na tri claisean 
taobh-ri-taobh a bhi lan uisge is lan sneachda 
is lan tugha nan taighean, or trilain anns na 
claisean; uisge, saeachd, is tugha nan taigh- 
ean, in February the three furrows side by 
side should be full of water, full of snow, and 
full of house-thatch ; cha’n’eil port a sheinn- 
eas an smcorach 'san Fh. nach guil i seachd 
uairean mu 'n ruith an t-Earrach, for every 
song the mavis sings in February, she'll la- 
ment seven times ere spring be over. The Gael 
of old regarded stormy weather toward the 
end of January as prognostic of a fruitful sea- 
son to follow, and vice versa, as shown in the 





Jriginal fron 


F = Lr gä 
| | d ki LL i [ 
ANI V e i 


NOIS AT 


| IR Li n A hn C hn , EN A E A 
m Los Ia" Lum I "Ir r^ bk L 


Faoilteach 


above proverbs. Smeuran dubha 'san Fh., 
black bramble-berries in February—applied to 
anything very improbable or out of season. 
Na faoiltich, the equinoxes ; see am Feillire. 

faoilteach, -iche, a. Happy at meeting. 2 Hosc 
pitable, generous, inviting. 3 Welcoming. 
Fhir a’s fhaoiltiche gun fheall ! thou most gen- 
erous without deceit ! 

faoilteachd,** s.f. Practice of hospitality. 2 
Welcoming. 3 Readiness to welcome. Le h- 
aighear 's le f., with joy and welcoming. 

laoilteas,**-eis, s.m. Gladness. 2 Hearty wel- 
come, kind reception. 

Faoiltheach, see Faoilteach. 

laoiltich, v.v. Receive kindly. 2 Rejoice at 
meeting. 3 Become cheerful. 

faoin, -e, a. Vain, foolish. 2 Idle. 3 Una- 
vailing. 4 Empty. 5 Light. 6** Lonely. 7 
"*Trifling. 8**Useless. 9**Sloping. Nif., a 
trifling affair ; is £. dhuit, itis unavailing for 
you ; duine f., a silly fellow ; tha thu f. 'nad 
bharail, your opinion is unfounded ; beanntan 
t. a dhuthcha, the lonely hills of his country. 

-—— -bheachdail, -ala, «a. Foppish. 

—— -bheanntan, s.m.. Sloping hill. 

tfaoinbhleaghain, s.f. Gentleness, mildness, 

faoin-bhréagh,** a. Tawdry, 2 Foppish. 

faoin-bhréaghas,** -ais, s.m. Tawdriness, 2 
Foppishness. 

faoin-bhreith, $.f. Abortion. 

faoin-chainnt, s.f. Idle talk, vain boasting, 
babble, babblement. 

—each, -iche, @. Prone to foolish 








talking. 





eachd, 
faoin-chainnt. 

faoin-cheann, -chinn, s.m. Empty head. 

ach, -aiche, v. Empty-headed. 

faoin-chomhradh,** -aidh, s.m. Vain talk, bab- 
bling, tattle. A’ seachnadh faoin-chomh- 
raidh, shunning vain talk. 

faoin-dreuchd,** -an, s,f. Sinecure. | 

facine, comp. of faoin. More or most vain. 

, S.f.ind. Same meanings as faoineas, 

achadh, -aidh, s.m. Making vain. A’ f—, 
pr.pt, of faoinich. 

faoineachd, v.a@. see faighnich. 

—, s.f.ind. Vanity, folly, silliness, 
lightness, emptiness, vacuity, bauble, silly 
manner. 2 Toying, trifling. Luchd f., ‘silly 
people ; clachan na f., the stones of silliness. 

faoineadh, -nidh, -nidhean, s. m. Indulging, 
humouring of one, indulgence. 

faoineag, -eige, -an, sf. Vain silly woman. 2 


s.f. Same meanings as 




















Vanilla (plant.) 
faoinealach, -aich, s.m, Silly man. 
faoinealachd, s.f.ind. see faoineas. 


faoineas, -eis, s.f. Vanity,bagatelle, idleness, 
uselessness, silliness, vacuity, trifling, toying. 
Ri f. riu, trifling with them. 
faoinein, s.m. see faoinealach. 
faoineis, s.f. see faoineas. 
— ————eachd, see faoineachd. 
faoin-ghalar,** -air, s,m. Feigned or imaginary 
sickness. 
faoin-gbloireach, -iche, y. WVain-glorious. 
faoinich, v.a. Make vain. 2** see faighnich. 
faoin-leisgeul, see fann-leisgeul. 
faoinreadh, see faondradh. 
faoin-sgeul, -sgedil, s. f. Vain or idle talk. 2 
Fiction. 
-—ach, -aiche, a. Idly talkative. 
———-—achd, s.f.ind, Telling of idle tales. 2 
Idle tale. 38t{Mythology. 
-—aiche, -an, s.m. Mythologist. 
faoin-sheanchaidh, see faoin-sgeulaiche. 
faoin-smuain, ** s.f. Foolish thought, idle 


D 


L 
ITEA RIT Nom = Lf 
a " à Val "i l A E 

— 1 — L] 3 "eA a — 


414 


faosaid 


thought. 2 Delusion. 3 Brown study. 4 
Chimera. 
faoireag, see oighreag. 


faoisdinn, -e, -ean, see faoisid, 

faoiseadh,** -eidh, s.m. Helping. 2 Recover. 
ing. 3 Recovery from sickness. 4 Aid. 

faoiseid, see faoisid. 

faoisg, pr.pi. a’ faoisgeadh, v.q. Unhusk, take 
the husk off, hull, as of nuts. 2*Chink, gape, 
leak, as a dish. 

faoisgeag, -eige, -an, s.f. Filbert, 2 Unhusked 
nut. [** gives Ripe filbert.] 

-—ach,** a. Abounding in filberts. 

faoisgneach,** a. Ripe, as a nut. 2 Bursting, 
as a nut from the husk. 

adh, -aidh, see faoisgneadh, 

faoisgneadh, -neidh, s.m. Unhusking, unpod- 
ding. 2 Bursting from the husk, asa nut. 
3 Emerging, as a heavenly body from behind 
a cloud. 4 Appearing on the horizon, as the 
sun. 5*Chinking, asa dish. A’ f—, pr. pt. of 
faoisgnich. Tha a’ ehuinneag air f., the water- 
pitcher chinks or leaks ; a’ ghrian a’ f., the sun 
appearing. 

faoisgnich, pr.pt. a’ faoisgneachadh & a’ faoisg- 
neadh, v.a@ Squeeze out. 2 Unhusk. 3à* 
Chink, gape, leak, as a dish. 

faoisid, -e, -ean, s.f. Confessing, confession, 2 
Avowal, acknowledgement. Cha’n aideach- 
adh no f. e, it is neither acknowledgement nor 
avowal ; dean t’ fh., confess to the priest. 

each,** a. Confessional. 

ich, v.a. & n. Confess, 

faoisneadh,$’-idh, s.m. Bursting from the husk, 

tfaol, -oil, s.m. Patience, forbearance. 2**Prop, 
support. 3 Wolf. 4 (AE)Wild dog. 5**Whelp. 

faol,-a, œ. Wild. 

—ach,** -aich, s.m. Bird of prey. 

——adh,** s.m. Doctrine. 

—ag, see faoileag. 

—asz, see falaisg. 

——bhaidh,(AF) s. Wolf. 2 Wild dog. 

——chon, -choin, s.m. Falcon. 

tfaol-chu,*-choin, -chona, s.m. Wolf. X 

faol-fhulang,** -aing, s.m. Prop. 

faol-iasg,( AF) s.m. Wolf-fish. 

faol-shnamh,** s.m. Swimming. ` 

faol-ulaith, s. Wolf, wild dog. 

faolum, see foghlum. 

aich, v.a. see foghlumaich, 

+faomach,** -aiche, see umhail, 

faomadh, see aomadh. 

tfaomh, -aoimh, s.m. Consent, permission. 

+faomh, v.n. Assent. 2 Consent. 3 Bear with, 
permit. 

faomhar,(CR) [ao short & mh sounded] s. fn, 
Harvest—A rran. 

faon, see faoin. 

faonach,** a. Mild, meek. 

faonbhach, -aiche, a. Mild, meek. 2 Silent, 

faondrach, -aiche, a. Wandering, unsettled. 2 
Irregular. 3 Defective. 4 Erroneous. 5 
Neglected. 6 Straggling, apt to go astray, 
erring. 

faondradh, -aidh, s.m. Exposure. 2 Wander, 
ing, straying. 3 Desert, waste. 4**Strag- 
gling. 5*Neglect. 6*Unsettled state. 

faontrach, -aiche, see faondrach. 

faontradh, see faondradh. 

faontradhach, -aiche, see faondrach. 

faontraigh, -e, -ean, $. f. Exposed place, the 
open shore. 

faor,(AC) s.m. Blade (of grass.) 

faosad,* see faoisid. 

faosadh,** -aidh, s. m. Protecting, relief, 2 
Collecting. 

faosaid, -e, -ean, 

















LI 


see faoisid, 


faosaideach 


faosaideach, see favisideach. 

ich, see faoisidich. 

faosg, (AF) s.f. Snipe, see croman-loin. 
fhaosg, is ofton written "ran naosg.’’] 

-——nach,** qœ. Auspicious. 

nachd,** s.f. Auspiciousness, 

-——nadh,** s.m. Auspice. 2 see faoisgneadh. 

faotail, -talach, s.n. see faodail. 

faotainn, s.f.ind. Getting, obtaining. 2 Find- 
ing. 3 Actof getting. 4* Accomplishment. 
5** Receiving. 6**Winning. A’ f—, pr. pt. of 
faigh. A’ f. seo, getting this. 

faotalaiche,** -an, s.m. Foundling. 

faothach, -aich, s. m. Alleviation— Dàin Iain 
Ghobha. 

faothachadh, -aidh, s.m. Relief from suffering, 
alleviation of suffering. 2 Relief, lightening, 
3**Rest, leisure. A'f—, pr.pt. of faothaich. 
Fhuair e f., he got relief ; gun fh. fad an la, 
without a/leviation the livelong day. 

faothachail, -ala. æ. Anodyne. 2 Mitigant. 

faothaich, pr.pt. a’ faothachadh, v.a. & n. Re- 
lieve, alleviate, be relieved, as from fever, &c. 

faothaid, see faghaid. 

faothaistean,(MMcL) s.m. Open space in creel 
for lifting it. 

faotuiun, see faotainn. 

far,adv. Where. Far am bheil e, where he i$; cha 
bhi loinn ach far ain bi thu, there will be no 
joy but where thou art. 

far-, a. Additional, extra, as far-ainm, nick- 
name. 

far, v.def. see fair. 

far, prep. ( for mar) With, along with, in com- 
pany with. Co théid far rium ? who will go 
along with me ? 

far, SC Nr Mull, &c. for bhàrr—Sgeulaiche-nan- 
cao. 

far,tt pr.pt. a’ faradh, v.a. Freight, as a ship. 

far? [f adv. Why ? Wherefore? 

far,(AC) prep. On (used in compounds.) 





[An 





far, Suth'd form ot tàir. get, obtain. 2 come. 
fàr, Used after nach. (Nach fhar or nach 
thar.) 


fara-bhradan,)AC) s.m. Spent salmon. 

fara-vhreac,(AC) s.m. Spent trout, 

farach,** -aich, sm. Mallet, beetle. 

farachaidh-chnocaidh,s.f, Mall, stone for grind- 
in; barley—Arran., 

farachan,t-ain, s.m. Death-watch beetle. 2++ 
Mallet, beetle. 3**Rammer. 

farachdach, -aich, s.m. Mallet, beetle. 

farach-donn,(AC) s. see lus-nan-cnapan. 

farach-dubh, -duibhe, s.m. Fig-wort, see lus- 
nan-enapan. [McL & D gives Kernel-wort. | 

fara-chrann, see faren-chrann. 

fàradh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. [ f. in Perthshire.) 
Ladder. 2 Shrouds of a ship. 

faradh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Hen-roost. 2 Loft 
ma;le of sticks covered with divots, 3 Freight, 
ferriage. 4 Gallery. 65**Litter in a boat to 
receive horses or cattle. 6.Sometimes used 
for farradh. Paidh f., pay the freight ; air an 
fh., on the cock-loft ; f.-luing, æ ship’s load, 

faragair,** v.n. Welter. 2 Flounder. 3 Bathe. 

fara-yhaol,(AC) s. m. False love, 

fara-ghruag, s.f. Peruke. 

faragrach,** a, Weltering. 2 Floundering. 

faragradh,** -aidh, s.m. Weltering. 2 Floun- 
dering. 3 Bathing. 4 Report. 


faraiche, -an, s.m. Cooper’s wedge. Rinne f. 


de ’n fharaich, he made a plug of the punch—. 


driving out a plug with another and that 
other sticking in its place—i. e. he is as bad- 
ly off as ever. 

faraid, see farraid. 


farail, -alach, -alaichean, s.f. Visit, enquiry 


Digit ized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 
| N IET d E | AME HI VE 


415 


fardalach 


after health. 
far-ainni, -ainmeannan, see fath-ainm. 


-— ———-e86u, see fath-ainmeach. 
faraire, -an, s. f. Night-watch, watching a 
corpse. 2 The entertainment on such occa- 


sions, wake. 

faralach, -aiche, a. Squeamish. 12 Like. 

fara-laogh,(AC) s.m. False calf, monstrosity. 

faram, -aim,-an, see farum. 

faramach, -aiche, a see farumach. 

faran,$s.m. Garlic, see gairgean. 2**see far- 
im 3(AF) Turtle-dove, see turtur. 4**Tur- 

e. 

aich,” oo see farranaich. 

faraon, adv. & conj. see araon & maraon. 

tfaras, -ais, s.m. Reason, argument. 

farasda, -aisde, o Solid, sober, composed. 2 
Mild, gentle, tranquil, 3* Soft. Gu f. foil, 
solemniy and softly.  [F. is often confused 
with furasda.] 

chd, s.f.ind. Solidity, composure, easi- 

ness, gentleness. 2ttSoftness. 3**Soberness. 

farasg,(AC) s.m. False fish, fish found dead 
on the sea or shore. 

farbhail, -e, pl. -ala & -ean, s.f. Lid, covering. 
F. nan sul, the eyelids. 

farbhalach, -aich, s.m. Stranger, foreigner. 2 
Tt Big clown. 

farbnalla, chan, s.m. Buttress. 

-————ch,** a. Having a buttress. 2 Like a 
buttress. 3 Of, or belonging to, a buttress oz 
rampart. 

-————-dh, see farbhalla. 

farbhas, -ais, -an, s.m. Surmise, guess. 2 Re- 
port, rumour. 3 Destruction. 4 Attack, as- 
sault. 5 Coarse mixture, 6 Loathsomeness 
—Dain I. Ghohha. 

ach, -aiche, 

2 Rumouring. 

far-bheann,** -bheinne, -bheanntan, s.f. Cliffy 
mountain. 2 Pinnacle, 3 Mountain ridge. 

—— ——-—àch,** a. Cliffy, rocky. 2 Pinnacled. 

far-bhonn, -bhuinn, s.m. l'ore-sole of a shoe. 2 
TiInner sole. 

far-bhriathar,** see for-bhriathar. 

far-bhualadh, -aidh, s.m. Striking backwards. 

far-bhui!'le, -an, $./., Back-blow. 

farca, -r &-chan, see farchan. 

farean,** .ain, s.m. Oak. 2 Corn on the hand 
or foot, 

farch,(AC) -a, s.f. Kind of musical instrument, 
probably the lyre, possibly the lute. 

farchachan, see farchan. 

farchan, -ain, -an, sm. Mallet. 

farch-chrann,(AC) s.m. Bread-toaster. 

farch-chiüil, )AC) s.f. see farch. Bu bhinne 
na f. do ghuth, sweeter than the lyre thy voice. 

farchin, see far-chrann. 

far-chluais, see far-cluais. 

far-chraiceann,** s.m. Epidermis. 

far-cluais, -e, s.f. Listening unperceived, eavese 
dropping, overhearing. 2 Hearkening. 

-————ich,** v.n. Overhear, eavesdrop, lis- 
ten under windows. 2 Listen. 

fàrdach, -aich, -aichean, s.f. House, dwelling, 
lodgings, quarters, mansion, hearth, home. 
F. oidhche, @ night’s lodging ; taobh cùil na 
fardaich, the back part of the house ; t’ fh., 
thy dwelling ; théid 'fh. bun os ceann, his 
dwelling shall be overturned. 

fardadh, ad". s.m. The bark of alder, used in 
dveing black. 

fardal, -ail, an, s. m. Delay, hinderance. 2 
Detention. 3**Longing. Obair gun fh., @ 
work without delay. [tt gives pl. fadailean.] 

ach, o Slow. 2 Late, tardy. 3**Dila- 

tory. 4 Ubstructing. Gu f., dilatorily. 





&. Guessing, surmising. 





fardan 


fardan,t -ain, s.f. see feòirling. 

fardath,* s.m. Lye or any colour in liquid. 
gorm, liquid blue. 

fàrdoch,-oich, see fàrdach. 

far-dorus, -uis, s.m. Lintel of a door. 

fardrach, s.f. see fardach. Teasraig an teach ’s 
an fh., protect the house and household. 

farfas,(CR) s.m. Loathing, nausea—Lochbroom, 

far-fhuadach, -aich, s. m. Banishing, forcing 
away. 


F. 





-——adh,** -aidh, s.m. Banishing, dis- 
placing, ejectment, displacement. A’ f—, pr. 
pt. far-fhuadaich. 

far-fhuadaich,** v.a. Banish, displace, drive 
away by force. 

far-fhuadaiche,** s.m. Exile. 

farfonadh,f -aidh, s.m. Warning. 

fargradh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Report, rumour. 
2 Surmise. Tha f.ann, it is reported. 

fa ri chéile, adv. see under far ri. 

far-iouga, -an, s.f. White swelling. 
prov. 

farlas, see fairleus. 

farlus, -uis, -an, see fairleus. 

farmachan, -ain, sm. Sand-lark. 

farmad, -aid, s.m. Envy, grudge at another’s 
success. 2 Malice. Cuis fharmaid, an envi- 
able object ; gabh f. ris, envy him ; ise f. a ni 
treabhadh, emulation makes ploughing—one 
man's achievements spurs on his neighbour to 
similar deeds ; an cunnart a chaidh seachad, 
is cùis fharmaid e, a past danger is an envi- 
able danger—enviable in the sense that it is 
nice to talk about it. 

a. 2** Malicious. 


2ttAgnail. 


Envious. 





ach, -aiche, 
3IrIEnviable. 

farmail, -alach, -an, s.f. Large water pitcher— 
Hebrides. 

, a Enviable. 2 (DC) Business-like, 
of successful intention. An tir ro fharmail, 
chliüteach, ainmeil, the land that is much to 
be envied, famous and celebrated — F'ilidh, p.21. 

far-mhaladh,** -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Eye-lid. 

farpas, -ais, see fortas. 

ach, -aiche, a. see fortasach. 

farpuis, -e, -ean, s.f. Contest, strife, emulation. 

- each, -iche, a. Contending, emulative. 

farr! inter. Off ! be off ! 

farrabhalladh, -aidh, -aidhean, see farbhalla. 

farrabhonn, -uinn, see farbhonn. 

farrach, -aich, s.m. Force, violence. 2 Act of 
forcing. A’ f—, pr.pt. of farraich. Na bi 
'ga fh., do not press him. 

tarrachd,(DMO) s.f. Enquiring. A’ f. air à shon, 
enquiring for him, A’ f—, pr.pt. of farraid— 
Uist. 

farrachan,(AF) -ain, s.m. see farachan. 

farradh, -aidh, s.m. Crop raised by a married 
farm-servant for his own use. Strictly speak- 
ing, it means the tilling done by the wife, 
while the husband is attending to the 
graithseach, the master’s crop, Occasionally 
avery active woman might get through more 
work than her less active husband, in which 
case it would besaid, is mó am f. na ’ghraith- 
seach, the servants crop is bigger than the 
master’s. 

farradh, -aidh, s.m. Litter, straw or brushwood 
laid in a boat. 

tiarradh, s.m. Company, vicinity. 2**Com- 
parison. 3**Force. 

tfarradh, prep. Along with. 

farra-dhruim, see forra-dhruim (A4 under bata.) 

farragan,t -ain, s.m. Ledge—A rran. 

farraich, pr. pt. a farrach, v. a. Force, urge, 
press, prevail. 

e, sm. see fairche. 














eo 


Digitize 1 Dy 


NTERNET ARCHIVE 


416 


farsuingeachadh 


farraid, pr.pt. a’ farraid, (also farrachd— Uist) 
7.0, Ask, enquire, question, ask for or after. 
—, -e, -ean, $.f. Enquiry, aet of enquiring, 
asking for or after, A’ f—, pr.pt. of farraid. 
Cha d' thug e f. orm, he made no enquiry of me; 
cha d'rinn iad w’ fharraid, they did not ask 
for me, : 4 i 
: each, -iche, o Inquisitive, prying, cur- 
ious, meddling. 2 Mocking—A En. ý 
; eachd,** s. f. og, lInquisitiveness, Cur- 
iousness, prying habit. 
ich, v.a. see farraid. 
farrais, see parras. 
farral, -ail,s.m. see farran. 
ach, -aiche, @ see farranach. 
farran, -ain, s.m. Anger. 2 Pettisbnness. 3 
Vexation, 4 Regret. 5* Slight offence. 6** 
Disquietness. 7 Incommodiousness, 8 rarely 
Force. Mu'n tig f. air ’aodann, ere vexa- 
tion fall on his brow. 
farranach, -aiche, o Vexatious, provoking, 
annoying. 2 Proud, haughty. 3 Meddling. 
4**Vexed. 5 Incommodious. 
——— — —d,$.f. same meanings as farran. 
—adh, -aidh, s.m. Exasperation, provo- 
cation, vexation, annoyance. 2 Provoking, 
teasing. A’ f—, pr.pt. of farranaich. 
farranaich, pr. pl. a’ farranachadh, v.a. Vex, 
exasperate, tease, pester, gall, annoy, anger. 
2** Discompose. 
farranaiche, comp. of farranach. 
farranaichte,** a. Chagrined, soured. 
farranta, a. Neat. 2 Stout, great. 3 Lofty. 
4 Stately. 5**Generous. 6** Brave. 
— —— —ehd,** s. f. Stoutness, 2 Bravery. 3 
Generousness. 
farrantan,** s.pl. Tombs. 
farrantas, -ais, s.m. Power. 2 Stoutness. 3 
Manliness, 4 Bravery. 5**Generosity. 
farras, s.f. see parras. 
farrbhalladh, see farbhalladh. 
farr'bheinn, -e, -bheanntan, see far-bheann. 
—— ———-.—each, see far-bheannach. 
farr-bhonn, see far-bhonn. 
far ri, adv. With, in company with. Far rium, 
with me ; farriut, with you; far rithe, with 
her; far ri ( for mar ri) chéile, together. 
farruinn,t s.f. see faruinn. 
far ruinn, for maille ruinn, & mar ruinn, see un- 
der far ri, with us, together with us. . 
farrusg, -uisg, -an, s.m. Peeling. 2 Inner 
rind. 3 Cuticle of diseased flesh. 4 Scales. 
5 Refuse of anything. 6 (DMC) Short new 
wool under the old fleece— Uist. 
farrusgag,? -aige, -an, s.f. Artichoke—cynara 
scolymus.  |F. and bliosan are applied to Je- 
rusalem artichoke (helianthus tuberosus) and 
plür-na-gréine to the flower, from the popular 
error that the flower turns with the sun.] 
—ach,** a. Ofartichokes, 2 Abound- 
ing in artichokes. . 
ratang, -e, see farsuing, 
tfarsan, -ain, s.m. TET pu: 
tfarsanachd, s. f. ind. } Explication, parsing. 
farsanach, (DC) a. Given to straying or wan- 
dering. 
farspach, T -aiche, -aichean, s.f. The great black- 
backed gull—larus marinus. 
—  — -bheag, s.f. Lesser black-backed gull, 
see sgaireag. 
farspag, -aige, -an, 
farsuing, -e, a. Large, wide. 
Gu fada f., far and wide. 
each,tt -eiche, «, Wide, extensive. 
eachadh, -aidh, s.m. Widening, enlarg- 
ing. 2 Act of widening, enlargement, A’ f—, 
pr. pt. of farsuingich, 




















see farspach. 
2. Liberal, open. 


al from 


"WI BOE E p ga — 
OF ILLINOIS 


Origil 


| | d | V Lr RS | T ` y 


Exp NON E es iar es) 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


farsuingeachd 


farsuingeachd, s.f.ind. Width, extent,largeness. 

—— GA, Same meanings as farsuingeachd. 

EL job, pr. pl. a farsuingeachadh, V.. 
Widen, increase, enlarge. 

farsuinneachd, s.f. see farsuingeachd. 

farsuinnich, see farsuingich. 

far-thagh,(AC) sàn. Certain amount of farm-pro- 
duce allowed to farm-seryants in olden times. 

far-thir,(AC) s.f. Border, coast. 2 Out-of-the- 
way place. | 

far-thireach,(PM) s.m. Foreigner, stranger, 

far-thobhta, chan, s.f. Buttress. 

fartus, -uis, see fortas. | 

faruinn, -ean, s.f. Pinnacle. 
opening between mountains. 

faruinn, see far ruinn. 

far-uinneag, -eige, -an, S.f. Lattice, casement. 

..——Aach,** a. Latticed. 

+faruisg, see farrusg. 

farum, -uim, s. m. Noise, report. 2 Percus- 
sion. 3* Sound of the tramping of horses, 4 
Clangour, clashing. 5 Rustling. 6 Burliness. 
7(AC) Figwort, see lus-nan-cnapan, — P. an 
stàilinn, the clangour of their steel ; f. an duill- 
ich sheargta, the rustling of their withered 


F. na beinne, an 





foliages. 
farum, a. Merry. 
farumach, -aiche, a. Noisy. 2**Loud,. 3** S0- 


4** Rattling. 5 Beating at regular 

intervals. 6 Energetic. 7* Merry. A’ dol 

air aghaidh gu f., going forward merrily ; 

beucadh an cuan gu farumach, let the sed roar 

mightily. 

d, s.f.ind. Noisiness. 

farusg, -uisg, -an, see farrusg. 

ag, -alge, -an, see farrusgag. 

fas, Ais, s.m. Growth, increase. 2 Growing, 
increasing, becoming, state or act of growing. 
3* Produce. F. an fhuinn, the produce or in- 
crease of the land ; cha’n "eil f. aig ni ‘sam 
bith, there is no vegetation of anything ; teachd 
an fhais mu dheireadh, the shooting of the lat- 
ter growth ; f. is gnàths is toradh, growing, 
indigenous and fruit-bearing—on New Year’s 
morning a branch or twig having these three 
characteristics was taken into houses in old- 
en times, asa token of wished-for prosperity 
during the coming year. The twig required 
to have life in it,i.e. it must be plucked off the 
tree. It required to bea native tree, no ex- 
otic or introduced tree would do, andit would 
require to bear fruit in its season, Fas a’ 
ghruinnd a réir an uachdarain, the yield of 
the ground is according to the landlord. A’ i—, 


pr pt. of fas. 

fas, pr.pt. a’ fas, v.n. Grow, vegetate. 2 In- 
crease, 3 Become great or little, good or 
bad. 4*Rise. Dh’ fh. e mór, he grew tall ; 
dh’ fh. sléibhtean ced air an fhairge, mount- 
ains of mist rose on the sea; f. reamhar, get 


or become fat; db’ fh. an t-eorna, the barley 


norous, 








vegetated. 
fas, -a, a. Empty, vacant, hollow, void. 2 
Waste. 3 Laid waste, desolate. 4*Unoccu- 


pied. 5 Uneultivated. 6 False, hollow. 7** 

Addle. 8** Addle-pated. Taigh f., on wnoc- 

cupied house ; fearann f., waste or uncultivated 

land ; ni thu e f., thou shalt make it hollow ; 

rinn mi f. an sràidean, I have laid their 
streets desolate ; thug e ceum f., [thug e ceum 
fallsa], he took a false step ; is f. a’ chul as 
nach goirear, deserted is the corner whence 
no (voice of bird) is heard ; cuir f., lay waste. 

Has, s.m. Homestead, abode. 

fasa, comp. offurasda. Easier. 

fàsach, -aich, -aichean, s.m. (except gen. sing. 
which is f., but f. in all cases in Badenoch.) 


Desert, wilderness, solitude, desolation. 2 


Digitized by 


P BR. p= pm m g = Ee = - 
i ES ) h = A m s EX d 
INTERNET ARCHIV 


417 


fasair, DO, 
-———, -srach, -sraichean, 


-— —eadh,(AG) 






fasda 


* forest." 3 Stubble. 4 
Choice pasture. 5jiEdge, border. 6i1Mark, 
spot.  7** Grassy headland of a ploughed 
field. F. fiadhaich, a £errible wilderness ; féidh 
na fasaich, the forest deer ; luehd-cómhnuidh 
na fasaich, the dwellers of the desert, 

fasach, -aiche, «. Desolate, untrodden. 

d, s. f. ind. see fàsalachd & falmhachd. 

9ft Growth. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Depopulation. 2 Act of 
depopulating or laying waste. A’ f—, pr.pt. 
of fasaich. 

fasachadh,** -aidh, s. 
Encumbering. 

fàsachail, -ala, a. see fàsail. 

fasad, 2rd. comp. of furasda. 

fasadach,tt -aiche, a. Crescent. 

fasadh, -aidh, s.m. Dwelling. 

fàsadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Protuberance. 

fasag, s.f. Plug-hole in a boat. 2(MMcL) Plug, 
— Moidart. 3 (DU) Pea-pod ih early stages, 
(before the peas have assumed anything like 
full size.) 

fàsaich, pr.pt. a’ fàsachadh, v.a. Depopulate, 
lay waste, desolate. 2 Afforest. 3 Destroy. 
A Encumber. Dh’ fh. e an dùthaich, he de- 
populated the country. 

ear, fut. pass. of fasaich. 

——-—te, past pt. of fàsaich. Depopulated, laid 
waste, desolated. 

fasaid, 2nd. comp. of furasda. 

fàsail, -ala, o Desert, desolate. 
lonely. 8**Wild. 4**Growing. 
a lonely brook ; a dry brook. 


Mountain, hill, 








m.  Encumbrance. 2 





2 Solitary, 
Sruthan f., 


fàsaidheachd, Suth’d. for fasachd (barrenness.) 
fàsair.(DU) s.m. Boat-plug. Toll(a) fasair, plug- 


hole, 

see asairich. 

s. f. Luxuriant pastur- 
age. [Also asair.] 

Reay country for fasanadh (pas- 


turing.) 


fasairica, 2.0. see asairich. 


fasalach,tt -aich, s.m. Void. 

d, s.f.ind. State of lying waste, desola- 
tion, emptiness, solitude. La f., a day of de- 
solation. 

fasam, for fàsaidh mi, I will grow. 

fasan, -ain, s. m. Refuse of grain. 

fasan, -ain, -an,-an, s. m. Fashion, custom, 
manner. 2 Homestead and cultivated ground 
around it. "San fhasan, in fashion ; as an fh., 
out of fashion. 

-——ach, a. see fasanta. Guf., fashionably. 

fasanadh, -aidh, s.m. The old custom of giving 
an hour’s grazing to milch cows on the green 
patches (ceannamhagan) adjacent to the corn 
prior to their being sent to the hill for the 

ay. 

fasanta, @. Fashionable, in fashion. 2 Cus- 
tomary, habitual. 3**Fond of fashion. Bain- 
tighearna fhasanta, a fashionable lady. 

chd, s.f.ind. Fashionableness, 2 Ad- 
herence to fashion or custom. 

fas-bheann, s.f. Desert hill. Ciob nam f., the 
rank grass of the desert hills. 

fas-bhuain, -bhuana, s.f. see asbhuain. 

fas-charn,** s.m. Cenotaph. 

fAs-cheannach, -aiche, œ, Barren, dull. 

fas-cheilg,** s. f. Hollow guile, low cunning. 
Labhair e gun f., he spake without guile. 

fas-choille, -choilltean, s.f. Young grove, grove 
or wood in the first few years of its growth. 
21r Wilderness. 

fàsd,** s. Seizure. 

fasda,(PM) s. m. Rope used in towing large 
lumps of seaweed called maois and bali after 
boats.— Uist. 





nN e i tn Moe ir me 


fasdachadh 


fasdachadh, see fasdadh. 

fasdadh, -aidh, s.m. lining, binding, as a ser- 
vant, for a stated term, 2 Stoppage, seizure, 
A’ f—, pr. pt. of fasdaidh. Biodh siod air 
t’ fhasdadh ’s lann chiun-aisnich, Ze gàirdean 
gasda leanadh i, that will be part of your 
wage, and a fluted sword and strong arms to 
wield it—Filidh, p. 11. 

fasdaien, v.g, see fasdaidh. 

fasdaid, a. Fee’d, as at market— A rran. 

fasdaidh, pr.pt. a’ fasdadh, v.a. Hire, engage. 
2 Bind, secure, make fast. tie. 

fasdail, -alach, -ailean, s.f. Dwelling. 2* Dome. 

fas-dhiobhuirt,|| s.m. Retching. 

fa seach, adv. Apart, distinctly, separately, in- 
dividually. 2 Alternately. Ceòl is cuirm fa 
seach, music and feasting by turns. 

fasg.* v.a. see faisg. 

fasg.** -aisg, s.m. Prison. 2 Band, bond. 8 
(DC) Cot in which to confine a sheep with a 
foster-lamb, to induce each to take to the 
other— A royll. 


——ach, -aiche, o Sheltering, well-sheltered. 


2**Screening. 3**Calm.  Aitef., æ well-shel- 
tered place. 

fasgach, -aiche, a. Wringing. 

fasgadair, see fàisgeadair. 


fasgadair, T s.m. Arctic 


gull, Richardson’s skua, 
—lestris Richardsoni. 


[This name is some- 


times applied to the fasgadan.] 2ttOne that 


picks ot or destroys vermin. 







zm 


oro E TE a 
Eus i. b Jd A 

== Ri 
Ge 


Loy Dë 


302, Fasgadair. 


fasgadan, -ain, s. m. Umbrella 2 Sun-shade, 
parasol. 

fasgadan, -ain, sm. Common = skua—lestris 
catarractes. 

fasgadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s. m. Protection, 
shelter, screen. 2**Refuge. 3**Shadow. 4** 
Sparks from red-hot iron. 5 Fold. 6 Pen- 


folding of cattle. 7 Blair Atholl for fasdadh. 
F. na daraich, the shelter of the oak: a dhìth 
fasgaidh, for want of shelter ; taobh an fhasg- 
aidh, a lee side. 

fàsgadh, -aidh, s.m. Wringing, squeezing, pres- 
sing. A’ i—, pr. pt. of fàisg. An ni nach 
gabh nizheadh cha ghabh e f., what will not 
wash will not wring ; f. samhlach, a copying- 
press; cha’n ionann do fhear na neasgaid 
agus do fhear 'ga fhàsgadh, it's different with 
the man of the boil and the man that squeezes 
tt—N.G P. 

fasgadh, -3idh, s.m. Cleansing from vermin. A’ 
f—, pr.pa.t. of faisg. 

fasgadhach,** a. Sheltering, protecting. 

fasgaich, v.g. Imbower, shelter, 

fasgaidh,tt s. f. Cleaning off vermin, A’ f—, 
pr.pt. of faisg. 

———— 2 Calm. 


,** a. Sheltered. 
pt. a’ fasganadh & a’ fasgnadh, v.a. 


fasgain, pr. 
Winnow. 2 Sift. 
Winnowed. 2 Sifted. 


fasgainte, past pt. 


418 


| faspan, -ain, -an, s. m. 





IA hach 


fascair,** s.m. Goler, keeper. 

fa4saun,** -ain s.m. Wiunow. 2 Sieve. 3 Mus- 
cle. F. an diomhanais, the sieve of vanity. 

fiseanadh,(MMeD) sm. Separating the husks 
from the seed in a strong wind, winnowing, 
A’ f—, or.pt. of fasgain. 

fasuath, -aith, -aithean, s.m. see fasgadh. 

"PERSE re ges a. re fasgach. 

fas-ghlac, -ghlaice, -an, s.f. l 

fas-ghleaun, -ghlinn, s.m. } Desert vale, 

faxgnadair,/CR) s.m. Winnower. 

fasgnadan,* -ain, s.m. Ventilator, 

fasgnadh, -aidh. s.m. Winnowing, cleansing of 
grain out of doors, ‘I'he process of cleaning 
grain by throwing it up with a sieve and 
catching it again, thus bringing the bad seed 
and chatt to the surface, after which it is 
lifted with the hand, and separated from the 
good grain—(DC.) 2 Sifting. A’ f—. pr. pt. 
of fasgain, Cailleach-fhasgnaidh, fanner. 

fasgnag, -aige, An, s.f. Corn-fan, wiunowing- 
fan. (beantag.) 

——- ach, a. Of or belonging to a hand-win- 
now. 2 Like a hand-winnow. 

fa-sgriobhadh,** -aidh, s.m. Appendix. 

fa sheaehd, adv. Seven times. 

faslach, -aich, -aichean, s.m. Hollow, vacuum, 
void, space, interstice. 2 Instigation. 3 see 
furail. } 

tfaslairt, s. Encampment. 

fas-lomairt, -ean, St Preparation of victuals in 
the fields or hills. 2 Ifasty meal. 3**Expe- 
ditious method of cooking victuals in the stoe 
mach of an anima!, once practised in Gaeldom, 
4 Temporary habitation. 

fasmhoire, comp. of fasmhor. 

fàsmhor, -mhoire, a. Growing, thriving, vegeta- 
tive. 2 Desert, desolate, lonely, waste. 

ach, -aiche, a. see fasmhor. 

— ———achd s.f.ind. State of growing, growth, 
increasing, thriving. 

fasnag, prov. for fasgnag. 7 

fas-na-h-aon-oidhche,§ s.Mushroom, see agairg & 
balg-bhuachaill. 














Difficulty, embarrass- 

ment. 

ach, -aiche, a. Difficult, embarrassing. 

fasradh, -aidh, see asradh. 

fasraichean, pl. of fasair ( for asair) 

fast,(AF) s.m. Reindeer. 

fasta, s. see fasdadh. 

fastachadh, see fasdadh. 

fastadh, -aidh, -aidhean, see fasdadh. 

fastaich, see fasdaich., 

fastaidh, v.a. see fasdaidh. 

fasuich, v.a@. see fasaich. 

fàth, s.m.ind. Cause, reason, object. 2 Oppor- 
tunity. 3 Ambuscade, principle. 4**Poem. 5 
**Field. 6**Heat. 7 Breath. 8 (AC) Vista, 
perspective. 9(AC) Long narrow glen. 10** 
rarely Skill, ¥F.mo dhuilichinn, the cause of 
my sorrow ; f. iongantais, œ cause of wonder; 
gabh f. air sin, watch an opportunity for 
that ; f. air son fola, an opportunity for blood- 
shed ; f. fad air falbh, a view far away ; chi 
wif. air an fhiadh, Z see a distant view of the 
deer ; ni'm faic mi f. dhiubh, nor do I see o 
view of them. 

fath,** s. Advantage. 

fath, -ach,-achan, s. f. see famh, [gen. fath- 
ann, rl. fathan—Ga:rioch, £c (DU) 

fath,* v.a. see fà:h-fheith. 

fàth, Gairloch for tàdh, gen.pl. of fàidh. 

——ach, -a/ch, s.m. see fàth. 

——ach, -aich, sm, Giant, monster, genius. F. 
was invariabiv usedin the old tales, and 
through ignorance of grammar the fA has 
beeu dropped in many places, and the gem. 





URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


tathach d 


NEG E ER TRAN m NE 
with the article is used instead of the nom.— 
guth an fhathaich, the giant’s voice, is thus 
erroneously written guth an athaich. The 
game thing has happened to many other words 
as, eagal, &e. 

+fathach, -aich, s.m. Prudence, knowledge. 

fathach,{t a. Pertaining to cause, reason or 
opportunity. 

fAth-ainm, -ean & -eannan, s.m. Nickname 

—each,** a. Nicknaming, apt to nick- 





name. 

fathamach,tt a. Fearful, reverent, obedient, 

fathamas, -ais, s. m. Degree of fear, reverence, 
awe, obedience. 2 Warning. 3 Occasion, 
opportunity. 4 Indulgence, partiality. 5 
Mitigation. 6+tSparing. 7 (DMC) Reprieve, 
respite—Uist. Gun fh. do dhuine seach duine, 
without partiality to one man more than an- 
other, 

fathan, -ain,s.m. Journey. 2$ Colt's foot, see 
cluasliath. 3 (AH) Light wind. 

—-—.—4ach, -aiche, a. "Trifling, silly, of mean 
appearance. 

achd, s.f.ind. Silliness of appearance. 

- fathann,tt -ainn, s.m. Rumour, news. 

——--—ach,ft a. Pertaining to rumours or news. 

fathas,** -ais, s.m. Skill. 2 Poetry. 3 Prudence, 

fathasdaich, Suth’d de, for fathast. 

fathast, adv. Yet, as yet. 2 Still, notwith- 
standing. Thig e fhathast, he will com yet ; 
is aoibhinn leam fhathast t? fhuaim, thy sound 
is still pleasant to me ;’n ann fhathast ? still? 
do you still persist? [Generally aspirated.] 

fathbh, see famh. 

fathbhan, -ain, -an, s.m. Mole-hill. [famhan.] 

fath-bheathach,(AH) s.m. Puny, half-starved 
animal. 

fath-chainnt, -e, s.f. see fachaint. 

fath-déistinn, s.m. Cause of abomination. 

wc 57 5 ae o. Having small doors or wic- 

ets. 

fath-dhorus, -uis, -dhorsan, s.m. Small door, 
wicket. 

fath-each, s.m. Make-shift horse. "Am fear a 
cheannaicheas am fath-each ceannaichidh e 
an t-ath each, he that buys a make-shift hack 
wiil have to buy another horse. 

fath-fhaim,** s.f. see faitheam. 

fàth-fheith, pr.pt. a’ fath-fheitheamh, v.a. Way- 
lay, beset, 2**Ensnare. 

—eamh,** s.m. Ambuscade, A’ f—, 
pr.pt. of fath-fheith. 

fath-ghabhail,tt s. Ambush. 

fath-loisg,** po, Char. 2(DM 

fathmas, see fathamas. 

fath-mhügach, s.f. see famh. 

fith-oide, -an & -chan, s.m. Schoolmaster, pre- 
ceptor. 2**Usher. 

fathrag,** -eig, s.m. Bath. 

fathraig,f pr.pt. a’ fathragach, v.a. Bathe, 

fathraire, see faraire. 

fa thri, adv. Thrice. 

fath-rud,** s,m. Appendage. 

fath-rusgach,1f-aiche, a, Paleous, 

fath-sgriobh, v.a. Subscribe, subjoin, write as 
a postcript. [fo-sgriobh. ] 

——adh, -aidh, s. m. Subscribing, sub- 
joining. 2 Act of subscribing or subjoining. 
3 Appendix. 4 Postscript. A’ f—, pr.pt. of 
fath-sgriobh. 

fa-thuaiream, prep. Towards, 2 About, Buille 
fa th., a chance trial. 

fathunn, -uinn, s.m. see fathann. 

——ach, -aiche, a. see fathannach, 

fathur,** uir, see fathunn. 

fé, Arran for fein, 

fé,** a. Wild, inconsistent in a fury. 








C) Burn heather. 





| 


= = pes E op - 
=| LS P ii i J 
a i e i = i 
LI [| I l a] 
i — i 1 P i 


II) 


18 ` fead 


fè, s.f.ind, see fèath. 2 see feith. 3** Quagmire. 





4**Park, 5**Fold. 6**rarely Measuring-rod. 
1**licdge. 

tfeabh, s.j. Conflict, storm. 2 Means, power, 
faculty. 


feabha, One of the comp. forms of math. 

id, 2nd. comp. of math. 

feabhas, 3rd. comp. of math, or s.m. (yen. -ais.) 
Superiority. 2 Goodness. 3 Beauty, comeli- 
ness. 4 Convalescence. 5**Improvement. 6 
7**ixcellence. 8**Better, best, 9 Decency. 
Cha'n fhaic mi ’fh., Z ‘cannot see its superior, 
or better than it ; an duine d' a fh., no matter 
how good the man may be ; air son ’fh., for its 
superiority ; air "fh. gum faighear thu, no 
matter how much you exert yourself ; tha "n 
duiue tinn a’ dol am f., the sick man is get- 
ting better or convalescent. 

feabhasach, æ. Better,timproved, ameliorated. 

feabhasaich, v. a & n. Ameliorate, correct, 
amend, 

feabnlan, see faoileann. 

Feabhradh,** -aidh, s.m. February. 

tfecabhsach, œ. Cunning, skilful. 





féach, v.a. see feuch. 

eset s. Journey. 2 Spade. 3 Handle of a 
spade. 

feachadh,** -aidh, s.m. Spade. 2 Mattock. 3 
Pick-axe, 


fèachainn, see feuchainn, 

feachd, -an, s.f. Army, host, forces, levy, train- 
ed bands. 2 War. Bliadhn’ an fh., the year 
of the war (1745) ; an làithibh cath is f., in the 
days of battle and warfare ; fî. nan sonn, the 
baitleof ihe brave ; f. oileinichte, æ trained 
army ; far nach bi na mic-uchd, cha bhi na 
fir-feachd, where there are no boys in arms, 
there will be no armed men. 

, va £ n. Bend, bow. 2 Yield. 3 
Swerve.  Ceaunabhard nach gabhadh f., @ 
chief who would not yield; esan a dh’ fh. op 
choir, he that swerved from the path tof recti- 
tude. 

ifeachd, s.f. ind. Bend, curve. 2 Cramp. 3 
Danger. 4 Journey, 5 Alternative time, turn. 
6 rarely Deeds. 

feachda,* a. Regimental. 

feachdach,** a. Crooked, bent. 2 Pliable. 8 
Having armies. 

feachdadh, -aidh, s.m. Bending, bowing. 2 Act 
of bending. A’ f—, pr.pt. of feachd. 

feachdail,** a. Hostile. 

feachdaire, -an, s.m. Warrior. 

feachd-aitreabh, -an, s.f. Barracks. 

feachd-cheum, {tt -éim & -a, s. March. 

feachd-dhaingnich, s.f. Garrison. 

feachd-dion, $.f. Fencibles. 

feachd-duthcha, -an-, s.f. Militia. 

feachd-imeachd, sf March. , 

feachd-imich, v.a. pr.pt, a’ feachd-imeachd, v.a. 
March. 

feachd-mara, s.f, Armada, fleet, navy. 

feachd-mharasgal, -ail, s.m. Field-marshal. 

tfeachdnach,** -aich, s.m. Prosperity, luck. 2 
Manhood. 

feachdraidh, s.pl. Armed infantry. 

feachdta, a. & past pt. of feachd. Bent, bow- 
ed, crooked. 

feachd-tire, s. f. Militia. 2(AH) Army—foot, 
horse, and artillery. 

fead, -an, sf. Whistle. 2 Hiss, hissing noise. 3 
x*Shrill yoice. 4 Blast. 5 Smart blow. 6** 
Bustle. 7**Fathom.  8**Island. 9**rarely 
Bulrush. F. "aan leth-cheann, o blow on the 
cheek ; f. air fuar-luirg, whistling on a cold 
track—'* a wild goose chase ”; f. an aonaich, 
the whistling of the wind on the heath ; dean f., 





ha 


fead 


whistle; ni e f., he shall whistle; gearr f. 
whistle— Uist. 

fead, pr.pt. a’ feadail, v.n. Whistle, hiss. 

jTífead, v.a. "Tell, relate. 

fead,?s.f. Soft rush, see luachair bhog. 

feada-coille, s.f. Wood-sorrel, see seamrag. 2 
** Bulrush. 

feadadh,** -aidh, s.m. Whistling. 2 Relation. 
rebearsal, SS 

feadag, -aige, -an, s.f. Flute. 2 
Whistle. 3 The third week 
of February. 4 Plover—char- 
adrius pluvialis. 5**Flageo- 
let. Le feadagaibh, with 
futes ; cha d thugainn f. ort, 
I don’t care a whistle for 
you. 









hip 











27 M 
EN 


* 
"Ee, 

E. Ka 7 

P pra 


d 
Ze 










ach,tt o Abounding in 
whistles, or plovers. 
-bhuidhe, (AF) see fead- 


an’ v 





ag 4, 
S ghlas,T s.f. Grey plover, 303. Feadag. 
see trilleachan. 
-riasgach,(A¥) s.f. Lapwing, see adhar- 
can-luachrach, 
feadaidh, Zut ago, of fead. Shall whistle. 
féadail, -alach, s.m. see feudail. 
feadail,** s.f. Whistling. 2 Hissing. 
A’ f—, vr.pt.of fead. Oganach a’ f. 'sa mhagh, 
. € youth whistling on the plain. 
feadail, a. Whistling. 2 Of, or pertaining to, 
a whistle, 
ich,* s.f. see feadalaich. 
feadain,** v.n. Pipe, whistle. 
gen. sing. &n, pl of feadan. 
e, (AC) prov. pl. of feadan (crevice.) 
feadaire, -an, s.m. Whistler, piper. 
~————-achd, 's.f. Whistling, Thòisich e air 
f., he began to whistle. 
feadalaich, s.f. Whistling. 
feadan, -ain, -an, s.m. Fife, flute. 

















2 Chanter of 


the bagpipe. 3 Reed. 4 Spout. 5 The cali- 
bre of a gun. 6 Barrel. 7 Crevice through 


which the wind whistles. 8 Oaten-pipe. 9 Dis- 
charge ofa still. 10**Canal. 11 Water-pipe. 
12** Flageolet. 13(DMO) Opening in the wall 
of a barn to let in the wind for winnowing 
grain. 14(DMO) Opening in the wall of a byre. 
15(DMC) Aqueduct under a road. F. na bàth- 
aich, the byre-rumnel; f. taomaidh, a pump ; 
ceol an fheadain tlath, the music of the soft 
reed. 

ach, -aiche, a. Of, like, or pertaining 
to, pipes, flutes, chanters, whistles, conduits, 
reeds, waterpipes or crevices." 

ACh, -aich, s.m. see feadanaiche. 

achd,** s,f.ind. Playing on a flageolet 

Or pipe. 

feadanaiche, an, s.m. Pipe-chanter. 2tt Piper. 
2^*One who plays on a flute, flageolet, &c. 

feadan-uisge,** s. m.  Water-pipe, gutter or 
rone of a house. 2(AH) Small cascade or 
waterfali. 

feadar, v ünpers. see feudar. 

** ap, Sam, Pass: 

feadaran,** -ain, s.m. Mirth. 

feadarsaich,(DMC) s.f. Whistling— Uist. 

tieadarthaehd, s.f. Possibility. 

fead-ghoite,** s. m. Noise in belly of horses 
when trot'in». 

fead-ghuil,** s.m. Lamentation. 

feadh, s.m. ind. [Governs the gen.] Extent, 
length. 2 Fathom. 3 Whilst, during, through, 
througuout. 4 Among, amid. 5 So long as. 
WF. ghleanntan fàsail, through desert valleys ; 
f. gach tir, throughout every land; f. an la, 
during the day-time ; i. gach ré, for evermore; 


e — ——À 
3 


Dia LIZe2o | 


NTERNET ARCHIV 


420 








fealan 


f. gach linn, through every age; f, 's is bed mi, 
while 1 Live ; f.'sa bha mis’ a’ tighinn, while I 
was coming. [Am feadh, and air feadh are 
often shortened to feadh by the omission of 
the prep.] Feadh 's a mhaireas an ruaig, 
white the chase lasts; air f. a chéile, mixed u 

together ; air f. an arbhair, among the corn p 


tha na radain air f, an fhodair, the rats are 
; feadh mo choise, the 


swarming in the hay 
length of iny foot-print —Suth’d.(DC) 
feadhachan,* -ain, $.$. see feadhanach. 
feadhail, pl. feadhlaichean, s.f. see fadhail. 
feadhain, (AF) s.m. Team of horses. 
feadhainn, -dhna, -dhnach, s.pl. People, folks. 
2 Band, troop, company, 3 Group of persong 
or things. 4* Some, others, those, An fh. &à 
thàinig a staigh, the people that came in; t. 
eile, others ; au th. a dh' fhàg sinn, those we 


left ; an fh. dhiubh a thig, those of them that. 


mean to come; cuid na feadhnach seo, tke 

property of these ; ceann-feadhna, a chieftain, 

feadhair,** @ Wild, savage, 

eachd,** sr Gift, present. 2 Stroll- 
ing, sauntering, idling, 

tfeadhan, -aine, a. Wild, savage. 

féadhan,(AF) s.m. Wild goose leader. 

ach, -aich, s.m. Soft breeze, breath of 
wind. F. gaoithe, breeze;of wind, 

feadhlan,(AF) see faoileann. 

Tfeadhma, s.f. Service, superintendence. 

feadhmach,** a. Powerful. Gu f, powerfully. 

—,** -aich, s.m. Governor, overseer, 2 
Steward, bailiff, | 

feadhmanta,** a. Official. 

—chd, s.f. see feadhmantas. 

8,** -ais, e am. Superintendence, 
overseeing, stewardship. 

tfeadhm-ghnathachadh, -aidh, s.f. Usurpation. 

feadhna,** s.m. Commander, chief, captain. 

, gen. of feadhainn. 

— ——-chd, s.f. ind. Captainship, captaincy. 
chieftainship, commaud. 

feadraich, -e, et Whistling. 

feag, -an, sf. see eag. 2**rarely Tooth. Zeg 
Offence. 

——ach,** a. Crenated. 

——aich, see eagaich. 

——aichte, see eagaichte. 

feagal, -ail, s m. Badenoch, 

feagamh, see theagamh. 

feagh,-a, sf. see feadh 2, 

Tfeagha, s.f. Beech-tree. 

féairde, see féairrd. 

achd,* see féairrdeachd. 

feairrd, comp. of math. [Described thus in all 
Gaelic grammars, but féairrd and math have 
really no connection etymolozically.] Is fh. 
thu sin, you are the better of that; cha’n fh. 
thu stuth dheth sin, you are nothing the better 
of that. 

féairrde,(DMC) s.f. Betterment.  Cha'n 'eil f. 
dhomh ann, it does me no good. 

achd,* s.f. Improvement, convalescence. 
2 Superiority, excellence. Cha'n fhaic mi 
fhéin f. sam bith air, Z doa t see any symptom 
of convalescence or improvement, 

feairsid, see fearsaid. 

feairt, see feart. 

tieal, s.f. Art, science. 2 Treason. 

n Lo Nur evil. 

feala-bheadradh, : 

feala-chluicu, Hä? Mirth. 

feala-dhà, s.f.ind. Joking, irony, jest, mirth. 
Ri f., jesting, playing the fool. 

fealan, -ain, -an, s.m. see fiolan. 9 Itch, hives. 
o**Fleshworm. 4** Furuncle, bile. 5 Rashon 
face or body.—Badenoch. Duine aig am bheil 























de, for eagal. 








fealan 
4 @ man who has the itch. 

zéi SC a. Affected with itch. 2 Full of, 
or like, fleshworms. ` V 
feala-rireadh, s. f. Earnest. Is tric a chaidh 

feala-dhà gu feala-rireadh (or feala tri), joking 

has Agi di cba in coma 
feala-tri, ap, Earnest. ; 
fiealb, -a, -an, s.m. Kernel 2 Lump in the 

flesh. ER 
ț--——has, -ais, s.m. Evil vision. 

ation. 
fealcaidh, -e, 

ful. 





2 Misinform- 


a. Austere. 
3 Unpleasant. 
eachd, s.f.ind Sharpness, sourness. 2 
Knavery, deceitfulness, 3 Dispute, debate. 
-—————eaSs,** -eis, s.m. Debate, dispute. | 
feall, s. f. ind. Treason. 2 Treachery, conspir- 
racy, trickery, deceit, falsehood. Ri f., 
practising guile. 
feall,* a. False. CA 
feall, v. a. Deceive, betray, fail, impose upon. 
fealladh, -aidh, s.m. Deceit, desertion, failure. 
A’ f—, pr.pt. of feall. 
fealla-dhà, see feala-dhà. j 
fealladh-bog,? s.m.Water-hemlock—cicuta virosa. 
feallair,**s. m. Deceiver, trai- me 
tor. 2 Liar. 3§Water-hem- 
lock, see fealladh-bog. 
—- —eachd,** s.f. Deceiving, 
deceitfulness. 2 Falsehood, 
feall-aithris, s.f. Pretence. 


feallan, -ain, s.m. Felon, trai- 
tor. see fealan, see fiolan. 

fealla-rireadh, see feala-ri- 
readh. 

fealla-tri, see feala-tri. 


2 Knavish, deceit- 











feall-bheart, -bheairt, -an, sf. it 
Deceit. : 
——ach, a. Deceitful. 304. Fealladh- 


feall-chomhairlich, v.a. Plot, bog 
feall-chruth,** s Disguise, 
feall-chüinn, v.a. Counterfeit, forge. 
feall-chuinneadair, tt -e, -ean,s.m. Counterfeiter. 
feall-chüinneadh, -idh, s.m, Counterfeiting, for- 

gery, act of counterfeiting or forging. 
| feall-chuinnte, past.pt. Counterfeited, forged. 
feall-dhealbh, v.a. see feall-chuinn. 

-——ta, see feall-chüinnte. 


feall-duine, pl. -daoine, s.m. Worthless man. 2 
Deceiver, traitor. 


feall-faire,(DMO) s.f. Waylaying. 

feall-fheitheamh,**-eimh, o m. Lying in wait, 
ambush, ambuscade, Ri f., lying in wait. 

feall-fhios,(AH) s.m, Extravagant or lying story, 
canard. 

feall-fholach, -aich, s.m. Ambush, ambuscade. 
————ail,** a, Treacherous. 2 Prone to 

lie in wait. 

feall-fholaich, oa. Liein wait. 


i punathachd, s.f.ind, Affectedness, affecta- 
;10n. 


feall-ghniomh, -aran, s.m. 
dle, trick, 
ach,** 


dling, cheating. 
feall-innleachd,** s.f. Deceit, guile, snare, 
feall-léigh, -ean, s.m. Quack doctor, medicaster. 
fea/llighiche, see feall-léigh. 
tf»all-mhac, -mhic, s.m. Learned man, scholar. 


feall-mhiann, -an, s.f. Conspiracy, deceitful in- 
tention. i 


feallsa, a. Mendacious. 2 see fallsa. 
feallsachd, s. f. ind. Mendacity, deceit. 
teallsadh,**-aidh, s.m. Philosophy, 2 Learn- 
Ing. 3 Literature. ` ` 

Philosophers, 


Tfeallsaidh, s pl. 
s.m. Philosopher. 





Deceitful action, swin- 








a. Base in action, swin- 


feallsaimh, -ean, 


IRIT ARIC T ARS L d 
ITERNET ARCHIV 
g L— 1 — Stu 


421 


feamainn-bhalgainn 


feallsamhua, s.pl. Philosophers. 

—— —— — ch, -aich, see feallsanach. 

chd, s.f.ind. see feallsanachd. 

feallsanach, -aich, s.m. Sophist, quack, false 
philosopher, 

os.) f. ind. Philosophy. 92 Leari- 
ing. 3 Literature. 4 Sophistry. Trid fh. 
dhiomhain, through vain philosophy. 

feallta, o. see fealltach. 

fealltach, -aiche, a. Treasonable, false, deceit- 
ful. Gu f., treacherously. 

fealltachd,** s.f. Treason, treacherousness,de- 
ceitfulness. 

fealltail,** a. Traitorous, treacherous, deceit- 
ful. 2 Murderous. 

fealltair, -ean, s.m. Traitor, villain. 2 Quack, 
rogue, deceiver. 

eachd,** s.f.ind. Conduct of a traitor, 
2 Roguery, villany, deccitfulness, 
fealltanach, -aich, see fealltair. 

tiealmhac, see feall-mhac. 

feam,* s. see feaman. 

-——ach,** o. Gross. 2 Dirty. 3 Silly. 4 Su- 
perüiuous. 5 Havinga large rump. 

-——achail, @ Dirty, nasty. 2 Clumsy, inele- 
gant. 3 Gross. 4 Stupid. 

-——achas,** -ais, s.m. Grossness. 
3 Silliness. 4 Superfluity. 

feamaid,(DC) s.f. Seaware—Uist. 

feamain,* s. see feaman. 

feamainn,§feamnach, s.f. Seaweed of all kinds, 
cast ware, whether growing on the rocks or 
cast ashore. 2$ Rosebay,see seileachan Frang- 
ach—a common name for plants growing near 
water, especially if long-stalked. [Badge of 
the MacNeills.] 
[In Skye, Lewis, e, the red or tangle sea- 
weed is called bruchd, and the cutting sea- 
weed an fheamainn. In Uist the red seaweed 
is called feamainn dearg, as distinguished 
from the black seaweed, which they cut on 
the rocks round the shore, and which is call- 
ed feamainn dubh. Feamainn is the general 
name íor all kinds of seaweeds, but there are 
names for the different kinds. F. dearg, or 
bàrr dearg,as it is sometimes called, is red sea- 
weed. In Uist the red seaweed, which is cast 
ashore in May, June and July, and of which 
kelp was made, is called am bragaire. The 
cutting seaweed, an fheamainn ghearraidh, is 
known as (a) feamainn dubh, which does not 
float, it includes aona-chasach and baiteach— 
(PM) ; (5) feamainn bhuidhe or bhuidheagach, 
which floats ; (c) gleadhrach, which also floats; 
and (d) feamainn chìrean or chireag. It is 
known as feamainn chireanach in Uist, and 
J. chireag in Skye and Lewis. It is only a few 
inches in length,and grows only on rocks that 
are seldom under the water during neap- 
tides. It has a strong laxative property, 
often being plucked off the rocks and boiled, 
when it is given to cattle that are suffering 
from dryness—JM. In Harris the long sea- 
weed that can be reached when the tide is 
very low is called langadal, in Uist rochd.— 
(DMC) In Loch Ewe red tangle is called 
Jeamainn dearg and barra-stamh.—(DU) All 
seaweed cast ashore is called when in a heap 
on beach bruchd, otherwise it is Jeamainn 
churra. The very same seaweed if cut from 
the rock by hand is called feamainn grearrta. 
—(DMy)] 

-——, pr.pt. a’ feamnadh, v.a. Manure with 
seaweed. 2 (DMC) Carrying the seaweed 
from the shore to theland. A’ feamnadh an 
fhearainn, manuring the land. 

-———_——- -bhalgainn,$ s.f. Knotted seaweed, 
bladder-wrack—fucus nodosus. 











2 Dirtiness. 


feamainn-bhuidhe 


feamainn-bhuidhe,§ see feamainn-bhalgainn. 2 
ES to all olive-coloured kinds of sea- 
weed. 





-bhuilgeanach, see feamainn-bhalg- 
-cheilp,(AH) s.f. see f— -bhuidhe, 
-chir, see feamainn-chirean. 
-chireag, see feamainn-chirean, 
-chirean, $.f. Channelled fucus— fucus 
canaliculatus. The short crisp seaweed near 
high-water mark, 
——— -chireineach, see feamainn-chirean. 
feamainn-chura, s,f. Seaweed cast ashore when 


ripe, ripe seaweed. 
-dearg, s.f. All the red kinds of sea- 
-dubh,$ s.f. Serrated seaweed—fucus 


serratus. 2 All the dark green kinds of sea- 
weed. 


ainn, 

















weed. 





" 





-phuil, s.f. Decomposed seaweed, used 
to manure the ground after it had become 
rotten. 

--—_—_——each, -eiche, a. Abounding in seaweed. 
2 Like seaweed. 

feaman, -ain, -an, s.m. Tail, rump.’ 

ach,** a. Tailed. 2 Having a long tail. 3 

Having a large rump. 

ach,** -aich, s.f. Quantity of sea-ware 
sea-ore or dulse. 2**Hind. 

feamnach, gen.sing. of feamainn. 

feamnadh, -aidh, s. m. Driving of sea-weed 
from the shore. 2 Manuring with seaweed. 
SiiDisarranging. 

feamrach, Arran for feamainn. 

feamuinn, see feamainn. 

fean, see feun. 

feannach,** a. Rough, hairy, as a quadruped. 

feanachas,** -ais, sm. Genealogy. 

feanadh, see feun. 

feann, a. Shortening or growing less by de- 
grees. Mar chloich a’ ruith le gleannan 
tha feasgar f. foghair, like a stone running 
down glen is the shoriening autumn evening. 

feann, pr.pt. a’ feannadh, v.a. see fionn. 

feannad, s.m, The surface ** peat," as opposed 
to ‘‘dubh-fhad,”’ the second or lowest **peat," 
So called from fionn,white, now obsolete here, 
it not being so black as the under peat from 
the presence in it of grass roots—Suth’d. 2 
(DMC) The turf covering the peat. 

feannadh, -aidh, s. Mm. & pr. pi. of feann, see 
fionnadh. 

feannag,-aige,-an, s.f. S[Carrion-crow—corvus 
corone. 2** Rook. 3 Rig, a ridge of ground 
generally used for growing potatoes, and 
sometimes also for raising corn, the seed 
being laid on the surface and covered with 
earth dug out of trenches along both sides. 
The term ‘‘lazy-bed ” applied to it in English 
is merely a southern odium on the system of 
farming in Gaeldom, where soil was scarce, 
and where bog-land could not be cultivated 
in any other way. Gheibheadh tu na feann- 
agan-firich, you would find the forest crows— 
said to persons who boast of doing impracti- 
cable things; ars’ an sedladair anns a’ chrann- 
aig—''thaà ero mhòr do fheannaig, agus ro 
bheag do fhearainn,” quoth the sailor in the 
cross-trees—'* it is too much for a rig amd 
too little for alot. ” This sentence is trans- 
lated in Campbell's West Highland Tales ** it 
is too biz for a crow, and too little for land.” 
A.V. gives a modern application of this say- 
ing from personal experience, which makes 
the meaniug clearer, and as he narrowly es- 
caped with nis life on the occasion, the words 
and their application are indelibly fixed in 
bis memory, When cut fishing in the Soung 








Digitized | 


PECIA HD. OM 
i A n i i 
ITERNET ARCHIV 


422 


fear 


of Sleat, in his youth, and overtaken by a 
storm, an old fisherman who was at the helm 
told the boys who were rowing to keepa sharp 


look-out for land, as the evening twilight was ` 


fast failing. One of the latter suddenly cried 
oub Chi mi feannagan A Néill! tha sinn 
faisg air a’ Chill bhig.”’ After taking a deli- 
berate survey (no easy matter in the circum- 
stances), N. replied rm Cha’n "eil fhios am an 
e, 'illean, tha e ro’mhér de dh’ fheannag agus 
ro bheag do dh' fhearran, ach dh' fhaodadh 
gnr e an t-eilean mor a th’ ann," (I don’t 
know, boys, it seems too big for a rig and too 
small for the land, but perhaps it’s the large 
island)—which it was, 





305. Feannag. `, 
feannag,** let Whiting. 
feannagach, -aiche, d. Of, or pertaining to car- 


906. Feannag-ghlas. 


rion crows’; or 2 Rigs. 
feannag-fhireach,(AF) s.f. Forest-crow. 
feannag-ghlas,9 et Hoodie—corvus cornig. 2** 
Carrion crow. 
feannag-uisge,J $.f. see gobha-uisge. 
feannaidh, fut. aff. à. of feann. see fionnaidh. 
feannan a. see,feann. 
feannar, v. & a. see fionnar. 
achd,* Cantyre for fionnarachd. 
— ————aàich, see fionnaraich. 
feanndag, -aige, -an, s.f. see deanntag. 
--—ach, -aiche, a. see deavntagach. 
-Ghreugach, see deanutag-G hreugach. 
feaunsair,** s.m. Gaelic spelling of fencer, 2 
(DC) Bullying fellow. 
——--——eachd,** s. f. ind. Fencing, sword- 





playing. 

feanntach,(DU) s.m. Turf taken off peat-bog 
before commencing to cut peais, 

fèar, -aire, @ see téathail. 

fèar, s.m, see feur. 

Tfear, @. see feàrr. 

fear, sm. Man. 2 Husband. 3 Any ol.ject or 
person of the masculine gender, 4 Maie. 

Thus declined : 


Indefinite. 

N. Sing. fear, Plur. fir, 

G. f, fhear, 

D: fear, fearaibh, 

V. fhir ! fheara ! 
Definite. | 

N. Sing. am fear, Plur. na tir, 

G. an fbir, pam fear, 

D. (do) ’nfhear, (do) na fearaibh, 

{Firibh, given by ** as dat. pl. is wrong. | 


Cath au fhir mhóir, the hero's battle; fear 
dhiubh, one of them ; an tore a lot t fhear, 
the boar that wounded thy husband ; am Fear 
Math, God—Arran ; am fear dona, the devil 
—Arran; am f. mór, the devil —A rayil, Skye, 
Uist ; inae an fhir mhóir, @ son of the devil; am 
fearinér port no port a gheibh sibh bhuam an 


Origi 


al from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 
URB 


ANA-CHAMPAIGN 


d 


iT 


e 


fear 


nochd deila tune will you get from me to-night;, | 
am fear ud, the devil—Uist; am fear ud troidh 
deil a foot. [Generally used to signify a sin- 
gie oc individual man, in contradistinetion to 
duine, which means a human being. Tha aon 
ühiubh seo aig gach fear, every man (but not 
woman) has one of these; tha aon aig gach 
ine, every man (and woman) has one. 


Compound words beginning with fear, form 
their plural with fr when men only are in- 
tended, but with luchd when women as well 
as men may be included, as, fear-ciüil, pi. 
luchd-ciùil, musicians. 

f.-ain-cheairt, a buffoon, puppet. 

f.-ainneir?, a tyrant. 

f.-airm, a soldier. 

f.-aiseig, a ferryman, 

f.-ambairc, fir-a—, an overseer. 2 scout. 

f.-an-taighe, the ** goodman ” of the house. 

f.-astair,** a traveller, pedestrian. 

f.-baile,.a farm-tenant. f. a’-bhaile, the farm- 

tenant. 2 tacksman, one allowed to sub- 
let his land. 

f.-bainnse, a bridegroom ; f. na bainnse, the 

bridegroom. 

f.-ballain, a cupper. 

f.-bàta, a boatman. 

f.-bogha;* an archer. 

f.-brataich, an ensign (oficer’s rank.) 2 a 

standard-bearer. 

f.-brath, a spy, traitor. 

f.-brionsgail, a dreamer. 

f.-brosgail, æ flatterer. 

f.-buitseachd, a wizard, sorcerer. 

f.-caidridh, an accompanier. 

f.-cartach, a carter. 

f.-casaid, an accuser. 

f.-casaidh, an assailant, 

f.-céaird, a tradesman, mechanic, artificer, 

travelling tinsmith. 

f.-cheistean, æ catechist. 

f.-cinnidh, a kinsman, clansman. 

f.-chriochnachaidh, æ finisher. 

f.-chur, a champion. 

f.-ciuil, a musician. 

f.-ciuird, see f.-céaird. 

f.-cluig, a bell-man. 

f.-cobhair, a helper. 

f.-cogaidh, æ soldier, 

f.-coghnaidh, see f.-comhnaidh, 

f.-coimhid, a watchman, scout, overseer. 

f.-comhnaidh, æ contributor,helper. 2 dweller. 

f.-comaraidh, a patron. 

f.-comuinn, fir-chomuinn, an associate. 

f.-connspaid, a wrangler. 

f.-cosnaidh, œ worker, working man, bread- 

winner for a family. 

f.-cuairt, fir-chuairt, œ sojourner, visitor, 

tourist. 

f.-cuideachaidh, o helper. 

f.-cuideachd, fir-ch—, a buffoon; droll, jovial 
companion, bottle companion. 

f.-cuidich, a helper, assistant. 

f.-cuir, @ sower. 

f.-cuiridh, an inviter. 

f.-cüirn, an outlaw. 2 absconder. 

f.-cùl-chàinidh, æ slanderer. 

f.-cumaidh, an artificer, former, framer. 

f.-cumail suas, æ sustainer. 

f.-cunntais, an accountant. 

f.-dàin or f,-dana, pl. tir-dhain or fir-dhàna, 
& poet. 

f.-dana an adventurer. 

f.-deasboireachd, a debater. 

f.-deilbhe, an artificer, artist. 

f.-diona, a defendant. 

f.-droch-bheairt, an evil doer, 


493 


fear 


f.-duan, see under f -fuinn. 

f.-eadhlain, an artisan, 

f.-cadrriginn, « reconciler. 

faire, fiv-füaire, a watchman, sentinel,sen- 
try. F.-faire na h-aon sùla, the one-eyed 
waitchur—a legeudary character, 

f.-farcluaise, an eavesdropper. 

f.-fasaich, an ascetic. 

f.-fasgnaich, a fanner. 

f.-feachu, @ soldier. 

f.-fearainn, æ landed proprietor. 

f.-fiacha, a creditor. 

f -foghluim,; @ teacher. 

f.-foirneirt, an oppressor, robber, violator. 

f.-fritheil, see f.-frithealaidh. 

f.-frithealaidh, an attendant. 

f.-fuadain, fir-fhuadain, an outcast, fugitive, 
stragg’er, vagabond, exile. 

f.-fuinn, o chorus man, one of a band of 
men who went about singing carols. 
Their leader was called fear-duan. 

f.-gairm-cuirte, @ court crier. 

f.-gleidhidh, æ keeper. 

f.-gniomha, a workman. 

f.-gu-breith, a dictator or judge (Cesar’s 
** Vergobretus," appointed by the Gael 
of old ‚to take supreme command in 
case of emergency against a common 
enemy —Gaidheal, ii, 129. 

f.-iasachd, « borrower. 

f,-innleachd, fir-innleaehd, an artist, engin- 
eer, ingenious person. 

f.-innsidh, a teller. 

f.-iomachair, a bearer, 

f.-iomaill, an accolent. 

f.-ionaid, an agent, attorney. 2 lieutenant. 

f.-ionaid righ, a viceroy. 

f.-iüil. æ pilot. 2 a guide, 

f.-lahhairt, fir-l—, a speaker, spokseman. 

f.-lagha, pl. fir-1— &, luchd-l—, a lawyer. 

f.-laimh-chéirde, fir-l—, an artist. 2 arti- 
san, mechanic. 

f.-laoidh, o hymmnist. 

f.-leisgzeul, an excuser. 

f.-na-fardaich, the host of the house. 

f.-nuadh-posda, a bridegroom, 

f.-oibre, luchd-oibre, an artisan, artificer. 

f,-posda, fir-phosda, o bridegroom. 2 mar- 
ried man, husband. 

f.-raiteachais, œ boaster. 

f.-réite, a reconciler. 

f.-riachaid, o steward, 

f.-riaghlaidh, æ magistrate, ruler, governor, 
overseer. 

f.-ruin, @ confidant. 

f.-sanais, an advertiser. 

f.-saoraidh, œ redeemer. 

f.-sàrachaidh, an oppressor. 

f.-sedlaidh, fir-shedlaidh, o director, guide, 
steerer, helmsman. 

f.-sgriobhaidh, fir-sgrìobhaidh, a writer, 

f.-sgrudaidh, fir-sgrudaidh, æ searcher, scru- 
tinizer. 2 critic. 

f.-siubhail, fir-shiubhail, o éraveller. 

f.-solar-loin, a caterer. 

f.-sodail, a flatterer. 

f.-stiüraidh, fir-stiuraidh, æ steersman, reg- 
ulator, guide. 

f.-suilbheachd, an overseer. 

f.-suiridh, fir-shuiridh, æ sweetheart, wooer. 

f.-sül, & f.-sul-bheachd, an observer. 

f.-tagair, see f.-tagraidh. 

f.-tathaich, æ visitor, 

f.-tagraidh, a pleader, defender, pursuer, 2 
advocate, 

f.-taighe, @ hushand, 

f.-taimuh, an abider. 


Jriginal TON 


1 r= so ` 
| | V ‘ree i " of ie 
K/ v L. i V 


| I| EH A A A i A ie Fi C- A 
Li Ai E m YAT I, W CA "n i 


d OIF 


ra 
Po 
i 


fear 


f.-tamha, see f.-tàimh. 
f.-talaich, æ grumbler, 
f.-tathuinn, o barker, 
f.-teoma, an artist. 
f-togalach, a bearer. 
builder. 
f.-togal-fuinn, a precentor, leader of a choir. 
f.-tuaileis, a backbiter. 
f.-tuiniche, an abider. 
f,-turuis, fir-thuruis, 
traveller. 
f.-uibe, a wizard. 
f.-uidhe, æ traveller. ? pedestrian. 
f.-umhlaidh, an amercer. 
f.-urrais, œ surety.4 
fear,* v.a. Follow, as a chief. 2 Claim kindred 
with. A’ dh'aindeoin có a dh’ fhearas ort, in 
defiance of any person that will take your part. 
—ach,** s. am. War-ery among the ancient 
Irish. 
—ach, a TWild. 
achail, (DMC) a Manly, brave. 
achas, -ais, s.m. **Adultness, manhood. 2 
*Act of claiming kindred or siding with. 3 
Following, asa chief. 4 see fearalachd. 5** 
Membrum virile. Mar leòghann lef., like a 
lion for boldness. 
——achas-taighe,** sm. Frugality. 
—achil, s.f.ind. Feat of manhood. 2 Power, 
strength.. 3 Manliness. 
——achdain,* see fearachas. 
fearach!ais-ürlair, s.m. Folding screen, fire- 
screen, 
fearaid,** -ean, s.f. Gaelic spelling of ferret. 
fearail, -ala, a. Manly, masculine. 2 Brave. 3 
tiMighty. Gu f., courageously. 
fearain, see fearan. 
fearainn, gen.sing. of fearann. 
tfearach,** a. Wild. 
fearalachd, s.f.ind. Manliness, courage, bold- 
ness. 2 Activity, vivacity. 
fearalas, -ais, sm. Same meanings as fearal- 
achd. 
¢fearamhachd, s.f.ind. Force, might, power. 
tfearamhalachd, see fearamhachd. 
fearan, -ain, -an, $.m.dim. of fear. 


little man. 

fen an, s.m. see feuran. 2(AC) Dove, stock- 
dove, wood-pigeon. F.-eidheaun, turtle-dove. 

fearavech, a. Abounding in little men. 

fearan-breac, (AF) s.m. 'l'urtle-dove, see 

fearan-eidaeann, turtur. 

ffearanda, s.m. Countryman, boor, farmer. 

fearann, -ainn. s.m. |s f. in Badenoch.) Land, 
country. 2 Estate. 3 Farm. 4**Karth, land, 
in contradistinction to water. F. saor, free- 
hold land ; f. bàn, lea-ground, 2 vacant (i. 
e. temporarily unoccupied) land ; f. treabhta, 
ploughed land; f. àlainn na h-Eireann, the 
fair country of Ireland ;f. tioram, dry land ; 
ann am f. fàs, in œ desert land ; f£. comhroinn, 
suburbs; f. oighreachd, o manor ; f. coillteach, 
wood-land ; f. dlighe, manor, 

fearannach, -aiche, a. Of, or pertaining to land. 
2 Agricultural. 

fearannail, a. see fearannach, 

fearann tuatha, s.m. Ancient Celtic tribeland 
customs, known later as the ''run-rig sys- 
tem." By itthere was no individual or iso- 
lated tenure. The peasantry lived in a vill- 
ageor township, and the surrounding lands 
and pasture were held, the latter in common, 
and the former-—the cultivated part—was di- 
vided every year under the supervision of a 
village officer called ‘‘ maor,” and in later 
times * constable.” 

fearanta, a. Masculine, 


2 wplifter. 3 a 


a wayfaring man, 








Mannikin, 


Digitized by 


NTERNET ARCHIV 


424 


fearna 


fearas, Suth'd for furasda. 

fearas, -ais, s. m. see fearachd & fearachas, 
F. art of ; eòlas, science of. 

+ adh, -aidh, s.m. Imitation. 

f——-—air, -ean, s.m. Imitator, mimic. 

t——-—aireachd,** s.f. Mimicry. 

fear-asal, -ail, -an, s.m. Male ass. 

fearas-bogha,** s.m. (Art of) archery. 

——— -chlaidheamh, s.m. Sword-combat, gladi- 
torial combat—Dain I. Ghobha. 

—-- -chuideachd, s. f. Diversion, wit, raillery, 
joking. Ri f., joking. (art of company.) 

—-— -dana,fi s.m. Poetry. 

-——— -taighe, s.f. Domestic economy, house 
DEE 2**Husbandry, croft manage- 
ment. 

tfearb,** s.f, Cow. 2 Excrescence. 3 Pimple, 
4 Goodness. 5 Word. 

fearban,** -ain, s.m. Crowfoot (plant. ) 

fear-bhoc,(AF) s.m. Hare. 

fearbholg,** -bhuilg, s.m. Scabbard, sheath. 2 
Budget. 

fear-bhuilleach, -iche, a. Manly in action. 2 
Iuflieting manly blows. 

fear-boe, s.m. Roebuck, 

fear-bréige, s.m. Puppet. 
used as a landinark, 

fear-chu, s.m, Greynound, 
Male dog. 

fear-choinean, pl. fir-ch—, s.m. Buck-rabbit. 

fear-cuir, see feur-cuir. 

feardha,* a. see fearail. Clann fh. tapaidh, a 
brave and active cian. 

Minis aha s.f Bravery. 2 Manliness, man- 

ood. 

feardhalach, see fearail. 

——— d, s.f. Manhood. 

fear-feoirne, fir-fheoirpe, s. m. 
man. 3 Draughts-man. 

fearg, feirge, s.J. Anger, rage, ire, passion, 
wrath, displeasure. F. dhoinionnach, stormy 
wrath ; a cur feirg’ air, irritaíing or provo- 
king him; am feirg, in @ passion, furious ; 
'nuàir a thraoghas 'fhearg, when his passion 
subsides. [** gives s.m, and gen.sing. feirg.] 

fearg,** s. m. Passionate person. 2 Warrior, 
champion. 

fearg,** v.a. lrritate. 2 Provoke, incite. 

feargach, -aiche, a. Angry, passionate, enraged, 
2* Furious, outrageous, 3 Raging, 4 Irri- 
tated. 5 Causing irritation, ’Saa doinioun 
fheargaich, in the raging storm ; an da righ 
feargach, the two kings in a passion; duine 
f., a passionate man. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Irritating, making an- 
ery. 2 Irritating, as of an ulcer, irritation 
A’ f—, pr.pt. of feargaich. | 

as,t{ -ais, s.m. Cholericness. 

d, s.f.ind. Anger, heat, passion. 2 
Irritation, irritableness, 3 Moodiness. 

feargaich, v.g. Provoke, fret, 2**Vex, enrage, 

anger. 3 Fester. 

fear-ybleus, -edis, -an, s.m. Manly achievement. 

-—ach, -aiche, a. Of, or pertaining to, 
mauly achievements. 

feargnachadh,(AH) -aidh, s.m. Fighting, ¢striv- 
ing, or contending against a superior force 
with perseverance and pluck. 

feargnadh,f -aidh, s.m. Provocation, 

fearg-thamailt, -ean, St Indignation. 

—————— each, -iche, a. Indignant. 

fear-iasg, s.m. Male fish. 

fóarlagan, (CR) s.m. Field mouse—W. of Ross. 

fearna,§ s.f. Alder—alaus glutinosa. 2 Old 
name for the letter F. 3 Shield.  4**Mast. 
Leis am bristear gach f., by whom every 
Shield shall be broken ; cabar feàrna, à rung 





2 Heap of stones, 
2 Male fox. 8 


Die. 2 Chess- 





Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


U R B A NA 3 L H A M - A | L J V 


l 


— a Tx. 0-4 X. i~ 


f eàrna 


or rafter of alder ; is diu teine f. ur, new alder, | 


425: 
Dia nam feart, God of (many) attributes. 


féathamhuil 


worst of fuel ; cliath-fh-, a wattle made of oi. feartach, -aiche, a. Full of virtue or energy. 2 


der; gach fiodh as a bhun, ach am f. as a 
bhàrr, (split) all wood from the top, but oi: 
der from the root. [Not elder, as gven by **.] 





207. Fearn. 
fe&rnach,** a. Aldern, abounding in, or made 
of alder. 
fearnaidh,** a. Masculine. 
fear-nimhe, s.m. Serpent. [/it, the poisonous 


one. Preceded by the art. am.] 

ffearndi, gen. of feàrn. 2 Buckler. 

fear-ogha, -oghachan, s.m. Grandson. 

féarr, comp. of a. math. Better, best. 2 Prefer- 
able. 
go ; an fh. dhomh falbh ? 's fhearr, had I bet- 
ter be going ? yes ` b’ fh. leam, I had rather, 
I prefer. 

fearra,(AF) s. Cow not milking. 

féarrad,** -aid, s.m. Improvement, ameliora- 
tion. 2 Convalescence. 3(DC) Good quality. 
*'S e f, na h-acfhuinn a thug roimhe e, the good 
quality of the gear brought it through ; a^ dol 
am f., getting better. 

fearra-dhris,§ e, -ean, s.f. Bramble-briar, dog- 

briar, dog-rose, see ros-nan-con. 

fearra-goloir, see earra-ghloir. 

fearraid, Gaelic spelling of ferret. 

fearrasaid,* s.f. see earrasaid. 2 see fearsaid. 
3**Tunic, Roman jacket. 

féearrdachd,tt sf.ind. see féairrdeachd, 

fearrdhalach, -aiche, see fearail. 

fearr-shion, s. Rain. 

fearsach,** a. Full of little ridges in the sand. 

fearsa, Gaelic spelling of verse. 

ifearsad, sm. Estuary, sandbank. 

feàrsaid, -ean, s.. Spindle. [The spindle is for 
winding thread, the ring on it to weight it, 

. So that it may gather momentum when twirl- 
ed between the thumb and fingers.] 
2 Axle of a cycle. 3 Dart. 4 Spear 
-shaft,  5ttSand-pit. 6iiWallet, 
F. na làimhe, one of the bones of the 
Jore-arm, the ulna. 

fearsaideag,§-eige, -an, s. f. Thrift, 
sea-gilly-flower,rocket—ca@vile mar- 
itimum. 

tfearsaidh, -an, s.m. Sage, wise man. 

fearsan, see fearsa. 

muon, -n, 8.f. Pool, standing wa- 

er. 

fear-shionn, see fearthainn. 

feart, -airt, s.f. Attention, notice,[208. Feàrsaid 
earefulness, heed. 2 Predicate in grammar. 
13 Grave. Na toir f. air, do not heed him. 

-—-—, -a, -An, [ pl. in Suth’d also feartainn,] s.m. 
Virtue, inherent quality. 2 Efficacy. 3 At- 
tribute, repute. 4 Miracle. 5 Country, land. 
+6 Grave, tomb. 7 Field. S Fair-green. Oif 
Action, deed.  10**Forces, host. 





’S fhèarr dhuit falbh, you had better |t 


Le f. do 


Effectual. 
4 Ivfinitive ‘of mood in grammar.) 
stantial. 6**Powerful, having forces. 
lorous. Toradh f., substantial crops. 

feartag, CR) s.f. Thrift, sea-pink—W. of Rose, 
[not fearsaideag there.] 

feartaich,** v.a. Accomplisb. 

te, past pt. Accomplished. 

-àla, @ Reputable. 2 Valorous, 3 

wonder-working. 4* Having 


3 Virtuous, reputable, renowned. 
5 Sub- 
7 Va- 


feartail, 
** Miraculous, 
good qualities, 

ffeartaille, s.m. Funeral oration. 

feartalachd, s.f.ind. Efficacy, virtue, energy. 2 
Miraculous quality. 

feartan, n.pl. of feart. 

feartas, -ais, s.m. Manly conduct. 

feart-bhriathar, -air, -thran, see for-bhriathar. 

feart-bhriathrach, -aiche, see for-bhriathrach. 

feart-fhacal, s.m. Adjective. 

feart-;hràbh, sm. Epitaph. 

fearthainn, s.f. Rain. 2(AF) see feartuinn. 

; -—each, -iche, @ Rainy. 

Tfeart.laoidh, -ean, s.f. Epitaph. 

feart-mholadh, -aidh, -aidhean, 8.f. Funeral 
oration. 2 Panegyric, epitaph. 

feartuinn,(AF) s.f. Salmon. 

tfeas, see fios. 

— ach, see fiosach. 

fiéasag, see feusag. 

feasan,$ s.m. Adder’s tongue fern, see lus-na- 
nathrach. 

feascorluch, see feasgar-luch. 

feascradh, -aidh, s.m. Sbrivelling. 2 Decaying. 

feasd, see am feasd. 

feasdrach,** -aich, s.m. Muzzle. 2 Bridle-bit, 

feasgal,** ail, s.m. Gaelic spelling of fiscal. 

aiche, s.m. Herald. 

feasgand, see feusgann. 

feasgar, -air, -graichean, s.m. Afternoon, even- 
ing. Air f., on an evening; beul an fh., the 
evening twilight ; mir î., an evening meal, 

ach, -aich, æ. Of, or pertaining to, the 

afternoon or evening, vespereal. 2**Late. 

an, -ain, s.m. Vesper, evening-song. 

-lueh, s.f. Dor-mouse. 2 Field-mouse, 
3**Cockchafer. 4**Beetle. 

tfeas-ghlanadh, -aidh,-aidhean, s.m.Gargarism. 

tfeasgor, -oir, s.m. Separation. 

feasoy, .see feusag. 

ach, -aiche, see feusagach. 

feasradh.(DU) Gairloch for easradh. 

feastrach, -wich, -aichean, s. f. Muzzle. 2 Bri- 
dle, bit, 

fèath, -a, -an, s. m. [ f. in Argyll amd some 
other parts.] Calm, tranquillity. 2 Learn- 
ing, skill, knowledge. 3 Gentle breeze. 4 
** see féith. 5tfBog. Thàinig f, oirnn, we 
were becaimed ; tràth thig am f., when the 
calm comes ; tha ’n oidhehe "na f., the night 
is a dead calm ; fhuair e f., he got a respite, his 
fever abated alittle ; f. dubh or f. geal, œ per- 
fect calm ; finn-fhéath, a perfect calm— Lewis; 
glag fh., a dead catan—Uist. [see note under 
féath-nan-eun. ] 

featha,(AC) s.m. Moorland. F. fada farsuing, 
the moorland fay and wide, 

féathach,(DU) a. Calm. 

feathachan,tf -ain, see feothachan. 

féathail, -ala. a. Calm, still, quiet. 

Tíeathadh, -aidh, s.m. Sight. 

¢feathal, -ail, s. m. Bowl. 2 Cup. 
Face, countenance. 5 Figure. 

féathalachd, s.f. Calmness, stillness, quietness. 

















3 Fur. 4 


fhrasaibh blàtha, by the virtue of thy warm |féathamhlachd, see féathalachd. 


showers ; feartan buairidh, tempting qualities; | féathambuil, see feathail, 


Digitized. by 
* INTERNET ARCHIVE 


féathan 


féathan,-ain, s.m. Fur, hair. 

féathanach,** a. Having fur, hairy. 

fèath-ghàire,tt s.m. Smile. 

feath-nan-eun, s.m. Calmness. Fèath nan eun 
mar sgàthan, ascalm as a mirror. Fèath 
nan eun fionn, in the tale Gaisgeach na 
sgéithe deirge,is a euphemism for a hurricane. 
In some districts, the phrase means a perfect 
calm, the fèath geal of the sea-folk, and the 
fèath dubh of the hill-folk. 

Tíéathsgaoileadh, -eidh, s.m. Palsy. 

tied, s.m. Narrative, relation, 

tfed, a. Hard, difficult. 

Tfeibh, s.f. Riches, goods. 2 Long life. 

Tíéich, -e, -ean, s.f. Sinew, see féith. 

féich, gen. of fiach. 

feichd, Gaelic form of effect. 

féicheadair, see féichnear. 

féicheamh, -eimh, see féichnear. 2 Debt. 

—ach, a. Pertaining to a debt. 

féicheamhnach, -aich, see féichnear. 

féicheanas,(MMcL) s.m. Friendly dispute. 

féicheannach, -aich, see feichnear. 

féichnean, n.p. of fiach. 

féichnear, -eir, -eirean, s.m. Debtor. 
viated Fr.—Dr.] 

féichnibh, dat.pl. of fiach. 

feideag, see feadag. 

féidh, gen. sing. & n. pl. of fiadh. 

féidh-fheoil (CR) s.f. Venison—W. of Ross. 

féidheil, see féidh-fheoil. 

féidhich, s.pl. Deer. 

féidhmealachd, see feumalachd, 

féidhmeil, see feumail. 

ffeidil,** o Gaelic form of faithful. 

tfeidir, a. Able, possible. 

+ , $. Power, possibility. 

tfeigh,** sf. see feith. 2 a. Bloody, sharp. 

feighe, s.m. Warrior, champion. 2 Top of a 
house. 3 Hill, mountain. 4**Slaughterer. 

feighreag, -an, see oighreag. 

feilbheachan,(MMcL) s.m. X Ear-ring. 

féild, -e,-ean, s.f. see filleadh. [* says “a 
philosopher—TIrish.”’ ] 

féile, gen.sing. of fial. Talla na f., the hall of 
of hospitality ; Righ na f. the King of pro- 
mise (Christ) ; cridhe na féile, the liberal soul. 
[Also used as nom. (f.) Is dona ’n fhéile 
'chuireas duine fhéin air an iomairt, it’s an 
unhappy generosity that drives a man to his 
Kë 

féile, -achan, s.m. see féileadh. 

tfeile, s.f. Charm, incantation. 

feile,( AC) a. Grassy. Faileagan f. fo ’r casan, 
grassy meads beneath your feet. 

¢feileacan,(AF) s.m. Butterfly, may-bug. 

féileach, -liche, a. see fialaidh. 

an, n.pl. of féile or féileadh, 

dat see fialaidheachd. 

féileadh, -lidh, -leachan, [pl. féilidhean—W. of 
Ross.] s. m. Thekilt, that part of the dress 
of the Gael from the waist to the knee. 

féileadh-beag, -idh-bhig, -eachan-beaga, s. m. 
The kilt in its modern form. 

féileadh-bhreacain,** s.m. The kilted plaid. 
'This consisted of twelve yards or more,of nar- 
row tartan, which was wrapped round the 
middle, and hung down to the knees. It was 
most frequently fastened round the middle 
by a belt, and then it was called ** breacan- 
an-fhéilidh," or ** féileadh-bhreacain." The 
breacan, or plaid part of this article of dress, 
was,according to occasion, wrapped round the 
shoulders, or fastened on the left shoulder 
with a brooch (braisd) of gold, silver or steel, 
according to the wealth of the wearer. By 


[Abbre- 











this arrangement there was nothing to im- 


D 


SITCORICT AGS H 
INTERNET- ARCHIV 


426 


feimean 


pede the free use of the sword-arm. 
féileadh-mór, -idh-mhóoir,-leachan-móra, s. m. 
The kilt in its primitive form, consisting of 
one piece, generally of tartan, covering, when 
Ae the whole body, and girt round the 
waist. 
feileag,** -eig, s.f. Honeysuckle. 
an,** s.m. Butterfly. 2 Diminutive per- 
féileas,** eis, s.m. Trifle. 2 Vanity. Luchd 
féileis, triflers. 
s ach,** a. Frivolous, vain. Gu f., frivolous- 


y. 

féileasachd,** s.f. Frivolousness. 2 Vanity. 

féile-faraich, s. Unexpected encounter, unlook- 
ed-for meeting, accident. 'N déis na b’ eudar 
dhomh ’ghabhail le féile-faraich de 'n dram, 
what I was compelled to receive, owing to an 
unlooked-for drain of drink—Duanaire, 187. 

tfeilfios, s.m. Secondsight. 

féill, -e, -ean & -tean, s.f. Feast, festival. 2 
Fair, market. 3 Holiday. 4**Vigil of a fes- 
tival 5**Banquet whereat the chief presi- 
ded. 6**Company at sucha banquet. F. an 
roid, or f. roid, the autumnal equinox, rood- 
day ; làithean f., holydays, also days of folly ; 
cum an fh, air an là, keep the festival on the 
right day—very seasonable advice at the pres- 
sent time, when owing to the completion of 
the 19th. century there is now an additional 
day between the Old and New Styles, (New 
Year’s Day Old Style now being Jan 14th.) 
and in some parts of Gaeldom the dates of 
festivals being still kept according to 19th. 
century Old Style reckoning, there are three 
styles in useat present! "Cum an fh. air 
an là," also signifies pay or keep the engage- 
ment on the stipulated day. [Féill does not as- 
pirate a proper noun following in Scotland, 
although it does in Ireland.] Féill Bride, 
February—Arran ; F. Bealltainn, May—Ar- 
ran. Hadar Nollaig "ab roid, eadar F. roid 
's F. Briain,— ai the year round. 

féill-bhiiadhnail, s.f. Anniversary. 

féill-Bride, s.f. Candlemas. [Preceded by the 
art. AN FH—] La fh.-Bride, Candlemas day. 

féilleachadh, -aidh, sm. Keeping of holidays 
or holydays. 

féilleachd,** s.f. Festivity. 

féilleil, a- (DU) Desirable, much sought-after, 
valuable, 2 (PM) Marketable. Beathach f., 
a marketable beast. 

féill-Eoin, ** s,f. St.John's day or feast. [Pre- 
ceded by the art. AN FH—.] 

féillire, -an, s. m. Almanac. 





son. 





féill-Martuinn,** s.f. Martinmas. [Preceded by 


the art. AN FH—. ] 

féill-Micheil, s.f. Michaelmas, [Preceded by 
the arb, AN FH—.| | 

féill-nan-righ,** s.f. Epiphany. 

féill-Samhna,tt s.m. All Hallows. [Preceded by 
the art. AN FH—.] 

féillteach, a, see féilteach. 

--————-d, see féilteachd. ; 

féilteach, -iche, a. Of, or belonging to, fairs or 
markets. 2**Hospitable. 3**Festal. 4** 
Fond of feasting. Lee 

cl, s.f.ind. Feasting, festivity. 2 Keep- 
ing of holidays or holydays. 38**Hospitable- 
ness. 

feilteag,** -eige, s.f. Cod. 

feiltire, see; feillire. 

féim, -eannan, s.m. see feum. 

feim,** s.f. Woman, female, wife. 

——each, -iche, a. see feumach. 

—each, -ich, s.m. see feumach. 

-—ean,** .ein, sm. The feminine gender. 


féin 


féin, pers.pron. Self. Used only as an adjunct 
to nouns or other pronouns. Mi-fhéin, my- 
self ; thu-fhéin, thyself; iad-fhéin, themselves. 
When combined with a possessive pronoun it 
may be translated by own, as mo mhac-féin, 
my own son ; siod fhéin e mar iolair, that 
same is he, like an eagle ; mar seo fhéin, in 
this very way ; an seo fhéin, in this very place; 
an sin fein, then and there ; an diugh féin, this 
very day ; 'cheana féin, already ; chan fhaigh 
duine an t-uisge féin 'san àite seo gun &chean- 
nach, one cannot get even water here without 
paying for it ; is duine dona gun fheum, & 
chuireadh cuireadh orm fhéin is caitheamh, 
heis a pitiful fellow who would invite me and 
leave me to pay—a strange use of féin. 

It is a peculiarity of the Northern dialect 
of Gaelic that it makes a distinction in the 
pronunciation of féin when that word is used 
with the first personal pronoun, Generally 
it is fhin in that connection, as, mi-fhin, sinn- 
fhìn, orm-fhin—thu fhéin 's mi-fhìn. In Suth’d 
from Strathy Water to Durness, instead of ei- 
ther fhéin or fhin with the first person, they 
say fhéin, mi-fhéan, &c., and in the remainder 
of Strathy and in the S.E. of the county, they 
say fhian, mi-fhian, leam-fhian, sinn-fhian, 
nimi mo sheunadh fhian, J will charm my- 
Self. In other connections the word is fhéin 
in the North, as it is in all connections in the 
South. 

féin, -e, s.f. Selfishness. 

féin-agartach,** a. Full of compunction, re- 
morseful. 

féin-agartas,** -ais, s.m. Self-reproach, com- 
punction, remorse. Saor o fh., free from self- 
reproach. 

féin-aicheadh, s.m. Self-denial. 

féin-bharalachd, s.f.ind. Positiveness. 

féin-bheachd, s.f. Self-conceit. 

féin-chiontach, -aiche, a. Seli-reproached. 

ifeine, s.m. Boor, ploughman, farmer. 

féineachas, -2is, sf. see féinealachd. 2**His- 
tory. 3**Genealogy. 

féineachd, s,f. Personality, egotism. 

féinealachd, s.f.ind. Selfishness. 

feiu-eallach,( A F)s.m.Cattle given in restitution. 

féinear,** -eir, s.m. Egotist. 

feinecreasadh,(AF) s.m. Ferret. 

féineil, -eala, a. Selfish, self-interested. 

féin-fhios, s.m. Consciousness. 2**Experience, 
knowledge acquired by experience, 

-————-ach, a. see féin-fhiosrach. 

-— ————raàch,-aiche, a. Conscious. 2 Exper- 
ienced. Tha mi f. air, Iam conscious of it. 
-—————rachadh, -aidh, s.m. Consciousness, 

self-knowledge. 2 Experience. 
-— — ——ra&chd, 8.f. see féin-fhiosrachadh. 
féin-fhoghainteach, -tiche, œ.  Self-sufficient, 
self-confident, 





-—————-——-4, 8.f. ind. Self-sufficiency, 

self-confidence. 

féin-fhoghainteas,-eis, see féin-fhoghainteachd. 

féin-fhoghantas, -ais, see féin-fhoghainteachd. 

—— -ghabhaltas, -ais, s.m. Intrusion. 

—— -ghluasach, -aiche, @. Automatic, 
tomotous. 

—— -ghluasad, -aid, -an, s.m. Self-motion. 

—— -ghluasadach, see féin-ghluasach. 

—— -ghluasadh, -aidh, o Automatous, self- 
moving. 

—— -ghluaisear, -eir, ean, s.m. Automaton. 

—— -ghluas-rud,** s.m. Automaton. 2 Perpet- 
uum mobile. 

—— -ghradh,** -ghraidh, s.m. Self-love. 2 Self- 
ishness. 

—— «ghr&dhach,** -aiche, e, Selfish, self-inter- 


au- 


D 


Da ES P. Mao HN, ee AUS An 
AB E Ei RUE d E || a 
d = T d = AR H VE 


427 


CLAM: | V.N., 


féist 


ested. Fear f. a self-interested man. 

féin -irisiol, œ. Humble, condescending. 

—— -irisleachd, see féin-irioslachd. 

—— -irioslachd, s.f/.ind. Condescension, humble- 
mindedness. — 

feinistear, -eir, Gaelic spelling of French fen- 
estre, a window. 

féin-mharbbadh, -aidh, see féin-mhortadh, 

—— -mheas, s./. Self-conceit. 

—— -mheasail,** g. Self-conceited, vain. 

—— -mhort, see féin-mhortadh. 

—— -mhortadh, s.m. Suicide, act of self-murder, 

—— -mhortail,** o. Suicidal. 

—— -mhortair, -ean, s.m. Self-murderer,suicide. 

—— -mhothachadh, -aidh, s.m. Conviction, 

Féinn, -e, s.pl. The Fingalians. 2 The country 
of the Fiugalians, which included the great- 
er part of Gaeldom. 

féinneachas,** s.m. Militia. 

féin-reubach, -aiche, @. Self-lacerating. 

—— -riaghladh, -aidh, s.m. Continence, 

—— .shealbhaich,** «v.g. Possess by prescript- 
ive right. 

—— -smachd, see féin-riaghladh. 

—— -spéis, -e, s.f. Self-conceit, self-love, self. 
interest. 

—— -spéiseil, -eala, æ. Selfish, self-conceited, 
self-opinioned. 

— -thoil, -e, s.f. Arbitrament. 2**Self-will, 
wilfulness. Aoradh féin-thoile, will-worship. 

—— -thoileach, -eiche, a. see féin-thoileil. 

—-thoileil, @ Arbitrary. 2** Self-willed, 
wilful, opinionative. 3 Spontaneous. Gun 
bhif., without being self-willed. 

—— -thoilich, s.pl. Voluntaries, in an ecclesias- 
tical sense. 

tfeir, sf. Bier. 

tféird, e, -ean, s.f. Track or rut, made by wheels 
of a cart. 

féirdeachd, sf. see féairrdeachd. 

feir-dhris, s. Bramble, 

feireag,? -eig, -an, s.f. Cloudberry, see oigh- 
reag. 

feiread, -cid, Gaelic spelling of ferret. 

feirg, gen sing. of fearg. 

feirgueachadh, see feargnachadh. 

feirm, Gaelic spelling of farm or form. 

feirmeal,( DMC) s.m. Boasting, bragging. 

feirmealaiche,(DMO) s. me Boaster, braggart, 
man of great professions. 

feirmige, s. m. Ram with one of its testicles 
wanting— Lewis. 

tfeirsde,** s.pl. Pits or dibs of water on the sand 
at low tide. 

féirseag,(CR) Arran for feursann. 

feirsidh,** s.f. Strength. 2 Courage. 

feirt,** s.f. see féird. 

feis,(AF) s. Pig, swine. 

féis, see féisd. 

ffeis, s.f. **Convocation. 2**Synod. 3** Car- 
nal intercourse. 

féisd,§ s.f. Feast, as applied to grass—festuca. 

Feast. 

——,-e,-ean, s. f. Entertainment, feast, ban- 
quet. Là féisde, a feast-day. 

——e, s.f.(DMy) Tether for cattle, to keep them 
from the eorn— Lewis. 

—eachd, s.f.ind. Feasting, banqueting, en- 
tertainment. 

féisdear, -eir, -an, s.m. Entertainer. 

féisdeas, s.m. Entertainment, accommodation. 
F. oidhche, a night’s lodging. 

féisdeil,** a. Feasting. 2 Hospitable. 

féisdeireachd,** s.f. Banqueting. 

féisdire, see féisdear. 

feiseag, -eig, s.f. see piseag. 

féist, see féisd. 

2 E2 


feisteas 


féisteas, see féisdeis. 

féisteil, see féisdeil, 

feith, pr.pt. a’ feitheamh, v.g. & n. Wait, re- 
main, stay, attend. F. requires the prep. air, 
or ri, simple or compounded, after it, as, f. 
air, wait on; f. rium, wait for me. 

fèith, s.f. see fèath. 

féith, -e, -ean, s.f. Sinew. 2 Vein. 3 pl. (féith- 
ichean—DMy) Rents in moor- or bog-land 
made by water. There is no grass in these 
hollows, and they look very like sinews at a 
distance—Lewis, An fh. a chrùb, the sinew 
that shrank. 

——, -e, -eachan, [gen.sing. féithe, pl. féithich- 
ean—Gairloch.] s.f. Bog, quagmire, fen, mo- 
ass. 2 Bog-channel. Am fear a bhitheas ’s 
an fhéith, cuiridh a h-uile duine a chas air, 
everyone puts his foot on (as a stepping-stone) 
him who sticks in the mud. 

feith,$ sr Honeysuckle, see uilleann. 2(AH) 
Relief, alleviation, easement. F. roimh ’n 
bhas, relief preceding death ; fhuair e f. ghasda, 
he experienced a welcome relief. 

féith-chrübadh, -aidh, s.m. Spasm, convulsion. 

feithde, see feitheideach. 

féitheach, -iche, a. Sinewy, nervous, tendonous, 
muscular, 2** Having large veins, 3**Boggy, 
marshy. 

an, n.pl. of féith (bog.) 

a3, -als, s.m. Nervousness. 

———d, s.f.ind. Muscularity, wiriness. 

feitheadh, see feitheamh. 

feitheamh, -himh, s.m. Waiting, attending. 2 
Expecting. 3 Attendance. 4**Delay, linger- 
ing. A’ f—, pr.pt. of feith. A’ f. ri gaoith, 
waiting for a (favourable) wind ; a’ f. am fath, 
lying in wait. 

—air, -ean, s.m. Overseer, watchman, 
waiter, 2liSeer, augur. 

féithean,** -ain, s.m. Sinew, tendon. 

—————ach, -aiche, a. Sinewy, muscular. 

féithear, a. see féitheach. 

feitheid,* s.m. Beast or bird of prey. 2 Vulture, 

each,* -aiche, a. Like a beast or bird of 








rey. 
x each,*-ich, s.m. Person ready to pounce 
on anything, like a vulture or bird of prey. 2 
(AF) Beast. 

féitheil, -eala, o see féathail. Oidhche fh., 
a calm night. 

feith-ghaire, s.f. see féath-ghàire. 

féithich,** v, Becalm. 

féithid, see feitheid. 

Tíeithil, v.g. Gather. 2 Keep. 

feithis, v.g, Gather, assemble. 
serve. 

féithleag,t s.f. Honeysuckle, see uilleann, 2 
Pod of any leguminous vegetable. 

féithlean, s.m, Honeysuckle, see uilleann. 

féith-lianan, s.7. see lionan-féitheach. 

féith-luthaidh,** s.f. Sinew. 2 Ham-string, 

féithmealachd, see feumalachd. 

tiel, s.f. Strife, debate. 

tiem, Gaelic spelling of French femme. 

Hen, s.m. Air, 

feo,(CR) s.m. Airin gentle motion—Loch Tay 
& Strathtay. F. fuar a’ chamhanaich, the 
cold morning air. [1t & tt give s.f.] (see feò- 
chan.) 

feobha, see feabha. 

feobhaid, see feabhaid. 

feobharan. -ain, s.m. Pith. 2 Puff. 

feobhas, see feabhas. 

aich, see feabhasaich. 

feocalan, see feócullan. 

feoch,** v.n. Droop, fade, decay. 

adan, -ain, s.m. Corn-thistle—carduus ar- 





2 Keep, pre- 





428 





feolar 
vensis. see aigheannach. 
feochan, -ain, s.m. Air, gentle breeze, breath 


of wind. 2**Decay. | 
feachdan, § s.m. Corn-thistle, see aigheannach., 
feocullan, -ain, s,m. Poleeat, Sc. foumart, Gre 


Sneaking fellow, 3(AF)Weasel 4(AC)Ferret. 
Tfeodaidh, a. Hard. 
feodaire, -an, s.m. see feódarair. 
feodar, -air, s.n. Pewter. 
feodarach,** e Stannary. 
feodarair, -ean, s.m. Pewterer. 
feodarra, see feddaraeh. 
feodhachadh,** -aidh, s.m. Drooping. 
feodhaich,t v.a. Decay, fade. 
feodhail s.f. Shallow estuary—G@airloch. [ for 
fadhail.] 
feodhainn, see feadhainn. 
feodhas, see feabhas, 
feodhnach,** o, Feudal. 
feodhradh,** -aidh, sam. Manner, fashion, 
feoghain, see feadhainn. | 
feòil, gen. feòla, dat. feòil, voc. ’fhedil, [ gen. feol- 
adh in Skye & Lewis.] sg Flesh. 2 Flesh 
in a theological sense in contra-distinction 
to spirit. Mart-fh., beef ; muilt-fh., mutton; 
circe-fh., chicken ; tha a fuil 'sa f. ’na craic 
eann fhéin, Aer flesh and blood are in her own 
EE ss of a woman who has borne no chil- 
ren. 
—— -bhocta, 8.f. Baked flesh. 
—— -chnoidheag, see feoil-chruimheag. 
—— -chruimh, s.f. Flesh-worm, maggot. 
—— -chruimheach,** a. Having maggots. 2 
Pertaining to maggots. 
—— -chruimheag, -eige, -an, s.f. Flesh-worm, 
maggot. 
—— -dhath, -aith, -an, s m. Carnation (colour.) 
—— -dhaithte, a. Flesh-coloured. 
— -dhionair, s.m. Creosote. 
—— -fhrigheanaichte, s.f. Fried flesh, | 
—— -ghabhail, -alach, s.f. Incarnation, the act 
of assuming body. An fh., the incarnation. 
—— -itheach, -iche, œ. Carnivorous. Eun f., @ 
carnivorous bird. 
—— -réiste,(MMcD) s.f. Flesh which is dried 
and smoked. | 
—— -theirce, s.f.ind. Leanness. e 
——ach, -iche, a. Lean, having little 
flesh. 
feòir, gen.sing. of feur. 
feoirlig, see feòirling. 
feòirling, -ean, s.f. Farthing sterling. 2 Far- 
thing Scots, one twelfth of a penny sterlin 
“ turn-odhar." 3 see feorlan. 4tł Sm 
peice of land (3 of a ‘‘ peighinn.”’) 
feoirlinn, see feoirling. 
feoirne, s.m.ind. Chess. 2**Grass. Fear-f., @ 
chess-man, Gearradh f., a hack under the toes. 
achan, (AC) s. m. Fairy mouse, lesser 
shrew. 
an, -ein, s.m. Pile or blade of grass. 2** 
Cock of hay. 3**Straw. 4**Buckle. Nach 
dean f. lubadh, that will not bend a blade of 
TASS. 
d ineach, -iche, o. Grassy. 2** Strawy, 
light as straw. 3**In heaps or cocks. 
Tfeoite, a. Faded, decayed. 
fedla, gen.sing. of feoil. i 
feòlacan, (PJM) s.m. Dormouse— Lewis. 
-——ch, -aich, s.m. Carnage, slaughter. 
-——dair, -ean, s.m. Butcher, flesher. 
-——daireachd, s.f.ind. Butchery. Ris an fh., 
butchering. . 
fedladh, gen. sing. of fedil—Skye. 
feolan, -ain, s.m., Proud flesh, flesh growing be- 
yond the skin, || excoriation. 
feolar, see feolmhor. 











feolmhach 


feolmhach,** -aich, 6.7m. Flesh-meat. 

feolmhoire, comp. of feolmhor. 

.—achd, see feòlmhorachd. 

feòlmhor, -oire, æ. Fleshy, fat. 2* [ustful, car- 
nal. An inntinn fh., the carnal mind. 

achd, s.f. Lust, carnality, fleshiness, 
bestiality. 

feorachadh, 
ing, questioning, 
raich. ; 

feòrachail, -ala, a. Curious, | 

feorachas,** -ais, s.m. Curiosity, 

feorachd, see feorachadh. * 

feòrag, -aig, -an, $.f. Squirrel. Cho grad ri 
feòragan Céitein, as nimble as squirrels in 
May. [Sometimes applied in error to the 
ferret.] 

ach,tt o, 

feòraich, pr.pt. a’ i 
Enquire, ask, question, 
quired of her. [ 

, s.f. Enquiring, asking. A’ f—, pr. pt. 
of feoraich. 

feo'ran, seefeobharan. 

feoran, -ain, -an, $.m. Green. 2 Mountain val- 
ley. 3 Green land adjoining agbrook, 4 Gen- 








-aidh, s.m. Enquiry, act of enquir- 
asking. A’ f—, pr.pt. of feo- 
inquisitive. 

inquisitiveness. 





Abounding in squirrels, 
feoraich & a’ feorachadh, v.a. 
Dh’ fh. mi dhi, Z en- 





tle breeze. 
feòran-curraidh, s.” m. Water 
hore-hound—lycopus europe- NN 
| u8 V 


fedras,§ -ais, s,m.Common spin- 
dle-tree, see oir. i 

feorlan, -ain, -an, $8.7. Firlot. 
2 Bushel, four pecks. 

feornachan, see fedirneachan. 

feornan,** -aim, 8.71. See feòir- <=> 
nean. k 

— — —ach,** a. see feòirnein- 
each. 

fedsag, -aige, -an, 

ach, -aiche, 






see feusag. 
a.see feusag- 





$09. Fedran- 


ach. 
+feoth, v.n. Wither, fade. curraidh. 


feothachan,f-ain, 8.9. Little 
breeze. 

feothan, s.m. Dormouse. 

feothas, see feabhas. 

~ aich, see feabhasaich. 

feubh, v. prov. for feith. 

feucagach, -aiche, @. see peucagach. 

feuch! inter. See! behold ! lo! Feuch ris ! 
what do you think of him ! —isn't he the brave 
man ! feuch riut ! look you ! believe me ! 

feuch, pr.pt. a’ feuchainn, v.a. See, behold. 2 
See, take care, 3 Show. 4 Taste, try. 5 
Give. F. gu'm pill thu, see (take care) that you 
return ; f. dhomh mo threun, show me my hero; 
feuchaibh an toiseach, try in the first piace ; 
f. ris, give it a trial, try it; f. greim arain, 
try a piece of bread; feucbaidh mi fhathast 
thu, PU test you yet; a dh’ fheuchainn a 
chéile, to compete with each other ; feuchaidh 
seo riut fhéin, this will test your powers con- 
siderably, 

feuchadair, -ean, s.m. Wizard, seer. 2 Tester, 
assayer. 3 Competitor. 4 Rival. 

feuchainn, s.f. Trying. 2 Seeing. 3 Tasting. 4 
Showing. 5 Disclosing. 6 Trial, attempt. 7 
Look, aspect. A’ f—, pr.pt. of feuch. 

feuchainneach,* -aiche, «. Trying. 

feuchar,** fut. pass. of feuch. Shall or will be 
shown. 2 imp. pass. Let (it) be shown. S. 
dhomh an òigh, let the maid be shown to me. 
F. is also used impersonally with the prep. le, 
simple or compounded, expressed or under- 
stood. Feuchar ris (leam) mu dheireadh, ii 
will he tried (by me) at last. 





D 
RNET 


" f j 
= i [ 
E. pmp pm "Jw 
L E f 1 = = 
' — f^, i l LT] a 
1 5 K LI 


429 


feur 
feud, v. May, can, ought, behove. 2 Must, 
(in a negative sentence only.) Feudaidh 


gach neach dol as, everyone may escape ; feud- 
aidh e bhith, maybe, perhaps ` ma’ s fheudar 
tuiteam, if we must fall. [also faod.] 

feudail ! inter. Dear me ! 

feudail, -alach, an, s.f. Treasure, cattle, prey, 
spoil, booty. 2 Profit, benefit, advantage. 3 
Term of endearment. M’ fheudail, my darling, 
[also w eudail, my object of jealousy] ; toradh 
na feudalach gun am faicinn, the fruit of the 
cattle that have not been seen. 

each, -iche, c, Rich, having treasure, 
abounding in cattle, 2 (DMC) Precious. Nach 
e tha f. agad, how precious itis to you. 

feudal, see feudail, 

feudar, s. May, can. 'Sfh. dhomh, I must; ma 
’s fh. dhuit, if you must. 

feudmhach, -aiche, @. Potent. 

tfeugmhas, -ais, s.m. Absence. 2 Want. 

feulainn,* s.f. Honeysuckle, see iadh-shiat. 

feum, v.a. & n. Be in want of, be in need of, 
must, needs must. Feumaidh mi falbh, £ 
must go; am feum mi falbh ? must í go?; 
cha’n fheum mi falbh, 4 need not go; dh’ 
fheumadh thu dol dhachaidb, you would re- 
quire to go home ; am fear a théid ’san dris, 
feumaidh e tighinn aisde mar a dh’ fhaodas e, 
he that goes among briers must come out as he 





n, 
feum, -a & féim,s.m. Need. 2 Use, usefulness, 
2 Dire necessity. 4 Poverty. 5 Worth. 4 
Occasion. Dà isf. dha ? what is the use of it € 
cha/n "eil f. ort, there is no occasion for 
(or need of,) you ; cha dean e f., he, (or it) wilt 
not do ; cha’n 'eil f. annad, there is no use in 
you; is beag feum a th’ ort, you are quite use- 
less ; ann am fheum, in my time of need; 's e 
am f. a thug air sin a dheanamh, dire necess- 
ity made him do that. 


feumach, -aiche, a. Needy, necessitous, F. 
air biadh, in need of food. 
,-aich, s.m. Needy person. 
feumaich, v.g. Employ, use. prov. 
feumail, -ala, o Needful, necessary, useful. 


Ro fh., very useful. 
feumalach, -aiche, d. see feumach. 

—d, s.f.ind. Use, utility, necessity. 2 
**Advantageousness. Fhuair mi m’ fh., I 
have got what serves my purpose ; f. an ni seo, 
the utility of this thing. 

feumalan,(CR) s.m. Thistle—Arran. 

feumanach, a. Having a keen sense of smell. 

feumanach, -aich, s. m. Needy person. prov. 
2 Beggar. 3**Tool. Cuidan fheumaunaich, 
the portion of the poor ; ni e f. dhiot-sa, he will 
make a tool of you. 

—d,** stad, Beggarliness, 

feumannach, -aich s.m. Superintendent., 2 
Inspector. 3 Steward. 

feum-sgaoilte, a. Extensively useful. 

feun, gen. -a & -6in, -an, s. m. Cart, waggon, 
wain. 2**War-chariot. 3(AC) Arm. 4 Hand, 
hollow of the palm. 5 (CR) pronounced 
*£feuinn." Load, what a person can carry— 
Arran. F. uisge, a *'gang "' of water. 

—adair,-ean, see feunair. 

feunaih, see feun, 

feunaidh, -ean, s.f. Little cart. 2 Peat cart— 
Inverness. 3**Cart-horse. 

feunair,** -ean, s.m. Carter, wazgoner, Carman. 

eachd.** s.f.imd. Waggon-driving, busi- 

ness of a waggoner. 

feur, feòir, s. m. Grass. 2 Herbage. 3 Hay. 
F. tioram, hay ; cruach fheòir, a hay-rick ; f. 
gorm, green grass; bharr an fheoir, off the 
grass, from grazing. | 











feur 


feur, v.a. Feed on grass, graze. 

feurach, -aiche, o, Grassy, abounding in grass 
or hay. 2**Verdant. 8(AH)Grazing. Cnocan 
buidhe f., a yellow verdant knoll; paidhidh 
am feaman am f., the tail (manure) will pay the 
grazing. 

, -aich, s.m. Pasture, 2**Hay-loit. 3** 
Hay-yard. 

feurach, s.m. & pr.pt. Uist for feurachadh. A’ 
f. na ba, grazing the cow. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Feeding on grass, graz- 

ing, pasturing. A’ f—, pr.pt. of feuraich.. A’ 

cur an eich air feurachadh, putting the horse to 

gasture. 

—air,** s.m. Fodderer. 

feurachas, -ais, s.m. see feurach. 











feuraich, pr.pt.a’ feurachadh, v.a, Feed on grass, 
graze, pasture. 





810. Feuran. 511. Feur-a’-phuint. 


feuran, -ain, s.m. Green, grassy field. 

feuran,$-ain, s.m. Chives, wild garlic—allium 
schenoprasum. 

feur-aà'-phuint,$ s.m. Couch-grass—triticum re- 
pens. 

fear-caonaichte,(AH) s.m. Hay. 

feur-chaorach,§ s.m. Sheep’s fes- 
cue grass—festuca ovina. 

feur-cuir, s.m. Rye-grass. 

feur-ghartadh,(CR)s.m. The keep- 
ing of his own cattle next to the 
crops by the crofter whose turn 
it is to do the herding of the 
township—W. of Ross. 

feur-gortach, see conan. 

feur-itheach, a. Graminivorous. 
Beathaichean f., graminivorous 
beasts. 

feur-lann, an, s.m. Hay-house. 
2 Hay-stack-yard. 

feur-lobht, -a, -an, s.m. Hay-loft. 

feur-loch, -an, s.m. Grassy lake. 
3* Morass, 
cus. 





812. Feur- 
chaorach. 


marsh, swamp. 4 3 confervæ, fu- 





—an, -ain, dim. of feur-loch. s.m. Grassy 
pool, morass, marsh. 

feurmhor, o. see feurach. 

feur-nan-con, see feur-a’ -phuint. 

feursa, -an, sm. Canker. ?2tf see feursann. 

feursag, dim. of feursa, see feursann. 

feur-saidhe, s. m. ind. Hay. 2 (AH) Natural 
grass,as distinct from rye-grass. 

feursann, -ainn, -an, sf. Worm in the hide of 
cattle. 

feursdag, prov. for feursann. 


D 


NTER 


AIT AIO irm 
d E i A L H VM zé 


430 









—— —— -dubh,|}_ s. m. 


fiacaill 


feur-shion,** s.f, see fearthainn. 

feur-sithein-sithe,$ see conan. 

feursnan,(CR) Skye & Lewis tor feursann. 

feurtainean,(CR) Reay country for feursann. 

feur-thuinn,** s.f. see fearthainn. 
7———each,** a. see fearthainneach. 
feur-tioram, s.m. Hay. 

feur-uisge,} s.m. Sweet water-grass, see mils- 
ean uisge. 2 Confervee. ~ 

feusag, Mg. em af, et SÉ Barb. 

ach, -aiche, a. Bearded. *Hairy, | 

*Barbed. EE ur 

-bheóil, s.f. Moustache, 
see féisd. 

a, “an, sf. see féis. 

feusgan, -ain, s.m. Mussel. 

ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in mussels, 

2 Of, or pertaining to, mussels, 

ay See féis. i 

euth," s, Ditch,fslough. 2 (PJM) Moor hag. 

—ach,* -aiche, æ. Sloughy. ) m 

fh, is silent except at the beginning of the words 

fhathast, fhéin and fhuair, when it is pro- 
nounced like hin English house. 

fh For all words beginning with fh, except 

) the following, see under f, 

fhad's, adv. (fad+agus) While. 

fhal, for falach. 

'fheoil ! voc. sing. of feòil. 

(ES Although the three following words are 
treated by Gaelic grammars as variations of 
faigh, kthey are not connected with it etymo- 
logically. | 

fhuair, past aff, of faigh. Got. 

fhuaradh, past af. pass. of faigh, Fh. e, it was 


Is math a fh, 











feusd, 











ot. 
ee past aff. pass. of faigh. 
thu ! how well you succeeded I 
tii, s.m. Anger, indignation. 
TÉ, a. Bad, corrupt. 
tfia, a, The farthest. 
fiabhras, -ais, -an, s. am, Fever. 2 Ague. 3 
Confusion. 4 Later stage of feyer—Arran, 
—ach, -aiche, a, Feverish, of or connected 
with fever, aguish. 
—achd,** $.f. Aguishness. 
— — — -bainne,| s.m. Milk fever. [Preceded by 
the art. AM.] 
— — — -buidhe,l 8.2. Yellow fever. [Preceded 
by the art. AM.] 
-cleibhe, s.m. Pneumonia. [Preceded 
by the art. AM. | 
-chosg,** s.m. Febrifuge. 
— —— -chosgach,** s.m. Antifebrile. 








— ——— -critheanach,|} s.m. Ague. [Preceded 


by the art. AM) 
— -dearg,|| s.m.Scarlet fever. [Preceded by 


the art. AM.] 
[Preceded by 
the art. AM.] 


— -loisgeach,** s.m, Burning ague. 


Typhus. 





fiabhruidh, v.n. Ask—Arran. [fiafraigh.] 
fiabhrus, 
2 Reedy lake. | fiacaill,-cla, -clan, s.m. Tooth. 2 Cog of a wheel. 


see fiabhras. 


3 Dovetail in joinery. 4**Husk. 65 Tooth of 
a quern. 6 Jag of a saw, or any dentated in- 
strument. 7 Fluke of an anchor. 'S fhaide 
t' fhiacaill na t' fheusag, your tooth is longer 
than your beard—a remark sometimes made 
toa boy with a hungry look; cha tig d' a 
fhiaclan ach na thàinig, they have come all 
that will come of his teeth —a remark often ap- 
plied to one making a prudent answer or 
statement ; fiaclan a’ ghliocais, wisdom teeth; 
is geur f. á fraoch, one is always hungry when 
coming fron the hill (lit.sharp is the tooth from 
heather.) 


Original fro 


"1 | TP fg = —Á d m EF 
IINDZERS Y CF 
A A LEN haat = 

— m a. ` =, E Bee A a“ ` 
LIDDAMIA AMPALGN 
L RDA | G-A HA d Te | S A 


AS x 
JOS Al 


fiacaill-carbaid 
flacaill-carpaid, s.in. Oheek-tooth. 


coin-chriche.] 

fiacaill-cüil, s.n. Back tooth. 

po cms s.m. Late-grown tooth, wisdom- 
tooth. 

tiacaill-guibhre,(AF) s.m. Name given toa man 
who holds out against his neighbours. 

fiacaill-ledghainn, s. m. Dandelion, see béarnan- 
Bride. [Gaelic translation of the French 
name dent-de-lion. | 

fiacais, in the conversational Gaelic of Eigg & 
Uist, is the more or less courteous retort to 
inquisitive folk—c ait’ an robh thu ? bha, aig 
cul na fiacais, where have you been ? at the 
bak of the fiacais ; dé th’ agad an sin ? tha, 
greim de "n fhiacais, what have you got there? 
a piece of the fiacais. In some places an ex- 
postulatory exclamation—fhiacais,ua bath an 
teine ! dear me, do not drown thefire! “Eh. 

hriseil !" is a common expression of surprise 

in Argylishire. 

fiacas (CH) s.m. Small fish allied to the dog- 


fish. 

tfiach, see fitheach. 2 Wrath. 

fiach ! int. see feuch, 

fiach, féich, fiachan, s.m. Value, price, worth. 
2**Hire. ` Zant, Debt, arrears, F. shé sgill- 
inn, sixpence-worth ; an fh. e P is it worth, is 
it good ; an d’ fhuair thu ‘fh. ? did you get its 
value ? Coma am p’ fh. leat labhairt ris ? why 
would you condescend to speak to him ? cha D 
fh. leam e, I would scorn it ; am bheil sin mar 
fhiachaibh orm P am I vnder obligations to do 
that ? am bheil e am fiachaibh ort-sa seo a 
dheanamh P is il obligatory om youto do this ? 
cuiream mar fhiachaibh oirbh, let me charge 
you ; tha e eur mar fhiachaibh orm-sa, he 
would fain make me believe ; b’ aill leis a chur 
mar fhiachaibh orm-sa gur caise mo shron, he 
would fain make me believe that my nose is 
cheese ; gun fh., without debts, also worthless ; 
dh’ fhiachaibh, incumbent, obligatory ; maith 
dhuinn ar fiachan, forgive vs our debts. 

fiach, -a, a Worthy, valuable. 2 Good. 3 De- 
serving. 4 Proper. prov. Cha’n fh. seo, this 
is of no value ; ma’s fh.an duine a tha do 
ghnothach ris, if the man you have to dowith 
ts a respectable person ; an geall na 's fh. e, 
almost done for ; an fh. dhuit do shaothair ? is 
it worth your while ? ma’s fh. an teachdaire 's 
fh. an gnothach, if the bearer is respectable 
the message is important ; cha ’n fh, sin idir, 
that is not proper at all; ma ’s fh. leat, if you 
condescend to such ; is fh. thu do chairbhisd, 
you.are deserving of a beating ; cha’n fh. leam 
e, tt is beneath me. 

flachach, -aiche, a. see fiachail. 

fiachaicht’, a. Ransomed—Déin I. Ghobha. 

fiachail, -ala, a. Worthy, dignified, 2 Virtu- 
ous. 3 Having rauk or influence. 4 Valua- 
ble, relating to adebt. 5* Important. Duine 
f., @respectable man ; ni f., an important af- 
air. 

fiachalachd, s.f. Worthiness, value. 

fiacham,* s.m. Pretension. Cuir mar fh., pre- 
tend, assume. 

fiachan,* s.m. Value, debt. 

fiachan, pl. of fiach. Debts. Fear f., a creditor, 

fiacn-giulain, -an-, s.m. Fare. 

fiaclach, -aiche, æa. Toothed, having teeth. 2 
Jagged, dentated. 3 Prenged. 4**Serrated. 

fiaclachadh, -aidh, s. m. Showing the teeth. 2 
Getting ausry. 3 Indenting. 4 Notening. 5 
Dove-taiing.  6**Serrating. 7 Grinning. 8 
Gnashing of the teeth. A’ f—, pr. pt, of 
&aclaich. 


Dig timed by 


tT I"E"E- r n ET r^ Fa ye EX FE" 
IMTERNET ARCHIVE 


431 


à fiaclachan, -ain, sm. Saw-fish, 
fiacaill-cricne, s.m.  Eye-tootn, gag-tooth [also' 








fiadhaich-ghearr 


2 (DO) Iron 
garden rake—Argyll. 
fiaclach-coille, -aich-, s.m. Wild boar, wild pig. 
fiaclaibh, dat. pl. of fiacal. 
fiaclaich, pr.pt.a’ fiaclachadh, v.a. Grin, show 
the teeth. 2 Be angry. 3 Indent. 4 Notch. 
5 Dove-tail, 6 Serrate. 
fiaclair, s.m. Dentist. 
fiaclan, n. pl. of fiacal. 
tfiadh, v. a. Relate, tell. 
tfiadh, s.m Lord. 2 Land, 3 Meat, victuals. 
fiadh, féidh, s.m. Deer. Mar fh. air fireach, 
like a deer on a mountain. 
NAMES OF DEER AT VARIOUS AGES : 
Males— Red deer. {Damh—stag.] 
Young—Laogh, calf. 
1 year —Laogh, calf. 
2 years—Mang, brocket. Procach—Suth’d. 
3 years—Cnochdach, bod-da-bhioran, spayad. 
4 years—Scopannach,Damh, damh-féidh, stag. 
5 years—Damh cabrach, great stag. 
6 years—Lan damh, hart. 
Males—Fallow deer. [Boc—buck] 
Tonos —Meann-earb, fawn. Laogh—Loch* 
aber. 
Males—Roedeer.  [Boc—buck 
[No Gaelic names exclusively used for fal- 
low deer and roe deer have been obtained and 
if such exist they are local and not general) 
Female of red deer—Agh-féidh, and after 
1 year Eilid, hind ; eildeag, grioch(MMcL) 
— Lewis, roe. 
Female of fallow deer and roedeer—Earb, 


yoe. 

Cry of the stag—Langan, langanaich. In 
the rutting season bùirich and raoicich— 
AH, bray or bellow, Langanaich in Le- 
wisis the cry of deer in general—MMcD. 

Cry of the roebuck—Nualan. Beucaich, 
raoicich—A H. Bodhar-gneum—DC. bell. 

fiadha, a. see fiadhaich. 

fiadh-abhal, -ail, -bhlan, s.m. Crab apple, crab 
tree. 

fiadhach, -aich, s.m. Hunting, especially of 
deer. 2 Venison. 3**Herd of deer, 4**Lord. 
5**see fiadhachas. 6 Deer-forest. 

tfiadhach, a. Detestable. 

fiadhagh, -aiche, a. Abounding in deer. 2 Of, 
or belonging to deer. 3 see fiadhaich. 

— .— —adh,** -aidh, s.m. Deer-hunting. 2 
Deer-hunt. 3 Roe-hunt. 4(AH) Act ofinvi- 
ting or offering hospitality. 5 Invitation to 
a wedding, funeral, &c. Í—, pr. pt. of 
fiadhaich. A’ f. bheann, hunting in the moun- 
tains; là dhuinn a’ f., one day as we were 
hunting. 

-—as, -ais, s,m. Wildness, shyness. 

-—d, s.f. see fiadhachas. 2 Hunting, es- 
pecialiy of deer. 3**Chase. 

fiadhadan, -ain, s.m. Witness. 

fiadhag. -aig, -an, see fiantag. 

fiadhaich,** pr. pt. a’ fiadhachadh, v.a. Hunt 
deer, hunt, chase. 2(CR) Invite, make wel- 
come, give welcome to—Skye & Lewis. 3(DC) 
Invite to a wedding or funeral— Uist. 4 (PJ 
M) Challenge to figit. 

fiadhaich, -e, a. Wild, untamed, savage, 2 
Fierce. 3 Tempestuous, boisterous.  4**Un- 
cultivated, in a state of nature. Daoine f., 
savages ; catf., a wild cat. 

e, -an, sm. Huntsman, hunter. 2ff 

Wildness. 

e, comp, of fiadhaich. 

eachd, see fiadhaichead. 

— —ead,-eid, s.f. Savageness, wildness, 

2 Shyness. 




















——— 





fiadhaich-ghearr,(AF) s.m. Wolf. 


fi adhaidh 


fiadhaidh, see fiadhaich. 
fiadhaidheachd, see fiadhaichead. 
thadhaile, -an, s.f. Weed. 
fialhain,-e, a. 
Bitter, sour—Ddin I. Ghobha. 
crab apple. 
fiadhair, -dhrach, s.f. Lea land. 
sward, Bean fh., & barren woman—Uist. 
e,(DMC) s.f. Hard moorland grass. 
each,tt o Abounding in lea land. 








fiadh-àite, -achan, s.m. Wilderness, wild desert 


place. 


fiadhan, -ain, s.m. see fiadhachas. 2 Evidence. 


fiadhanta, a. Wild, shy. 2 Savage. 3 Fierce. 
4 Cruel. Gu f., wildly. 

fiadhantachd, ar, see fiadhantas. 

fiadhantas, ais, s.m. Fierceness, wildness. 2 
Shyness. 3 Savageness. 4 Cruelty. 

fiadh-asal, -asail, -an, s.m. Wild ass. 

fiadh-bheathach, -aich,-aichean,s.m. Wild beast. 

fiadh-bheist, s.f. Wild beast. 

fiadh-bhoireann,(AF) s,f. Hind. 

fiadh-bhriathar,** s.m. Barbarism. 

fiadh-chat,** s.m. Wild cat. 2 Pole-cat. 

fiadh-chleasachd,* s.f. Antic. 

fiadh-chu, -choin, s. m. Wild dog. 2 Wolf. 
Fiadh-choin nan càrn, the wolves of the rocks. 

fiadh-chullach, -aich, s.m. Wild boar. 

fiadh-dhuine, -dhaoine, s.m. Wild man, savage. 
2 Satyr. Glaodhaidh am f.. the wild man shall 
cry. 

fiadh-fhal, -àil,-an, s.m. Deer-park. 

fiadh-fionn,(AF) s.m. Young roebuck. 

"fiadh-fireann,(AF) s.m. Hart, male deer. 

fiadh-ghath, -aith, -an, s.m. Hunting spear. 

fiadh-ghearr,(AF) s.f. Wolf. 

fiadh-ghobhar, -uibhre, s. f. Wild goat, see 
gobhar-fhiadhaich. 

fiadh-ghleann, inn, s.m. Wild glen. 2 Glen 
where deer herd together. 

fiadh-ghullach, see fiadh-chullach. 

fiadh-lann, -lainn, -an, s.f. Deer-park. 

fiadh-lorg, -luirg, s.f. Hunting pole. 2 Slot or 
track of a deer. 

fiadh-mhue, -uice, -an, sf. Wild sow. 2 Wild 
boar. 

fiüidhmhuin,(AF) s.m. Any wild animal, 2 
Hare. 


fiadh-óg, s.m. Fawn. 

tfiadhnais, see fianuis. 

-—, 9. see fianuisich, 

fiadh-radh,** s.m. Barbarism. 

fiadh-roidis,** s.f. Wild radish, 

fiadh-ros, -an, s.m. Wild rose. 

fiadh-seang,(AC) s.m. Roebuck. 

fiadhta, a. Froward. 2 Wild, fierce, 
4 Surly, unsocial. 





3 Shy. 





ness. 3 Fierceness, asperity. 

fiadh-thore, -uirc, s.m. Wild boar. 

fiadh-ubhall, see fiadh-abhall. 

fiadhuire, -an, see fiadhair, 

tfiafrabh, o Inquisitive. 

fiafraich, see feóraich. 

fiafraigh, see feoraich. 

fiag, -a,** s.f. Rushes peeled and prepared. 2 
Candlewicks. 

fiagh, féigh, s.m. see fiadh. 

fiaghair,(DC) s.m. see fiadhair. 

fia-ohàire, see féath-ghaire. 

fi iile,** s.pl. Weeds. 

fial, -a & féile, s. f. Bounty, hospitality. 2 
Liberality. 3 Liberal man. 4**Ferret. +5 
Veil of a temple. 
Clàr na féile, the table of hospitality ; bha 
fleadh, bha fial, bha dàn ann, there was feast- 
ing, hospitality and song. 


Digit 


Ku Lh WER 
JTERNET A 





Wild, untamed, savage. 2 


2 Green 


chd,** sr Wildness, shyness. 2 Surli- 


432 Fianntachan 


fial, -a & féile, &. Generous, liberal, bountiful: 
2 Good. 3**Modest. 4 Hospitable. T’ fhàr- 
dach f. gach uair, thy dwelling always hos» 
pitable ; an t- anam f., the liberal soul, — 


Ubhal f., a| fialachd, see fialaidheachd. 


fialaidh, e, o. Bountiful, hospitable, liberal. 
Gu f., hospitably. 
goo: s.f. Relationship, consanguinity, at, 
nity. 


fialaidheachd, s. f. ind. Bounty, hospitality, 


Ka 


liberality. 2 Banqueting, feasting. 

fial-chridheach, -iche, a. Open-hearted. 

-—d, s.f. Open-heartedness, 

fialas,** ais, s.m, "Tribe. 

fallach, -aich, s. m. Hero, champion. 2 
Knight-errant. | 

fiallachd, s.f. Heroism, bravery. 2 Knight- 
errantry. 

fiaimhaitheas, eis, s.m. Munificence, 

fialmhoire, s.f. Bounty, liberality. 2 Heroism, 

fialmhor, -oire, o. Bountiful, generous, muni- 
ficent, 2**Heroic. 

——-——achd, s.f.ind. Liberality. 

fial-teach,** s.m. Place where ferrets are bred. 

fialtus, -uis, s.m. Protection, [** gives fialtas,] 

fiaman, see fiadhmhuin. 

fiamarach, -aich, s.m. Glutton. 

fiamh, -a, s.m. Fear, awe, reverence, trepida- 
tion. 2 Hue, colour, aspect, tinge. 3 Chain. 
4 Trace. 5 Track, 6 Footstep. 7 Chair, P. 
dearg, a red tinge ; f. gorm, a blue tinge ; air 
t. an oir, of the colour of gold ; gabhaidh e t, 
he shall take fright. 

tfiamh, o, Ugly, disgusting, horrible. 

famhach, -aicne, @. Fearful, timid, modest, 
shy. 2**Skittish. Is f. an t-sùil a lotar, the 
eye that has been wounded is ever fearful of 

arm. 

fiamhachd,s.f. Modesty, shyness, awe, timidity, 
2 Complexion. 3 Resemblance, 4 Skittish- 
ness, 

fiamhadh, -aidh, s.m. Tracing, pursuing. 








fiambaidh, e, o, Fearful, timid, shy, modest: 


2**Skittish. 

fiamhail, -ala, @ see fiamhaidh & fiamhach. 

fiamhan, -ain, s.m. Heinous crime. 2**Fear. 

fiamharach, -aich, s.m. Glutton. 

——d, s.f. Monstrousness. 2 Monster. 
3 Monstrous deed, 

fiamh-bhothan, -ain, & m. Tent, hut, bootb, 
cottage. 

fiamh-ghàire, see féath-ghaire. 

fiamh-ghàireach, -iche, a. Smiling. 

fiamhlachd,(DC) s.f. Fright, skittishness, as of 
a horse. Tha f. air, he is skittish. 

fiamh-lochd, -an, s.m. Heinous crime. 2 Fear. 

tfan, s.m. General, 

fianach, (MMcL) s.m. Moor-grass— Lewis. 

fianaidh, dim. and N. Inverness-shire local form 
of feun. Peat cart. 

Tfian-bhuth, s.m. Hut, cottage, booth. 

Tfianlach, -aich, s.m. Fear, scaring. 

tfian-laoch, s.m. Champion. 

fiann,** s.m. Giant. 2 Warrior. 3 Fingalian, 
(this the correct nom. case—Féinne is a gen.) 
Flath nam f., the chief of warriors. [see Féinne] 

fiannach, @ August. 

fiannach, -aich, s.m. Month of August. 

fiaunach,** æ. Heroic, gigantic. 2 Like a Fin- 
galian. 3 Of, or pertaining to, a Fingalian. 

fiannachail, -ala, a. Like a Fingalian. 2 Gi- 
gantic. 3 Heroic. 4 August. 

fiannag, -aig, Gairloch, dc. for neag. 

fiannacach, @ see fiueagaeh. 

fiannaidh, -ean, s.m. Fingalian. 2 Giant. 3 
Hero. 4(CR) s.f. Thin, slender person. 

Fianntaohan,* s.m., dim. Dwarfof the Finga- 





Fianntachan 


lians. 

fianntan, n.pl. of Dann, Fingalians. 2 Cham- 

ions. 

ta tag, -aige, -an, s.f. Black heath-berry. 

fiantaiche, see fiannaidh. 

fianuis, -ean, s.f. Witness, evidence, testimony. 
Presence. Thog iad f. ’na aghaidh, they bore 
testimony against him ; mar fh. air sin, as evi- 
dence of that ; aon de na fianuisean, one of the 
witnesses ; mach á w’ fh. ! or as m’ fb ! out of 
my presence ! tog f., or thoir f., bear record ; tha 
mi a’ deanamh f., J bear record ; am f., in 
sight, in sight of ; t. bhréige, æ false witness. 

fianuis, v.g. see fianuisich. 

fianuiseach, -iche, a. Present, witnessing, being 
& witness. 2* Capable of bearing testimony. 
Is f. thus’ air sin, you are able to give evidence 
in this instance. 

fianuiseach,* Ach, sm. see fianuis, 
fianuisich, one of the witnesses. 

fianuiseachadh, -aidh, s.m. Witnessing, bearing 
witness, giving evidence as a witness. A’ 
f—, pr.pt. of fianuisich, 

DEE, -ich, s.m. & pr.pt. see fianuiseach- 
adh. 

fianuisich, pr.pt. a’ fianuiseachadh & a’ fianuis- 
eadh, v.a. Witness, bear witness, give evi- 
dence. 

fianuis-shül, s.m, Eye-witness. 

fiar, -a, a. Crooked, curved, bent, not straight. 
2 Perverse. 3 Wicked, unjust. [4 Oblique. 
5 Fluctuating. 6 Winding. 7 Wild, fierce. 
Cuir f. e, place it obliquely or crosswise; mar 
bhogha f., as a bent bow ; an gleanntaibh 
f., in meandering valleys ; duine a tha f. 'naà 
shlighibh, a man that is perverse in his ways ; 
HOM nà fiar-ghaoithe, (he steed of the wild 
wind. 

fiar, pr. pt. a’ fiaradh, v.a. & n, Bend, twist, 
make crooked. 2 Pervert. 3 Go astray or 
aside. 4*Beat against the wind.8go obliquely, 
as aship.. 5 Squint. 6**Wrest. Cha'n fh. 
thu breith, thou shalt not pervert judgment. 

fiar, a. & s. see iar. 

fiar, s.m. see feur. 

fiar,** adv. Aside. 1 

fiarach, -aiche, a. Inclining, slanting. 2 Twist- 
ing, wreathing. 

———, 8.m. see feurach. 

-tarsuing, see fiodhrach-tarsuing. 

adh,** -aidh, s.m. Slanting. 2 Bending. 
3 Perverting. 4 Wresting. 5 Slant. 6 Bend. 
7 Perversion. A’ f—, pr. pt. of fiaraich. 

fiarachd, s.f.ind. Crookedness. 

fiaradh, -aidh, s. m. Inclination, slanting, 
going off from the straight line. 2 Bending. 
3**Twisting. 4 Whirling. 5**Perverting. 6 
**Wreathing. 7** Perverseness. 8**Bend, 
turn. 9**Meander. 10**Cadence of a strain. 
A’ f—, pr.pt. of fiar. A’ f. na fìrinn, perver- 
ting the truth ; f. nam fonn, the variations of 
the music; f. na gaoithe, the whirling of the 
wind ; f. luchd-do-bheirt, the perverseness of 
transgressors ; is glan am f. a tha ’nad mhal- 
aidh, (agus ho Mhórag), exquisitely curved ts 
the sweep of thine eyebrow ; a’ La bhruthaich, 
climbing the brae in 2ig-zags ; cha d thug sin 
f. as. that did not make him alter his ways ; f 
na h- oidhche, the twilight; na cuir f. ann, 
do not bend it. 

fiarag, -aige, -an, s.f. Slant line, line or rope 
cast over the corn stack to secure it during 
winter storms. Two of them are placed to 
each of the four points of the compass and 
when there is a storm a heavy stone is at- 
tached to them on the side from which the 
stormis blowing. 2 Fetlock. 3(Fionn) Ban 


Aon de na 








Digitized by 


j d — = D d ET A D vd, i / — 
AR? oe I mi - W — 


433 


fideag 


dage over à sore eye or brow, generally eye, 
tied at back of head. 4(AH) Siy hint, 5( DO) 
bursts of petty temper. 
fiaraich, v.a. see fiar. 
fiaras, -ais, s.m. Crookedness. 2 Perverseness, 
fiarasach,-aicne,a.Crooked, curved,not straight. 
2 Curve-necked. Each f.,a curve-necked horse. 
fiar-char, s. m. Crauk. 
fiar-ogha, s.m. Given by ** for iar-ogha. 
fiar-óthaisg, s.f. Year old ewe. 
fiar-rabhadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Inuendo. 
fiar-shüil, -üla, -shüilean, s.f. Squint-eye. 
———-each, -iche, a. Squint-eyed, looking 
askance. 
iche, $. f. Squinting in the eyes. 
fiarslanan, (CR) for feursann. 
fiarsnan,(MMcL) s.m. Flesh-worm in lean cat- 


tle. 

fiartanan, (CR) N. Inverness-sh.& Lewis for feur- 
sann. 

fiasag, 

Tfiasdar, -air, 

fiasgan, -ain, see feusgan. 

fiaszanaeh, -aiehe, see feusganach. 

fiaslanan,(CR) Gairloch for teursann. 

fiat, see fiadhta. 

fiata, a. see fiadhta. 

fiatach,(CR) a. Quiet, sly, stealthy. —Skye. 

fiatachd, see fiadhtachd. 

fiatail,** s. f. Species of weed. 2 Vetches. 3 
Tares. 

fiatanach, -aiche, o Peevish,waspish. 2(AH) 
Wild, untractable. 

fiatghal, -ail, s.m. Vetch—vicia sativa. 

fiath, Gairloch Ze, for fèath. 

—ach, a. see fèathach. 

fiathachadh, -aidh, s.m. In- 
vitation. F. an rathaid 
mhóir, neo 'r thaing cia- 
mar tha thu 'n diugh 's 
cia mar tha iad agaibh, 
the highway invitation, 
any amount of enquiries 
as to how you are to-day 
and how your folks are— 
but no offers of hospital- 
ity. 2(DMC) Challeng- 
ing. 'Ga fh. gu sabaid, 
challenging him to fight. 

fiadhaich,(DU) v.a. Wel- 
come. 

fiathail, see féathail. 

fiathalachd, see féathamhlachd. 

fib,§ see lus-nam-braoileag. 

fibin, s.f. Rabies, 

fich ! int. Nasty. Fich ort! 
an expression of disgust or contempt. 

ifich, s. Country village. 2 Castle. 

fichead, -chid, a. Twenty. [Followed by a noun 
in gen. pl.| F. fear, twenty men ; aon fhear 
thar fhichead, twenty one men; tri fir fhichead, 
twenty three men; tri fichead clach, sixty 
stones. 

tficheall, -ill, sm. Buckle. 

ficheadamh, a. "Twentieth. 

fideadh, -idh, -idhean, s.m. Bending. 2 Sug- 
gestion. 3 Whisper. 4(DMO) Belief, credence. 
Na toir f. air, do not believe him. 5(PM)Short 
time— Uist. 

fideag, -eige, -an, s. f. Small worm. 2(AF) 
Ringworm. 3 Small pipe or flute. 4 Reed. 
5 Whistle. 6 (herb,) see fiteag. 7**Kind of 
bird. Cluich na fideige, the game ** hunt the 
whistle ;" in shinty. the act of throwing up 
the ball, hitting it while still in mid-air, and 
sending it, at a somewhat high trajectory, to 
the other end of the field.—AH. 


see feusag. 
s.m. Anger. 





313. Fiatghal. 


fideagach 


nc tabard SNe EA 

fideagach, a. Like a small worm. 2 Full of lit- 
tle worms. 

fideag-cham, see fiteag-cham. 

fidealadu,( AH) -aidh, s.m. Confused and irre- 
gular intertwining,intertexture, tran sversion, 

fideil, (AH) v.a. Entwine, intertwine, twist. 2 
Weave, inweaye. 3 Tangle, entangle. 4 Ra- 
vel, disheyel, 5 Knot. 

fidean, s.m. Green islet or spot uncovered at 
high-tide. 2 Web of sea-clam.— sies. 

fideis, (PM) v.a. Meddling or playing with work. 

fidh, see figh. 

tfidh, o Faithful, 

filheadair, see figheadair. 

fidheall, see fiodhull. 

fìdhle, gen. siny. of fiodhull. 

fidnleir, -ean, s.m. Fiddler, violinist, 

eachd, s.f.ind. Performance on the vio- 
lin. 2 Business of a fiddler, fiddling. Ag 
ionnsachadh na f. learning to play the violin. 

fidileir,-ean, s.m. Bad violinist. 2 Restless 
fidgetty person. 

eachd, s.f. Bad fiddling. 2 Restlessness. 

fidilin, -ean, s.f. Small fiddle. 

fidir, pr.pt. a’ fidreadh, v.a. Consider,weigh. 2 
Try. 3 Search narrowly, examine. 4 Sym- 

athize. 5 Advert. 6**Prove by trial. 7(M. 
cD) Perceive, notice. Cha’n fh. an sathach 

an seang, the satiated will not sympathize with 
the starveling ; f. is ceasnaich mi, prove and 
examine me; and’ fh. sibh an cabhlach ud ? 
did you examine that fieet ? *nuair a dh’ fhidir- 
eas mi m’ athair, when I shall have sounded 
my father ; dh’ fh. mi rud a’ gluasad, I became 
aware of something moving. 

fidir, s.m. "Teacher. 

fidleireachd, s.f. Restlessness. 

(The five following words are given. by ** with 
an extra i, thus, fidireach, &c.] 

fidreach,** - iche, a. Considerate, thoughtful. 

see fidreadh. A’ f—, 








2 Prying, inquisitive. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. 

pr.pt. of fidrich. 

ail, -ala, a Inquisitive, 

d,** sr QConsiderateness. 
ness. 3 Inquisitiveness, 

fidreadb, -reidh, s.m. Considering. 2 Prying, 
examining. 3 Experience, 4 Agitation. A’ 
f—, pr.pt. of fidir. 

fidrich, pr.pt. a’ fidricheadh, see fidir. 

———€, -an, s.m. Examiner, enquirer, trier, 
weigher, searcher, 

——te, past pt. of fidrich. 

tfig, -e, s.f. Slit. 

fige, -an, s.f. Fig. 2 Fig-tree, 

figeach, -giche, a. Having figs. 2 Of, or belong- 
ing to, figs. | 

fige-Indeach,§ s.f. Fig of India—ficus Indicus. 

figeireach,(AC) -rich, s.m. Fiend. 

figh, pr.pt, a’ fighe & a’ figheadh, v.a, Weave. 2 
Braid. 3 Knit. 4** Twine, twist, wreathe. 
F. an eige, weave the web ; f. an stocain, knit 
the stocking ; f. an t-sreing, plait the cord. 

fighde, -an, see fighdeach. 

fighdeach, -ich, -ichean, s.m. Links, land some- 
times covered by the sea.  Fighdean Lite, 
Leith links. 

fighdean, n.pl. of fighde. 

figheachan, -ain,-an, s.m. Garland. 2 Web. 
3 Little web. 4 Weaving. 5 Hanging. 6 
Wreath, wreathings. 

figheachas, -ais, s.m. see figheadaireachd. 

figheadair,-ean, s.m. Weaver. 2 Plaiter, twister. 
3* Knitter. 

eachd, &.f. Weaving, 

trade of a weaver, 








2 Minute- 








occupation or 
Ris anfh., at the weaving 


s ba 3 Ep A^ D P i j 
V E D VE Ch 1 = M 


434 


















figheag, 
Tfigheall,-ill, s.m. Buckler. 
firheis, s. 
fighil, s.f. Prayer. | 
fizhte, past qut, of figh. Woven, twisted, twined 


file, -an, s.m. 
fileab-a’-chléite,(AF) 8. 
year. os Poetry, 
ilead, -eid, -an, s.f. Gaelic spellin for jillet, 
———ach,** a Filleted: 4 ? P 
fileadh, -lidh, -lidhean, see filidh. 
——.-—achd, ) 
fileanta, a. Ready-worded, fluent. 


fileantachd, 


filidh 


gem 
trade. 


figheadair-fodair(CR) &.m. Spider—Glenlyon. 
fighead 


h, -idh, s. m. 
A’ f—, pr.pt. of figh. 
see fuigheag. 


Weaving. 2 Knitting 


Spear, 2 Lance. 


wreathed. d 


figis, s.f. Fig. [For illust. see crann-fìge, 

fil, (AF) s. Elephant. SZ 

fil, v. for (am) bheil. 

tilbin(AF) e Lapwing, see adharcan-luach- 


rach. 2 Woodcock, see coileach-coille. 
see filidh. 

Magpie, 

poesy. 


see fileachd, 

2 Eloquent. 
4 Tuneful, melodious. 

&.f ind. Fluency of speech, com- 
mand of language. 2 Eloquence. 3 Melo- 
diousness, tunefulness, execution of music, 


3 Poetical. 


filear,** s.m. Spruce fellow. 2 Crafty man. 
fileil,** o, Poetical, poetic, bardic. 

fileir, -ean, 
ffilibeart, Gaelic spelling of Jilbert. 

filidh, -ean & -nean, 8.m. Poet, bard, minstrel. 


see fìdhleir. 


2** Inferior bard. 3 Warbler, songster. 4 
Philosopher. 5 Orator. Gu f., tunefully ; 
filidhean binn nan coilltean, the melodious 
warblers of the woods. [Miss Eleanor Huil’s 
Textbook of Irish Literature says ** The jue is 
to be regarded as in the earliest times com. 
bining in his person the functions of magici- 
an, lawgiver, judge, counsellor to the chief 
and poet. Later, but stillat a very early 
time, the offices seem to have been divided, 
the brehons devoting themselves to the study 
of law, and the giving of legal decisions, the 
druids arrogating to themselves the superna- 
tural functions, with the addition, possibly, 
of some priestly offices, aud the fili them- 
selves being regarded henceforth principally 
as poets and philosophers. This division seems 
to have already existed in Ireland in the time 
of St. Patrick, whose preaching brought him 
into constant opposition with the druids, who 
were evidently, at that time, regarded as 
the religious leaders of the nation, though 
there does not seem to be much sign that they 
were, as they undoubtedly were, even at an 
eariier age in Britain and Gaul, sac: ificing 
priests. We have already spoken of the be- 
lief in transmigration, as being a part of the 
early mythology both of Britain and Ireland. 
It is to be understood that the Irish pagan 
belief does not exactly correspond with Cæ- 
sar's observations regarding the teaching of 
the druids in Gaul. In the pagan literature 
of Ireland, we find no trace of a belief ina life 
after death. The mortals that went into 
Magh Mell, or the Irish pagan Elysium, did 
not go there by means of, or after, death ; 
they went as visitors, who could at will re- 
turn again to earth. The distinction is es- 
sential. Until after the introduction of 
Christian teaching, the idea of a life after 
death seems to have been non-existent. 
Both the re-incarnations and the entrance 
into Magh Mell were made during the con- 
tinuance of mortal life; they have no refer- 


filidh 


ence to alife beyond the grave. Outside the 
sphere of the ancient mythology, the belief 
in transmigration is found also to persist ; it 
re-appears in semi-historic times.'' i 
Pomponius Mela speaks of the druid doc- 

trine of immortality in Gaul, but says no- 
thing as to the entry of souls into other bo- 
dies, He cites as proof, the practice of burn- 
ing and burying with the dead things appro- 
priate to the needs of the living, He wrote 
about A.D. 44. 

filidheach, a. Poetic, rhyming. 2 Tuneful. 

filidheachd, s.f.ind. Versification, poetry, rhym- 
ing. 2 Tunefulness. 

filit,s.f. see fuar-lite. A 

fill, pr.pt. a’ filleadh, v. æ. Fold. 2 Plait. 3 
Imply. 4łłContain, include. F.an t-aodach, 
fold the cloth ; tha sin a’ filleadh a staigh, 
that implies ; air am filleadh anns a chéile, 

olded together. 


,pl.-eau, s.f. Collop. 2 Steak. Fillean 
saillte, collops of salted meat. 
fill, pl. filltean, s.f. Fold, plait. Le filltean 


teine, with folds of fire ; trì-fillte, three-ply. 

filleadh, fillidh, filitean & filleachan, [pl. fillidh 
& fillidhean in Gairloch.] s.m. Fold, plait, 
2 Ply. 3 Folding, plaiting, wrapping. 4 Im- 
plying. 5** A cloth. A’ f—, pr.pt. of fill. Beag- 
an fillidh, « little Med 

filleadh-beag, see féileadh-beag. 1 

fllleag, -eig, -an, s. f. Shawl, wrapper, little 
plaid. 2 Little fold or plait. 3 Doublet. 4 
Scarf. 5 Covering. 6(AH) Light, slight, shab- 
by cloth covéring, see pilleag. 

filleagach,** æ. Having folds or plaits. 

fillean, -ein, s.m. see filleag. 

fillean, -ein, s.m. Species of worm that breeds 
in the human head and neck causing painful 
swellings. 

fillean, -ein, s.m. Collop. 2 see filleag. 

fillear, fut.pass. of fill. Shall be folded. 

fillidh, fut.aj.a. of ill. Shall fold. 

fillidh, gen.sing. of filleadh. 

fillt’, see fillte. 

fillte, a. $ past pt. of fill. Folded, plaited. 2 
Implied. 3 Plied, as wool. 

fillte, a. Deceitful, treacherous. 

fillte, -an, s.f. Fold, ply. Tri-fillte, three-ply. 

fillteach, -iche, a. Implicative. 

fillteachadh, -aidh, s.m. Folding. 2 Multiply- 
ing. A’ f—, pr.pt. of filltich. 

vg pr. pt, a’ fillteachadh, v.a. Fold, mul- 

iply. 

filltiche, -an, s.m. Multiplier. 

filltichte, past pt. of filltich. 

Tfim, s.f. Drink, wine. 

fimeanach, -aich, s.m. Hypocrite. 

, -aiche, a Hypocritical. 

—d, s.f. Hypocrisy. 

j1ümh, s.f. Drink, potion, wine. 

fimridh, v.auz. Must, need. past aff. dh’ fhim- 
ir mi, I must ; pass. (impers.) dh’ fhimireadh; 
fut. aff. fimiridh mi, I must ; pass. (impers.) 
fimirear ; Subj. past, dh’ fhimirinn, I would 
need ; pass. (impers.) dh’ fhimirteadh ; Inter. 
am fimir mi? must 1?; pass. (impers.) am 
fimirear ? ; Neg. chan fhimir mi, I must not ; 
pass. (impers.) cha’n fhimirear. 

+fin, a. Fine. 

fine, -achan, s.f. Tribe, family, kindred, clan. 
2 Nation. 3 Soldier. 4 Surname. Na fine- 
achan Gàidhealach, the clans of Gaeldom ; 
gach f. gairmidhe, he shall call every tribe ; 
ciod is f. dhuit P what is your surname 3 

fineach, a. In tribes or clans. 2 Clannish. 13 


mn zo 








Frugal. 
fineach,(CR) s.m. Rank moor-grass,— Lewis. 


435 


fineamhuin 


fineachail, (DMC) a. Heathenish. 

fineachan, n.pl of fine. 2 Heathens, gentiles, 
A réir nam f., according to ther naions ; 
thàinig na f., the heathen came. 

fineachas, -ais, s.m. Kindred, relationship, con- 
sanguinity. 2 Inheritance. 3 Nation. 4 
Law. 

fineachd, s.f. Same meanings as fineachas. 

fineadach, a. Wise, prudent, sagacious, 2 Cun- 
ning. 3 Clannish. 

fineadach, -aich, s.m. Clansman. 

fineadail, -ala, a. National. 2 Clannish. 

fineadalachd, s.f. Nationality. 2 Clannishness. 

fineadb, -idh, s.m. see fine. 2 Cast. 

fineag, -eige, -an, $.f. Cheese-mite. 2 Animal- 
cule, 3 Miser, niggardly person. 4 Crow- 
berry. Lan fhineag, full of mites. 

fineagach, -aiche, a. Abounding in mites. 2 
Miserly, niggardly. 3 Full of crowberries. 
Caise f., cheese abounding in mites. 

fineal,§ sm, Fennel—feniculum vulgare. 





$14. Fineal. $15. Fineal-Muire. 
fineal-athaich,§ s.m. Fennel giant—ferula com- 
munis. [Not found in Britain or Ireland.] 
fineal-cübhraidh, s.m. Sweet fennel. 
fineal-Greugach,§ s.m. Fenugreek, see deann- 
tag-Ghreugach. 
fineal-Muire,$ s.m. 
phia. 


Flixweed—sisymbrium 80- 





316.Fineal-sraide, 317. Fineamhuin. 

fineal-sraide,§ s.m. Hog-fennel, sow-fennel, sul- 
phur-wort—peucedanum officinale. [Not found 
in Scotland.) 


finealta, -ailte, œ. Fine,elegant, handsome. 9 


Tidy. 3 Brave. 4 Well-dressed. 5 Polite. 
6(DMC) Gentle, Aghaidh fh., a gentle face ; 
foinneamh f., portly and well dressed. 

finealtachd, s.f. Fineness, elegance, handsome» 
ness. 2 Tidiness. 3 Bravery. 4 Fondness 
for dress. 5 Politeness, polished manners. 

fineamhnach, -aich, s.f. Place where vines 
grow. 

fineamhnaeh, -aiche, a Full of vineyards. 2 
Like à vineyard. 

fineamhuin,§ et Osier-willow or cooper’s wil- 


ki Je ri [ | = 


UNIV 
i i 


T 


URBANA-CHAMPAIG 


E 
) f 
a | 


fineamhuin 


low—saliz viminalis. 2 Vine. 
4 Twig. 5 Any small rod. F. fa m’ chomh- 
air, æ vine opposite to me, 

— eC, see fineamhnach. 

fineant, see finealt. 

fineun, -eòin, s.m. Buzzard. 

tfineur, s.m. Stock, lineage. 

fin-foinneach, Completely, from edge to edge. 
Foinneach is a contraction for foireannach. 
Fin-foinneach an là, the livelong day. 

i a. Black as jet. 

finic, s.f. Jet. 

finiche, s.m.ind. Jet. Cho dubh ri f., as black as 
Jet. 

finid,-ean, s.f. End, close, conclusion. 
ceann f. air, bring it to an end. 

finideach, -iche, a. Wise, prudent, 9 Bringing 
toan end. Gu f., wisely. 

finn, a. Distant. An leathar fhinn ’s an leath- 
ar fhaisg (col. am fad 's am fagus,) far and 
near. 

Tfinn, s. Milk. a. see fionn, 

tfinndeol, oo Enslave. 

finn-dhiol, v.a. Enslave. 

finne, gen.sing. of fionn. 

finne, -an, s.f. Maid, maiden. 2** Beautiful 
woman, 3**Whiteness, fairness. 4**Attend- 
ance. 5**Testimony, evidence, 

tfinneal, eil, s.m. Shield. 

finnean-feóir, -ein-, see fionnan-feòir. 

Tfinnein, -ean, s.f. Shield. 

finneun, -edin, -an, s.m. Buzzard, 

fin-neul, -nedil, s.m. White cloud. 

finn-gheal, v.g. Profess. 2 Promise, 

Tfüinnidheach, o. Vigilant, prudent, cautious. 

finnidheachd, s.f. Vigilance, prudence, caution. 
2 [given by ** for féinneachas (militia,)] 

finn-reic, s.f. Proscription. 

finn-reic, v.a. Enslave. 2 Proscribe. 

finn-sgeul, -sgedil, s.m. Romance, tale, fiction. 

Tfiob, -a, -an, s.f. Small battle-axe. 

tfiobhar, -air, -airean, s.m. Edge, whetting. 

tfioch, s.m. Choler, wrath. 2 Land. 

tfiochach, -aiche, a. Fierce, angry. 

tficchadh, -aidh, s.m. Spring. 2 Generation. 

tfiochail, a. Angry, fierce, choleric. 2 Brindled. 

fiochar, a. Angry. 

fiochdha, a. Augry, fierce, froward. 

fiochmhor, -oire, a. see fiochdha. 

tfiochmhorachd, s.f. Anger, fierceness. 

fiociradh, -aidn, s.m. Anger, choler. 

fiodadh, -aidh, s.m. Laughter, 

fiodh, -a, s.m. Timber, wood. 2 Wilderness. 3 
**'l'ree, An t-sail as an fhiodh, the log out 
of the timber ; nochd ef. dha, he showed him 
a tree. 

fiodhach, -aich, s.m. Shrubs. 2 Shrubbery,copse. 
(AF) Cheese-vat or wooden press, 

fiodhach, -aiche, a. Abounding in timber or 
shrubs, copsy. 2 Wooden. 

fiodhag, -aige,-an, s.f. Bird-cherry. 2 Wild 
fig. 3 Hard-berrv. 

fiod'iagach, a. Abounding in bird-cherries, wild 
figs or hard-berries. 

fiodhagach, s.m. see fiodhag. 

fiodhagaich, s.f. see fiodhag. 

tfiodhain, see fianuis. 

Tüodhais, s.pl. Snrubs, 

fiodhall, s.e fiodhull. ! 


Cuir 


fiodh almuig,$ s.m. Sandal wood—santalum al- 


bum, 
fiodhan, -ain, -an, s. m. Cheese-vat or press. 
fiodhannan, s.pl. Timbers of a boat in general. 
tfisdhbhadh, -aidh, see fiùbhaidh. 
fiodh-chait,** s.m. Mouse-trap. 
1&odh-cheall, s.m. Chess-play, 
fiodh-chonnadh, -aidh, s.m. Brushwood, fuel, 


KS E: n e ` 


436 
3 Vineyard. | 


fion-dheare ` 


cordwood. 

fiodh-ghait, see fioghait. 

fiodh-ghual, -ail, see gual-fiodha. : 

eit aer a. Carbonic, abounding io char- 
coal. 

tfiodhlair, s.m. see; fidhleir. 

tfiodhnach, a. Manifest, plain. 

fiodhnasach, a. Conspicuous. 

fiodhrach, -aich, s.m. Timber. 2 Increase. F, 
a thoirt do Lochabar, to bring wood to Loch- 
aber,—Gaelic equivalent of ** to bring coals to 
Newcastle.” ^ [** gives “ timber for vessel- 
building.''] | 

fiodhrach-tarsuing, s. pl. Cross timbers in a 
boat, see under bàta. 2 Cross-sticks of a kiin. 

fiodhradh, -aidh, aidhean, s. m. Impetuous 
rushing forward. 2**Testimony. 3**Fashion. 

fiodh-thime,?s.m.Thyme-wood— tA uja articulata. 

fiodhull, fidhle, fidhlean, s.f. Fiddle, violin. 

tfiog, s.m. Wall. 2 Wreath, braid. 

fiogach,(AF) s.m. Dog-fish. 

fiogag, -aige, -an, see fige. 

logair, -ea", see floghair. 

ffiogh, fighe, s.m. Braid. 2 Wreath. 

ffiogha, s.m, Weather or windward side. 

foghair, -ean, s.m. Figure. 2 ttsee fiughair. 

fioghait, -ean, s.f, Quadrangle, square. 

fioghaiteach,** a. Quadrangular, square. 

fioghal, a. Quadrangular, square, Feun f., @ 
quadrangular chariot. 

tfioghradh, -aidh, see fioghair. 

fioghuir, see fioghair. i 

fioguis, -ean, see figis. | 

fioguiseach, a. Abounding in figs. 

fiolag,(AC) s.f. Fly, flighty person. 

fiolagan,t -ain, s.m. Field mouse. 

tiolag-fheoir, see fiolan-fedir. 

fiolair, see iolair. 

fiolan, -ain, -an, s. m. Fly, worm, insect, ani- 
mal, parasite, bot-fly. 9tf Earwig. [** gives 
fiolann.] 

fiolan-donn, s.m. Earwig. 

fiolan-fada, s.m. Centipede, 

fiolan-fedir, s.m. Shrew. 

fiolan-fionn, s.m. Parasite. 2 Gad-fly. 

fiolan-luachair, s.m. Lizard, 

fiolar, -air, -an, see fiolan. 2 see iolair. 

fioleanach, o Foamy. 2 Bristling. 


|fioleanaich, af. Dashing, splashing. 


fiole-fhuilteach, -iche, a. Bloody. 

fiollan, see fiolan. 

fiomhalach, -aich, s.m. Giant, person of extra- 
ordinary size. 

tfion, a. Old. 2 Small. 3 Few. 

fion, -a, sm. Wine. 12 Truth. Ol f., drink 
wine, 

fionach, -aiche, a. Winy,full of wine. 

fionach, a. Old, ancient, antique, old-fash- 
ioned. 

fionachduinn, s.f. Experience. 

fionag, -aige, -an, see fineag. 

ach, -aiche, @ see fineagach. 

tfionais, see fianuis. 

fional,** s.m. Mulct. 

fìon-amar, -air, -mraichean, s. m. Wine-press. 
As an fh., out of the wine-press. 

flonan, -ain, &.f. dm. Vine, see crann-fiona. 2 
Vineyard, vinery, see fion-lios. ‘ir nam f. 
trom, the land of the heavy vines. 

ach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to, vines. 

tfion-bhuth, s.m. Tent, booth. | 

fion-chaor, -aoir, -an, s.m. Grape, 

fion-chrann, -chroinn, see erann-fiona. 

fion-dearcag,** e.r, Grape. 

fion dearg, s.m. Port wine. 

fion-dheare, -an, sf. Grape. Fion-dhearcan 
marbhtach, poisonous (deadly) grapes.  - 








fion-dhuille 


fion-dhuille,t+ s.f. see fion-dhuilleag. 

fion-duilleag, -an, s.f. Vine-leaf. 

fion-eun,(AF) s.m. Small bird. 

fion-fhàisgean, -ein, -an, s,m. Wine-press. 
gives fion-fhasgan, pl. -ain.] 

fiun-fhàsgaire,* see fion-fhaisgean. 

fion-fhogharadn, -aidh, s.m. "Vintage. 

fion-fhuil,tt -fhala, s.f. Pure, uncorrupted blood. 

fion-fionn,** s.m. White wine. 

fion-foirneannach, see fin-foineach. 

flon-geal, s.m. White wine. 

fion-geur,** s.m. Vinegar. 

ffionghail, -e, s.f. see fionghal, 

Tfionghal, -ail,** sm, ‘Treason. 2 Murder of a 
relative. 

fionghalach, a. Murderous, 2 Bloody. 

-—, -aich, s.m. Murderer, parricide, 

--—d, s.f. Murder, 2 Bloodiness. 

fion-ghàradh, -aidh, -aidhnean |**-ghàrachan,] 
8.m. Vineyard. 

fion-ghort, -airt, -an, see fion-ghàradh, 

fion-lios, -an, s.m. Vineyard. 

fion-liosach, o Having vineyards. 

fion-maihnhaiseach, s.m. Malmsey wine. 

fiou-mheug, -inhéig, s.f. Wine-whey. 

fioninhor, -oire, a. Abounding in wine. 
— — —, -oir, -oirean, s.m. Winebibber. 

fionn, -a, a. White, fair, pale. 2 Sincere, true, 
certain. 3 Small. 4 Fine, pleasant. 5 Pale, 
wan. 6 Lilac. 7 Degree oí cold. 8 Resplen- 
dent, bright. 9 Known. 10 Prudent. 11 see 
feann. Aon ni is f. duinn, one thing we know 
for certain or by experience ; an t-eun f., the 
ptarmigan (white bird.) [see note under 
 eun-fionn.) 

fionn, pr.pt. a’ fionnadh, v. a. & n. Flay, skin. 
2 Examine. 3 Behold,look,see. 4 Know by 
investigation. 5(DMC) Remove turf in order 
to get at the peat underneath. (also feann.) 

fionn, s.m. Chief, head. 











fionn, s. f. Milk. t2 Cow. 3 Cataract in 
(be Ge 4(AF) Sow. 6(AF) Hen-harrier, 
ird.) | 


fionn,f prefix, To, against. 

fionn, finne, $.f. Pretty female (fair one.) 

fionna, see fionnadh. 

fionnach,§ s.m. Mat-grass, see beitein. 

fionnach, -aiche, a. Hairy, covered with hair or 
pile. 2 Rough, shaggy. +3 Old, antique. 

flonnachas, -ais, s.m. Bravery. 

fionnachd,* see fionnarachd. 
(coolness.) 

fionnachdainn,** s. f. Experience. 
ledge. 3 Investigation. 

tfionnad, -aid, -aidean, s.m. Waggon, chariot. 

fionnadh, -aidh, s.m. Flaying, skinning. 2 
Trying. 3 Searching. 4 Examining. 5** 
Hair of à quadruped.  6** Beard.  7**Fur. 
8 Fur (article of dress.) 91 Pile, as of cloth. 
10(DMC) Removing the turf to get at the peat 
underneath. A’ f—, pr.pt. of Donn. 

fionnadh-balgain, s.m. Mode of skinning a car- 
case by a cut round the neck and without 
cutting down the breast or belly. 

fionnadh-builg,(Fionn) parts of Argyll for fionn- 
adh-balgain. 

tfionna-fada, s.m. The middle finger. 

fionnag, -aige, -an, s.f. White trout. 
salmon. 3* Whiting.  4**see feannag. 
Mite, see fineag. 

ach, see fineagach. 

fionnagan,tt s.m. Crowberry, see caora-fionnaig. 

fiounag-feoir, s,f. Fairy mouse, lesser shrew. 

fionnaidh, a, Antique. 

fionn-àirc, -e, -ean, $.f. Suber album, a white 
corky substance, or kind of fungus, growing 
on trees, and used as a styptic, also for tinder 


2 Refreshment 


2 Know- 


2 Young 


biz 





437 





|fionnarachd, s.f.ind. Cool, coolness. 


Ve) fionn-sgeul 


and as à razor-strop. 
tionnaire, comp. of a. fionnar, 
fionnaireachd, see fionnarachd. 


[** | fionnairead, -eid, s.in. Degree of coolness. 


fionnairidh, -ean, s.f. Watching. Bheir fear 
na moch-eirigh buaidh air fear na f., the early 
riser will veat the late watcher. 

fionnaltachd,** s.f. Fineness. 

fionnamhach, -aiche, o. Hairy. 
shaggy. 

fionna-mhiong,(AC) s.f. see fionn-mhèag. 

fionnan, -ain, s.m. One single hair. 

tionnan-aolta, a. Whitewashed. 

fionnan-feòir, -ain-fheoir, s.m. Grasshopper. 2 
Balm-cricket. 

fionnan-geal, -ain-ghil, pl. -ain-gheala,§ s.m. 
Grass of Parnassus, see fionnsgoth. 

fionuaobh,** a. Neat, clean. 2 ‘* Clever," 

tionn-aolta,** a. Whitewashed with lime. 

fionnar, fut. af. a. of Bonn, Shall be flayed. 

fionnar, aire, «. Cool, fresh, cold. 2 Agued. 
Gu f., coldly ; with indifference. 

fionnarachadh, -aidh, s.m. Becoming cool. 2 
Making cool. 3 Cooling, refreshing. 4**Re- 
frigerating. A’ f—, pr.pt. of fionnaraich. 

2 Cool 
breeze. Am f. an fheasgair, inthe cool of the 
evening. 

fionnaraich,{t pr.pt. a’ fionnarachadh, v.a. & n. 
Cool. 2 Refrigerate. 3 Be cool. 

fionnasga,s.pl. Bands with which vines are tied, 

fionnas-gàraidh, s.m. Parsley, see pearsal, 
tffionn-bhruinne, s.m. Fine brass. 

fionnehair,** s.f. Wisdom. 

fionn-chasach, o. White-footed. 2 White-legged, 
(cais-fhionn.) 3 Rough-legged. 

tfionn-choille, s.f. Flourishing wood. 

fionn-choinneach, ich, s.f. White moss. 
tfionnchor, s.m. Wisdom, knowledge. 
fionn-chosach, see fionn-chasach. 
+fionn-chosmhalachd, s.f.ind. Probability. 
fionn-chosmhuil,** a. Probable, like. 
fionn-chu,(AF) s.m. Greyhound, 
fionndach,{t -aiche, a. Hairy. 

fionndadh, s.m. prov. for fionnadh, 


2 Rough, 


fionndairneach, -ich, s. m. Rank grass. 3 
Downy beard. A 
ffionndruinne, see ffionn-bruinne. 2 (White) 

bronze. 


*tfionnfadh, -aidh, see fionnadh, 

fionn-faoilidh,(AC) s. Plant 

fionn-fheoir, see fionnan-feòir. 

fionn-fholaidh,(AF) s.m. White kine. 

fionn-fhuachd, s.f.ind. Coolness, coldness. 

fionn-fhuaire, see fionnarachd. 

..——, comp. of fionnar (fionn-fhuar 

-.——dachd, see fionnarachd. 

ad, -eid, see fionnairead. 

fionn-fhuar, œ. see fionnar. 

-—achadh, see fionnarachadh. 

-—adh, -aidh, s.m. Cooling, refreshing 

2 Refreshment. 

-——aich, v. see fionnaraich. 

fionnghail,**-e, SI see fionghal. 

fionnlach,§ -aich, s. m. Bog-myrtle, 
teach-liath. 

fionnlaid,(CR) s.f. Wooden lever. 

fionn-mhéag, -mhéig, s. m. White whey, 
whey wrung from cheese when pressed in the 
vat. 

fionn-ogha, -oghachan, s. m. d f. Grandchild’s 
grandchild. 

Lëonnrach, -aich, s.f. Daylight. Fad fionn- 
rach mhoireach an la, ail the livelong day. 

fionnsadh,(AC) s.m. Whirl. 

fioun-sgeul, -sgeoil, s.m. Fable, romance. 2 
Legend. Chain thu e mar fh., thou hast reviled. 























see moin' 


fionn-sgeul 


it as a fable. 
-——ach, -aiche, a. 





Romantic. 





lous. 

——— ——.—aiche,-an, s.m. Romancer. 

fionu-sgiath, -sgéith, s.f. White wing. 2 White 
shield. 

-—--—_—-—ach,** a. White-winged. 2 White- 
shelded. 





$18. Fionn-sgoth. $19. Fioran. 

flonn-sgotn,$ sm. Grass of Parnassus—parnas- 
sia palustris. 

fionn-sgothach,** æ,” Pertaining to grass of Par- 
nassus. 

fionn-staoig, -ean, s. The diaphragm. 

fionnta,** o, Hairy, rough, shaggy, furred. Lea- 
thar f. an daimh oig, the hairy hide of the 
young bullock, 

fionntach, -aiche, a. Hairy, having hair on the 
body. 2**Rough, shaggy. 3 Furred, 4** 
Woolly. 5tt Having pile, as cloth. 

Fionntaidh, s.pl. The Fingalians. 

fiontach, -aiche, a. see fionntach. 

fion-teantach,** ssm. Tent wine. 

fion-ubhal, -ail, s.m. Grape. 

tfionuir, s.f. Vine. 

fior,(AF) s.m. Milk, 

fior, -a & fire, a. True. 2 Genuine, pure. 3 
Sterling (of its kind.) 4**Just. 5**Real. 6 
**Perfect. 7**Notable. Am bheil e f, P 7s it 
true ? is f. e, it is true enough ; f. ghrùnnd an 
loch, the very bottom of the loch ; duine f., a 
just nan ; f. bhochd, very poor ; f. chosmhuil, 
very probable ; f. mhath, just so, very well ; f. 
shlavightire, a complete villain ; is f. an sean- 
fhacal, the proverb holds true ; f. dhìleas, very 
nearly connected ; suaimhneas f., true peace ; 
gu f., truly, indeed. 

fior.** v;g.. Verify. 

fiorach, s. Inside. Fo "pn fhiorach no fo 'n 
fhuarachd, inside or outside. 

fioradh, -aidh, s.m. Verifying, certifying. 

fior-agh,(AF) s.m. Two-year-old cow. 

fioraich, v.a. Justify. 

fioraidheach,** a. Veritable, true. 

d,** s.f. Veracity, truth. 

fior-aithris, ean, s. f. Veracity, speaking of 
truth, true tale. 

floran,} -ain, s.m. Fiorin grass—agrostis alba. 2 
(DC) Muran cuartach or creeping bent-grass, 
a variety of sea-bent. 3 **Welcome. 

fior-athrais, see fior-aithris. 

tfiorcan, -ain, -an, sm. Knot. 

fior-charaid,** s.m. True friend. 

fior-chinuteach, -tiche, a Faithfully true. 2 
Absolutely certain. 

fior-chion, s.m. Appetite. 

Hor-chosmhalach,** a. Probable, likely. 

al, sJ.ind. Probability, likeli- 











D 


ke el elef? = oe bh Fa gi LJ 
i — in LT 0 ous i Fa Le 
ITERNET ARCHIV 


438 






2 Fabu- 


fios 


hood. 
fior-chrann, -ainn & -oinn, s.f. Sycamore tree, 
See craobh-sice, 
Fi S i MM 6. m. Orthodoxy. 2**Sound 
aith. 
fior-chreidmheach, -mhich, $.m. True believer, 
2 Orthodox divine. s de 
Orthodox. 2 


tM 5 ICH. Cé 
Believing, faithful. i 

fiordha,** æ. Sincere, true. 2 Religious. 

fior-dhileas, -dhilse, a. Genuine, true. 2 Sin- 
cere. 3 Very faithful. 4 Near akin. 

fior-eun,tf -edin, ssm. Eagle. 

fior-fhuil, -fhala, s.f. Noble blood. 

fìor-ghlan, -ghloine, o Pure, clean. 
cere. 3 Bright, spotless. 4 Blameless. § 
Transparent. Le h-or f., with pure gold. 

fior-ghloine, s.f.ind. Perfect purity or cleanness. 
2 Spotlessness. 3 Blamelessness. 4 Bright- 
ness. 5 Transparency. 6{{Quintessence. 7 
ttSincerity. 

fior-ian, -edin, 8. see fir-eun. 

Dor-iasg,( AF) s.m. Salmon. 

fior-iochdar, -air, -an, s.m. The very bottom, 9 
‘Basis, lowest part. F. na h-uchdach, the very 
bottom of the ascent. 

fior-iochdrach, a. Lowest. 

fior-iomall, -aill, sm. The utmost limit. 

fior-leamh, -a, @ Very impertinent, impudent, 
rude or petulant. 2(AH)Overweenineg, shame- 
lessly pert and forward. 

—adas, -ais, s.m. Extreme impertinence, 
impudence, rudeness or petulance. 

fiormann,$ s,m. Wheat, see cruithneachd. 

no a. Perfectly good, very good, excel- 
ent. 

fior-mhaitheas, -eis, 
cellence. 

Tfiornan, -ain, s.m. French wheat. 

fior-naomh, a. Truly holy. Bitheadh e f., let 
him be truly holy. 

—achd, s.f. True holiness. 

fior-dthaisg, see fior-uan. 

fior-ordha, æ. Truly noble, illustrious, excellent. 

tfiorraideach,** a. Frivolous, trifling, contempt- 
ible. Guf.. frivolously. 

t d, s.f.  FPrivolousness, insignifi- 
cance. 


+fior-raidhteach, -aiche, a, Truthful. 

tfiorsa, s.m, Necessity. 

fior-shamhlachalachd, s.f. Characteristicalness, 

ffiort, an, see feart. 

fiorthan,§ Fiorin-grass, see Goran, 

fior-thobar, -air, -braichean, s.m. Spring well. 2 
Perennial well. l 

fior-thobrach, -aiche, a. Abounding in peren- 
nial springs or spring-wells. 

fior-uachdar, air, s.m. Top, summit. ` 

fior-uasal, a. Truly noble, genteel, polite. 

fior-uan,(AF) s.m. Hog that has had a lamb. 

fior-uisge, -uisgeachan. s.m. Spring-water, per- 
petual fountain. 2 Fresh-water, in contra- 
distinction to sea-water, Lochan f., a fresh- 
water loch. 

fios, -a, s. m. [s. f. in Badenoch.) Knowledge, 
information. 2 Notice, intelligence. 3 Word, 
message. 4ffScience. 5 Art, understanding. 
6ifVision. Fhuair mi f., I got word ; thoir 
f., inform, give notice ; fhuair sinn droch fh., 
we received sad sanity se am f. Guit ? am 
bheil f. agad P do you know ? tha f. agam, I 
know ; c' uin’ a fhuair thu f. P when did you 
get information t aréir f. domh-sa, to the best 
of my knowledge ; a’ s fh. do 'n bheò, what the 
living know ; ’ga f., to her knowledge ; ‘ga fh., 
to his knowledge ; thàinig e staigh gun fh. da, 
he came in unknown to him ; gun fh. nach tig 


2 Sin- 





s.m., Real goodness, €x- 








fios 


e, not knowing whether he may come ; gun fh. 
dé à ni mi, not knowing what I shall do; 
gun fh. c’ar son, without knowing why ; thain- 
ig f. ort, a message came for you ; f. an tor- 
raidh, an invitation to the funeral ; f. fuadain, 
@ flying report ; f. nam fàidh, fore-knowledge ; 
am f. à bu lugha, the slightest knowledge ; f. 
air an ih., repeated invormution; an urgent in- 
vitation ; is beag f. dhomh-sa, little do I know; 
f. freagairt, an answer to a letter ; tha f. fith- 
ich agad, you have a raven's knowledge—sup- 
posed to be supernatural ; also said to cheeky 
children ; foighneachd air f., foighneachd a’s 
mios’ a th’ ann, asking what is well known, 
the worst of asking ; chuir mi fios air a nios 
chugam, I sent word to him to come from below 
tome. [see ex. under dathadair.] 

flosach, -aiche, a. see fiosrach. 

-————&Ail,-e, a Knowing. 

———d, -an, £. f. Augury, foretelling, divina- 
tion, sorcery, fortune-teliing. Cha téid gu 
buidsiche nach fhaigh f. searbh, who inter- 
views d witch will get bitter news indeed. 

fidsaiche, an, s.m. Fortune-teller, soothsayer, 
augur, diviner, sorcerer. 

fiosdaidheachd, see fiosachd. 

fiosail, -ala &-aile, a. Knowing, expert. 

fios-dhearbhadh, -aidh, s.m. Demonstration, cor- 
roboration. 

fiosnachail, 
fiosrach, -aiche, 


see fiosrachail. 

a. Knowing, expert, well-in- 

formed. 2 Intelligent. 3 Conscious. 4 In- 

quisitive, prying, busy. 6 Convineed. Tha 

mi f., J am conscious ; is f. mi, I am fully a- 

ware ; duine f., an intelligent man ; am f. thu 

air sin ? are you aware of that * mar is fhiù is 

mar is fhiosrach mi, to the best of my know- 

ledge and belief. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Inquiry, act of inquir- 
ing, questioning or ascertaining. 2**Examin- 
ing. 3 Knowledge. 4 Experience. O m’ 
fhéin-fhiosrachadh, from my own experience ; 
a’ f. à mach, ascertaining. | A' f—, pr. pt. of 
fiosraich. 

fiosrachail, -ala, 
Inquisitive. 

fiosr2ich, pr.pt. a’ fiosrachadh, v, a. Inquire, 
ask, inquire after, investigate. 2 Try, exam- 
ine. 3**Visit, 4 Ascertain. Chan fhiosraich, 
mur feòraich, nothing ask, nothing learn. 

fiosraiche, s.m. Critic. 

fiothal,(AF) s.m. Calf. 

fiothnaise,** s.f. Sorcery. 2 Poison. 3 Bad 
news, detestable news. 

fiothran, see fioran. 

fir, gen. sing. & m. pl. of fear. For compounds 

. of fir, not given below, see under fear. 

#firb, s. Swiftness, rapidity. 

fir-bhogha, s.pl. Archers. 

fir-bhréige, s.pl. Puppets. 

Fir-bholg, s.p/. The Belgse. 2 The ancient Irish. 

fir-cheart,** -cheirt, s. m. Justice, righteous- 


ness. 

fir-chlis, s.f. The Northern lights, aurora bore- 
alis, ‘‘ merry dancers." [Preceded by the 
art. NA.] An uair a bhios na fir-chlis ri mire 
’s gann ffach dean iad milleadh, when the 
merry-dancers play they are like to slay—the 
playfulness of the merry-dancers is supposed 
to end occasionally in quite a serious fight. 
Next morning, when children see red patches 
of lichen on the stones, they say among them- 
selves, thug na fir-chlis fuil á càch-a-chéile an 
raoir, the merry-dancers bled each other last 
night. [The appearance of these lights in 
the sky is considered a sign of the approach 
of unsettled weather. | 





a. Knowing, intelligent. 2 


Digitized | y 


AITEDNMIET AD; LJ 
^ — D VE. I^ A - V 


439 


firinnichte 

fir-chlisneach, s.f. see fir-chlis. 

fir-chneatain, s.p}. Backgammon-men. 

fir-chrann, s. f. (fior-chranno) Sycamore-tree, see 
erao5h-sice. 

fir-dhris,** s.f. Bramble. 

fir-dhuan, s.pl. see under fear-fuinn. 

Ge EE) \ it s.f. Truth. 2 Event. 

fire-faire ! inter. Ay, ay, what ! what a pother ! 
Is fhèarr ‘‘fire-faire " na ‘' mo thruaigh,” 
better to be envied than pitied. 

fireach, -ich, -ichean, s.m. Hill, moor, mountain, 
acclivity. 2 Top of a hill, 3 High barren 
ground. 4 Name ofa dog. Air f. an fhéidh, 
on the deer-moor ; gheibheadh tu feannagan 
firich, you would find the forest crows—said to 
those who boast that they ean obtain impossi- 
bilities. 

— ———ail, -ala, ve. Manly. 2 Cheerful. 3 
Showy. 4 Of a good address. 5 Active, nim- 
ble. 6 Barren. 7 Moorish, upland. 

firead, -eid, -eidean,s.f. Gaelic spelling of ferret. 

ach ** g, Like a ferret. 2 Abounding in 

ferrets. 

fireadh,** -ridh, 2 Truth. 3 
Flower. 

firean, ein, s.m. Manikin, dwarf. 

firean, -an, dat.pl. fireanaibh & fireantaibh, 8.m. 
Righteous man. Aoibhneas air an fh., the 
righteous rejoicing. 

fireanach, -aiche, a. Righteous. 2 Honest. 

— —————, -aich, s.m. see firean. 

— —————Aaádh, -aidh, s.m. Justification. 2 Act 
of justifying. A’ f—, pr. pt. of fireanaich. 

fireanaich, pr. pt. a’ fìreanachadh, v.g. Justify, 
exeuse. 2 Confer righteousness. 

— —— —.-ie, past pt. Justified, verified. 

Hüreann, s.m. Chain, garter. 

fireann,** g, Upright, righteous, just. 
firionn, 

fireannach, see firionnach. 

fireannachail, -ala, a. Justificative. 

fireannachair,** s.m. Avower. 

fireannachd, s.f. see firionnachd. 

fireannachd, s.f.ind. Justification. 

fireanta, a. True, just, righteous. 
Gu f., faithfully. 

—chd, s.find. Righteousness, integrity, 
honesty,uprightness, sincerity, truth. 2 F'aith- 
fulness, loyalty. 

fireantaibh, dat.pl. of firean. 

fireas, Loch Ness for pireas. 

firein, -ean, s.m., dim. of fear. Manikin. 

fireineach,tf œ. Abounding in manikins, 

fir-eun, Goin, s.m. Eagle, see iolair-bhuidhe. 
fireunachadh, -aidh, see fireanachadh. 
fireunta, see fireanta. 

fir-iasg, see fior-iasg. 

firich, gen.sing. of fireach. 

firinn, -ean, s.f. Truth, verity. 2 Faithfulness, 
3 Righteousness. Tròcair is ,f., mercy and 
truth. 

firinn, s.f. Girl. 2 Maiden—Braemar. 

firinneach, -iche, a. True, just, honest. 2 Up- 
right, righteous. 3 Exact. 4 Faithful 5 
Sincere, loyal, Guf., faithfully. 

——————-—,-ich, s.m. Justified person, one of 
the righteous. 

—adh, -aidh, s.m. Justification. 2 Act 
of justifying. A’ f—, pr. pt. of firinnich. 
firinneachd, s.f. Truth, veracity. 2 Justifica- 
tion. 3 Righteousness. 4 Sincerity, loyalty. 
firinnich, pr.pt. a’ firinneachadh, v.a. Justify, 
excuse, absoive from accusation. 2 Verify. 3 
Confer righteousness, 4 Affirm. 

firinnichte, a. & past pt. of firinnich. Justified, 

verified, 





sm. Bottom. 


2 see 


2 Loyal. 


I 1| TT F 


erme Ae 
E E Je, " | 


| 2 iJ 
L Pr 


i 
h i toe nal 

mr AB Aj = A Re 

| rà m Oho dl, EN 

OR L PE 4 rmi d ek 


Lak 
LE D 


firinn-shuidhichte 


firinn-shuidhicite, s.£. Aphorism, axiom. 
firinteachd, see fireantachd. 

firiochdrach, see fior-iochdrach. 

fir-iomall, -aill, see fior-iomall, 

fir-ionadach, s.pl. Lieutenants. 

firionn, &. Male, masculine, F. boirionn, ker- 








maphrodital. 
Team, Male. F. ’na threud, a male in 
his ftock. 
ach, -aich, s.m. Male. 2 Man. 
———achd, s.f.ind. Manhood. 2 Virility. 3 


Male species. 

firlion, v.a. Multiply. 

———adh, -aidh, s.m. Multiplying. <A’ f—, pr. 
pt. of firlion. 

firmidh, Badenoch for imiridh, 

ore e s.f. Colour, dyeing. 2 Dream. 8 Know- 

dge. 

fise faise ! int. Noise of things breaking. 2 
Clandestine private talk. 

fiseag, see piseag. 

fit (DC) fiteach, pl, fitean & fiteachan, s.f. see 
fidean. 

tft, -e, s.f. Life, living. 2 Breakfast, collation. 

fiteag-na-machrach,§ s. f. Yield foxtail-grass.— 
alopecurus ogrestis. 

fiteag-an-loin, s.f, Meadow foxtail grass—alope- 
Surius praleases., 

fiveag-cliam,§ s./. Kind of grass called alopecu- 
TUS geniculatus. 





320. Fiteag-na-machrach, 

fitean,** s.m. Quill. 

BED sr. Land. 

Tfith-cheall, -chioll, s.m. Philosopher. 

tfithchil, s.pl. Tables, chess-board. 

fitnchiod, a. see fichead. 

Tüthehioll,-a, s.m. Chess-board. 2 Complete 
suit of armour, | 


321. Fiteag-an-loin. 





s a GEN 
era 3 


322, Fiteag-cham. 323. Fitheach. 
fitheach, -thich, s.m. Raveu—corvus coraz. Tha 
fios fithich aige, he has raven's knowledge—sup- 
posed to be supernatural ; fios fithich gu ròic, 
raven's knowledge toa feast—said of one arri- 
ving accidentally and opportunely ; thug na 
fithich aran ann, the ravens brought bread. 
[The raven, which isthe Clan Dougall bird,was 


Digitized by 


KIYTTPNITT Ae iym 
i 1 IK 
L — E i ke fi — | hi 

i | PI KR LI 


440 


fiùran 


considered sacred in Scandinavia, and is sup- 
posed to have been introduced into the clan 
by a daughter of Olave the Beil [** gives 
Vulture. | 

fitheach-fairge, see fitheach-mara. 

-garbh,(AF) sm. Vulture. 

—-— -mara,(AF) s.m. Cormorant. 

fithean,(AF) -ein, s.m. Hog, boar. 

tfithil, sm. Poetaster. 

fithreach, s.m. Species of edible seaweed, see 
duileasg. | 

fithriach, s.m. see duileasg. 

fiù, a. Worthy, estimable, worth. 2 Deservine. 
t3 Like, alike. f4 Edible.  Cha'n fh. e dad. 
it is not worth anything ; cha'n fh. e air, he 
is not deserving of it; cha’n fh. e mise, he is 
not worthy of me ; mar is fh. is fhiosrach mi, 
to the best of my knowledge and belief. 

fiù, s.m.ind. Worth, value, price.  2*Know- 
ledge. Is beag t’ fh., you are worth little. 

Thubhaidh, s.f. see fiithaidh, 

—, -ean, s.m. Prince. 2 Valiant chief. 
3ttHero. 4 Company. 

fiübhas, ais, s.m. Dignity, worth. 





——— 





ein Boil, simmer. 2 Estuate. 8 Spring 
forth. 
-——ach,** a. Boiling. 2 That boileth. 


——-acdh,** -aidh, s.m. Boiling, simmering. 2 
Regurgitating. 3 Heat. . 

-——aireachd,** sf. Boiling rage. 

-—--ar,(CR) a. Dapper, nimble—W. of Ross. 

fiudhail, see fiùghail. 

Doch, a. see fiu. 

aidh, -ean, s.n. see fiüthaidh. 

-——ail, -ala, a. Worthy. 

fiughair, -ean, s. f. Earnest expectation, hope, 
longing. 2**Memory. 3** Regard, respect. 
Cha’n ’eil f. again ris, we do not expect him. 

each, -iche, o Full of hope, cheerful, 
happy, expectant. 2 Having a good memory. 
Gu f., hopefully. 

eachd, ** sf.ind. Hopefulness, expect- 
aucy. 2 Reminiscence. 

fiughalach, a. see fiùghail. 

————,(DMy) s.m. Worthy man. 

d, s.f.ind. Worthiness. 2 Consider- 
ableness. 

fiugiian, see fiodhan. 

fiürhanta, o see fiùghantach. 

--— ch, o. Generous, liberal, benevolent, 
charitable. 2 Brave, heroic. 3**Ample. 4tt 
Worthy. Gu f., generously ; cridhe f., a gene- 
rous heart. 

—--—chd, s.f.ind. Generosity, benevolence, 
charity, practice of benevolence. 2 Bravery. 
heroism. 3**Ampleness. 4ffWorthiness, 

——--——s, -ais, sm. see fiughantachd. 

fiughar, see finghair. 

fiùi, see fiüghaidh. 

fiuli, see feall 

fiultag, s.f. Fetter on two lambs or sheep, t 
kcep them together, a fore-foot of each being 
tied. to either end, 

fien,(AF) s.f. Cow, see fionn. 

fiünas,** ais, s.m. Worth, price, value. 

fiundach,** a. Worthy, deserving. 

fiundas,** -ais, s.m. Merit, worth. 2 Dignity. 

tiundruin,** g. Polished, smooth. An roth f., 
the polished wheel. k 

fiuntach, see fiundach. 

fiùrach, -aich, -aichean, s.f. see iùbhrach. 

-———— -tarsuing, see fiodhrach-tarsuing. 

fiiradh,** -aidh, s.m. Satisfaction. 2 Comfort, 
9 Completion. 4 Sufficiency. 

fiùran, -ain, s.m. Sapling, branch. 2 Straight 
free-growing young tree. 3 Blooming or hang 
some youth. 4$ Cow-parsnuip, see odharan. 5 











EE S A M fiiche 


Tendril, germ, sprout.  6** Bud of a wild| 3 Stateliness. 4 Bravery. 
briar. 7**Hunter, huntsman. 8 (DU) meta- ——ach,-iche, o Brave, heroic. 2 
horically Hero. F.seasmhach, æ stout strip-| Princely,noble, 3 Stately. Gu f., n a prince: 
ing; a cur sùgh 's na fiùrain, putting sap| ly manner. 
in te tendrils ; f. aigeantach, æ mettlesome atb s.m. Diet (meeting.) 
youth. ath-shonas, s.m. see flaitheanas. 
——ach, -aiche, a. Flourishing, blooming, | flath-threun, s.m. Dou AE. ; 
outhful. 2**Strong,. 3 Like a twig or sap- | fleachdail, -ala, @ Flowing in ringlets. 
ing. 4ttFull of young trees. fieadh, -a,-an, s. m. Feast, banquet, enter- 
ba a. i ia fiùranach. 2(DMO) Active, EN carousal. 2 Company at a feast, 
smart in walking. 3( C) Spell. F. do m' réir, a t i 
fiusach,**-aiche, a. Earnest. Gu f., earnestly. of me. ae nett ide Gama ted 
fiüthaidh, -ean, s.m. Subject, matter. +2 Tim- ach, -aiche, o Of, or connected with 
ber for boats. 13 Arrow. {4 Sheaf of arrows.| feasting, banqueting, or carousing, convivial, 
19 Gun. t6 Spear. t7 Poet. T8 Boat. F.is| prone to entertain. Aodach f., dress clothes ; 
tae arrow | el ke ha cota e? a dress coat. 
thail, o see fiùghail. E achas, -ais, s.m. Feasting, banqueting, 
flaiche, dpt SI Bye of plans SNE, carousal, Sie R d 
ach, -iche, @. indy, gusty, squally. achd, s.f. see fleadhachas. 
tanith eee js GE dee -àidh, s.m. Brand- 
al St, ilk. ishing. 
faith, gen. sing. of flath. fede ahehe am Soirée, 
t—, -ean, s.m. Flower. 2 Strong ale. fleagh, see fleadh, 
flaith-chiste, -eachan, s.f. Royal treasure. ach, see fleadhach. 
E -an, S.f. Government, supremacy. achas, see fleadhachas. 
ristocracy. -uis ^ 2 
E eM, see Eso. ares rr alae ics ap iudi 
aitheamhnas, -ais, see flaitheanas. 4 rati 
flaitheamhuil, see flathail. PETES pisi [824. Fleann- 
Biilhean, n. pL of flath. fleasg, -a, -an, s.f. Rod, wand. uisge. 
flaitheanas, -ais, s.m. Heaven. 2 Sovereignty, " vise qp E et SE 
dominiov, 3** Kingdom. 4**Reign. **Moisti "a cum rarely Sheaf, 
flaitheas, -eis, sm. Sovereignty, dominion. 2 Jf SCH sture. „9 Bottle, flask. F. dir, a crown 
Kingdom. 3 see flaitheanas. Os ceann nam d [The fleasg was, of old, the sign of 
BUDE UA heavens manhood. No one could wear any head-dress 
” HON MI Rd ca E DEE EE until he proved himself by testing his strength 
lee reg Tollat a a A m del that he was able to fill à man's place, hence 
faitheil, Get fathail oo & princeiy hau, er ee WEE EE are 
i E EP still to be iound in many parishes near the 
Ed Seng church. DC. ut 
E a? Bloo d : fleasgach, -aich, -aichean, s.m, Young man. 2 
MEETS d Purple, red Apu en ibaa Gë Bachelor. 4 Best man 
A He EA ° ** 
Sage ierch) ich,” sf. Bloody sux. 2| E. "Suing: Ohare clown. E 
M ry. ` h 4 D G = o 
flann-dhearg, s.m. Purple. 2** Red. 3 Staynard Eu eee Mera d Sing z T Taar a 
colour in Roraidri. used to express Boro dis- | .. ma a ge Best man n: a Ur ps S e 
grace or blemish in a family. : E p arndpnch,. Late 
flann-fhuil, -fhola, s.f. Clotted gore tle stripling. 2**Rustic. 38**Mean fellow. 
ebben, ** s m, D eae d fleasgaich, gen. sing, & n-pl. of fleasgach. 
ean dhadench icha 4 Ié NEE d fleasgairt, ean, s.f. Vessel, barge. 2 Vessel 
flasg, -aisge, pl. -an & ~aighean, a f. Gaelic] g a EA 
spelling of fask. 2**Basket. 3**Vessel made | qn SaD, pe Sm. Treasure. 2 npl. of fleasg. 
ofwicker, 4**Bottle covered with wicker. ecc eech, ei. ey ES 
flath, -aith, pl, -an & flaithean, s.m. King. dassde ay, S aug ter, butcher. d 
Prince, chief, commander. 3 Hero champion. | occa, E -an, 8.7. Arrow-maker.  [fléis- 
F. nan dul, God ; f. de’n fhine laimh-thréin, oor eae n Ad busi 
a ise of the strong-armed clan. dines. (SJ. Art or business of arrow. 
——ail, -ala zë, OG Princely, stately, : zi : e 
ES Hit 1 pete : doque s.m. see fleisdear. 2 Gaelic form 
Illustrious. 6 Noble. 7 Splendid, magnifi- | 4... "ca ona s.f. Gaelic form of 
cent. 8 Heavenly. 9 August, Qu f., nobly, | feodas (DC o s së orm of fleshery. 
in a princely manner ; ceum f., a stately step, See, |Pleodag in. Oist] 
I——aileachd, see ON e ^ Y Step. | fleddar, -air, s.m, see feddar. 
flathalachd, s.f.ind. Augustness. 2 Princeli- fledd vid GE irt - 
ness. 3 Stateliness, pomp. 4 Showiness eodradh, -aidh, s.m. Floating. 2 Buoyancy. 
E Gaitteausnass, 6 EE Gem f. le fallus, I am in a bath of perspir- 
A l . 
| En n.pl. of flath. fleodruinn, -ean, s.f. Buoy. 
athas, see flaitheanas, fi * Sole (fish.) 2:4 F 
. ach, -aiche, a. Elegant. 2 Splendid, | — —, 4:9 6 peed E E 
showy. 3**Stately, majestic. 4**Victorious | m» "aim, s.m. Untidy person, 2 Flabby 
b**Heroie. GHtDi ise . ictorious, Bes Vë flat fish. 4**Sole. 5**Fluke. 
-———achd, ** sf. Princeliness. 2 Stateli- eges 
Dess. : dg anach, -aiche, a. Untidy, tawdry, unshape- 
Ss. 3 Elegance. 4 Victoriousness. 5 He- ly. 2 Flabby. 3 Like a flat fish. r pee 


‘flath-thaclach, "Miche, a. Happily expressed wee T haar g Flabbi 
 fath-innis, s.f, see flaitheanas. fleoidhte, a. Placid SEET 


@ath-mhaise,** er Princeliness. 2 Nobleness, | fiche, s.f.ind. Moisture, phlegm, 2**Humours, 
2 F 



















































fliche 


3**Water. 4 Wetness. 
fliche, comp. of fliuch. Wetter. 2 Wettest. 
flicheachd,** s.f. Humour of the body, 2 Moist- 
ure, ooziness. 
flichead, -id, s. f. Moisture, ooziness. 2 De- 
gree of moisture or wetness. 
flicheann,** -flichne, see flichne. 
fliche-inneal,** s.m. Hygrometer. 
flichmheas, s.m. Any measure for liquids, 
flichmheidh,tt see flichmheas. 
flichne, s.m.ind. Sleet—Cowal, CoU. 
flichneach, -eiche, a.  Sleety. 
Phlegmy. 
—d, s.f.ind. Sleet. 2 Ooziness, moist- 
ure. 3 Cold weather. 
fiichneadh, -nidh, s.m. Sleet. 2 Oozing. 3 see 
flichneachd. 
flichneadh-sneachd,(CR) s.m. Sleet—W. of Ross. 
flichneadh, see flichneachd. 
flichnidh, -e, a. see flichneach. 
- , Se see flichneadh. 
flipe,$s. f. Sandwort—arenaria alsine. 
fliodh. 


fiin,(DMy) Lewis for fiinne. 

flinne,* s.m. Sleet—Islay, Arran. 

-——achd, see flichneachd. 

fiiochd,** s. f. The second dram taken after 
breakfast. [see note under friochd.] 

fliodh, -a, s.m. Chickweed—steliaria media. 2 
Wen. 3 Excrescence. Duine air am bit, 
a man who has @ wen. 


2Wet. 38 





2 see 





327. Fliodh-a’-bhalla. 328. Fliodh-an-tugha. 
fliodh-a’-bhalla, -a-, s.m. §Dwarf elder—sam- 


[* gives Danewort.] 
2 Abounding in 


bucus ebulus. 

fliodhach, -aiche, a. Wenny. 
chick weed. 

fiiodhan, -ain, -an, s.m. Little wen or exeres- 
cence. 

——ach, -aiche, Full of little wens, 2 
Like a little wen. i 

fliodh-an-tugha,§-a-, s.m. Species of fumitory 
—corydalis claviculata. So called because it 
is frequently found on old thatched roofs. It 
has long fragile stems and. small whitish flow- 


ers. 
fiodh-mór, sm. see fliodh-an-tugha. 


de 


T ^. F 

i L 
Eed Gen del, eent) geit — NC 
4 L-E A E rh ERI NI 
` 7 i Pa | Ll 
— 1 — i 3 Të Y 


442 


flur-a’-Phrionnsa 


fliodh-na-nathrach, sm. Adder’s wort. 

fliothasg,(CR) s.f. Earthworm—Suthd. 

fflitheachd, s.m.ind. Matter. 

NEES, up Sleet—Skye, Arran. 
ithne-sneachda e 

thui, N \ (DC) Sleet— Vist. 

fliùc, s.f. Fluke of an anchor. 

fliuch, fliche, a. Wet, moist, damp, oozy. La 
f., a rainy day ; fwar, f. gun deo léirsinn, cold, 
wet and stone blind ; bata f., a boat given to 
taking waves on board. 

fliuch, pr.pt. a’ fliuchadh, v.a. & n. Wet, make 
wet, moisten. 2 Water. 3(DC) Make drunk 
—Uist. Fliuch e, wet it. 

ach, -aiche, a. Wet, rainy, humid, oozy. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Wetting, act of wetting 

or watering. 2 Wet weather, moistening rain. 

A’ f—, pr.pt. of fliuch. ’Ga fhliuchadh, wet- 

ting it. 

aidh, fut.af.a. of fliuch. Shall wet. 

ain,** s.f. Juice, moisture, wetness. 

alachd, s.f.ind. Rainy weather, wetness, 

moistness. 

an, ain, s.m. Wet spot. 2 Mark caused 
by wetting. 3 Drop of any fluid. 

fliuch-bheulach, -aiche, a. Watery-mouthed. 
2 That spits much about. 3 That tipples. 4 
That ships water. 

fliuch-bhileach,** a. see fiiuch-bheulach. 




















fliuch-bhòrd, -bhuird, s.m. The plank of a boat 


next the keel, keel-board. 

fliuchlachd,** s.f. Wet weather, continued rain. 
2 Puddle. 

fiiuchneachd, see fliuchlachd. 

fliuchras, -ais, s.m. Moisture. 

fliuch-shneachd, -a, s. m. Sleet, moist snow. 
[ pron. flichneachd.] 

fliuch-shronach, -aiche, a. Phlegmatic, snotty. 

fliuch-shuil, -shüla, -shuilean, s.f- Blear-eye. 

-—each, -aiche, a. Rheum-eyed. 2 Hav: 
ing blear-eyes. 3 Tearful. 4 Ophthalmic. 
-—eachd, s.f.ind. Blearedness of the 

eyes. 2 Running of water from the eyes. S 
Ophthalmia, 

fliug,(DC) s.f. Sleet—Barra. 

fliuiche, s.m. see fliche. 

fliuiche, ( for fliche), comp. of fliuch. 

fliuichead,tt st Wetness, moisture. 

flo, s.f.ind. Hallucination, infatuation, stupe- 
faction. Thàinig flo-chadail air, he dozed or 
slumbered ` ¢huir e f. orm, it amazed or dazed 


me. 

flocas,** ais, s,m. Lock of wool. 

tfloch, a. Lax, soft. 

flod, -a, s.m. State of floating. 
3tfFleet. Air f., floating. 

flod, v.a. Float. An do fh. am bata? has the 
boat floated 3 

flodach, -aiche, @. see plodach. 

flodadh,-aidh, s.m. Floating. 2 State of floating. 

flodar, Kiltarlity for feodar. 

fluirean, -ein, see flùran. 

fluireineach, -iche, a. see fiùranach. 

flur, -tir, pl. flüirean & flüraichean, s.m. Flour. 
2 Meal. 3 Flower. 4 Nosegay. 

—— ach, -aiche, y. Floury. 2 Mealy, like meal, 
3 Pulverized. 4 Flowery. 

——an, -ain, s.m. Floweret, blossom. 2 Nose- 
gay. 

——an, n. pl. of flùr. 

— anach, -aiche, a. Flowery, full of blossoms. 

——anachd,** s.f. Floweriness. 2 Botany. $ 
Horticulture. 

—anaiche,** s.m. Botanist. 2 Florist. 

——an-cluigeanach,§ see plüran-cluigeanach, 

flür-a/-Phrionnsa,$ s.m. ‘The Prince's flower— 
calystegia soldenella. A kind of pink convol- 
vulus, originally sown by Prince Charles in 


2 see plod. 





Ce 


<- 
Lee 


te“ 
P P "ei 


e zi P Tm a 


fo, prep. Under, beneath, 


1to. 


Bio, v. 


- fochaide, s.f. Disease, disorder. 


flir-a”-Phrionnsa 


ee 
1745 when he landed in Eriskay, and still 


growing in that island. 
flusg,** -uisg, s.m. Flux. 


fluth, -uith, s. m. Chick- 
weed. 2 Wen. 

-——ach, -aiche, @ see 
fliodhach. 


fò (AC) sm. Brink. Fo a’ 
bhais, the brink of death. 


below. 2 Atthe foot of. 
3 tt Towards. Aspirates 
8, noun sing, definite or in- 
definite, and governs the 
dative case. ha tighinn 
fodham, it is my intention, 





or I am inclined to; to chis, Lë 
tributary;fo bhron,mourn- s 

ful ; fo leon, wounded ; fo 829. ber o." 
fheasgar, before evening ; Phrionnsa. 


caidieam fo ’n fheur, let me sleep beneath the 
turf ; da thoman fo dharaig, two ltttle mounds 
at the foot of an oak ; bheir mi an saoghal fo 
'm cheann, I will go abroad and take the world 
for my pillow—i.e. I will run away and take 
my chance in the world. 

Combined with the personal pronouns thus: 
fodham, under me ; fodhad, under thee ; fodha, 
under him ; foipe, under her ; fodhainn, under 
us; fodhaibh, under you ` fopa, under them. 
s.m. King, sovereign. 2 Honour. 3 Re- 
gard, esteem. 4 Decency. 


- tfo, ja. Good. 2 Unconcerned. 3 Easy, quiet. 


4 Powerful. 

see bha, 

#foain, s.f. Swarm, crowd. 

fob, v. Suth’d for ob. (Cease, give over, faint, 
refuse.) 

fobair,** s.f. Advancement. 
Undertaking. 

fobhaidh,** a. Swift, rapid, quick, nimble. 

fo-bhaile, -bhailtean, s.m. Suburb. . 

fobhair,** s.f. Salve, ointment, F. shul, an 
eye-salve. 

t———, -e, a. Sick, weak. 

T t, ean, s.f. Drenching. 2 Salve. 

fobhannan, .ain, s.m. see fóthannan, 

fobhar,* (bh scunded v) s.m. Harvest. 

fobharradh,* see fogharadh. 

fobh-thomain,(AF) s.f. Dormouse. 

fo-bhuail, v.a. Strike gently, pat. 2 Strike þe- 


low. 

fo-bhualadh, -aidh, s.m. Striking gently, strok- 
ing. <A’ f—, pr.pt. of fo-bhuail. 

fo-bhuidhe,** a, Tawny, yellowish. 

fo-bhuille, -ean, $.f. Gentle blow, slight stroke. 
2 Understroke. 

fobhurtach, -aiche, @. 

foc,** see fogha. 

tfoc, s.m., Voice. 

focal, -ail, -clan, s.m. see facal. 

-—— -aonaidh, see facal-aonaidh. 

-—— -freumhachd, see facal-freumhachd. 

-—— -freumhaiche, see facal-freumhaiche. 

focalach, -aiche, see faclach. 

focalaiche, see faclaiche. 

fócalan, see feócullan. 

focall, -aill, see facal. 

fochaid, -e, s.f. Scoffing, mocking, scorn, ridi- 
cule, derision, Fear f., @ mocker ; fear na 
f., the mocker. 

fochaid, v.g. see fochaidich. This verb takes 
the p: air after it, simple or compounded, 

. air, mock him. 


2 Rencontre. 3 





Quick, nimble, sudden, 


fochaideach, -iche, a. Scoffing, mocking, ridicu- 
ling, deriding, inclined to scoff or mock. 


Dir iT 


INTERNET A 


H 


me gem f y 
- | H jl ! 
NK d 


443 


toana 


fochaideachd,** s.f. Apishness. 

fochaidich, v,a. Scoff, jeer, scorn, mock, deride, 
ridicule. 

ifochain, s. f. Cause, motive, reason, 2 Dis- 
turbance. 

tfochaidin, -ean, s.f. Disturbing. 

fochair, s.m. Presence, company, nearness, 
neighhourhood. 2 Conjunction, Dithis ’nam 
f., two in contact with them; am f., near to, 
in presence of ; 'nam fh., in my presence ; "oa 
f., in her prese. "e. 

tfochall, -aill, s.m. Dirt, filth. 

fochallan, see foicheallan. 

fochann, -ainn, s.m. Young corn in the blade. 
2**Plant. 3**Food, provender, 4**Chit. Fo 
fh., in blade ; tha f. air an eòrna, the barley 
has bladed. 

ach, -aiche, a. Of, or pertaining to, grow- 

ing corn. 2ffBrairded. 

fochar, s.m. see fochair. 12 Wind. 

fochas,$ -ais, s.m. Marsh-mallow, see leamh- 


adh. [lit. the itch, so called from being used 
as a remedy for that disorder.]  2**Voraci- 
ousness. 


tfo-chathair, -thraichean, s.f. Suburb. 
fo-cheannard, -aird, -an, s.m. Lieutenant. 
Tfochd, s.m. Interrogation. 
fochd,(DC) s.f. Hole where a crab or lobster 
retires— Uist. | faichd.] 
fochdalan, -ain, -an, see feocullan. 
tfochla, s.m. The common people, 
fochla,(AF) s.m.  Lion's den. 
tfochlach,** -aich, s.m. Lowest order of poets or 
philosophers. 
fochladh,** -aidh, s.m. Den, cave. 2 Palace. 
3 Value or worth of anything. 4 Offering. 
fochlas,** ais, s.m. Prize. 2 Gift. 3 Reward 
for valour. Fìon is f. is fedil, wine, a reward 
of valour and venison. 
fochnadh,** -aidh, s.m. Dry rotten wood. 
fochradh, see fògradh. 
fochraie,** s.f. Happiness, bliss, felicity. 
fochras,** ais, s.m. Bosom, breast. 
fo-chrodh,(A £) s.m. Inferior, little, mean or 
small cattle. 
fochuidhe,** s.f. Flout, jeer, derision, scorn, 
Tfochuidmheach, -eich, s.m. Joking. 2 Mocker. 
fochuin, see fochain. 
fochunn, see fochann. 
— ach, see fochannach. 
focla, pl. of focal, for faclan. 
tfocla, s.m. Proposition, maxim, 
foclach, -aiche, see faclach. 
foclachadh, -aidh, see faclachadh, 
focladair, ean, see facladair. 
eachd, see faclaireachd. 
foclaich, v. see faclaich. 
foclaiche, -ean, see faclaiche, 
foclair, -ean, see faclair. 
eachd, see faclaireachd, 
foclairiche, see facladair, 
foclan, see feócullan., 
focull, -uill, see facal. 
focullan, see feócullan. 
fo'd, (for fothad), under thee. 
fo d' (fo do) Under thy, beneath thy. 
fod, s.f. see fòid. 12 s.m. Art, science, skill. 
tfodach, -aiche, a Wise, discreet. 
1fodachadh, -aidh, s.m. Obstruction, 
fodair, gen.sing. of fodar. 
fodair, v.a. Fodder, give food to cattle. 
fodar, -air, s.m. Straw, hay, provender, fodder, 
[gen. in Suth’d. fodrach. 
fodarach,** œ. see fodrach. 
Tfodh, s.m. Knowledge, skilfulness. 
fodha,(AH) s.m Sunken rock. 2 Surface (of 
the sea.) 
2F 2 





todha 


low him orit. 2 Under his command, Tha 
’n làag brath leigeil fodha, the day is well 
nigh past, [* translates this as, this day is 
likely to rain;] tha a’ ghrian a’ dol f., the sun is 
setting. When two men are rowing, if the one 
in charge wants to stop the boat he says 
«leig f," “cum f." or “dean f."back water ; 
if he wishes to stop quickly, or even put the 
boat backwards, he says ‘‘ dean f. gu math,” 
or ‘‘f, na 's fhèarr” ; chaidh e fodha, he sank. 
[emphatic, fodha-san] 

fodhad, prep. pron. Under thee, below thee, be- 
neath thee. An leabaidh a ta f., the bed 
which is under thee. 

fodhaibh, prep.pron. Under you, beneath you, 
below you. 

fodhail,** st Division. 2 Dissolving. 3 Re- 
leasing. 4(DC) Homage. 

#fodhail,** o Loose, release, untie. 

fodhaileach,(DC) a. Rendering homage. 

fodhainn, prep. pron. Under us, beneath us, be- 
low us. emphatic, fodhainne. 

fodhair,** s.f. Froth. 

fodham, prep. pron. Under me, beneath me. 2 
Under my command. emphatic, fodhamsa. 
Thàinig sin fodham, Z was so disposed ; thàin- 
ig f. falbh, I determined to go ; tha tighinn f. 
éirigh, I am inclined to rise, itis my intention 
or purpose to rise. | emphatie, fodham-sa. ] 

tfodhb, -a, s.m. Cutting down. 

tfodhla, a. Learned. 

fo-dhord, s.m. Loud noise. 2 Conspiracy. 

fiodhord, s.m. Humming of bees, whispering. 
2 Conspiracy, plot. 

fo-dhorsach, see fath-dhorsach. 


fo-dhorus, see fath-dhorus. 

fodhpa, see fopa. 

fo-dhuine, -dhaoine, s.m. Dwarf. 2 Servant. 3 
Plebeian. 4{tPloughman. 5 Farmer. 


fo-dhurdan,** -ain,s.m. Humming, low murmur, 
2 Conspiracy. 

fodrach,** a. Having much straw or fodder. 

fodradh, -aidh, s.m. Giving of provender, hand- 
feeding of cattle. 

fodraich,* pr. pt. a’ fódradh, v.a. Give proven- 
der, fodder. 

tfoduair, s.f. Caution, notice. 

#foduchadh, -aidh, s.m. Obstruction. 

ffodurluasach, -aiche, d. Busy. 

fc eagal, adv. Aghast. 

fo-fiicasgar, Towards evening. 

fo-fhiaitheachd, s.f.ind. Lieutenancy. 

tfogail, v.a. Teach. 2 Dictate. 3 Loosen, untie. 

fogair,** s.f. Proclamation, command. 

Hogair,-ean, s.m. Exile (person.) [spelt fog- 
aire by MeL & D.] 

fogair, pr.pt. a’ fògradh & a’ fògairt, v.a. Ex- 
pel, banish, drive away forcibly. 2 Chase, 
pursue. 3 Warn, order. 

fogair,** v.g. Warn. 2 Order, command. 

fògairt, s.f.ind. Banishment, exile, expulsion. 
2 Chasing, pursuing, driving away forcibly. 3 
Banishing, expelling. A’ i—, pr. pt. of fògair. 
Air f., in exile. 

forarach, see fograch. 

fogaradh, see fògradh. 

fovaraiche,** s.m. Bandit. 

fogaraichte, past pt. of fògair, 
iled, expelled. 

fògarrach, s.m. see fograch. 

tfogartha, o Gracious, 

fogasg, see fagus. 

fogn, a. Careless, unconcerned, indifferent, easy. 

tiogh, sm. Attack. 2 Rape. 3 Hospitality. 4 
Pirate. 

fogha,** a. Suffrage, 


Banished, ex- 


T n r 
i | 
RIT Bb Fa ën LE 
i Dir Là mH I Li 
i = i = d 


[TI 
rj 
II) 


444 
fodha, prep.pron. (fo+e) Under him or it, be- | foghail, -ean, s.f. Hostile incursion, 


foghladh 


2 Plun- 
der, spoil, robbery. 3 Offence, offensiveness. 
4 Sorrow, grief, vexation. Gun àrdan gun fh., 
without pride or offensiveness. 
foghail, -ean, s.f. Noise; bustle. 2(DMC) De- 
light. 3(DMC) Excitement. 
foghail,** v.a. Plunder, spoil 2 Make a hose 
tile incursion. no 
-iche,** s.m. Plunderer, spoiler. 
foghain, pr.pt. a’ foghnadh, v.a. Suffice, be suf- 
ficient. 2 Avail, 3 Do for, kill 4 Finish, 
Foghnaidh seo, this will be sufficient ; fogh- 
naidh mi dhuit, Z will finish you ; cha'n fhogh- 
nadh a sgiath dha air a tiuighead, the thick» 
ness of his shield could not avail him ; f. da, do 
for him, i. e. kill him, 
foghaint, see foghain. 
— ——,ii s.f. Heroism, 2 Cleverness. 
each, -iche, o Brave, valorous, heroic. 
2* Sufficient, fit. 3**Prosperous, 4**Ample. 
5(CR) Generous—Arran. Duine f., a valor- 
ous, Orave person; daoine f., lable men ; bithe 
eadh a lamhan f., let his hands be sufficient. 
eachd, s.f.ind. Sufficiency, valour, fot- 
Seat: bravery.  2**Stoutness. 3**Prospere 
1 y. 








. eas, -eis, s.m. see foghainteachd. 

foghair, -ean, $.f. Tone, accent. 2 Vowel. @ 
Resound, re-echo. 4 Blow that causes a sound, 
5(DC) Thud, 

foghair,** v.a, & n. Make a noise. 2 Tingle, 

fo-vhaire, sm. see féath-ghàire. 

foghairt,** sf. Chasing, pursuing. 2 Banish- 


ing. 
tfoghaluidhe, an, sm. Robber, 
fog SE -ain, s.m. see fothannan, 
3 
foghannas,* -ais, see foghainteachd. 
foghanta, a see foghainteach. ^ 
-—————ch, see foghainteach. 
——chd, see foghainteachd, 
+foghantaidhe, -an, s.m. Servant. 
foghantas,* see foghainteachd. 
1fo-ghaoth, -aoithe, s.f. Gentle wind, 
foghar, air, s.m. Sound, noise. 2*Note. 3 
Vowel. 4* Blow that causes a noise. 5 Fa- 
vour. 6 Froth. 
foghar, -air, s.m. Harvest. 2 Autumn. 3(DO) 
Crop. F. an eòrna, the barley-harvest ; f. ai 
chruithneachd,the wheat-harvest; f. na saidhe, 
the hay-harvest; air an. fn., out harvesting ; 
meadhon an fhoghair, the middle of autumn; 
ré an fh. uile, during the harvest]; a’s t-Fhogh- 
ar,in Autumn ; f. nam ban bréid-gheal, the 
harvest of young widows—a prophecy of a time 
when all men would be slain in battle. 
, air, -an, sm. see foghair. 2** Favour. 
3** Froth, 
ach, æ. Autumnal. 2 Harvest. 3**Loud, 
noisy, clamorous. 4**Echoing. 
achadh,** -aidh, s.m. Working at harves6, 
harvesting. 
achd,** s.f. Autumnal labour. 
adh, -aidh, s.m. Often used for foghar, 
but foghar is harvest-time, and fogharadh ig 
the produce of the harvest. 
fogharaich,** oa, € n. Hire for harvest-work. 
2 Work at harvest. 
fogharaidh, see fogharach. 
fogharail,** a. Autumnal, 
fognard,** -aird, s.m. ‘Tingling noise. 
foghbhannan, -ain, s.m. see fothannan. 
fozhlach,(CR) s. m. Rank grass growing on 
dunghills, manured grass, grass growing on 
manured land. [forlaeh intArgyll.] 
tfoguladh,** -aich, s.m. Trespass, offence. 2 
ksobbery. 

















D 
LTI 
i y 
IP 
i 
i 4 e 
ae 
> 
SH 
rJ 
Es 
C. 


m 
uL 
LC? 


SC Cri 
bii zo WT 
, mam Pee gn 


Ae. 36 


a? Da 


CF at A 


Ti sae 1 bs 





foghlaich 445 foighreag 


foghlaich,** oo, Rob, pillage, plunder. ad, -eid, see fagusachd, 

--————e,** s.m. Robber, plunderer, fogus, see fagus. 

foghlainte, s.m. see foghlumaiche, fogusg, see fagus. 

—ach, s.m. see foghlumaiche. foi, (fuidh) for fodha & fo. 

foghlas,** v.n. Grow pale. foicheall, -ill, s.m. Day's hire, wages or salary. 

toghlmuine, see foghlumaiche, 

foghluich, see foghlaich. 

-—— ————-e, see foghlaiche. 

foghluidhe,{j -an, s.m. Robber, sea robber. 

fogh!uidheach,** o Piratical, rapacious. 

Zoe blumm, pr.pt. a’ fòghlum, v. æ. Learn. 2 

each, instruct, 

te, a. & past pt. of foghluim. Learned, 
2 Taught, instructed, trained, disciplined, 

foghluimeach, -ich, s.m. see foghlumaiche. 

foghlum, -uim, s.m. Learning, instruction. 2 
Acquired knowledge. 3 Act of training, 
teaching. 4 Learning.  5**Discipline.  6** 
Edification. 7* Intelligence, A’ f—, pr.pt. 
of foghluim. 

ach, -aich, s.m. see foghlumaiche. 

ach, -aiche, æ. Instructive, edifying. 2 

Of, or belonging to, teaching orlearning. 2 

Academic. 

adair,* see foghlumaiche, 

aiche, -an, s.m. Learner, novice, scholar, 
student, apprentice. 2 Teacher, instructor. 

3 Man of learning. 

—— ——aid,* s,f. College, university, place of 
learniug. 

——_——-ail,** æ. Doctrinal. 

anaiche, see foghlumaiche. 

foghlunta, see fòghluimte. 

—chd, s.f.ind. Education, learning. 

foghmhair, -ean, see famhair. 

—— ——eachd,** s.f. Piracy. 2 Plundering. 
Le f. air traigh 's air muir, with plundering by 
sea and land. 

— iche, s.m. Corsair, pirate. 

foghmhar, air, s.m. S. Argyll & Arran (as in 

reland) for foghar. [ogh is sounded with ao 

, Short —written fobhar and fobharradh by *.] 

fòghnadh, -aidh, s.m. Sufficiency. 2 Slavery, 
servitude, service. 3* Use. 4**[mprovement. 
5**Availing. Fhuair e 'fh., he got what did 
Jor him. p a 

, 4rd. sing, imp. of foghain. P seo, let 
this sufice. - 

fòghnaidh, mut af e, of fóghain. 

foghnamh, -aimh, see fòghnadh, 

foghnan, see fothannan, 

foghnar, see fothannan. 

foghnas,** -ais, s.m. Profit, gain, advantage. 2 
Sufficiency, Tha m' fh. agam, I have enough. 

foghrachail,** a, Autumnal. 

foghraidh, s.f. Warning, charge, caution, pro- 
clamation, 

foghraimh,** s.f. Diploma. 

fognamh, s.m. Use, improvement. 21f Servi- 
tude, slavery. 3 ffAssistance, 

fograch, -aiche, a. Of, or relating to, banish- 
ment or exile, expelling, expulsive. 2**Warn- 
ing, cautionary, admonitory. 

, -aich, Sam, Outlaw, exile, outcast, va- 
gabond. 

fogradh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Exile, banish- 
ment. 2 Act of expulsion, pursuing, ejecting 
ordriving away. 3**Warning, charge, procla- 
mation, decree, ordinance. 4**Robbery. 5** 
Trespass. A’ f—, pr.pt. of fògair. 

fograibh, 2nd. pl. imp. of fogair. Expel ye. 

fograichte, past pt. of fogair. Banished, exiled, 
expelled. 2 Persecuted. 

— fograidh,** s.f. see fògradh. 

fograidh, fut. af. a. of fògair. 

fograr, fut. pass. of fògair, 

foguisge, see fagusachd. 





prov. " 

foicheallan,(DC) -ain, s.m. Useless fellow, lout, 

——-—ach, æ. Loutish. 

foichean,T s.m. Wrapper, infant’s napkin. 2 
Piece of cloth wrapped around the foot over 
the stocking, when men wore cuarain, or shoes 
of untanned leather, 

foi-chéimneachadh, -aidh, s.m. Series. 

foichein, see foichean. 

foi-cheumnadh, -aidh, s.m. Gradation. 2 Series. 

foichill, no, Provide, prepare. 

foichirean, s.m. Herb growing on dunghills. 

foichleadh, -idh, s.m. Wages, prov. 

foichlean, s.m. Sprout, blade of young corn ap- 
pearing above ground, 2**Chit. 

foid, -e, -ean, s.f. Clod. 2 Peat. 3 Turf, sod. 
4* Land, country. 5**Glebe. Gus an càrar 
mi fo ’n fh., till I am placed under the turf ; 
o ’n thàinig e do 'n fh., since he came to the 
country ; f. mhòine, æ single peat ; f. chülaig, 
a peat placed at the back of the fire ; f. a bhreith 
"sa bhàis, the spot where a man is destined to 
be born or to die ; thae nis air f. na firinne, he 
is now on the sod of truth—dead. 

——each, -iche, a. Turfed, abounding in turf. 

ema. -ein, S.M., dim. of fòid. Little peat or 
surf, 

——eanach, qd. Abounding in little peats, 

foidear,(/DMC) s.m. Man who works with a spade 
after the plougn. 

foid-fail, s. m. Turf, see under taigh, 

foidhe, see foipe. 

foidheach, Ach, s.m. Beggar, prov. 

foidheachas, ais, s.m. Mendicancy. 

foidheam, s.f. Inference. 2(DC) Rumour. Is 
e sin an fh. a thug mi as, that is the infere 
ence I drew from it, 

foidhearach, -aiche,a. Naked, prov, 

Tfoidhneul, -neòil, s.m. Glance. 

Tfoidhreaeh, -eich, s.f. Little image, 

Tfoidhreachd, -an, s,f. Likeness. 

foigh, see faigh. 

foighe, see faighe, 

an,** sm. Green, mead, lawn. 

tfoighid, v.a. Bear, suffer, endure, put up with. 

foighid, see foighidinn. 

e, see foighidinn. 

foighideach, -iche, a. see foighidneach. 

foighidinn, s.f.ind. Patience, forbearance. Glao 
f., have patience ; beiridh f. air a’ bhliadhna 
nach d’ thàinig, ach cha bheir i air a’ bhliadh- 
na ’chaidh seachad, patience will overtake the 
coming year, but not the past year ; rug an fh. 
air an lon againn, patience overtook our eager- 
ness—a remark used in describing how we 
have been saved from probable or certain 
trouble by not saying or doing this or that : 
cha’n 'eil f. agad, you have no patience.[ pron, 
fo(gh)ailtean in Gairloch. ] 

—-— ———each,-iche, o. see foighidneach. 

foighidneach, -aiche, o, Patient, enduring, 
forbearing, long-suffering. 

— — — ——il -ala, a. see foighidneach. . 

foighin,** s.f. Green plot, mead. 

Tfoighiontach, a. Ample, 

Jfoighiontas, -ais, sm. Amplitude, 

foighir, see faidhir, 

tfoi-ghliocas, -ais, s.m. Low cunning, 2 Grea$ 
prudence. 

foighneachd, see faighneachd. 

foighnich, v.a. see faighnich. 

foighreag,§ sf. Cloudberry, see oighreag. 

















=! 
































ro1gse 


see faisge. 

——achd, see faisgeachd. 

foighteag, s.f. see faoiteag. 

foil, pr.pt. a’ foileadh, v.a. Roast or boil hur- 
riedly upon embers, 2(DMy) Pilfer, steal by 
instalments, Dh’ fhoil eleis, he pilfered. 

foil, -e, Gan, ‘s.f. see fail. 

foil, v.a. see fail. 

foil, -e, a. Patient, tranquil, gentle, mild, soft. 
2 Slow, stately. 3 Solemn in gait. 

foil, -e, -ean, s.m. While, little while. 

tfoilbheum, -eim, see oilbheum. 

+—_——_—ach, -aiche, a. Fierce, cruel. 

+foilcheas, v. Dark, obscure. 2 s. Mystery. 

foileabaidh, ** -leabach, -leabaichean, 8. 
Truckle bed. 

foileachan, -ain, s.m. see foileag, 

, see feileachan, 

foilead,** -eid, s.m. Fillet, coif. 

foileadh, -idh, s.m. Act of roasting or broiling 
hastily on embers. 2 Acting hurriedly or im- 
perfectly. 8t+Develop slowly without forcing. 
4(DMy) Gradual stealing or pilfering. A’ f. 
bonnaich, toasting a cake in a hurried manner. 

foileag, -eige, -an, s.f. Cake suddenly and im- 
perfectly toasted. 2 Little cake. 3tftHastily- 
made cake. [fóileag in Poolewe.] 

ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in little cakes. 
2 Like a little cake. 

foilean,** v.a. Follow after. 


foigse, 


f. 











2 Hang after. 3 





Hanker. 
- (AF) s.m. Foal, filly. 
ifoilearbadh, -aidh, s.m. Death. 


foilearm, see faoileann. 

Tfoileasan, -ain, see fuileasan. 

foileid,** s.f. Wimple. 2 Muffler. 

foileum,** af, Leap, skip, bounce, 

foilidh, s.f. Gaelic spelling of filly, foal. 

foill, -e, s.f. Deceit, fraud, treachery, wrong. 
2 rarely Leisure. Labhair e le f., he spoke 
with deceit ; ri f., practising deceit, playing un- 
fair ; cha lugha an fh. na ’m freiceadan, the 
treachery is not less than the guard—i. e. how- 
ever much the enemy are to blame for adopt- 
ing treacherous tactics, the guard are quite 
as bad; gabh brath-foill air, devise deceitful 
measures against him. 

fòill, -e, s.m. Composure, tranquility. 2 Leisure. 

foill,** s.f, Pursuit, chase, 2 Enmity. 3 En- 
emies. , 

tfoille, s.f. Smallness, littleness. 

ifoilleachd,** s.f. Track, footstep. 

foilleachdach, -aich, s.m. Research. 

foillealachd, s.f.ind. Deceitfulness, falsehood, 
treachery. 

foillear, -eir, -eirean, 
knave. 2**Traitor. 

foillear,** -eir, s.m. Bud of a flower. 

foilleil, -ala, a. Deceitful, fraudulent, unfair, 
treacherous,wrongful. Tha a mhic f., Ris sons 
are treacherous. 

fóilleir, see foillear. 

foill-fhalach, see feall-fhalach. 

foill-fhalachadh, see feall-fhalach. 

foill-fhalachail, see feall-fhalachail. 

fòill ! fòill ! int. Stay ! not so fast ! 

foillidh, a. Hidden, latent, that does not exter- 
nally appear. 

each, a. Negligent. 2 Sluggish. 

eachd, s.f. Negligence. 2 Siuggishness. 

foill-mharbhadh,** sn. Assassination. 

foill-inhortadh,** s.m. Assassination. 

foili-mhortair,** s.m. Assassin. 

foillse,** s.f. Light. 2 Manifestation. 

ach,** o Declaratory. 

foillseachadh, -aidh, s.m. Revelation,disclosure, 
declaration, manifesto, discoyery, manifesta- 


2 Tracing. 


8. m. Cheat, deceiver, 











Digitized by 


NTERN ET 


^ m 


ARCHIV 


4306 


open. 3 Express. 






foinne, -an, s.m. Wart. 











foinneamh, s,m. = 
foinneasach, -aiche, a. Sightly, well-favoured, — 


foinne-lus, 
foinnich, v.a. Temper, as a weapon. 


foinnidh, -e, a. 


foirbh 


tion. 2 Act of rerea tine, disclosing, mani- 
festing or discovering, 3 The Apocalypse. A’ 
Í—, pr. pt. of foillsich. Fear-foillseachaidh, 
æ publisher, one who reveals. 


foillseachail,** a. Apocalyptical, revealing, dis- 


closing, explanatory. 


foillseachas,** -ais, sm. Revealment, manifes- 


tation, disclosure. 


foillsich, pr.pt. a’ foillseachadh, v. a. Reveal, 


publish, discover, manifest, declare. 
4 Allege. 
ear, -eir, -eirean, s.m. Publisher. 
ear, fut.pass. of foilisich. Shall bere 
vealed. 


2 Lay 


— ————te, past pt. of foillsich. Revealed, de- 


clared, manifested, laid open. 


tfoilmean, -ein, s.m. Bad dress. 
tfoilmhich, v. 
foiltean, see failtean. 

tfoimeal, -a, s.m. Consumption. 

tfoineach, -nich, -an, s.m.Demand. 2 Question. 
foineachadh, see faighneachadh. 

foineachd, s.f. see faighneachd. 

tfoineall, -eill, s.m. F 
foineasach, -eiche, a. 
Tfoineul,** -neoil, 


+. 
foinich, v. 
tfoinn, -e, s.m. Matter, importance. Chan 'eil 


see falmhaich. 


Fool. 
see faighneachdail. 
s.m. Little cloud. 2 Gleam. 
3 Trance, 
ach, a. Glittering. 
see faighnich. 





f. air, it is no matter. 

: Am f. mun iath a’ 
ghlac, is niarachd mac air am bi, am f. mu'n 
iath a’ bhrog, is niarachd bean og air am bi, 
SE on palin luck to lad, wart on instep luck 
o lass. 


—w—ach, -aiche, a. Having warts, of, or be- 


longing to warts, warty, chitty. 
achadh, -aidh, s.m. Tempering. A’ f=, 
pr.pt. of foinnich. 


— ——al,** -eil, s.m, Fool. 


amh, -a, dg. Handsome in shape, stately, 
comely, portly, elegant, genteel. 2 Active, 
lively. F. finealta, portly and well-dressed; f. 
mileanta, handsome and brave. 

see foinne. 

slight, genteel. Guf., slightly. 
s.m. Spurge, see spuirse. 


te, a. & past pt, Tempered. 
see foinneamh. 
ifoinnse, s.f. Ash-tree. 


+foinnseag, -eig, s.f. Ash-tree. 

+foinnsidh, s.pl. Springs, wells, fountains. 
foipe, prep. pron. Under her, beneath her. 9 
emphatic foipe-se. 


Under her command. 
When a cow is near calving they say, “ tha Ì 
'eigeilfoipe. [see notes under fodha.] 

fòir, pr.pt. a’ foirinn, v.a. Help, save, deliver, 
2 Relieve. 3 Waiton. 4**Heal. 


cifully save me. 
foir,** -e, St 
3 People crowded together. 
fòir, -e, s.f. Help, deliverance, aid, relief. 


and deliverance. Dean f. air, help. 
foir-,t prefix, ** Super-.’’ 
Soir. (AF) s.m. Pig. 2 Dog. 
Tfoir-àillieh, v.a. Decorate, adorn. 


foir-ainm, s.m. Epithet. 2 Pronoun. 3 Nick- | : 


name, 


Tfoirb, -e, s.m. Land 


foirbh,** v.a. Adorn, deck. 2ttAttend on. 31$ ` $ 


Wait on. 


foirbh, see fairbhiteach. 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOISS 


kh Ka 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGNS 


b 5** Bless 23 
[Used with prep. air.} F. le tròcair orm, mer- ` 


SE 


Ship’screw. 2 Crowd of people. 


geg 
Border, edge, rim, brink. Furtachd is f., help _ 





coat we d 


> 


K B - Ime 
EN EI x v 7 4 
man ML. mo cut Parma Mars te, 


Ke 





——— -— 


.foircean,** -ein, s.m. 


foirbhaillidh 447 


foirbhaillidh,** a. Acceptable. 

foirbheach, -ich, s. & a. see foirfeach. 

—d, see foirfeachd. 

foirbheart, -eirt, -an, s.f. Help, assistance, 

—ach, -aiche, a. Aiding, assisting. 

—ach,** -aich, s.m. Assistant. 

foirbheiteach, (DMC) eich, 3. m. Wanderer, 
vagabond, 

foirbhidh, see foirfe. 

foirbhillidh, a. see foirbhilteach. 

foirbhilteach, -iche, a. Acceptable. 

foirbhiteach,(DC) em, District oversman, 
ground officer. The equivalent in Uist is 
constabal, but the office is now obsolete. 

foir-bhrath,(AH) s.m. Cruel betrayal. 

foir-bhreath, -an, see foir-bhreith. 

——nuchadh, see foir-bhreithneachadh. 

MR —nuich, v.n, Divine,guess,conjecture, 

foir-bhreith,** s.f. Conjecture, 2 Random pro- 
phecy, guess. 3 Prejudice. 

——— —--— nich, v.n. Divine, guess, conjecture, 
prophecy. 

--—nicheadh, -aidh, s.m. Divining, con- 
jecturing. A’ f—, pr.pt. of foir-bhreithnich. 
#foir-bhriach, s.m. Power, authority, strength. 
foir-bhriathar, -air, -thran, s.m. Adverb. 2 

Adjective. 
foir-bhriathrach, -aiche, a. Adverbial. 
ffoirbhriogh, -a, sm. Power, force. 
foir-bhruach, -aiche, s.f. Pinnacle. 2 Precipice. 
3 Edge of a precipice. 
foirceadal, see foircheadal. 
foircealadh,(DMC) s. m. Truthful disposition, 
ECH "eil f. agad, you have no regard for the 
truth. 




















Embrocation. 
—nach, see foircheannach. 
foirch, see forach. 





foirche, (AC) s.f. Reef. Sorchair orm gach f,, 


illumine to me every reef. 
foircheadal, -ail, -an, s.m. Instruction, exhor- 
tation, admonition, lecture. 2 Doctrine. 3 
Essay. 4**Warning, caution. 5 Catechism. 
t —, v.a. Teach, instruct, admonish. 
foircheadalair, -ean, s.m. Preceptor, teacher. 
foircheann, -chinn, s.m. End, conclusion. 
foir-cheann, -chinn, s.m. White head. 2 White 
-—ach,  q. 


face. 
White-faced. 2 White- 
headed. 


--—ach, -aich, s.m. White head, 

ffoir-cheimnich, v.n. Proceed, advance. 

foirchinnteachd, s.f.ind. Predestination. 

foir-chroiceann, -inn, -an [& -chroicnean,] see 
roimh-chraiceann. 

ffoircinn, s.f. Embrocation. 2 Fomentation. 

tfoirciobal, -ail, s.m. Reinforcement. 

¢foirciosach, -aiche, o. Fat, oily. 

foircnich,** oo, Foment, apply embrocation. 

foir-dhealbh, -a, -an, s.m. Scheme. 2 Sched- 
ule, drawing, plan. 

——, v.a. Scheme, plan, draw fout a 

scheme or plan. 

—adair, -ean, s.m. Schemer, planner. 

air,** s.m. Designer. 

foir-dheirc,** a. see oirdheirc. 

———eas, -eis, s.m. see oirdheirceas, 

foir-dhorus, -uis, -dhorsan, see for-dhorus. 

foir-dhris,** see fearra-dhris. 

tfoire, a. Separated, consecrated, Laithean f., 
holy days. 

foireagan,(CR) s.m. Playing with, teasing, 
tormenting,—Arran. 

foireagh, see far-thagh. 


























— foireann, -inn, pl. foirne, s.m. Auxiliary band. 


2 Brigade. 3 Troop. 4 Crew of aship. 5 
Dweller, inhabitant, 6 Crowd, multitude. 


foir-innis 

Foirne fearail, & manly crew, 

——ach,** a. Marginal. 

foirear,** Ar, sm. Watchman. 

foireigean, see foireigin. 
—tair,** -ean, s.m. 
pressor, 

foireigin, v. see foireignich. 

——-, s.f.ind. Violence, oppression, 2 In- 
effectual effort to force a door. 3 Attack, 4 
**Tyranpy, compulsion. 5 Constraint. Luchd- 
f., oppressors. 

foireigneach,** -niche, a. 
cal, Gu f., oppressively. 

foireigneachadh, -idh, s.m. Rapacity,‘ violence. 

foireigneadh, -idh, s.m. Oppression, extortion, 
violence. 2 Actofoppressing, 3**Tyranny. 
4 Compelling, constraining. A’ f—, pr.pt. of 
foireignich. Fear foireignidh, an extortioner, 
foireignich, pr.pt. a’ foireigneachadh, po. Op- 
press, harass. 2 Extort. 3**Compel, constrain, 

-——e, -an, s.m. Oppressor, tyrant. 

-——te, past pt. of foireignich. Oppressed, 
constrained, forced, harassed. 

foreil,** a, Steep, headlong. 192 Clear, evident. 

Hoireinneachadh, -aidh, sm. "Travelling. 

foirfe, a Perfect, good, faultless. +2 Old, an- 
cient, 3 Come to man's estate or years of 
maturity. Duine f., a full-grown man; gu f., 
perfectly, faultlessly. 

foirfeach, Ach, s.m. Elder of the church. 2** 
Full-grown person. 

———,* a. Come to years of discretion or 
maturity. 

—d, s.f.ind. Perfection, completeness, ex- 
cellence. 2**Maturity. 3 Old age. Tha e 
air teachd gu f., he has arrived at maturity. 

tfoirfeadh, -eidh, s.m. Harrowing. 

foir-fhiacaill,** -cla, -clan, s.m. Fore-tooth. 
foir-fhiaclach,** o, Having fore-teeth, having 
large fore-teeth. 

foirfich, pr.pt. a’ foirfeachadh, v.a. Perfect, ac- 
complish. 2 Perform, execute, 

foirfidh, see foirfe. 

eachd, see foirfeachd. 

tfoirgeall, -eill, s.m. Truth.! 

foirgheall,** a, ssm. Pledge for protection. 2 
Hostage for safety. 

foirghioll,** -ghill, s.m. Declaration, proclamas 
tion. 2 Assertion. 3 Proof, witness. 4 De- 
cision, judgment. P. na fìrinn, the manifesta- 
of the truth. 

-—— ——,** q. Clear, evident. 

—,** v.a. Prove. 2 Declare. 

foirghlac,** v.a. Occupy, possess. 

tfoirghlidhe, s.f. Nobility. 2 Truth. 

tfoirgneachadh,** -aidh, s.m. Building. 

tfoirgneadh, -idh, s.m. Building, 

foirgneadh-fuinn,** s.m. Timber necessary for 
the use of afarm. 2 Fabric. 

tfoirgnich,** oa, Build. 

foiriarach,** o, Preposterous, eccentric. 2 
Troublesome, not easy to be served. 

foirich,** v. see fuirich. 2 Enchase. 

d ) ssm. Lump. 2 Mallet. 3 Pes- 

tle, the stone used in crushing corn in the 

corn-mortar. [see fairche, ] 

e, see foirich. 

e, see forach. 

foirichean,* s.pl. Borders, boundaries. 2 Sub- 
urbs, environs. Mu na f. seo, about these bors 
ders ; f. a’ bhaile, the suburbs of the city. 

ifoirichinn, s.f. Help. 

foiridinn,** s.f. Pursuit. 

foirinn, -e, -ean, s.f. Supply, aid, help. 2 Re- 
medy. 3 Strength. 4 Comfort. 5(AC) Bore 
der land, debatable land. 

foir-innis,** va. Predict. 


Obstructor. 


2 Op- 


Oppressive, tyranni- 


























foir-inniseach 


foir-inniseach,** œ. Predictive. 

foir-iomall, -aill, -mlaichean, s.m. Limit, boun- 
dary. 2**Frontier. 3**Territory. 4**Circum- 
ference ofa circle. F. uan sliabh, the utmost 
boundary of the hills. 

—ach, -iche, œ. On the outmost limit. 
2 Bordering. 3 Outward. 4 On the frontiers, 
extrinsic. 5**Territorial. 

foir-iomallach, s.m. Utmost boundary, frontier. 

foir-iomradh, -aidh, -ean, s,m. Ceremony. 2 
Compliments. 

foir-iomraiteach, 
‘Complimentary. 

foir-iongantach, -aiche, v. Prodigious, wonder- 
ful, strange. 

foir-iongantas, -ais, -an, Prodigy. 2 Phenome- 
non. 

foirionn, -an, s.m. see foireann, 

foirireadh, see foiriridh. 

foiriridh,(AC) s.f. Keen observation. 2 Anxious 
waiting. 3 Wake, watching a corpse. 

foirithin, see foirin. 

foir-leathad, -aid, s.m. Expanse. 

foir-leathann, æ. Very broad, spacious, exten- 
sive, large. 2 General. 

-——ach,** æ. Periphrastic. 

achadh,** -aidh, s.m. Periphrasis. 

foirleud, -leoid, s.m. Expanse, extent. 

foirlion,** a. Much, great, plenty. 

foir-lion, v.a. Complete, make perfeet, fulfil, 
supply, fill up. 12 Multiply. 

foirlion,* s.m. Crew. 

—adh, -aidh, s. m. Completion, supple- 
ment, reinforcement, appendix, act of comple- 
ting, perfecting. A’ f—, pr.pt. of foirlion. 

-———ta, a. & past pt. of foirlion. Completed, 
complete, perfected, filled up. 

foirm, -e, s.m. see fuirm. 2 Pomp, display, os- 
tentation—Dain I. Ghobha. 3 (AH) Dash, 
swagger. Thàinig e astaigh le f., he came 
in with pomp. 

Tfoirm, a. Dark, obscure. 

foirmealach,(CR) -aich, s.m. Formalist in reli- 
gion, stickler for forms. 

foirmealach, -aiche, a. see foirmeil. 

, “aich, s.m. Proud, vapid fops, 2 

Conceits—Dain 1. Ghobha. 

—d, s. f. Formality, ceremony, pom- 
pousness, forwardness. 2 Cleverness, 

foir-mheang,** v.n. Prevaricate. 

foirmeil, -eala, œ. Brisk, lively, Scots clever, 2 
Forward, pompous, ceremonious. 3 Noisy. 4 
(DU) Remarkable, noteworthy, applied to a 
person. 

foirn,tt pr.pt. a’ foirneadh, v.n. Intrude, press. 
2 Bearrogant. 

foirne,** s. Fodder. 2 see foireann. 
nidh. l 

tfoirne, s. pl. Dwellers, inhabitants. 

foirneachan,** s.m. Roller. 

foirneadh, -idh, s,m. Intruding, intrusion, act 
of intruding. 2 Arrogance. 3 Inclination, 
sloping. 4}7Forcing. 5(DC) Intrusive ex- 
hortation. A’ f—, pr. pt. of foirn. A’ TL gu 
dana, intruding boldly. 

foirneal,** eil, s.m. Appearance, colour, 

ach, see foirmealach. 
foirneanta, a. Conspicuously brave. 
ward, arrogant. 3 Stout. 

—chd, s.f. Bravery. 
Firmness, steadiness. 
vance. 

foirneart, -eirt, s.m. Oppression, violence, force. 
2 Fraud. 3 Attack. F. w’ eascaire, my ene- 
my’s oppression. 

ach -aiche, œ. Oppressiye, violent. 2 

Fraudulent. 3 Overbearing. 





-iche, o  Ceremonious. 2 




















eu — 





9 see foir- 


2 For- 
4 Firm, steady. 

2 Stoutness. 3 
4 Forwardness, arro- 








448 


foistine 

f., oppressive tyrants, ` 

achadh, -aidh, s.m. Oppressing, act of 

oppressing or overbearing. 2 Defrauding. A’ 
Í—, pr. pt. of foirneartaich. 

aich, pr. pt. a’ fdirneartachadh, v. æ. 

Oppress. 2 Force. 3 Overbear. 4 Defraud. 

foirneata,t a. see foirneanta. / 

Tfoirneil, -e, d. Open, manifest. 

foirneis, ean, s.f. Gaelic spelling of furnace, 

foirnidh, s.pl. see foireann. 

foirseadh,** -eidh, s.m. Harrowing. 

foirsear,** air, sm. Harrower. 2 Ruramager, 
searcher. 3 Constable, 

foirsearachd, s.f. Rummaging, searching. 

foir-sheómar, s.m. Lobby. 2 Ante-chauiber. 

Tfoir-shiol,** v.g, Propagate. 

T-— ———adh,** -aidh, s.m. 
pagation, 

ffoir-shuidh, an. Preside. 

—~ ear, -eir, -irean, s.me, President, 

foirtealachd, see foirteileachd. 

foirteil,** o, Brave, hardy. 2Patient. 3 
Strong. Gu f., bravely. 

eachd,** s.f. Bravery, hardihood. 2 Pa- 
tience. 3 Strength. 

foir-theachdair,** -ean, $. m, Usher. 2 Fore- 
runner. 

foir-theagasg, -aisg, -an, s.m. Rudiments, intro- 
ductiou to any part of learning, 

foir-thir,** o, Farther, remote. 2 Foreign. 

— ——^, &.f. Remote or foreign country. 

foirthir,(AF) s.m. Bird of passage. 

Tfoirthoirt, -e, a. Bold, stout. 2 Active. 

tfoirtil, -e, œ. Able, strong, hardy. 

t———e, $.f. Patience, courage. 

T each, -eiche,@ Patient. 2 Courageous, 

fois, -e, s.f. Leisure, rest. 2 Tranquility. 3 
Habitation, dwelling. Gabh gu f., be quiet ; 
f. do t anam, peace to thy soul ; f. auama, 
soul’s peace—a death blessing ; f. do bhonn a 
choise, rest for the sole of his foot ; is beag f. 
a fhnair e, little rest did he get; aig f., at 
rest. 

foiscionn,** s.m. Malice, backbiting. 

foiscionnach,** @, Malicious, apt to backbite. 

——— ,** s.m. Malice, 2 Cry. 

——— ———40, 8,f. Maliciousness. backbiting. 

foisdin, -e, 9.7. Taciturnity, government of the 
tongue, quietness. 

each, -iche, a. Quiet, silent, calm, 2 At 

rest. [* gives s.m. | 

eachd, 8,f.ind. Calmness, sedateness,com- 
posedness, tranquillity, peaceableness, arran- 
gement. 

foiseachadh, -aidh, s.m. Stopping, resting. A’ 
Í—, pr.pt. of foisich. 

foisead,** -eid, s.m. Faucet. 

foiseamh, -imh, s.m. Recovery. 

foisg, see faisg & fagus. 

foisge, comp. of faisg & fagus. 

foisgeachd,** s.f. Closeness. 

foisgeil, (CR) @ Frank, free, open-handed.— 
Suth'd. 

foisgich, v.a. Approach, draw near. 

foisich, pr.pt. a’ fuiseachadh, v.n. Stop, rest. 

foisneach, -iche, a. Quiet, composed, sedate,se- 
rious, tranquil, peaceable, arranged in order. 
Duine f., a sedate man, a man of rest; gnùis 
fh. na doimhne, the tranquil face of the deep ; 
f. fàilteach, peaceable and hospitable, 

——————d, see foisdineachd. 

tfoiste, s.f. Resting, residing. 

: achair -e, -ean, sm. Hireling. 

foisteadh, -idh, s.m. Wages, salary. 2 Hire. 

foisteanach, -aiche, «a. Serious, arranged in 

good order, 2(DMC) Restful, repose£ul, 





Propagating, pro- 




















Aintighearnan |foistine, s.f. Best, dwelling, 


Original from 


WK " Ai rd Lt K 4 





KA 


(71 MIU a Are 
ët E, 


EN 


EE ape 
2a n 


«c ^ 


SON. Aii 


bei 


7A 


€ 


E 


2 
2 
E 
Ee e 


AER 


Kn 





UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


^m or eer 
- h d 


Ze 
Ru 


= 


> ef 


ee 
ig E 


Dee 


= 
PU E. 





foistinn 


foistinn, s.f. Quiet—JDaàin 1. Ghobha. 
— ——-each, -iche, a see foisdineach. 
eachd, see foisdineachd. 





 tfoitheal, -eil, s.m. Plunder, prey. 


foithearachd,** s.f. ''ouchiness, 

foithre,** s.pl. Woods. 

fol, see foladh, 

fíola, s.m. Garment. 

fola, gen ging, of fuil. 

folabh, see falbh. 

fo-labhairt, s.f. Speaking under one's voice. 

fo-labhradh, ** -aidh, s.m. Good speech, plead- 
ing, reasoning. 2 Low language. 8 Insidious 
question, 

fòlach, -aich, s.m. Rank grass growing on dung- 
hills, manured grass. 

folach,** s.m. see falach. 

—adh, see falachadh. 

an, -ain, -an, see falachan. 

-———d,-an, sf. Feud, spite, grudge, malice. 
2 Treachery. 3 Extraction. 4**Bloodiness. 
Ard am f., of noble extraction or descent ; iosal 
am f., of base extraction ; f. eadar chàirdean, 
feuds among relations ; gach f. air chùl, every 

rudge forgotten ; is buan meacan na folachd, 
ong lasts the rod whose root sprang from blood. 

-————dan, -ain, sm. Water-salad, water-par- 
snip—sium augusiifolium. [t gives folachd- 
ainn as nom.] 

folach-fead, see falach-fead. 

foladair,** s.m. One who sheds blood. 

foladas, -ais, s.m. Spite, grudge, feud. 2 Chas- 
tisement. 

foladh, -aidh, -ean, s.m. Power, ability. 2** 
Hatred. 3** Grudge, feud. 4(AF) Cattle, 
dowry of cattle. 5 see falach. 6 Cover, co- 
vering, screen. 17 Garment, robe. 

folaich, v. see falaich. 

-ear, see falaichear, 

——-—te, see falaichte. 

folaid, see falaid. 

folaigheach, -iche, see falaigheach. 

fíolair, sm. Command. 2 Offer, proffer, 

folais, s. Reay country for bùlas, 2 see follais. 

folamh, -aimhe, a. see falamh, 

folamhaich, v. see falmhaich. 

1folaradh, -aidh, s.m. Command, order, 

folarnaidheach,** o, Equal. 

—__—_——-—d,** s.f. Equality, parity. 

folartair, s.m. Emperor. 2 Commander. 

tiolas, -ais, sm. Shoe, slipper, sandal. 

folbh, see falbh. 

folbhach, see falbhach. 

folbhair, see falbhair. 








` folbhan, see falbhan. 


fole, see faile. 

folcadh, -aidh, see failceadh. 2 Ley of potash. 

foldath, -aithe, a. Generous. 

fo-leabaidh,** -leabach, s.f. Truckle-bed. 

tfolfaidh, a. Whole, entire. 

folg, a. Active, nimble, quick, 

Tíollach, -aich, s. m. Covering, garment. 2 
Military colours. 

ffollach, -aich, s.m, Water gruel. 2 see falach. 

+——-—dain, -e, s.f. Sufferance. 2 Patience. 

folladh,** -aidh, s.m. Government. 

follais, a. see follaiseach. 

** sf. Openness. 2 Publicity. 3 Con- 
Spicuousuess. 4  Evidentness. 5 Clearness. 
Am f., evident, clear ; thoir am f., make mani- 
fest ; thig e am f., it will come to light. 

-———eàch, -siche, a. Public, conspicuous. 2 
Clear, evident, open, manifest, known, public. 
Ionad f., a public place. 

———eachd, sf. Publicity, clearness.  2Evi- 
dence. 3 Conspicuousness, 

———ich, DO, see foillsich, 





Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


419 


fonamhadach 


follamh,** -aimh, san. Ancestors, 

follamhan, -ain, s. m.Grace, ornaments. 

follas, -ais, s.m. Publicity, state of being public, 
being well known. 

follas,** o Manifest, evident. 
public, proclaim. 

-——ach, -aiche, a. see fol- 
laiseach. 

follasgaiu,$ s.f. Goldilocks 
—ranunculus auricomus, 


Dean f., make 


follsgadh,** -aidh, & m. 
Scalding, 
folluis, see follas. 


each, see follaiseach, 
-eachd, see follais- 
eachd. 

ich, see foillsich, 
follus, see follas. 














830. Follasgain, 
Tfollusghlan, -aine, o. Clear, shrill. ` 
folmhaise,** s.f. Advantage, opportunity. 
tfiolmhein, s.f. Thunderbolt, 


folmhuich, see falmhaich. 

———te, see falmhaichte. 

folosg, -oisg, s.m. see falaisg. 

ain, s.f. see follasgain. 

fo-losgann, -ainn, s.f. Tadpole. 

folrachd,** s.f. Gore. 

folt, fuilt, sm. see falt. 2**Wages. 3 Decei- 
ving. 4**Falling. F.ban, fair hair ; f., dual- 
ach, curly hair; f. dubh-dhonn, dark brown 
hair ; fhir an fhuilt bhàin, thou fair-haired 
man. 

foltach, -aiche, see faltach. 

tfoltach, -aich, sm. Vassal, hireling. 

foltan, -ain, see faltan. 

folt-chib, -e, -ean, s.f. Leek. 

folt-dhealg, -dheilge, see falt-dhealg. 

foluaimean,** ein, s. m. Giddy motion. 
Running. 3 Skipping. 

foluaimneach,** a; Moving, stirring. 2 Fickle. 
3 Active. 4 Prancing. 

foluaineach, see foluaimneach. 

fo-luaisg.** v.a. Rock gently, dandle. 

ifoluar,-air, s.m. Footstool. 

fo-luasgach,** y. Rocking, dandling. 

fo-luasgadh, -aidh, s.m. Rocking, dandling. 

foluich, see falaich. 

tfoluidheach,* see falaidheach. 

— ——, see falaidheachd. 

foluimte, see foghluimte. 

folum,(AF) s.m. Cat. 

foiuman,** .ain, sem. Bad clothes. 

fo "m (fodham), Uuder me, beneath me. 

fo m', (fo mo) Under my, beneath my. 
cheaun, under my head. 

fomas,** -ais, sm. Obedience, submission. 

ach,** o, Obedient, submissive. Gu f., 
obediently. 

fomh, see famh. 

fomhach, see famhair, 

fomhorach,** -aich, s.m. 

fomhair, see famhair. | 

fo-mhaol,** -mhaoil, s.m. King's slave. 

fo-mhar, see foghar. 

fo-mhisg,** s.f. Tipsiness. 

fo-mhisgeach, -icbe, a. Half drunk, tipsy. 

fo-mhisgear,** er, s.m. "Tippler. 

fònadh, -aidh, see fòghnadh. 

fonagradh,(MMeL) s.m. Disturbing. 

fònaich, see foghain. 

fonaidh, see foghnaidh. 

fonail,** s.f. Chilliness. 

tfonal, -ail, s,m. Cold, rigour. 

fonamhad,** -aid, s. m. Mockery, derision. 2 
Sneer. 

—ach,** s.m. Jester. 2Sneerer. 

—ach,** -aiche, o Jeering, sneering. 








Fo m’ 





2** Pirate. 
Pirate. 2 Giant. 





fo ’n choill 450 forcadh 
fo ’n choill, (W. Isles—JM.) Outlawed. ’N uair | foraim, 


a bha Prionns’ Tearlach fo 'n choill, when 


Prince Charles was an outlaw. 


fo-neul, -neóil, s.m. Little cloud. 2 Thin cloud. 


2 Apt to 


3 Trance. 

ach,** o, Somewhat cloudy. 
fall into a trance. 3 Like a trance. 

fonn, fuinn, s.m. Land, earth, plain, 





Frame of mind, temper, humour. 
tune, music. 7**Drone of a bagpipe. 
Chorus. 


thaf. ciatach air, heisin grand humour Mb d 


clàrsaich, Aarp-music; dh! éirich f. air, de- 
sire awakened within him ; f. diadhaidh, a 
hymn ; f. cadail, a lullaby ; cheum e troimh 'n 
fh., he marched over the plain; chriothnaich 
am f., theearth trembled ; f. is cuan, land and 


sea. 
tionnadh,** -aidh, s.m. War-chariot. 2 Jour- 
ney. 3 Proficiency. 4jf Club. F. fioghal, a 


quadrangular chariot, 
fonnar,* see fonnmhor. 
achd, see fonnmhorachd. 
fonn-cadail, s.m. Lullaby. 
fonn-ehrith, s.m. Trembling, impatience. 
fonn-duain, s.m. Recitative, 
tonn-ghradhaiche, an, s.m. Patriot. 





fonninhor, -oire, a. Tuneful, melodious, musi- 
cal. 2 Willing, inclined. 3 Desirous. 4 For- 


ward. 5 Merry, gleesome, cheerful. 6 Meek, 

dispassionate. Aite f., a cheerful situation. 
-— ————aàch, -aiche, see fonnmhor. 
-————achd, s.f.ind. Melody. 2**Melodious- 

ness, 3 Inclination, propensity. 4 Meek- 


ness. 5ttMirth, humour,cheerfulness,gaiety. 
6 Gravity. 
fonnsa, s. Rim of a cycle. 12 Troop, band. 


tfonnsair,* -ean, s.m. Trooper. 2**Cooper. 

fonntan, Arran & N. Argyll for fothannan. 

fopa, prep. pron. Under them. 

Hor, s.m. Discourse. 2 Protection. 3 Enlight- 
ening, illuminations, 4(DMC) Intention, idea, 
thought. (AH) Heed, attention. 6AE) 
Dog. | Cha d' thug mi f. air, I did not think 
Rr us it ; tha d' thug thu for, you paid no heed 
— Uist, 

for-,f prefix, Super-, 

fora,** s. Bench, seat, 

for-abaidh, a. Early, ripe before the time. 

forach, s. m. (AC)Projection, swelling. 9 Rock 
or reef in the sea. 13 Dispute, controversy. 
4(AH) Act of fishing for news or stories. 

forachair,** see forair. f2 see furachair. 

Tforachras, see furachras. 

foradh,** -aidh, s.m. Purveying. 2 Forcing, 
3 Seat, bench, 

fora-dhruim, see under bata, A4. 

foragan,** -ain, s,m. Rustling noise. 2 Keen- 
ness, 3 Anger. 

Och, "xo, Causing a rustling noise. 2 
Angry, passionate. 3 Keen. 

tforaich, v.n. Watch, wait. 2(AH) Fish for news 
or stories. | 

+- vus 


foraidheach,** q. 








Wages. 

Wild, fierce. 2**Cruel. 

— —— —-d,s.f. Wildness, fierceness. 2 Cruelty. 

forail,-ean, sm. Command. 2**Gift. T9 Ex- 
eess, superfluity. 4 Offer. 

* a. Imperious.  2(DO) Attentive. 

--——, V.&. Command, 2 Offer: 

foraileach, -iche, a. Imperious, imperative, 

—d, s.f.ind. Imperiousness, 2 Excess- 

iveness, 

tforaileamh, a. 


Imperative. 


D 


L 
ITee ri RIET hm e d dE 
L -K u- ARL VE 


2 Region, 
district,country. 3 Delight,pleasure, 4 Desire. 
Longing, carnal inclination, excitation. 5 
6* Air, 
8&(DU) 
Triruinn ’s am f., three verses and 
the chorus ; dé f. a th’ ort P how do you do ? 


See foir-ainm. 

foraimh,** s.m. Journey. 2**Excessivenesg. 

for-ainm, see foir-ainm. 

forair, -ean, s.m. Watchman,guard. 2 Night 
watch, watching, wake. 

foral,** -ail, sm. Head of a spindle wherein is 
a groove in which the string or band plays 
which gives it motion. . 

-——amh,** -aimh, s.m. Anger, wrath, venge- 
ance. 

Horan,-ain, s.m. Anger, wrath. 

fo-rann, -rainn, s. m. Short verse or poem. 2 
Versicle, stanza. [tuous. 

foranta, d. Angry. 2 Resolute. 3 Presump- 

for-aois, -aoise, s.f. The verge of old age. 

tforaos, -aois, s.m. Forest. 

foraosglach,** o, Old, ancient. 

—., $.m. Old man. 

for-aradh,* s.m. Balcony. 

Tfor-arbhais, -e, sf. Mischief. 

foras, see forfhais. 

t——, Law. 2 Increase. 3 Ford ofa river. 4 
Depth. 5 Foundation, bottom. 6 Armistice. 

foras,* s.m. Assumed airs or importance of a 
trifling person. 2 Denomination, 

»** a. Old, antique, ancient, 

-——ach,* -aiche, a. Assuming airs, 

forasda, a. Grave, sedate, sensible, see farasda. 

— — —ehd, s.f.ind. Gravity, sobriety,  2** 
Mildness, suavity. 

forasaglach,** o. Old, ancient. 

———— ,** -aich, sm. Old man. 

tforasartha, a. Grave, sedate. 

forasna, qd, Illustrated. 

Ee fuirb, s.m. Landlord. 2 Land, 3 Glebe 
and. 

forbach,**-aich, s,m. Funeral entertainment. 

forbadh, -aidh, 8.m. Cutting. 2 Slaughtering. 8 
Flaying. 4 Spending. 5 Finishing. 6 Tag, 
7 Land, glebe land. 

forbaidh,** s.m. Superior. 

tforbailteach, -aiche, a. Acceptable. 

Tforbair, v. Grow, increase. 

forbairt, -ean, s.f. Increase, profit, 2 Emolu- 
ment. 

fovbais,** s.f. Conquest. 

forban,** -ain, s.m. Excess. 2 Extravagance. 

forbann,** -ainn, s.m. Marriage banns. 

tforbhailtigh, -e, see forbailteach. 

tforbhaiseach, see farbhasach. 

forbhas, ais, sm. Snare, ambush, surprise. 

— ———ach,** a. Ensnaring, full of snares, treg- 
cherous, 

for-bhrat, -ait,-an, s.m. Cloak, upper garment. 
2 Wrapper. 

for-bhriathar, -air, -thran, s.m. Adjective. 2** 
Adverb. 

for-bhriathrach, -aiche, a. Eloquent, persuasive. 

for-bhruach, -bhruaiche, pl.-bhruachan & -bhru- 
aichean, s. f. Pinnacle. 2 Steep ascent. 3 
Edge of a precipice. 

forc, fuirc, pl. -an & forcaichean, s.f. Fork. 2 
Prong. 3 The cramp [with the art. AN.] An 
fhorc, the cramp ; f-saidhe, a hay-fork. [** 
gives 1 & 2 as s.m.] 

forc, pr. pt. a’ forcadh, v. a, Push hard with 
hands or feet, as a person dragged against his 
will, 2 Get & purchase with lands or feet. 3 
Pitch with a fork. 4 Press, crush. 5 Teach, 
instruet. 

tfore, -a, a. Firm, steadfast, 

fore,** s.m. Top, summit. ` 

forcach, -aiche, a. Forked. 2tt Having the 
cramp, 

——adh, see forcadh. AO f 

forcadh, -aidh, s.m. Forking, pitching with a 
fork. 2 Pushing. A’ f—, pr.pt. of forc. 











"rt 


Sab 


r t J 
` ee P^ a. Bs 


Ki 
^2 OO. ms - 


«^? 
x v] 
^ 





 for-chraicionn, -inn & -cne, 


for-dhubh,** -dhuibh, s.m. Lid, cover. 


INTERNET ARCHIV 





forcan 451 


for-ninneagach 


forcan, -ain, -an, s.m., dim. of forc. Litile fork. | forlaimh,** s.f. Leaping, bounding. 


forcaich,** oo, Fork, pitch with a fork, 

fforcaidh,** s.m. Superfluity, excess. 2 Rising 
or dawning of day. 

aa a. Forked, forky. 2 Pronged, furca- 
ted, 

fforcar, -air, -airean, s.m. Violence. 2 Wooden 
hook. 

forch, see forach. 

forchaoin,** s.f. Catch in words, quibble. 

forchar,** see forcar. 

-gobhlach,(AF) s.m. Earwig. 





forchan,** -ain, s. m. Instruction, 2 Sermon. 
for-chathraichean, s.pl. Suburbs, 
for-cheumnachadh,1i -ailh, s.m. Series. 


for-chinnteachd, s. f. ind. Predestination. 2 
Prescience. 

for-choimhead, -id, s.m. Watching, lurking for. 

for-chongradh,** s.m. Persuasion, advice, in- 
dulgeuce. 2 Command. 

see roimh-chrai- 
ceann, 2 Scurf. 

fforcuidh, $.f. Superfluity. 2 Rising or dawn- 
ing of day. 


fordal, -ail, s.m. Erring, straying. 2 Mistake. 


3 Delay, hinderance. 

ach, -aiche, æ. Erroneous. 
astray. 

ffordharc, -airc, s.m. The light (see fradharc.) 

ffordhare, a. Manifest. 

for-dhorus, -uis, pl. [-dhorsa &] -dhorsan, s. m. 
Porch, vestibule. Troimh 'n fh., through the 


orch. 
for-dhroin,** s.f. Womb. 2 Loin. 





2 Wandering, 


F. an 
sul, their eyelids. 

tfordul, -uil, see fordal. 

for-eigean, see foireigin. 

fforf, s.m. Guard. 

fforfaire, s.m. Watch, guard, 

tforfaireach,** a. Vigilant, observant. 

T—————-—, s.m. Watchman. 

for-fhacal, -ail, -clan, s.m. Proverb. 2 By-word. 

for-fhaclach, -aiche, a. Proverbial. 

tfor-fhaire, see forair. 

forfhaireach,** a. Vigilant, observant. 

-—,** sm. Watchman. 

forfhais, -ean, s.f. Inquiry. 2 Knowledge, in- 
EE, Air f, an taighe, tn search of the 

ouse. 








each, -siche, a. Inquisitive. 
ich,** v.n. Ascertain. 





for-fhuasgladh, -aidh, -ean, s.m. Vanquishing, | 


defeating. 
for-fhuinneag, see for-uinneag. 
forgamh, -aimh, s.m. Blow, thrust, wound. 
forgan, -ain, s.m. Keenness, 2 Anger. 3 Rust- 
ling noise. 4 Chime. 
ach,** -aiche, @. 2 Keen, 3 
" Angry, passionate. 
forganta,* a. Rigid. 
tforghabhail, s.f. Forcible possession. 
for-ghairm, v.a. Provoke. 
-—, -e, -eannan, s.f. Convocation. 
forghall,** -aill, sm. Lie, fable, romance. 
forgladh,(DMy) -aidh, s.m. Commotion caused 
by a person coming in unexpectedly. 
forghart,** -airt, s.m. Forepart of the head. 
forghlac, v.a. Prevent, hinder. 2 Catch. 





Rustling. 





 forghuin,** s.f. Wound. 2 Sharp pain, beating 


pain. 
forgnadh, see foirgneadh. 
forgradh, see fargra‘th. 
fo-riarach,** y. Preposterous. 
forlach, -aich, s.m. Pass, furlough. 2 Passport. 
forlach, Argyll for foghlach. 
fòrladh, -aidn, s.m. see fórlach, 


Digitized by 


(WI 


forlamlias,** -ais, s. m. Possession, 2 Force, 
power. 3 Conquest. 4 Pain. 5 Superfluity. 
Tforlan,** -ain, s.m. Power, force. 2 Pain, 3 
superfluity, excess, 4 Conquest. 
T gus, -uis, s.m. Banishment. 
forlonn, sf. seeforluinn. +2 Attack. 
forluinn, -e, S.f. Spite, grudge. 2 Hatred. 
tformach, -aich, s.m. Increase, swelling. 
formad, -aid, see farmad. 
-—-——ach, -aiche, see farmadach. 
formail,** æ. Shapely, sightly, of good form or 
figure. 
,** sf. Hire, wages. 
formaise,** s.f. Ornament. 
Tformalach, -aich, s.m.  Hireling. 
forman, -ain, -an, 8.m. Type, mould. 2 Sound, 
noise. 3(DMO) Gaelic form of foreman. 
forn,* s.m. Furnace. 2 Ship-well. [* gives 
Shop-work, and ** Shipwreck.] 
Tftornailheach, s.m. Glutton. 
fornair,** s.m. Command. 2 Offer. 
for-oideas,** -eis, s.m. Rudimeut, elements of 
knowledge. 2 Tradition. 
—ach,** a. Elemental, elementary. 2 
Traditionary. 
for-orduchadh, -aidh, s.m. Predestination. 
forrach,(AF) -aich, s.m. Perch (fish.) 2 Angling 
rod. 3 Perch (land measure.) 4 Oppression, 
compulsion. [** makes all meanings obsolete.] 
forradh, -aidh, -ean, s. m. Gain, emolument. 
2 Culling hastily. 21Excrescence. 4 Shift. 
forra-dhruim, s. f. Slip-keel, false keel, see 
bàta, A4, p. 73. 
Tforraid, adv. Near, hard by. 
forr-dreas, see dreas-chubhraidh. 
forran,** -ain, s.m. Oppression. 2 Destruction. 
ach, d. Oppressive. 
Tforrudh, -uidh, -uidhean, s.m. 
forrumha,** s.pl. Fringes. 
iforrus, -uis, s.m. Increase. 
forsail,(CR) a. Well-to-do, prosperous. 
anach f., @ prosperous farmer. 
forsair, -ean, s.m. Forester, one who watches 
a deer-forest. 
——eachd, s.f.ind. Forestry, the keeping of à 
forest, the business of a forester. 
for-shoitheach, -hich, -hichean, s.m. Basin. 
for-shuidhear, -an, see ceann-suidhe. 
forsmaltadh, -aidn, s.m. Injustice. 
fortachd,** s.f. Comfort. 
2 Patient. 3** 


fortail, -ala, a. Strong, hardy. 
fortalachd,** s.f.ind. Strength, hardihood, bra- 








Fringe. 


Tuath- 


Brave. 


very. 

Tfortamhuil, see fortail. 

fortan, ain, s. m. Fortune, luck. Deagh-fh., 
good fortune ; droch-fh., bad luck ; mar bha 'm 
f., as good luck would have it. | 

——ach, -aiche, «. Fortunate, lucky. Gu 
f., luckily. 

— —achd, see fortan, 

fortas, -als, s.m. Straw, litter, orts, refuse of 
fodder. 

——w—ach, -aiche, a Abounding in refuse. 

tforthan, ain, s. m. Plenty. 2 (AF) Stud of 
horses. 

for-theachdair, -ean, s.m. Usher, under teacher. 
2**Squire. 

for-theagasg, -aisg, -an, s.m. see foir-theagasg. 

fortraidh, s.f. Rising. F. na maidne, the ris- 
ing dawn, 

fo-ruacth, -ruaidhe,a, Reddish, of a bastard red, 
reddish-brown. 

for-uinneag, -eige, -an, s.f. Balcony. 2 Lattice. 
3 Window-shutter. 

ach, @ Having a baleony, belong- 


EE 


LINOIS 


LU R BANA-CHAMPAIGN 


HT 


i 
Li 
F4 


for-uinneagach 452 fothrag 


ing to a balcony. 

forum, -uim, -an, s.m. see farum. 2(AC) Fig- 
Wort, see lus-nan-cnapan. 

- —ach, -aiche, see farumach. 

We -uis, ëm, Dwelling, abode. 211Know- 
edge. 

fos, adv. Moreover, too, yet, still. Mu’n do 
ghineadh f. na cnuic, before ever yet the hills 
were formed ; fos tamuill beag, yet a little 
while ; ach fos, but still, but yet. 

fos, Badenoch for OS, above. 

tfos,* v. for foisich, 2 Prop, stay. 3 Pitch. 
4 Lead. 

tfos, see fas. 

tfos, -ois, s,m. Ditch. 2 Wal. 3 Buttress, 

fosadh, -ean, s.m, Desisting, cessation, recess, 
respite. 2 Concord, confederacy. 

tfosadh,** -aidh, s.m. Cessation, rest, respite. 
2 Delaying. 3 Staying. 4 Atonement. 5 
Prop, buttress. 6**Sloping. Cha sluagh gun 
chruaidh a bheireadh f. orra, i£ would not be 
unarmed people that could make them cease. 

fosadh-airm, (fois air airm =fainits, cease) s.m. 
Parley. 

fosadh-comhraig, see fosadh-airm. 

fosair,* v. a. Labour awkwardly in dressing 
food. 2 Pound bark, 

fosaradh, -aidh, -aidh, 8. m. Deep ploughing, 
trenching. 

fosdadh, -aidh, s.m. Steadiness, 

tfosdoigh, v. see fasdaidh. 

fosg.(AC) s.m. Space. Am f., the space above us; 
am f. os ceann nam fanus, the Space above the 
sky-line. 

fosz,(AC)s.m. The lark. (bird of the open space.) 

fosgadh, see fosdadh. 

fosgadh, -aidh, -aidhean, see fasgadh. 

fosgag,(AC) s.f. Little lark. 

fo-gag-Moire,(AC) s.f. Skylark, 

fosgail, pr.pt. a’ fosgladh, v.a. Open. disclose. 
2 Unlock. 3 (DU) Introduce a discussion. 
Am fear nach f. a sporan, fosglaidh e a bheul, 
he who will not open his purse will open his 
mouth—most people when hearing of distress 
will be profuse in their expressions of regret, 
but how very few will express their sympathy 
in the smallest sum of hard cash. 

———te, a. & past pt. of fosgail. Opened, that 
hath been opened. 2 Disclosed. 3 Unlocked. 
4 Public. 

teachd,* s.f. Airiness. 2 Openness, can- 
dour, fairness. 

fosgaireachd, see fosgarrachd. 

fosgaldair, s.m. Broacher. 

fosgar, s.m. Grunting noise made by some per- 
sons when eating.—SutA'd, 

fosgarra, œ. Open, frank, free. 2 Cheerful. 

— —— —-ch, -aiche, a. see fosgarra. 

chd, s.f. Candour, openness, affability, 

frankness, 

-dh, see fosgarra. 

fosghair, œ. Energetic, strong, irrestrainable. ' 
A thlachd bhi 'sgoltadh le roinn fosghair. 831. Fothannan beannaichte. 















campment, camp, 


e phortach, a. Having harbours, 





Anything to tighten a leaky dish. 9**Know- 
ledge. 10** Clasp, cramp.  11(WO) Scraps, 


kinds (when fodder was getting scarce.) 

tfost, v.a. Hire. 

tfost, s.m. Prop. | 

fostadh, -aidh, s.m. Securing. 2 Pacifying, 

Tfosuign, -ean, s/f. Lodge. 

Tfot, s.m. Giant, 

tfot, a. Raging. 

fot,* see foid. 

fotas, see fotus. 

fotha, see fodha. 

tfotha, s.m. Foundation. 2 Cause, 

fothach, -aich, s.m. Kind of cough, 2 Glanders 
in horses, 3 Lake, marsh, pond. 4 Wilder- 
ness, waste. 5**Giant. 6**Cry, shout. 

,** a. Glandered, as a horse. 

tfothadh, -aidh, s.m. Birch, 

fothair, see fòir. 

fothal,(DMC) s.m. Gossip. 

fothalach, a. Gossiping. 

fothalaz, 8.f. Gossiping woman. 

fothalan,(CR) s.m. W. of Ross for fothannan. 

fothalan, -ain, s.m. Untruthful fellow. 2(DMy) 
Restlessness. 

— — ch, a. Restless. Leanabhf., a restless 
child. 


fotham, see fodham. 

fothamas, -ais, seefathamas. 

fóthannan, -ain, s.m, Thistle. 

— -breac, Mary's thistle, see fóthannan 
beannaichte. i 

————— -beannaichte,$ s.m. Mary’s thistle— 
carduus Marianus. The leaves of this pan 

are blotched as if with milk being spilt on 




















his delight was to cleave (the billows) with| them, the superstition being that they are 
sturdy prow.—Filidh, p. 62. spotted with the Virgin Mary’s milk—hence 
fos-ghàir, s. Clamour. its other names, f. Muire and f. breac. Its 
fosglachd, see fosgailteachd. nam. of bearnan breac is from the peculiar 


fosgladh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Opening. 2| notched shape of the edges of the leaves. 
Unlocking. 3 Breach. 4 Act of opening. 5{|—— -Muire,$ see fothannan beannaichte. 
Act of making a breach. 6(DU) Sheet light- —— -soilleir, s.m. Carline thistle. 
ning—Gairloch. 7 (DU)Introduction to a dis- | fothantan, (CR) Shiskine, Arran for fothannan. 
cussion, treatise. <A’ f—, pr, pt. of fosgail, |fothargadh, -aidh, s.m. Bath. 2 Well of purifi- 








fosglan,(AC) -ain, s.m. Porch. cation. i n 
fo-sgriobh, v.a. & n. Subscribe. tfothlainteach,** -aich, s.m. Novice. 2 Appren- 
weg AL Du "aidh, s.m. Postscript. 2 Ap-| tice. 

pendix. | fothlus,(AC) s.m. Figwort, see lus-nan-chapan, 
Tfoslong,** s.m. oe dwelling-house, fothrag, see fathrag. 


t——-—phort, .phuirt, s. m. Harbour. 2 En- 


fosradh, -aidh, s.m. (AF) Grazing of cattle 
when tetherel. 2 Hand feeding for cattle. 
4**Release, 4** Dissolution. 5**Dwelling. 6 
**Bed, 3** Pounded bark to stop leaks, 8 


mixed food for cattle, Scraps given to pigs. 12 
Refuse of straw. Cha robh ann ach f., there 
was only food composed of refuse of various 








fothraig 


fothraig, see fathraig. 

fothram, -aim, see farum, UE 

ffothughadh, -aidh, s.m. Beginning. 2 Power. 

fotlus, for fothlus, see lus-nan-cnapan. 

fotrum, -uim, s.m. Great figwort, kernel-wort. 

fotrus, -uis, see fortas. 

fòtus, -uis, s.m. Refuse, 2 Corruption. 3 
Flaw, blemish. 4 Rotten pus. 5 (AH) Leav- 
ings of cattle when fed with straw or hay. 6 
see fortas. Dream rìoghail gun fh., o royal 
and spotless clan. 

— ach, -aiche, a. Full of refuse, 2 Corrupt, 
blemished. 3 Causing blemishes. 

—-—achd,** s.f. State of being blemished. 

fo-uachdran, -ain, s.m. Lieutenant, deputy go- 
vernor, viceroy. 

——— -— —achd, sf. Subordinate command or 
authority, viceroyalty, lieutenancy. 

fo uamhann,** adv. Aghast. 

frabhas,tt ais, s.m. Refuse. 

frac,** s.m. Bleakness. 

firach, -aich, s.m. Bleakness. 

ail, (DC) s.f. Vestiges, trifling appearances. 
Tha f. oibre ann, there are trifling jobs of work 
to be had. 

frachd,t an, s.f. Freight. 

frachd,(DMC) s.m. Rags. 2 What is left of 
wool after the best has been pulled out. 

fradhaidh, SutA'd for rabhadh. 

fradharc, -airc, see radharc. 

——--——AÀch, -aiche, see radharcach. 

frag, Age, s. f. Hand. 2 Woman, wife, 
Shield, buckler 41IKind wife. 

fragh, see fraigh, 

fraghaidh, see rabhadh. 

fraidh, -ean, see fraigh. 

fraigealach, -aiche, a. Ostentatious of personal 
strength. 

ffraigealachd, s.f. Show of personal strength. 

fraigean, -ein, s.m. Smart, little, brisk, warlike 
fellow, little man with an erect martial gait. 
[-ein, is also used as nom.) 

————ach, a. Squat and strutting. 

fraigeasach, -aiche, a. Smart, lively. 

——--—, -aich, s.m. Lively little man. 

ffraigeil, -e, a. see fraigealach. 

traigh, -e, -ean, s.f. Partition-wall, side wall. 
2 Wattled partition. 3 Border, edge, rim. 
4 Border of a country. 5 Frame. 6 Arch. 7 
Skirt. 8 Shelf. 9 Wall-press, pantry. t10 
Bush of hair. 11**rarely the sea. 12*Roof. 
Fraighean na Criosdachd,the borders of Christ. 
endom ; is duilich beanas-taighe a dheanamh 
air na fraighean falamh, it is hard to keep 
house with empty pantries ; crog fraigh, pict- 
€ formed by the shadow of the hand on the 
wall. 

ftaigheach, a, Having borders or rims, border- 
ed, rimmed, skirted, labiated. 2 Having side- 
walls, pantries, &c. 

fraighean, n.pl. of fraigh. 

fraighnich,* ar see fraigh-shnighe. 

fraighnidh, see fraigh-shnighe. 

fraigh-shnighe, s. m. Water oozing through a 
wall. [** gives s.f.] 

fraileach, -ich, s.f. Sea-weed. 

fraineach, Suth’d for raineach. 

fraings’, s.f. Scouring-brush made of cross- 
leayed heath—Badenoch {variant of roinnse, 
ruinnse in Bodenoch, rainnse in Perthshire.] 
fraoch-frangach. 

fraith, see fraigh. 

framadh,** -aidh, s.m. Frame. 

framh, see freumh, 

framhach, see freumhach. 

Frangach, a. French. Coileach f., a turkey- 
cock ; cearc-fh., a turkey-hen ; an galar f., the 


2 Small potatoes. 





Pn 


453 

















fraoch, -aoich, s.m. Anger, fury. 2 Hunger. 


fraoch ! int. 


fraoch-Fireannach 


venereal, 
Frangachail,** o Frenchman-like. 
frangalus, -uis, s.m, Tansy—tanacetum vulgare. 
[lus-na-Fraing$. | 
————ach, à. Abounding in, made of or like 
tansy. 
3 


Girning expression of countenance. 4 Ripple 
on the surface of water. Laoch bu gharg f., 
a hero of fierce wrath. 


fraoch, -&oich, ssm. Ling, heather—calluna vul- 


garis. Air feadh an fhraoich, among the hea- 
ther ; coileach-fraoich, æ heather-cock. grouse. 
Heather ! A war-cry of the Mac- 
Donalds. 


fraoch-a'-bhadain,$ s.m. Smooth-leaved heath 


—erica cinerea. [Given in error by 3 as the 
Sai of the Robertsons instead of the brack- 
en. 





$32. Fraoch. 
fraochach, -aiche, a. Heathy, heath-covered. 2 


333. Fraoch-a’-bhadain, 


Passionate, wrathful, angry, fretful. 3 Rag- 
ing, stormy. Beanntan f., heath-covered moun- 
'Qins. 

fraochag, -aige,-an, s.f. Cranberry, see muil- 
eag. 2ftWhortleberry. 

—ach, -aiche, o Of, or belonging to 
whortleberries, abounding in whortleberries. 

fraochaich, po, Enchafe. 

fraochaidh, o. Angry, fretful, passionate, furi- 
ous. 2 Stormy. 

fraochail, -e, a, see fraochach and fraochaidh. 
Gu f., angrily. 

fraochan,$ -ain, s.m. Whortleberry, see lus-nan- 
deare. 2**Bilberry. 

fraochan, ain, s.m. Toe-cap, patch on the toe 
ofa shoe, to preventits wearing by rubbing 
against the heath, 2 Slight fit of passion. 3 
Part of a deer. 

—ach, -aiche, @ Patched asshoes. 2 
Fretful, 3 Passionate. 4 Rippling. 

———-—achd, s.f. Fretfulness. 

-—aich, see faochanaich. 

fraoch-an-dearrsain,§ s.m. Smooth-leaved heath. 
(lit. the heath in which the wind makes a 
buzzing sound, or which crackles when being 
burnt.) also fraoch-a’ -bhadain. 

fraoch-an-dearrsain geal, s.m. White heath. 

fraoch-an-ruinnse,§ s.m. Cross-leaved heath, see 
fraoch Frangach. 

fraocharnach, -aich, s.f. Heathy hill. 

fraoch-bhadain, see fraoch-a -bhadain. 

SE apa, -bheiune, -eanntan, s.f. Heathy 
hill. 

fraoch-cheare, -chirce, -an, s.f. Grouse-hen, fe- 
male of the red grouse. 

fraoch-Dhaboch,$ s.m. St. Dabeoe's heath—da- 
beocia polifolia. [Native of west Ireland, but 
not of Scotland or England.] 

fraoch-Eireannach,$ s.m. Irish heath—erica 
Hibernica. [Not found in Scotland or Eng. 
land, but in Ireland and on the shores of the 
Mediterranean.] 








_fraoch-Frangach 





834. Fraoch-Dhaboch. $335.Fyaoch Eireannach. 


fraoch-Frangach,$-aich, s.m. Cross-leaved heath 
—erica tetralix. 
heather, | 

fraoch geal, s.m. White-flow- 
ering variety of common ling. 
—calliuna vulgaris alba. 





337. Fraoch-a'- 
Mheinnearaich. 


fraoch-gorm,$ s.m. Ling, see fraoch. 

fraocli-wmara,$ $.m. Kind of seaweed—polysi- 
phonia fastigiata. 

fraoch-meangain,* see fraoch-Frangach. 

fraoch-4'-Mheinnearaich, s. m. Menzies’ heath 
—phyllodoce menziesi. So named after the 
naturalist Archd. Menzies. It is not the 
badge of Clan Menzies. ] 

fraoch-nan-curra-bhitheag, s.m. see fraochan. 
fraoch-sgriachain,tt s.m. Crackling heath, see 
fraoch-a’-bhadain, 

fraoch-spreadanach,§ s.m. Smooth-leaved heath, 
see fraoch-a’-bhadain. 

fraoghaidh,** s.f. Warning. 

fraoichean,(AF) s.m. Heather chatterer, whin- 
chat. 

fraoidh, see fraigh. 

fraoidhleadh, -idh, -idhean, see fraoileadh. 

fraoidhneadh, -idh, s.m, see fraoidhnidh. 2t+ 
Embroidery. 

fraoidhneas, -eis, -an, 2 Tassel. 
3 Embroidery, 

—-——-—-~ach, -aiche, a. Waving, flourishing. 
2 Richly fringed. 8 Full of embroidery or 
fringes. 

fraoidhnidh, -ean, s.m. Flourishing appearance 
or hue, 

frao:ghlich,* see fraoileadh. 

fraoileach,** a. Tipsy. 

fraoileadh, -lidh, -lidhean, sm. Flustering by 
liquor, tipsiness. Tha f. ort, you are tipsy. 

fraoineasach, @ Waving, flourishing.» 2 Calm. 
8 Sheltered, 

fraon, -aoin, s.m. Place of shelter in the mount- 
ains, or in a rock. 2 Low-lying valley. 

— —aiseach, see fraoineasach, 

fras, froise, -an, [pl. frasdan—Arran.) s. f. 


. Fraoch-Franjach. 


8.m. Fringe. 


Digitized by 


ee ee ee Ea A 1 
NTERNET ARCHIV 


454 
| Shower of rain or hail. 





[MeL & D and * give cat- 


freag naire 

2 Small shot. 3 Seed 
of plants. _4 Any small round grain, as of 
flax. F. feòir, grass seed; f. 'sa ghunna, small 
Shot in the gun ; f. lin, flax-seed ; le cas is E 
corn-growth (lit with foot and root); frasan 
sneachd, falis of snow ; an lion fo fhras, the 
flax. bolled or podded ; f. corcaich, hemp-seed ; 
ZS lin, lint-seed; bogha-froise, rainbow ; fras- 
luaidhe, small shot. [** gives; gen. frois & s.m.] 


tfras, Ga. Ready. 2 Active. 
fras, pr.pt. a’ frasadh, v.a, Shower, rain. 2 
Scatter. 3 Dash. 4(DU) for frois. Frasaidh 


mi aran, I will rain bread. 
frasach, -aiche, a. Showery, rainy. 2 Fruitful, 


prolific. 3 Imbriferous. 4 In flower, as flax. 
EY -aich, s.f. Shower. 2 Manger. (pras- 
ach. 


frasachd, s. f. ind. Rain, showers. 2 Showery 
weather. 3 Showeriness. F.a’ Chéitein, the 
Showers of Spring ; bheir mi dhuibh f., Z will 
give you showers. 

frasachdach, a. Showery. Laf,, a showery day. 

frasadh, -aidh, s. m.  Showering. 2 Act of 
Showering. 3(DU) for froiseadh. A’ f—, pr. 
pt. of fras. A’ f. fola, showering blood. 

fras-fhliuch, -fiiuiche, a. Moisteued by a shower. 

frasrachd, see frasachd. 

tfreac, a. Crooked, bent, bending. 

freacadan, -ain, -an, see freiceadan. 

—ach, -aiche, a. see freiceadanach. 
—————-aiche, -an, see freiceadanaiche, 
freacadh, 8.m. Attendance. 

Tfreacair, s.m. Use, practice, 2 Attendance, 
Tfreacar, air, s.m. Witness. 2 Testimony,evi- 
dence. 3 Practice, frequency. 
Tfreacaraich, v.a. & m. Wrestle, 

8 Accustom. 
freacaraiche, s.m. Wrestler 2 Exerciser. 
Tíreacaran, -aiu, s.m. Wrestling school. 2 Place 
for exercise. 
freachnamh, -aimh, 


2 Exercise, 


s.m. Labour. 


tfreachnamhach, @ Cautious, careful. Gu f., 
cautiously. 

freachnamhachd, s.f.ind. Cautiousness, care- 
fulness. 


tfreacnaire, s.m. Conversation. 

tfreacuaire, s.f. The present time, 

freacuaireach, a. Modern. 

freacuarach, see freacuaireach. 

Tíreadh, s.m. Pillaging, plundering. 2 Booty. 

freagair, pr. pt. Ia freagradh, &] a’ freagairt, 
v.d. dn, Answer, reply. 2 Suit, fit. 3 Cor- 
respond, 4 Obey. F. an duine, answer the 
man; am bheil an cot’ a’ freagairt P does the 
coat ft? čar son nach f. thu mi? why will 
you not obey me? 

freagairt, -ean, s.f. Answer, reply. Answering, 
act of answering, obeying, suiting or fitting, 
A’ f—, pr. pt. of freagair. Fios f., an answer 
to a letter ; cha d thug e f. dhomh, he gave 
me no reply. 

freagairte, past pt. of freagairt. 2 
Suited, adapted, fitted. 

freagar, see freagairt & freagradh. 

freagaraich, v.g. see freagraich. 

freagarair, 8.71, Respondent, defender, an- 
swerer. l 

freagarrach, -iche, a. Answering, that answers 
or replies. 2 Answerable. 3 Suited, suitable. 
4 Accountable, liable,responsible, 5 Accurate, 

freagarrachd, s.f.ind. Congruity. 2 Account- 
ableness. responsibility, answerableness. 3 
Accuracy. 4 Agreeableness, 5 Fitness. 

freagarraich, see freagraich. 

freagnailh, -aidh, s.m. Labour, work, employ- 
ment. 

freagnaire, sf. Conversation. 


Answered. 


Original fram 


, " r= PIs 
| | ^, | k , Ee Li! K | T 
ti Ww L J | | 


= e 
"s 
LIF 
wg 





LINOIS Zb 


RBANA-CHAMPAIGN SIE 


ax 





freagrach 


freagrach, a. see freagarrach. 

freagrachd, see freagarrachd. 

freagradh, -aidh, -aidhean, s. m. Answer, reply. 
2 Act of answering. 3 Suiting, fitting. A’ 
t—, pr.pt. of freagair. 

freagraich, v.g, Answer. 2 Suit, fit, adapt. 

—te, a. & past pt. of freagraich. An- 
swered, suited, adapted, fitted. 

freagram, Ist.sing. imp. of freagair. Let me an- 
swer. 2 For freagraidh mi, 4 will answer, 

fréamh, -an, see freumh, 

D ach, see freumhach. 

fréamhadh, -aidh, see freumhadh. 

fréamhaich, v. see freumhaich. 

treang, s.m. Hide, skin. 

#freang, v.a. Make crooked, bend, twist. 

freangach, a. Crooked, bent, twisted, winding, 
turning. 

freangach,(AF) s.m. Pin-fish. 

treapadh, -aidh, s.m. Bouncing, kicking, skip- 
ping. f2 Medicine. 

trearag, (e close) Suth’d for fradharc. 

freasdail, pr. pt. a’ freasdal Is a’ freasdaladh] 
v.a. Attend, waiton. 2 Depend on. 3 Re- 
lieve, 4 Provide, prepare. 5 Take precaution. 
F. do’ n bhòrd, wait at table; cd a fh. ? who 
relieved ? 

treasdal, -ail, ssm. Serving, attending, waiting. 
2 Providence. 3 Fate, lot. 4 Guardian an- 
gel. 5 Visitation. 6 Charge. F. Dhé, God's 
providence ; choimhead do fhreasdal, thy visi- 
tation has preserved ; is fhéarr f. na gabhadh, 
foresight is better than falling into danger. A’ 
f—, pr.pt. of freasdail. 

[reasdalach, -aiche, a. Provident, foresighted. 
2 Attentive. 3 Providential. 

—adh, -aidh, s.m. Attendance. 
of making provision, 
dalaich. 

freasdaladh, -aidh, s. m. Providing, making 
provision. A’ pr. pt. of freasdail. 

freasdalaich, pr. pt. a’ freasdalachadh, v. a. 
Provide, make provision. 2 Serve, wait, at- 
tend upon. 

pam v.a. Climb, ascend, mount. 
reasgabhail, s.f. Ascension to heaven. 

freaslach, -aich, s.m. Anger, resentment, dis- 
pleasure, 

freastal, -ail, see freasdal, 

freatachadh, -aidh, s.m. see freiteach. 

freiceadain,* v. Watch narrowly and slyly. 

freiceadan, -ain,-an, s.m. Guard, watch. 2 
Watching most attentively or narrowly. 3** 
Regiment. 4 Sentinel. Am F. Dubh, the 
Black Watch or 42nd. Regiment of foot, now 
the Royal Highlanders ; ceannard an fhrei- 
ceadain, the captain of the guard. 

freiceadanach, -aich, a. Of, or relating to sen- 
tinels, guards, &c, 2 Regimental. 

——— —————d, s.f. Watching, guarding, con- 
tinued watching. 

freiceadanaiche, s,m, Sentry, guard. 

freigh, see fraigh. 

freimeiseanta,* a. see freimseil. 

freimh, see freumh. 

freimseadh, -sidh, s. m. Great huff or offence 
for little or no cause. 2ffFuss, pother. 

freimseil,* o, Hale and hearty though very old. 
2** Jolly. 

freineach, Badenoch for raineach. 

freislidh, s.f. Anger, vexation. 

freiteach, -tich, -tichean, s.m, Vow, valedictory 
resolution. 2 Oath. Thoir f. nach dean thu 
eucoir, make a vow that thou shalt not do evil; 
cha chum freiteach ach deamhain, none but de- 
vils keep rash vows. 

—-—adh, s.m. Abjuration. 











2 Act 
A’ t—, pr. pt, of freas- 


455 


fridh-mheirleach 


resolve to abstain from something, as drink: 

freoine, s.m.ind. Fury, rage. i 

freothainn,tt -e, 8.f. Bent grass—Argyll. 

freothal, -ail, s.m. Whirl. 2 Eddy. Mar fh. 
na mara, like the eddy of the sea. 

———ach, a. Whirling, 2 Eddying, full of 
eddies, 

freumh, -a, -an [& -aichean], em, Root, stem, 
stock, 2 Lineage. 3 rarely Sound sleep. 
Spionara fh. 4 bun, his root shall be torn up. 
[** gives gen. sing. freimh, and s.m.] 

freumh, v.a. Take root, establish. 

freumhach, -aich, -aichean, sf Root, stem. 2 
Origin. 3 Lineage, pedigree.  Diridh snoth- 
ach o ’n fhreumhaich, sap shall ascend from 
the roots ; a chionn nach robh f. aige, because 
it had no root. 

freumhach, -aiche, œ. Fullof roots, rooted. 2 
Steady, well founded, 3 Fibrous. 4 Funda- 
mental. 

freumhachadh, -aidh, s.m. Taking root, rooting. 
2 Propagating. 3 Derivation iu grammar. 
A’ f—, pr.pt. of freumhaich. Air dhuibh bhi 
air bhnr f., on your being rooted. 

freunihachas, ais, s.m. Firmness of root. 2 Ety- 
mology. 

freumhachd, an, s.f. Original cause or origin. 
2 Rootedness. 3 Etymology. 

freumhag, -aige, -an, s.f. Fibre, root. 2(CR) 
Portion,measure. Na'm biodh f, slàint' agam, 
if I had a measure of health—W. of Ross. 

freumhaich, v.a. Take root, radicate. 

— ———-— —te, past pt. of freumhaich. Rooted. 
F. "na ehridhe, rooted in his heart. 

freumhaichean, n.pl. of freumh. 

freumhail,-e, a. Radical, 2t{Constitutional. 

freumhair, ean, s.m. Etymologist. 

freumhaireachd, s.f. Etymology. 

freumh-fhacal, -ail, -clan, s.m. Primitive word, 
etymon, radical term. 

freumh-fhaclach, a. Etymological. 

freumh-fhaclachd, s.f. Etymology. 

freumh-fhaclaiche, s.m. Etymologist. 

freumh-fhaclair, s.m. Etymologist. 2 Etymolo- 
gical dictionary. 

freumh-uibhir, -ean, s. f. Primary or cardinal 
number. 

freumhuinean, -ein, s.m. Sucker, sprout. 

freunaich, gg, Found, establish. 

fri, see frid. prep. 

tfrialta, æ. Free, freed. 2 Fried. 

friamh, pl. friamhan [& friamhaichean,] see 
freumh. 

frid, see fride. 

frid, prep. Through. Air m’ onair gu’n deach e 
frid a’ bhealaich mhóir, 'pon my conscience he 
took leg-bail. 

fride,ll s.f. The itch. 2 The insect acarus seabei, 
3 Tetter. 4 Ringworm, fleshmite. 5 Pustule. 
6 Small pimple. 7 (AC) Gnome, pigmy, elf, 
rock-elfin. j 

frideach, a. Pimply. 2 Like apimple. 3 Pus- 
tulous. 

frideag, -eige, an, s. f. Small ringworm. 2 
Pimple, small pustule, 3 see frìde 6. 

frideagach, a. Pimply, full of small pimples. 

frideam, -eim, s.m. Attention, support. 2; DMC). 
Sufficiency, suitability. Cha dean e f., i£ is 
quite inadequate; cha'n "eil f. agam air, I 
don’t care a fig about it. 

frideamach -aiche, a. Officious, attentive, sup- 
porting. ` 

fridean, see fride 6. 

fridean-fionn,(AF) s.m. Wren-mite. 

fridh, e, -ean, s.m. see frìth, s.f. 

fridh-ghaduiche, -ean, s.m. see frith-ghaduiche. 

fridhire, see frithire. 


freitich, pr.pt. a’ freiteachadh, v.m. Vow, swear, ! iridh-mhéirleacb, see frith-mhéirleach. 


Di pera. Dn 

o aL AT d e Ze 
i 3 1 n Pi 17 L d 
ITERNET. ARCHIV 
ü EL i = ri Ec LU 


£rid;ch 

fridich, see fride 6. 

tfridiomb, s.m. The use of another's house as 
your own for & limited time, 
tality, see frilean, 

fridiombach, -aiche, a. 
restrait in another’s house. 

frigh, see frith. 

frigheannachadh, -idh, s.m. & pr.pt. see frighig- 


eadh, 
frighig, v.a, Fry. 
frighigeadh, -idh, s.m. Frying, act of frying. A’ 
. f—, pr.pt. of frighig. 
trighigichte, past pt. Fried. 
frilisg,(CR) s.f. Earth worm used as bait 
—Gairloch d Lochbroom. 
frineas, -eis, see frionas. 
frineasach, æ. see frionasach. 
friobhag, -aige, s.f. see frith-bhac, 
friobtiruth, s.m. Refusal, denial. 
friochanntaireachd, sr BRecantation. 
friochd, -an, s. m. Second dram, nip, half-glass- 
ful, after a *'sgaile ” 


for trout 


to take when he awakened :— 
1 An sgaile-nide, 
2 An friochd ullinn, 
3 An deoch chas-ruisgte, and 
4 An deoch bhléth, 
before he partook of food in the morning.] 
friochd, v.a. Lance, pierce or probe quickly, 
with an awl, pin, &c. 
friochdadh, -aidh, s.m. 
quickly and painfully. 
frivchdail, -ean, s.m. see friochdan, 
friocidan, -ain, s.m, Frying-pan. 
friochnach,**a. Diligent. 2 Careful, 
Gu f., diligen'ly. 
friochnadh, -aidh, s.m. 
diligence. 
friochnamhach, æ. Careful. 
friochoidheas, -is, s.m. Antipathy. 
friodhan, -ain, see frioghan. 
friodhanach, a. see frioghanach. 
friodh, see frioghan, 


Care, consuming care, 


friogh,(DMC) s.m. Angry countenance, accom- frith-, prefix equal to the prep. ri, which see. Ki 


panied by sharp, cutiing language. 
friogh,** o Sharp, keen, piercing. 2 
Gu f. ndinbach, sharply and hostilely. 


frioghach,** a. Sharp, keen, piercing. 2 Bristly, | frith-aimm, -eannan, s.m. By-name, nickname. 


frioghach, -aiche, o see frioghanach. 
frioghail,** a. see friogh & frioghach. Guf., 
sharply ;chof. ris na leoghainn, as keen as 
the lions. 
frioghalachd,** 5s. f. 
Bristliness. 
thy wit. 
frioghan, -ain, sm. Sow’s bristle. 
Gloom. 4 Frown. 
7 Barb. 
the ridge of a house, 9(DO) Stubble. 
frioghanach, -aiche, a. Bristly, bristling, rough. 
2 Frowning, as winter, wintry. 3 Angry. 
frioghanachd,** s.f. Bristliness. 
friophanaich,** v. Bristle. 


2 Edge. 3 


irioghlaisg,(CR) s.f. Sbred of skin turning up at |frith-bharaileach, a. Paradoxical. 
pus P SE 2 | Hrith-bheart, Ga, Contradict. 2 Object. 


the base of the finger-nai!.— Perthshire. 
Barb of a hook also—Loch Tay. 


friolaisg,** s.f. Small splinter rising on the sur- | frith-bhuail, pr.pt. a’ frith-bhualadh, v.n. Pal- . 


face of deal, or on the skin. 

friolanna, s.pl. Streamers, 

frioluaisg,** 
mouth of a bag or sack. 2 Move up and 
down. 

frionas, -ais, s.m. Fretfulness, anger. 2 Cha- 
grin, vexation. 

frionasach, -aiche, a Angry, vexed. 2Fretful, 
peevish. 3 Impatient. 4** Bitter. 
"sa f., be not impatient ; gu f., fretfully. 


Di ILL Zeug pv 


Lk Leg Fab — oe "om dx LIP 
dIERNET ARCHIVE 


456 


kindliesc hospi- | friosg,** v.g. Turn down 


Quite at home, under no | friosg,** a. N imble, active. 


or morning bumper. [It |friothair, -e, a, 
was usual for a guest in à house in Gaeldom |friothaireachd, s.f, Crossness. 


as | frivcaradh, s.m. Contradiction. 


Quick stab, Stabbing |írisealair, a. see friotalach. 


circumspect, Sc -e, -ean, &.f. Forest (of deer, 


Bristly, | frith-ainbheach, s.m. Arrears, trifling debts, 


Sharpness, keenness. 2: 5 à 
F. t’ inntinn, the sharpness of |frithaireachd, s.f. Hastiness. 2 Peevishness. 


5 Sharp cold. 6łłAnger. | frith-bhacach, -aiche, a. Barbed. 
8&AH) Layer of thatch resting on |frith-bhaile, -bhailtean, s.m. Suburb, 2 Ham- 


v. Ga. Turn down and open the | frith-bhualadh, -aidh, s.m. Palpitation. 2 Pul- 


Na bi | frith-channtair, -ean, s.m. Recanter. 


frith-channtaireachd | 
irionasachd, st Fretfulness, peevishness. 2 
Impatience. 3 Cholericness. 


and open the mouth of 
a bag or sack. 


friosg, (AF) s.f. Earthworm—Lochalsh, 
friot,** -a, s. Fret, fit of fretfulness. d 


friotach, -aiche, æ. Fretful. 2 Angry, 3 Ill- 
natured, hasty. Gu f., fretfully. 
friotachas, ais, s.m. Ill-nature, anger. 
A "il, s.m. Word. 2 Interpretation. 3 
ret. 
friotalach, -aiche, a. see friotach. Gu f., fret- 


fully. 
friotalachd,** s.f. Fretfulness, 
frioth, a. see frith. 
friothail, v.a. see fritheil. 
friothailt, see fritheilt, 
friothailteach, -iche, a. see fritheilteach. 
friothaindeach,* see frith-ainmheach. 
frioth-ainm, see frith-ainm. 
Passionate, touchy, frettish. 


2 Angriness, 


friothaladh, -aidh, s.m. & pr.pt. see frithealadh. 
friothalaich, v. see fritheilich. i 
friothalaiche, -an, s.m. see fritheiliche. $ 
friothan, see frjoghan. 

fri thirach, a. Contradictory. 
friot .arachd, s.f. Captiousness, 


Le di 
EZ T2 JE Cd 


firisceart, -eirt, s. m. Auswer. 


frisgis, s.f. Hope, expectation. 

frith, -a, o Small, little, triding. [Always Aë 
used before the noun qualified. } Zei 

not of trees.) 

eath, moor. 8**Deer-park. Mo chàir- 

dean ’san fh., my friends in the deer-fores.. 

frìth, -e,-ean, s.f. Rage, anger. 2 Augury, di- 
vination. 3f Incantation to discover if far- 
away persons live, 4 Fate. 51 Sour or angry 
look. 6 prov. Profit, gain, advantaze. 

tfrith, s.f. The mouth ofa river, firth. 2 Suit, i 
attendance. | 


wu PX A. 
o0 gp P^ ss » 


frith-aghann, -aighne, s.f. Warming-pan. 
remainder of a debt. 


———— — —eaàch, a. Nicknaming, | 

frith-ainmich, pr.pt. a’ frith-ainmeachadh, v.a. 
Nickname. | ' 

frithaireach, a. Hasty. 2 Peevish. Gu f, fret 
Jully. 


frith-bhac, -aic, -an, s.m. Barb of a hook, are E 
row or anchor, 1 


let, village. Anns na frith-bhailtean, in the 
suburbs. 
frith-bhailteach, aq, Abounding in hamlets, 2 À 
Having suburbs. 3 Suburban. l 
frith-bharail, s.f. Paradox. 


m 


frith-bhruidheann, s.m. Chat. 


pitate,vihrate. 2 Strike back. 3 Strike softly. 
frith-bhuailteach, a. Repercussive. 2 Vibrative. 


sation. 3 Striking softly. 4 Repercussion. 
A’ f—, pr.pt. of frith-bhuail, Tha mo chridhe 
a’ frith-bhualadh, my heart palpitates. 

frith-bhuille, -an, s.m., Little stroke. 2 Back 
stroke. 3 Vibration. 


frith-channtaireachd, sr, Recantation, 


S. Hr DTE EN 


ceed 


C3 
~ 
- 


- | 
(Sp 
CH? 
I 
|| 
CY e 
T sp 
Be 
A? 
de 
6 w 
— Ln 
à : B. 


eneit -— p= 
Uu S| 


UNIV 





e UMOR 


s d 
t 





frith-chasd 


frith-chasd,(AH1) s.m. Short, dry, intermittent 
cough. 

frith-cheannaiche, s.m. Hawker, cadger. 

frith-cheol,(AC) s.m. Low music. 

frith-cheum, -annau, s.m. By-walk, by-road. 

frith-choille, -ltcan, s.f. Underwood,brushwood, 
copse. 

tith-chombiradh, see frith-bhruidheann. _ 

fritheachd, s f. Coming and going. 2 Returning. 

frith-eagal, -ail, -an, s.m. Slight degree of fear, 
panic, sudden terror. 2 Surprise. 


frith-eagalach, a. Causing a panic. 2 Apt to be 
startled. ; 
frithealach, a. Waiting, attending, 2 Officious. 


9 Attentive. Gu f., oficiously. 

frithealachair, s.m. Administrator. A 

frithealachd,(DMC) s.m. Enough, sufficiency. 
Tha f. agam dheth, I have what will do of it, 

frithealadh, -aidh, s. m. Attending, waiting, 
ministering. 2 Dispensation. Bean-fh., a 
midwife [bean-ghitin is better] ; fear-fritheal- 
aidh,an accoucheur, attendant, waiter. A'f—, 
pr. pt. of fritheil. 

frithealaich, see fritheil. 

frithealaichte, see fritheilichte. 

frithear, see frithir. 

frithearach, -aich, oe Uneasy. 2 Peevish, 

.. morose, cross, impatient. 3 Fervent. 

frithearachd, s. f. Peevishness, moroseness, 
crossness, fretfulness. 

trithearra, @.Peevish: 2*Whimsical. 

fritheil, pr. pt. a’ frithealadh, v. a. Attend, 
wait upon, minister, serve, 2* Attend a wo- 
man in child-bed. 

fritheileach, a. Officious. 2 Attending, wait- 

ing on. 3 Attentive. 

——d, s.f. Officiousness. 2 Attendance. 
3 Attentiveness. 

frith-eilean, -ein, -nan, s.m. Small island. 2** 
Floating island, 

-——ach, -aiche, a. Having small or float- 
ing islands. 2 Of, or pertaining to, small or 
floating islands, 

fritheilich, v.a. Same meanings as fritheil. 

—e, s.m. Attendant. 2 Administrator. 

——ie, past pt. of fritheilich. Attended, 
waited upon, served, 

tritheilt, -e, -ean, s.f. Attendance on a woman 
in child-bed. 

—————each, -eiche, a. Attentive in waiting. 

—eachd, s.f.ind, Obsequiousness, 2 see 
fritheilt, 

trith-fhacal, -ail, -clan, s.m. By-word. 

frith-fhill, v.g. Turn down and open the mouth 
of à bag. 

frith-fhroineach, see frith-raineach. 

frith-ghaduiche, an, s.m. Poacher. 

frith-ghaol,(AC) s.m. Small love. 

frith-ghaoth,(AC) s.f. Weak wind. 

frith-gharadh, s.m. Old or small fence, Aig 
taobh an fh., beside the old fence. 

frith-ghearan, -ain, -an, s.m. Habit of complain- 
ing, querulousness. 

ach, -aiche, @. 























-== Querulous, com- 
plaining. 

frith-gheumnaich,(AH) s.m. Act of lowin noisily 
while walking or running. Thàinig am mart 

. dachaidh 'san fh., the cow came home lowing 
demonstr atively. 

frith-iasg, -éisg, pl. -a, -éisg &- iasgan, s.m.Small 
fry of fish. 2 Baitforfish. Generally appli- 
ed to garvies, matties and immature fish—AC. 
3 Ink-fish, cuttle-fish—Lewis. 


frithich, v.a. Afforest. 
frithil,t+ a. 


nil, Angry. 
Tfrithing, s.f. Relapse. 
frithir, -e, a. Earnest, eager, fervent, 2 In- 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


457 


2(DC) ** Kinks ” in whooping cough. | frithir, s.m. 


frogach 
3ttFretful. 

Impatient man. 2 Augurer. 3 
see frithearachd. 

frithire, s.m. Forester. 

——-—achd, see frithearachd, 2(AC) Augury. 

frith-lagh, s. By-law. 

frith-léim, see frith-leum. 

frith-léimneach, -eiche, æ. see frith-leumnach, 

frith-léimnich, see frith-leumnaich. 

frith-léimrich, see frith-leumnaich. 

frith-leum, s.m. Quickstep. 2 Skip, bound,hop. 

frith-leum, v.n. Skip, leap, bound, hop. 

frith-leumartaich, s.f. Skipping, bounding, hop- 
ping. Ri f., skipping. 

frith-leumnach, -aiche, æ. Skipping, bounding. 

frith-leumnaich, s,f. Skipping, bounding, caper- 
ing, hopping. 

frith-leumraich, see frith-leumnaich. 

frithlisg, s.f. Splinter. 

frith-mhaighstir, -ean, s. m. Under-master, 
usher. 

frith-mhinistear, -an, s.m. Curate. 

frith-mhinistrealachd, s.f. Curacy. 

frith-mhuir, -mhara, sf. Salt-water loch, arm 
of the sea. 

frithne, s.f. Uninbabited place. 2 Unfrequent- 
ed place. 

— —-—aásach, @. see frionasach. 

frith-mhéirleach, s.m. Poacher, 

frith-phune, -phuiuc, s.m. Quaver in music. 

frith-raineach,? -nich, s.f. ,bladder-fern, dwarf 
fern—cystopteris fragilis. 


traetable, furious. 





338. Frith-raineach. 
frith-rathad, -aid, pl. -thadan & -aidean, s. m. 
By-road. 2 Foot-path. 3 Short cut, near way. 
frith-rathadach, a. Having by-roads or short 


cuts. 
frith-rod, see frith-rathad. 


-— —— ——&a&ch, see frith-rathadach. 

frith-sheirc, s.f. Return of affection, mutual 
affection. 

frith-sheomar, -air, -mraichean, s.m. Side room, 
small apartment. 

frith-shlàinte, s.f. Convalescence, 

frith-shraid, s.f. By-street. 2 Alley, lane. 

frith-staidhir, -dhreach, -dhrichean, s.f. Back 
stairs. 

frith-thraigh, (AC) sf. Small ebb. 

fro, a. Hoarse—Dain I. Ghobha. 

frog, -dige, -an, s.f. Hole, chink, niche, nook, 


cranny. 2 Marsh, fen. 3 Retired habitation. 
4 {Den. 6* Dismal, dark hole, ugly place. 6 
Anger, Am frogaibh nan toll, in the clefts 


of the caverns. 

frog, (CR) a. Active, energetic. 2 Good or quick 
at work. Ged tha e beag, tha ef., though he 
is little, he is able—Lochbroom. (grideil in 
Gairloch.) 

frogach, -aiche, @ Full of holes. 2 Fenny, 
marshy. 3* Full of ugly crannies, 4*Having 
ugly sunk eyes. 

frogach, -aich, s.m. Hollow. °S móran frógaich 
"Dad aghaidh, and many hollows in E? face, 

2 


Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF 


Fa Fa ARIA "x AA A ek 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGh 


LLINOIS Al 


frogag 


frogag, aig, -an, S. f., dim. of frog. Little 
hole. 2 Fen. 

frogagach, -aiche, a. Full of little holes or fens. 

frogail, a. Merry, cheerful. 2 Tipsy, maudlin. 
Ag éirigh gu f., rising merrily. $ 

frogalachd, s.f. Merriness, cheerfulness. 2 Tip- 
siness. 

frogan, -ain, s.f. Liveliness, cheerfulness. 2 De- 
gree of tipsiness, 3 Merry fit. 4 Anger, slight 
fit of anger. 

froganach, see froganta. 

—d, see frogantachd. 

froganta, a. Pert, lively, merry. 2 Tipsy, maud- 
lin. Guf., merrily. 

frogantachd, s.f.ind. Merriness, cheerfulness, 
Hveliness, pertness. 2 Tipsiness. 

frog-na-cubhaig, s. f. Cuckoo-flower—Arran. 
[bróg-na-cubhaig.] 

frogoiseach, -siche, see froganta. 

frog-shuil, -ula, -ean, s.f. Surly eye. 

frog-shuileach, -eiche, a. Surly-eyed. 

froidhleach, -iche, a. see froganach, 

froidhneadh, -nidh, -nidhean, see fraoidhneas. 

frdig, -e, -ean, see frog. 

froigh, -e, -ean, see fraigh. 

troupes. $.m. Wetness oozing through a 
wall. 

froineach, see raineach. 

froineadh, -idh, -idhean, s.m. Sudden tugging 
or plucking. 2 Rushing at or to. 3tiShake. 
4++Drubbing. 

froinich,* s.f. see fraoidhneas. 

froinis, -e, -ean, see fraoidhneas. 

froinnseach, a. see fraoidhneasach. 

froinse, gen. of froinis (fraoidhneas.) 

frois, pr.pt. a'froiseadh, v. a. Cast seed from 
overripeness, spend, as standing corn. 2 Give 
off as thread. 3 Untwine yarn from clew. 4 
Scatter. 5tfRun out, as a stocking. 

SE S.f. Shower of grain of other articles (not 
rain. 

frois,(AC) s.f. Top. Bho fh. m’ aodainn, from 
the topof my face. 

froiseach, -eiche, a. Scattering in every direct- 
ion, wide scattering. 2 Shaking off, as corn. 
Gaoth fh., a sweeping blast. 

froiseadh, -sidh, -sidhean, s.m. Wide scatter- 
ing, dispersion. 2 Shaking off, as ofcorn, 3 
Rain. 4 Blast. "Ga fhrasadh m’ a chluasan, 
scattering it about his ears. When oats are 
stripped of their ears by a storm, it is said, 
“chlaidh an coirc’ a fhroiseadh.’ 

froisean,(DC) s.m. see roisean. 

froisnein, -ean, s.m. Grain of seed. 

froithlin,** $.7. Whirl, 

tfromadh, sm. Trial. 

fromh,* s.m. Hoarseness, cold. 

Tfromh, v.a. Try, taste. 2 Enquire. 3 Examine. 

fromhach, -aich, sm. Glutton. 

tfromhadh, -aidh, i.m. Trial, tasting. 2 En- 
quiry. 

frombaidh, e, a. Hoarse. Guth f., à hoarse 
voice, a deep-toned voice. 

fromhail,(CR) s.f. Croaking of frogs—Islay. 

fron, -óin,** s.m. Nose. 

fronnsa, s.m. Kind of play or mock-wedding at 
wakes. 

fros, -oise, -an, see fras. 

Tíros, a Dark, obscure. 

frosach, -aiche, see frasach. 

frosachd, see frasachd. 

frothal, -ail, s.m. Whirl, whern. 

frothalach, a. Whirling. 

fruan,(AC) s.m. Acclivity, steepness, steep hill. 

fruchag, -aig, -an, s.f. Cranny. 

fu, prep. see fo. 

+fuabart, -airt, sm. Attack. 2 Spoiling. 





z ——— € 8. fat, ës IJ 
(RUE rh ES LP 
= D d L— [^i A " H W 


458 


fuaghal 


fuach, -aich, s.m. Word. 

Tfuachaidh,-e, -ean, s.f. Jilt, tricking strumpet. 
2 Coolness, displeasure. 

fuachaideach, a. Jilting. 2 Like a jilt. Guf., 
jittingly. | 

fuachaideachd, s.f. Jilting. 

fuachas, ais, -an, s.m. Cry, outcry. 2 Cold. 3 
(AF)Fox's den. | 

fuachasach, a. Making anoutery, tumultuous. 


2 Cold. Gu f., tumultuously. 

-——, sm. Den, cave, hole. 2 Fox’s den. 

fuachasacn, a Full of caves. 2 Very, exceed- 
ingly. F. laidir, very strong. 

fuachasachd, $.f. Outcry, tumult, continued tu- 
mult. 2 Tendency to tumult. 

fuachd, 8. f. ind. Cold, coldness, chilliness. 2* 
Obstructed perspiration. 

fuachdan, -ain, sm. Any sore occasioned by 

. cold. 2 Chilblain. 

fuachdas-làmh,(AH) s.m. The degree in which 
one's hands are susceptible to cold. Tha 
fuachdas-lamh math alge, his hands are sel- 
dom affected by extreme cold;tha droch fhuachd- 
as-lamh aige, his hands are (habitually) rea- 
dily affected by cold. 

fuachd-ghuirean, s.m. Chilblain. 

fuad, v.a. Elope, run away with. 2 Impress. 

fuadach, -aich, see fuadachadh. Dh’ fnalbh i 
am fî. leis, she eloped with him; cù fuadaich, 
adriving dog. 

fuadachadh, -aidh, s.m. Running away. 2 Dri- 
ving or chasing away. 3 Banishment. 4 
Rapine. 5 Elopement, eloping. 6 Driving a 
vessel out of her course. 7 Estrangement of 
affections. <A’ f—, pr.pt. of fuadaich. 

fuadachd,* see fuadachadh. 


fuadaich, pr. pt. a’ fuadachadh, v.a. Put to 
flight, expel, drive away, banish. 2 Carry off 
by force. 3 Elope. 4 Ravish. 5 Impress. 
6 Drive out of the proper course or channel. 7 
Estrange the affections. Gu’m f. e, that he 
will drive out; f. le fonn a ghruaim, drive 
away his frown with a song; adh’ fhuadach- 
adh bhan, £o carry off (elope with) females. 

fuadaichte, past part. of fuadaich. Put to 
flight, expelled, banished, 2 Taken or snatch- 
ed away clandestinely. 

fuadain, e, v, Exiled. 2 Foreign. 3 Fleeting, 
transitory, momentary. Sgàil f., a fleeting 
shadow. 

fuadan, -ain, s.m. Wandering. 2 Carrying clan- 
destinelyas a horse. 3 State of straggling or 
straying. 4 Exile. 5(AH) Wanderer, friend- 
less person. Is coma leam fear-fuadain is e 
luath a labhar, J don't like a wayfarer who 
talks loudly and volubly ; naigheachd fuad- 
ain, œ side-wind story ; air Íhuadan, astray ; 
aodann f., a mask used at Samhuinn time. 

fuadar, Air, s.m. Haste. 2 Preparation to do 
anything. : w | 

fuadarach, -aiche, a. Active, diligent. 2 Hasty, 
in à hurry. 

fuadh, s.m. Bier. 2 Foe. 3 Horrid sight, de- 
mon, ghost. 4 Slender, ghastly person. 5 see 
fuath. 

fuadhaiche,tt s.m. Scarecrow, bogle. 

fuadhmhar, -aire, see fuathmhor. 

fuadradh, -aidh, s. m. Bier. 2 Hindering. 8 
Crossing. 4 Forbidding. ` ` 

fuaduichte, past pt. see fuadaichte. l 

fuagair, pr.pt. a’ fuagradh, v.a. Proclaim. 2 
Denounce. 3 Placard. ! 

fuagarthach, -aich, s.m. Exile, banished per- 
son. 

fuagairt, s.f. Adjuration, warning. 

fuaghal, see fuaigheal. 





fuaghladh 459 fuarachadh 


faüaghladh, -aidh, s.m. Bastinade, A’ Í—, pr. fuaim-sgriobhair, s.m. Phonograph. 
pt. of fuaghail. i fuaim-sgriobhadh, s.m. Phonography. 
fuagradh, -aidh, s.m. Exile. fuaintean, s.pl. Pegs in a Warping-frame. 2(DM 
fuagradh, s.m. Proclaiming, proclamation. 2| ©) Handles of a plough, 
Denouncement. A’ f—, pr.pt. of fuagair fuair, s. f. Sound. 
fuagradh, -aidh, s.m. s.m., Proclamation, edict. | fuair, (CE) v. [aspirated fhuair, everywhere exe 
fuagraich, v.a. see fuagair. cept in Suth’d.] Fuair mi e, I got it ; is esia 
ep qe see ri ; na fuair e, that is all he got. 
uaid, s.f. Remnant. uaircean, s.pl. Pins or pegs in a, warpine- RK 
fuaideach, a. Having remnants. fuaire, ag of fuar. Golder. eden. © Gase 
fuaidearag,(AF) s.f.Minnow. Ag iasgachadh le | fuairead, -id, s.m. Coldness, degree of coldness. 
fuaidearaig, trolling for lythe by line and sink-| A’ dol am f., growing colder amd colder ; air 
er dragged astern of à boat. | fh. ’s ge' m bi an t-earrach, however cold the 
fuaidheal, see fuaigheal. spring may be. 
fuaidh, see fuaigh. fuaireadach, -aiche, a. Chilly. 
£uaidhlean, -ein, s.m. Anger, fury. fuairid, comp, of fuar. Colder, Is f. e sin, i£ ie 
fuaidhte, see fuaighte. the colder for that. 
fuaidne, -an, s.f. Pegina warping-frame. 2|fuairsgeul, “sgeoil, s.m. Silly story. 
Knot. 3 Pillar, post. [fuaidhne in Uist.] fuais, gen.sing. of fuas. 
fuaidnean, s.pl. Warping-pins in weaving. tfuait, sf. J udgment. 
fuaidreag, s.f. Eel or natural fly used in fishing. | fuaithne, see fuaidne. 
—Argylishire, [ fual, -ail, s.m. Urine, water, 
fuaigh, pr. pt. a' fuaigheal, v. a. Sew, stitch, fualach, -aiche, a Nephretic. 
knit, connect. 2* Seam or nail, as planks in 
a boat. 3**Bastinade.  Fuaighidh tu suas, 
thou shalt sew up. 
fuaigheal, -eil, em Seam. 2 Sewing or stitch- 
ing, act ofsewing or stitching. A’ f—, pr. pt. 
of fuaigh., Am gu f., æ time to sew. 
fuaigheam, emm, s.m. see fuaigheal. 
fuaighil, pr. pt. v.a. Bastinade. 
fuaighte, a. & past pt. of fuaigh, Stitched, sewed. 
2*Nailed, pegged, as timbers in a boat. 
fuaigh-shlat, s. Temporary stock of a ship while 
building, 
fuail, gen.sing. of fual. 
fuail-fheadan, -ain, see fual-fheadan. 
fuailisg,(AC) sz Hatred. 
fuail-uisge, see fual-uisge. 
fuaim, -e, -ean, s. m. & f. Sound, noise 2 
Echo. 3 Accent. 4 Voice. F. an cliù, the 
noise of their fame ; ri f., sounding. 
fuaim, v.a. see fuaimnich. 
fuaim-an-t-siorraimh,§ s. m. Fumitory, see lus- 
deatach-thalamhainn, (a play on the Latin 
Rame)—fumaria officinalis. 



























$40. Fualachdar. 8341. Fualachtar. 

fualachdar,§ air, 3m. Water speedwell—vero- 
nica anagallis. 

fualactar,§ -air, s.m. Marsh-wort—heliosciadtzens 
inundatum. 

fualan, -ain,-an, s. m. Urinal 2 Pimp, 8 
Chamber-pot. 

fualas, -ais, s.m. Tribe, family. 

fual-bhrosnach, -aich, s.m. Diuretic. 

fual-bhrosnach, -aiche, a. Diuretic. 

fual-bhrosnaidh, a. Diuretic. 

fual-fheadan, -ain, s.m. The urethra. 

tfualiosg, s.f. Strangury, see cuing-fhuail 

ffualiosgach, a. Strangurial, 

fual-losgach, o, Causing heat in urine. 

fual-losgadh, -aidh, s.m. Heat in urine, 

fual-phoit, -eachan, s.f. Chamber-pot. 

fual-ruithe, s.f. Diabetes. A 

fual-uisge, sm. Stranguary, see cuing-fhuaiL 

fuaman -ain, s. m. Shadow, shade, 2 White, 
ness, 3 Rebound. 

fuamh, for fuath. 

fuamhair, -ean, see famhair. 

fuamhaireach, o, see famhaireach, 

fuamhaireachd, see famhaireachd, 

fuan, -ain, s.m. Veil, cover, mask. 2 Cloth. 3 
Mercy. F. air lochd, veil on œ fault. 

fuan, v. Veil, cover, mask. 

fuar, -aire, q. Cold, chilly. 2 Stinging. 

fuar, s.m. Cold, Cha dean f. bliochd, cold will 





$39. Puaim-an-t-siorraimh, 

fuaimeal, -eile, see fuaimeil. Gu f., noisily. 

fuaimear, see fuaimearra. À 

fuaimearra, a. Reverberant, sounding, noisy, 
sonorous. 

fuaimeil,-e, a. Sounding, resounding, noisy, 
sonorous, 2 Echoing. Tràigh fh, a sounding 
shore ; gu f., noisily. 

fuaim-iüii, s.m. Diacoustics. 

. fuaimneach, -niche, a, Sonorous, noisy, 2 Echo- 
ing. Guf., noisily. not make milk. i 

fuaimneach, -neich, s, f. Great noise, frequent | fuar, v.a. Get a-head, get before the wind of 
noise,continued noise. F. shleagh, the noise of | another ship or boat. 2 Get to windward of 
spears. a point. Feuch am f, thu a’ charraig, try and 

fuaimneachd, s.f.ind. Noisiness. weather the point. 

 fuaimnich,tf s.f. Great noise. fuar-achadh, s.m. Untilled land—Arran. 

fuaimnich, pr.pt. a’ fuaimneachadh, v.a. Blow. fuarachadh, -aidh, s.m. Cooling, act of cooling. 
2 Sound, resound. 3 Echo. 2 Ease, relief, A’ f—, pr.pt. of fuaraich. Dean 


fuaimreag, s.f. Vowel, in grammar, do gharadh far an d' rinn thu E is warm 


Digitized by 


— = —— Lope Ars "er 
& [7T AIC A Dg lj 
TERNET ARCHIV 


fuarachadh 


yourself where you grew cold. 

fuarachas, -ais, s.m. Coldness. 

fuarachd, s.f. Coldness, cold, chilliness. Crodh- 
aidh f. iad, the cold shall crowd them together. 

fuarachd, s.f. (CR) Dampness. 2(AH) Chilblain, 
generally used in the pl. 8 (DO) Mildew on 
cloth, books, &c. Tha f. ann, it is damp— 
said e. g. of a house, wall or floor— W. of Ross. 

fuarad, -aid, s.m. see fuairead, 

fuaradh, -aidh, s.m. The windward or weather 
side. 2 Blast. 3 Cooling breeze. 4 Draught, 
as from a door or window. 5 (DMC) Anticipa- 
tion of coming evil. 6 (AH) Reaching, in 
sailing. Air f. ort, on your starboard ; leis 
ort or leis dhiot, on your port ; air taobh an 
fhuaraidh is air an taobh leis, beating,as a ship 
just before æ shower ; f. cluais, & ship's ear- 
ring ; sùil ri f., an eye to windward; cum an t- 
eathar bho chladach an fhasgaidh, agus cum- 
aidh i fhéin bho chladach an fhuaraidh, keep 
the boat from the lee shore, and she "ll keep her- 
self from the wind shore. 

fuaradh-froise,tt s.m. Breeze which precedes a 
shower. 

fuaraz, -aig, -an, s.f. [Mixture of meal and wa- 
ter or milk, hasty pudding. Scots, crowdie. 2 
Poultice. also stapag. 

fuaragan, -ain, pl. -ganan & -gain, s.m. Fan. 2 
Ventilator. 

quaraich, vr.pt. a’ fuarachadh, v.g. & n. Cool, 
become cool. 2 Beírigerate. 

fuaraich, (MMcD) s. f. Black soot dripping 
through the thatch after a heavy shower— 
Lewis. 

fuaraichear, -eir, -eirean, s.m. Cooler. 

fuaraichte, a. & past pt. of fuaraich. Cool, cool- 
ed. 2 Refrigerated. 

fuaraidh, a. Coldish, chill. 2 Cool in manner. 
3 (CR) Damp.—W. of Ross. Tha ’n oidhche 
f., the night is cold; talamh f., damp or wet 


soil. 
fuaralach, -aiche,"w. Cold, chilly. 2++Indiffer- 
ent. Gu f, coldly. 





Indifference. 
fuaran, -ain, -an & -ain, s.m. Well, spring, foun- 
tain. 2**Pump-well. 3**Pool for cattle to 
stand in to cool themselves. F. nan càrn, 
the spring 
troop of horses on the space of thy pools. 
ach, -aiche, œ. Abounding in springs. 








| ta, o, Chill,cold.grown cold. Gu f., coldly. 


¢fuarasdair,** a. J udicious. 

fuar-bheaun, gen.pl. of fuar-bheinn. 

fuar-bheinn, gen.p!. fuar-bheann, s.f. Cold,bleak 
mountain. A’ siubhal fhuar-bheann, travers- 
ing the cold mountains. 

Ffuar-bhodradh,** -aidh, s.m. Benumbing. 

fuar-bholadh, -aidh, s. m. Unpleasant smell, 
stench. 

fuar-bhord, s.m. Weather-board. 

fuar-bhuille,(WC) s.f. Fatal blow, death-stroke. 
Có a thug an fh. dhi ? who gave her the death- 
stroke ? 

fuar-chasach, -aiche, a. Cold-footed. 

fuar-chrabhach,-aich,s.m. see fuar-chrabhaiche. 

,-aiche, @. Hypocritical, Gu 
f., hypocritically. 

fuar-chrabhadair, see fuar-chràbhaiche. 

fuar-chrabhadh, -aidh,-aidhean, s.m. Hypocrisy, 
false devotion. 2ttSuperstition. Luchd fuar- 
chràbhaidh, hypocrites. 

fuar-chrabhaiche, s.m. Hypocrite. 
tious person. 

fuar-chrapadh, -aidh, s.m. Benumbing. 

fuar-chridhe,** s.m. Cold heart. 

pee enn ach, -eiche, @. Cold-hearted, anfeel- 








2 Supersti- 


Digitized by 
IRIE T A EN [| f 
LE H Y 


CO A D j 
i 1 


460 
















—d, s.f.ind. Coldness, chilliness. 21t 


of the rocks; greidh air t' fhuarain, @ 


fuasgair 


fuar-chrith, -e, s.m. Shivering with cold, cold 
shivering. Thai "nat, she is in a cold shiver. 
—__——-each, a. Shivering with cold. Gu f., 
unfeelingly. 

fuardachd,** s.f. Coldness, chilliness. 

fuar-dhealt, -a, s.m. Mildew. 2** Blight. 
Cold dew. Lef., with mildew. 

———-—ach, -aiche, a.  Mildewy, blighty, 
blighting. 

fuar-fhead, -an, s.f. Cold whistling, as of wind. 

fuar-ghreadadh,** s.m. Blast. 

fuar-ghreann, s.f. Scowl, cold, shivering look. 


fuarlanach, -aiche, a. Cold, 2 Unfeeling, ma- 
lign, invidious. 3 Neglectful, unkind. Gu f., 
unfeelingly. 


—,** -aich, s.m. Malignity, hatred. 
— — —— —4, s.f.ind. Coolness. 2 Malignity, ha- 
tred. T’ fh. dh’ Albainn, thy hatred for Scot- 


land. 
fuar-larach,(AH) et Cold, empty dwelling, 
house at meal-time without any fire or signs 


of food. 
fuar-leabadh,(DC) s.f. Plank on which a dead 
body is laid—Skye. 
fuar-léine,(TS) s.f. Shroud. 
fuar-lite, -ean, $.f. Cataplasm, 
is for fuarag. 
fuar-lorg, -luirg, s.m. Retracing, cold scent. 
fuarmadh,** -aidh, s.m. Form, seat. 
fuar-mharbh,** a. Starved with cold. 2 Cold 
in death. 


poultice. 2 Lew- 


,** v.a. Starve with cold. ; 
adh,** -aidh, s.m. Perishing with 


cold. 
——— tachd,** s.f. Numbness. : 
fuarnach,** -aieh, q. Controversial, wrangling, 
quarrelsome. 
fuarnadh,** -aidh, s.m. Controversy, argument. 
2 Paper war. 
fuarrach,** a. Helping, 

















assisting. 


fuarrachd, s. f.ind, Moisture, dampness. 2° 
Chill. 

fuar-rag, -raige, a. Numb. 

fuarraidh, see fuaraidh. 

-- eachd, see fuaralachd. 

fuarralanach, s.m. see fuarlanach. 

fuar-sgallais,** s. Game. 

fuartanach, a. Anodyne. 

fuas, -ais, pl. -ais & -uasan, s.m. See fuathas. 

fuas, see fuathasach, 

fuasach, -aiche, see fuathasach. ; 

fuasan,** ain, S.T". Gainsaying, eontradiction. 

fuasgail, pr.pt. a’ fuasgladh, v. a. & m. Loose, 
untie. 2 Unlock. 3 Liberate. 4* Unriddle, 
guess, solve. 5 Unyoke. 6 Relieve, aid, as- 
sist. 7 Redeem. 8 Absolve. 9 Explain. F. 


loosen the cord ; f.an toimhseach- 
riddle ; f. air, relieve him ; daoine 
a dh’ fhuasgladh gach snaoim, men who could 
solve every dificulty—untie every knot. [In 
Gairloch tuasgail, where the £ is also retain- 
in derivatives—W C] À 

te, a. & past pt. of fuasgail. Loosed, 
untied, freed, liberated. 2 Unconstrained. | 
Active, having command of one’s limbs, nim- 
ble. 4 Absolved. 5 (WC) Senseless, simple. 
Neach f., a person devoid of perfect sense. 
teach, -eiche, @. Active, nimble, uncon- 
strained. 2**Loose, licentious. 3**Giving OF 
causing freedom. 4**Aperient. 5**Having 
free use of one's limbs. 
teachd, s.f.ind. Ease, 
dom of action, 3 Use of one'slimbs. 4 Act- 
ivity, unconstraint, unrestrictedness. 5 Ab- 
soluteness.  6**Openness. 7**Siumplicity. 
ifuasgair,** V. a. Verrify. 2 Put to flight. 3 


an t-sreang, 
an, solve the 








looseness. 2 Free- 





Original from 
ad 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


Jm 


NS 


aw 


D kd e 
dam. li e mn 


= 
pee at PEE UN 8 EP 


ag — 





















fuasgaldach,** q. Aperient, 

fuasgaldair,** s.j. Saviour, deliverer, redeem- 
er. F.a’ chinnidh dhaoine, the Saviour of 
the world. | 

fuasgar,** -air, s.m. Dispersion, total rout. 

fuasglach,** o Loosening. 2 Absolving. 3 
Ransoming. 4 Delivering. 

fuasgladh, -aidh, -àidhean, s.m. Loosing, un- 
tying, act of loosing, 2 Relief, assistance, 
redemption. 3 Guessing. 4**Ransoming. 6 
Deliverance, ransom, 6** Explanation, ex- 
position. 7** Loosening of the bowels. F. 
deas, ready deliverance ; thoir f. dhómh, set 
me free; ‘ga En. loosing or freeing him: a’ 
f. air, relieving him ; thug e f. dha, it gave 

im relief ; f. na ceisd, the answer of the rid- 

dle; f. briogs’, being at stool, moving of the 
bowels, A’ f—, pr.pt. of fuasgail. 

fuasglaidh, fut.af.a. of fuasgail. 

fuasgiair, “can, s.m. Redeemer, ransomer, 

fuasgradh,** -aidh, s.m. Fright. 

fuaslagadh,** -aidh, s.m. see fuasgladh. 

fuaslaig,** v.a. see fuasgail. 

,"" &,f. see fuasgladh. 

fuasinadh,** -aidh, s.m. Blow. 

fuasnach,** q, Terrible, frightful. 9 Tumultu- 
ous. 

fuasn idh, ** -aidh, s.m. Astonishing, astonish- 
ment. 2 Driving forward. 3 Tumult. 

fuatarach, see fuadarach, 

d, see fuadarachd. 

fuath, -a, s.m. Hatred, aversion, abhorrence, 2 
Hateful object. 3 Scarecrow. 4 Diminutive, 
insignificant person, 5 Apparition, spectre, 
ghost, demon, spirit. 6 Kelpie. 7 Spite. 
Duisgidh f. e, hatred shall stir him up ; le ’m 
briathraibh f., with their words of spite ; frith 
nam f., the forest of the spectres. 

fuathach, -aiche, a. Hateful, abhorrent, averse. 
2**Spectral, demoniacal. 

7 — — , -aich, -aichean, Monster. 2ttSpectre. 

-- adh, -aidh, s.m. Detesting, abhorring, 
abhorrence, A’ f—, pr. pt. of fuathaich, 

fuathachail, -e, a, Loathsome. 

fuathachair,** s,m. Hater. 

fuathachd, s.f. see fuathmhorachd. 

fuathadair, -e, -ean, s.m. Hater. 

fuathadh,** -aidh, s.m. Detesting, detestation, 
abhorrence. 

füathaich, v.a. & n. Hate, detest, abhor, 

fuathaiche, -an, s.m. Hater. 

fuathaichte, past pt. of fuathaich, Hated, ab- 
horred, detested. 

fuathail, -e, o Spectral, £hostly,'eFhastly. 2 
Frightful. 8 Hateful, 4 Diminutive, insig- 
nificant, 

fuathais, gen.sing. of fuathas. 42 s.f. Den, 

fuath-a’-mhadai h, s.m. Monkshood—aconitum 
napellus. 2ttWolf’s-bane, (ill. 342,) 

fuathar, a, Antipathetical. 

fuath-arrachd,(AF) $.f. Monster, 

fuathas, -ais, s. m. Spectre, apparition. 2 
Prodigy, 3 Fright, sudden alarm. 4ttGreat 
quantity, great degree of, Chunnaic iad f,, 
they saw an apparition. 

fuathasach, -aiche, a. Dreadful, horrible, ter- 
rible, 2 Wonderful, prodigious, Act of Parliament. 

fuathasaich, v.q. Terrify, horrify. fü'd, cont. for fothad. Under thee, 

fuath-gorm,3 s.m. Woody nightshade, bitter- fudag, -ain, -an, $J. Shoe-strap. prov. 
Sweet, see searbhag-nihilis. 


| J fudaga dud ! int. Fie! for shame ! 
fuath-mhadaidh, see fuath-a'-mhadaidh, fudagag, (AC) s.f. Woodcock, see coileach-coille, 
fuathmhoireachd, see fuathmhorachd. 


fudaidh, -ean, s.m. Vile, worthless fellow, the 
fuathmhor, -oire, œ. Hateful, disagreeable, 9 


: [ refuse of his kind. Breunan is F. an cuid- 
Terrific. 3 Horrible, 4 Hating, disliking. 5| eachda chéile, Dirty and Rubbishy going to- 
**Spectral. 6**Unclean. Gach eun f., every 


gether—a Lewis proverb, taken from a verse 


fuasgair 461 fudaidh 
MENU ee er Bes c coo 
fuasgaladh, see fuasgladh, > 





$42. Fuath-a’-mhadaidh. 
unclean bird. 
—achd, s.f.ind. Hatefulness. 
fuath-mhuc, s.f. Bluebell, wild hyacinth—scilla 
non scripta. 2 Hare-bell, 

















ASS S y 
CNW VÀ 


343, Fuath-mhue, 

fuath-radain, s.m. Rat’s-bane, 

fuaths, see fuathas. . : 1 

fuath-shlat, -shlait, $.m.*Thing in its primordia] 
state. 2t7Temporary hoop. 3 (AH) Frame- 
work, as the ribs and hoop of a basket. 4(D 
My)—fuath-shlatan—said of the long legs o£ 
thighs of a tall/man. 

fuath-thannasg, -aisg, s.m. Hideous spectre, 

fuath-thogalachd, s.f. Invidiousness. 4 

fuath-thoilltinneach,*-aiche,a. Hateful, abomin- 
able, deserving of hatred. 

fuc, Ga. see pùc. 

füc, pr.pt. a’ fùcadh, v.a. Full, waulk, as cloth. 

fùcadair, -ean, s.m. Fuller of cloth. 

—- —-eachd, s.f. Fulling of cloth. 

fücadh, -aidh, s.m. Fulling of cloth. 2( CR)Push« 
ing or moving heavily. Cha b’ e an clò ciar- 
dubh nach fhiach 'fhueadh, it is not the dark 
home-made cloth that deserves not fulling—allu- 
ding to the change of cloth which came into 
fashion in 1746, when the use of the Gael’s 
beloved tartan was forbidden by a despicable 


DCITwW OF 


1 LJ 

| | `J l j 
` j 

= | L 
LJ 


a i 

DOE fi d n - i 
Eh Ed i gc 
nf rA 


Digitized by 


ee) Sc 
Å- (mmm (e A, fm A 1 " LU F 
N ER d = ARC H VE 


NOIS 


-HAMPAIGN 


D. =p 


ec) 
j 1 


fucaidh 


servants to pull heather : 
Chuir mise Breunan is Fucaidh 
A bhuain fraoich an cuideachd a chéile ; 
Thug Breunan dhachaidh an cudthrom, 
'S thug Fudaidh dhachaidh na geugan, 
(I sent B. and F. to pull heather together ; B. 
brought home the weight, and F. brought 
home the boughs.)—NGP. 

fudaidh, e, a. Mean, vile, contemptible, tri- 
fling, worthless. 

[üdar, -air, s.m. Powder, gunpowder. Mheil e 
gu f. e, he ground it to powder ; f.-dhurrag, @ 
worm-powder ; £.-cluaisein, priming; f.-sroine, 
heliebore. 

———ach, -aiche, @. Powdered, of, or pertain- 
ing to powder. 

aich, v.g, Powder, pulverize. 2*Urge on 
todo mischief, instigate. Is tusa a dh’ fh. e, 
it is you that urged him to do it. 

fudlan, -ain, -an, see udalan. 

fudradh, -aidh, s.m. see fuidreadh. 

fudraic, -e, a. Smart, brisk, lively. 2 In good 
condition, in good health. ’ 

füdraich, see fudraic. 

fufaireachd,** s. f. Irish ery or conclamatio at 
funerals. 

fugasg,** -aisg, s.m. Patience. 2 Persecution. 
3 Steadiness. 

ffughall,** -aill, s.m. Judgment. 

fughar, see futhar. 

fuiceag, -eig, see fuidheag. 

fuich ! inf. see fich ! 

tuicheachd,** s.f. Lust, lechery. 

luicheall,** ill, s.m. Reward, hire, wages. 

tuideallan,(DMO) s.m. Part of a tether between 
the swivel and the animal's neck or leg— Ust. 

fuidh, prep. see fo. 

tuidh ! int. see fich. 

tuidheach,** a. Thankful. 2 Joyful. 

fuidheag, -eig, -an, 3.f. see fuigheag. 

fuidheall, -ill, see fuigheall. 

Ffuidhir,** s. f. Gain. 2 Wages. 3 Word. 4 
Vassal. 5 Hireling. 6 Servitude. 7 Veil. 

fuidhleach, see fuighleach. 

fuidhn’, prep. for fodhainn, see under fo. 

tfuidhne, see fuithreach. 

fuidhpe, see foipe. 

fuidhre, see fuidhreach. 

ach,** s. pl. Attendants. 2 Establish- 

ment of servants. 

,"* y, Naked, exposed. 

fuidhreachdach, -aiche, a. Quarrelsome. 2 Trea- 
cherous. 

fuidhreachd, s.f. Mixture. 

fuidir,* v.a. Besprinkle. 

(AC) s.m. Fool, lout, clown. 

fuidir, v.a. Fumble. 

füidreadh, -idh, s.m. Commixing. 2 Pounding, 
pulverizing. 3 Heterogenous mixture. 4 
Turning hay in the sunshine to dry it, ted- 
ding. 5*Sprinkling. 6**Paste, 

fuidreadh, -idh, s.m. Fumbling. 

füidrichte, a. Mixed. 

füidse,** s.m. Coward. 2 Conquered dispirit- 
ed cock. 3(DMC) Challenge, A’ toirt f. 
dha, challenging him. 

füidsidh, o. Craven. Coileach f., @ craven cock, 
the vanquished ome in a cock-fight. 

fuiflen, s.m. Blister on the breech. 

fuigh, v.a. see faigh, 

ifuighbheatha, s.m. Vital sap. 

fuigheag,-eig,-an,s.f. Thrum, the warp thread in 
weaving, 10 or 12 inches long, remaining un- 
woven at the end of the web. 








emm 





2 Mixing. 





»—————üàch, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to 
thrums, like a thrum. 
Digitized by 


NTERNET ARCHIVE 


462 
€—— M EE NO EIL CX e E 
by J. Morrison of Bragar on having sent two | fuigheall, 



















fuil, gen. sing. fola, dat. 


4tuil, 
fuilbhean, 


fuil-dhortadh, 








fuilear 


-ill, s.m. Remainder, remains, Term: 
nant, refuse. 2**Relic. Is math f. na foigh- 
idinn, the final results of patience are excellent; 

f. an t-sluaigh, the remnant of the people; cha ` 
d' fhàg claidheamh Fhinn riamh f. beuma, . 
Fingal's sword never had to cut twice ; is fhèarr 

1. na braide naf. na sgeige, the residue of theft 

is better than that of scorn. 


fuigheall-margaidh, s.pl. Rabble, refuse of a 


multitude, worthless persons. 


fuighleach,-ich,-ichean, 8.m. Remains, leavings, 


refuse. F. bìdh, refuse of meat ; chan "eil de 
mhath air f. a’ chait ach a thoirt dha fhéin, 
the cat’s leavings are fit only for himself—appli- 
ed to men who would palm the dregs on others 
after they have drunk the cream. 

fuil, voc. fhuil ! s. f. 
Blood. 2 Family, tribe, kindred. 38*Blood- 
shed. 4¢tWound. 5(DC) Breeding. 6 (DM 
C) Temper, nature. A’ dortadh fola, shedding 
blood ; rinn iad f., they made bloodshed ; o pn 
fh. rìoghail gun smal, /rom the royal extract- 
ion uncontaminated ; f. bhrüite, extravasated 
blood; gu f. is gu bas, Zo bloodshed and death ` 
feadh fola is air, amid blood and slaughter ; 
fàth air son fola, opportunity for bloodshed ; is 
milis fuil nàmhaid, ach is milse fuil caraid, 
sweet is the blood of an enemy, but sweeter still 
the blood of a friend—friendship is stronger 
than enmity—in the olden times, it was no 
uncommon thing for the Gael of wild passions 
to drink the blood of a dear friend who had 
died a violent death, in token of undying love; 
nach ann tha ’n droch fh. ! what an evil teme 
per he has ! . 

see bheil? 

s.m. Atom. 

—ach, -aiche, œ. Atomical. 


fuil-bhrüite, s,f. Extravasated blood. 
‘fuil-chiont, s.f. Blood-guiltiness. 


—ach, a. Bloody, blood-guilty. 

-aidh, s. m. Bloodshed, blood. 
spilling. 

fuil-dhortair, s.m. Spiller of blood. 2 Sanguin- 
ary person, 


fuileacan, (AF) sm, Asp. 
fuileach, -eiche, a. Bloody, gory, sanguinary. 


9* Cruel. 3 (DO) Fat, full-blooded. Comhra 
f., œ bloody battle ; a righ a’s fuiliche lann ! 
king of the most sanguinery sword ! 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Drawing of blood. A’ 
f—, pr.pt. of fuilich. 

fuileachd, s.f.ind. Bloodshed. 2 Bloodiness. 3 
Atrocity. 4* s.m. Extraction. 

-—ach, -aiche, o. Bloody, sanguinary. 2 
Cruel. 3 Ravenous. An duine f., the bloody 
man ; do ’n eunlaith fh., to the ravenous birds. 

ach, -aich, s.m. Extraction. ~ 

fuileadh,** -idh, s.m. Increase, profit, gain. 1 

tuileamain,* s.m. Blister on the toe. d 

fuilear, s. Too much. Puilear is used to express | 
necessity, need or obligation,and forms a verb, 
which is Englished by must, need, or require, 
Cha/nfhuilear dhuibh a bhi cinnteach & sin, 
you require to be sure of that ; cha mhór nach 
b’ fhuilear dhomh e, if was no more than it 
could be—i. e. I am almost entirely dependent | 
on it ; cha’n fhuilear dha punnd eile, he wile 
require another pound ; cha b’ fhuilear dhaibh j 
tighinn aig aon uair, they would need to come 
at one o' clock ; cha/n fhuilear dhuit a bhi an 4 
seo, you would require to be here ; cha b’ fhuil- 
ear dhuinn cogadh no failneachadh, we were 
obliged to fight or yield ; cha b’ fh. uiread eile, 














* 
m 


as much again is necessary. Cha'n fhuilear is ] 

rendered affirmatively, and is uilear negative 3 

ly in English, as, cha’n fh. dha tasdan air an ` 

Original from d | 

BA P Wf e E TEL ? T a 

UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS ATI 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN E 


fuilear 463 fuirich 
tunnaig, he requires a shilling for the duck ; is | 


uilear dha tasdan air an tunnaig, he does not 
require (so much as) æ shilling for the duck $ 
tha thusa mara bha thu an uiridh, ’s ged 
bhiodh tu na b’ fhèarr cha b’ fhuilear, you are 
as you were last year, and if you were better, it 
would be no more than was needed. 
uileasan,** s.m. Asp. 
uile-thalmhainn, s.m. Bulbous crowfoot—ra- 
nunculus bulbosus. 
fuilich,* pr.pt. a’ fuileachadh, v.n. Bleed, draw 
blood. bu fhuilich e gu bas, he bled to death ; 
dh' fh. e air, he drew blood Jrom him. 
fuiliche, a. Blood-red. 2 comp. of fuileach, 
fuilidh,** a Bloody. 2 Bloo -red. 
fuilig, see fulaing. 
fuiling, see fulaing. 
, €iehe, see fulangach. 
fuilleadh,** -idh, sm. Reward, 2 Gain, 3 In- 
crease, 
fuilmean,** ein. s.m. Toe bleeding by striking 
it against a stone, 
fuil-mios,* et Menstrual discharge, 
fuil-nan-sluagh (AC) $.f. (lit. the blood of the 
hosts—fairies) Red crotal of the rocks melted 
by frost. In Argylishire, the saying when one 
sees red crotal is, thug na daoine beaga cath 
an raoir, the little men ( fairies) fought a bat- 
tle last night. 
fuil-siofraith, -e, s.f, Pumice-stone, 
fuilt, gen. of falt. 
SE -eiche, a. Bloody. 2 Atrocious. 3 
ruel, 























$44. Fuinnseach, 
fuinseag-coille,§ $.f. Golden rod—solidago vir- 
gäilen, 2 Mountain ash, see luis, {Name 
given by Shaw to virgo pastoris.] 





ail,-e, æ. see fuilteach. 

as, -ais, s.m. Bloodshed, Slaughter. 2 

Villiany, 3* Extreme cruelty. 

d, s.f.ind. see fuilteachas. 

fuiltean, -ein, pl. -eana & -eine, 3.m. Single hair. 
2 Quoif, 3 Snood. 4**The hair of the female 
head. Tog do bhréid is t’ fh., lift thy head- 
dress and snood ; fuilteine bhur cinn, the hairs 
of your heads, | 

—— -—ach,tt a. Containing single hairs. Ltt 
gives fuilteineach.] 

füiltein, see fuiltean, 

fuiltionnach, -aiche, a, see fuilceach. 

tfuin,(AF) ert Cow. 

thuin,** s.f. End or termination of athing. 2 
Will, purpose. 3 Veil, covering. 

fuin, be a’ fuineadh, v.a. Bake bread, 2 
Knead, 

fuince,(AF) &. Fox. 

fuine, sf. see fuineadh. 2 Lewis for foinne. 

fuineachan, -ain, s.m. Kernel, 2** Baker. 

. fuineadair, -ean, s.m. Baker, 

—eachd, s.f.ind. Trade or business of a 
baker. 

fuineadh, -idh, s.m. Baking, act of baking. 2 
Batch of things baked, asloayes. 3 Knead. 
ing. 4ffBoiling. A’ f—, pr.pt. of fuin. Na 
mnathan a’ f. na taoise, the women baking the 
dough ; ’s fhèarr f. tana na bhi uile falamh, 
better @ scanty baking than to be without 
bread altogether. 

fuineall, -ill, s.m. Funnel, 

fuinear, fut. pass. of fuin. 

ftuingeall,** -ill, s.m. Idiot, simpleton. 

fuinidh, fut.aff.a. ot tuin. 

tfuinn, s.f. Conclusion. 

fuinn, gen. sing. & n. pl. of fonn. 

tfuiune, s.m. The setting of the sun, the West. 

—fuinneag, .eig, sf, See uinneag. 

$1. ach, 4. see uinneagach. 

fuinnseach,$ -aich, s.m. Enchanter's nightshade 
; crema lutetiana & c. alpina. (ill. 344.) 

auinnseann,§ "àinn, 8.5, Ash, see craobh-uinn- 











845. Fuinseag-coille, 
fuinte, a. & past pt. of fuin. Baked, 2 Kneaded, 
fuipe, prep. pron. see foipe. 
fuir,** 8. Sign, token. : 
fuirbearnach, -ich, s.m. see fuirbidh. 
fuirbirneach, see fuirbidh. 
fuirbidh, s.m. Strong man, remarkably power- 
ful man. A d 

fuireach, Ach. s.m. Delaying, staying, ri 
lingering, A’ f—, pr. pt. of fuirich. Gu dà 
am f. a th’ ort? why are you waiting § 

fuireachadh, -aidh, s.m. see fuireach. 

fuireachail, see furachail. 

fuireachair, see furachail. 

fuireachd, s.f. prov. for fuireach, 

tfuireadh,** -idh, s.m. Preparation. 2 Feast. 

Tfuireann,** -einn, s.m. Crowd, multitude, 2 
Ship's crew. 3 Furniture. 

fuireanal, -ail, s.m. Urinal. 

fuireann,** Ann, s.f. Ballast. 

fuirearach,** a. Attentive, vigilant. ' 

fuirearadh,(DC) see fuirireadh. 

fuireas, ** -eis,! s.n. Entertainment. 2 Feast. 

fuirfheitheamh, -imh, s.m. Overseeing. 

fuirich, pr.pt. a’ fuireach Lë a’ fuireachd,] v.a. 
Stay, wait, delay, linger. 2 Abide. 3 Dwell. 
4**Deliberate. Cha’n fh. mi, J will not stay; 


r EIE J 
| ^ L i 
= Ki 





S KL i [ | [Lr 


ITI 


FH 


ized pn 
NTERNET ARCHIV 


j / 
EIES FF PARI = h^ dp A = 
| | FL! Limii-l IAS KN E pP L L 
- E P | F3 E 


y 


fuirich 


fuirich beagan, stop a little ; guidheam ort f., 
1 pray thee stay ; f. ort t! wait thou ! 1, orm! 
let me see a moment, wait till I remember ! 
fuiril,(AC) s.f. Lyre. Ainnir na fuiril, the dam- 
sel of the lyre. 
fuirionn,** s.m. see fuireann, 2** Land. 
fuirireadh,(AC) -idh, s.m. Parching corn, mode 
of drying corn to make the cakes used at 
Christmas and other festivals. Min fh., parch- 
ed corn-medal. 
fuirleach, s.f. Parchment or 
milk-dish. d 
füirleachadh, -idh, s.m. Overcoming, victory. 
fuirlich,** v.q. Overcome, defeat. 
fuirm, i-e, -ean, s. f. Form, Įmanner, fashion, 
usage, ceremony. 2 gen.sing. & m. pl, of furm, 
3 Pomp, 4 Activity, 
Thug e cuirm le f., 

























skin to coyer a 


he gave a banguet with 


omp. 

sinirmeadh,** -idh, s.m. Humiliation. 2 Less- 
ening. 8 Travelling. 

fuirmealachd, s.f.ind. Preciseness, prov. 

fuirmeil,-e, 4. Precise. 

fuirmheadh, -eidh, s.m. Seat, foundation. 

+fuirmhidh, a. Hard. 

füirneis, -ean, s.f, Furnace, 

each, œ. Like a stove. 
stoves. 

füirneisich, v.a. see àirneisich. 

4fuis, a. Active, thrifty. 

fuiseag, see uiseag. 

uite, s. Sound, reiterated noise. 

fuiteachadh, s.m. Coaxing one to take or to do 
anything— Badenoch. 

iuith, s.f. Rag of cloth. 

fuith ! int. see fich ! 

fuithe, prep.pron. see fodha. 

fuitheag, see fuigheag. 

fuithein, s.m.ind. Galling, taking off the skin 
by riding. 2}}Trifling sore. 

yiuithir, s.f. Good land. Far am faighear famh 
bidh f.,where a mole is found, good land will be. 

fulachd, see folachd. 

ach, o. Patient. 

as, -ais, see fulangas. 

fulag, -aige, &.f. see ulag. 2 Swivel—Uist. 

fulaing, pr.pt. a’ fulang, v.a. Snuffer, endure. 2 
Permit, allow. 3 Bear. Fulaing dhomh, per- 
mit me; cha’n fh. an onothach e, the matter 
will not admit of it ; cha’nfh. mi dhuit, I will 
mot permit you. 

fulair,** s.m. Occasion, necessity. 2 Obligation. 


stove. 2 see àirneis. 
2 Furnished with 














,** o, Necessary. 2 Urgent.  (fuilear.) 
fulaisg, v.g. Rock, move baekwards and for- 
"wards. 
fulamair, see fulmair. 


fulang, -aing, -an, s.m. Patience, forbearance. 
2 Patient suffering, 3 Capability of enduring. 
4 Act of suffering or bearing. 5**Passion. 6 
**PFeeling. 7**Foundation. 8**Shore. g** 
Prop,buttress. 10**Stud, boss. 11*Hardihood. 
A’ f—, pr.pt. of fulaing. 

ach, -aiche, a. Patient, enduring, suffer- 

ing. 2 Hardy, tough. 3 Passive in grammar. 

4** Armed with spear or shield. Gu f., patient- 

ly ; na croinn fh., the tough, enduring masts. 

achd, s.f.ind. Passiveness. 

aiche, comp. of fulangaeh. More or most 
capable of enduring or bearing. 

fulangaiche, -an, s.m. Sufferer, patient. 2 Per- 
son of feeling. 

fulangas, -ais, 
Patience, 3 Passion. 4 Feeling. 
long-suffering, longamimity. 

Fulang dorrain, s.m. The banner of Fergus, i.e. 
the banner of one who could sustain a defeat, 











s. m. Suffering, endurance. 2 
Fad-fh., 


and play a losing game when necessary, Gut" 


Digitized by 


INTERNÉT ARCHIVE 


464 





fulasgadh, 


« cleverness." 5 Noise. | fullan,** -ain, 


—————.—, @. Restless. 


funntail,** a. Frosty. 2 Benumbing. 


funntainn, -e, 


furail 


trary to the English idea that the Gael can 
only,make one rush and are soon disheartened. 


1tulangtha, s.m. The passions. 
fulang-üird, s.f. Malleability. 
fulannach, -aiche, see fulangach. 


—d, see fulangachd. 


fulannaiche, see fulangaiche. _ 
fulannas, -ais, see fulangas. 
fulasg,* see fulaisg. 
fulasgach, -aiche, a. 


Moving backwards and 
forwards, agitated, rocking. 

1, -aidh, s.m. Rocking, act of rocking 
or moving backwards and forwards, tossing. 
A’ f—, pr. pt. of fulaisg. 


fulbh, -uilbh, s.f. Gloom. | 
+fulladh,** -aidh, s.m. Lie. 2 Leaping,skipping. 


s.m. Ornament, 





242. *Fulmair. 

fulmair, -e, -ean, s.m. Fulmar petrel—procellg- 
ria glacialis. [eun crom in Lewis—DMy] 
(AF) Polecat. 

fulpannach, -aich, see fulpannachd. 


An fhairge fh. fhal- 
pannach, the restless splashing ocean. 


fulpannachd, s. f. ind. Articulation, joining of 


things together. 


tfulrath, s.m. Corruption. 
fulshruth, s.m. Corruption. 2 Gore. 
fu'luaisg, see fo-luaisg. 

fuluing, see fulaing. 

fum, see fodham. 

4umair,-ean, s.m. Large lump. 
funn, see fonn. 

funntachadh, see funntainn. 
funntaich,Hr pr. pt. a’ funntachadh, 


VA. & N. 


Chill, grow cold. 
Ré là 
f., during & cold, frosty day. 
s.f. Excessive cold, extreme se- 
verity of wintry weather. 2 Stiffness. 
hFoundering. 4**Chilledness, benumbedness. 
Le f. an fhuachd, with the benumbing power 
of cold. 
—each,** a. Cold, benumbing, chill. 
Aimsir f., benumbing weather. | 
Hur, -uir, s.m. Thief, robber. 


fuar, 





fur, s.f. Preparation. 


fur,* see furan. 

furachail, -e, œ. Attentive, carefully observing, 
looking keenly, obseryant, vigilant. Gu f., 
attentively. 

furachair, -e, a. see furachail. F. mu m’ cheuma, 
watchful about my pie ; gu f., ‘diligently. 

.— — —eaehd,** s.f. Alertness. 

furachas, -ais, s.m. Watching, expectation, vi- 
gijanee, 2 Care, attention, attentiveness. 
Faiceall is f, circumspection and attention. 

furachras, -ais, see farachas. 

furadh, see fuireadh. 

furail, v.g. Offer. 2 Incite, provoke, urge, ex- 
hort, persuade. 2 Command. 

furail,tt a. Welcoming, hospitable. 

furail, -alach, s.f. Offering. 2 Command. 3 
Incitement, exhortation, persuasion. Rian & 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS Ag 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 











furail 465 G 


E e S ak clears 

ro-fh. air, he urged him. 

| eamh, see furail, s. 

furailt, see furmailt. 

each, see furail. 2 Courteous, affable, 

hospitable, welcoming. 

eachd, s. f. Kindness, 2 Civility, cour- 

teousness, 2ffability, 3 Hospitality. 

eas, see furailteachd. 

furain, s.f. Plenty, abundance. 2 gen. sing. of 
furan, | 

, pr.pt. a’ furanadh & a’ furan, v.a. Invite, 
press hospitably, welcome. 2 Salute. 

furan, -ain, s.m. Welcome, salutation, express. 
ion of kindly recoguizauce. 2 Hospitality. 3 
**Joy. 4 Fondling. 5 Entertainment. Le 
t. mor, with much welcome ; is f. a thog mo 
lann, hospitality has raised my sword ; is faoin 
t fh., vain is thy fondling. 

—-—ach, -aiche, a. Saluting kindly. 2 Cour- 
teous, civil. 3 Joyful at meeting. 4** Hospi- 
table. Tha thu f. truacanta, thou art courte- 
ous 1nd compassionate. 

futanachd,* s.f.ind. Complacency. 

furanaich, v.w. Invite, welcome. 

furaradh, see fuirireadh. 

furas,-ais, s. m. Patience. 2* Leisure. Am 
bheil f. ort ? have you leisure ? a’ cheud f. à 
bhitheas orm, the first leisure I get. 

furas, a. see furasda. 

fürasda, a. Easy, of easy accomplishment. 1st. 
comp. fasa, 2nd. comp. fasaid, 3rd. comp. fas- 
ad. Tha eòlas f., knowledge is easy ; chant, 
géill thoirt o òigh, it is dificult to obtain a vir- 
gin’s assent ; cha’n fh. leam t fhàgail, I am 
loath to leave you. 

—ehd, s.f.ind. Facility, easiness in doing. 

furbaidh,f see furban. 

furbairneach,** @. see fuirbearnach. 

furban, -ain, s.m. Wrath, fervourjof rage. 2 
Fits of indisposition. 3tTDisturbance of mind. 
4(AH) The restlessness and uneasiness which 

t sometimes accompany or characterize extreme 
sickness, 

ach, -aiche, @. Raging, provoking to 
wrath. 2 (AH) Extremely restless and per- 
turbed. 

furbhailt, see furmailt. 

each, -eiche, see furmailteach. 2(PM) 

Attentive. 

eachd, see furmailteachd. 

eas, see furmailteas. 

fur-bhuachaill, T s. m. Great northern ' diver, 
see muir-bhuachaill. 

fur-bhuachaill, s.m. Black-throated diver, see 
learga. 

+fur-fiogradh,** -aidh, s.m. Warning of remo- 
val. 2 Precaution. 

furghall, -aill, -ean, s.m. Suggestion. 

furiachadh,** -aidh, s.m. Detestation. 

furlachail,** a. Detestable. 

fürlaich, v æ. Hate, detest. [This verb takes the 
prep. ris after it, simple or compounded, as, 
dh’ fh. i riu, she detested them. | 

furm, -uirm, pl. -uirm &-uirmean, 8.9. Form, 
stool. 

furmach,H a. Abounding in stools. 

furmailt, e,-ean, s.f. , Welcome, reception. 2 
Complacency, urbanity. 3**Affability. 4**|g, gort, ivy, the seventh letter of the Gaelic 
Hospitality. 5**Ceremony. [-e also used as; alphabet now in use. When this letter is fol- 
nom.) Lef, is le mùirn, with courtesy and joy.| lowed by one or more of the vowels a, o, t, it 

furmailt, (DC) s.m. prov. for burmaid or bura- sounds nearly like g in gap, goose, or rather, 
ban (wormwood.) j itis sounded karder than g, and not so hard 

each, -eiche, a. Heartily welcome. 2| asc. G, atthe end of a word, if preceded by 

Courteous, complacent, polite, affable. Gu| one or more of the vowels @, 0, u, or à liquid, 


tfurnaidhe, s.f. Dwelling, residence. 

(urna:s, see füirneis. 

furralanach, -aiche, a. see fuarlanach. 

[urran,$ see eraobh-dharaicb. 

fursan, ain, s.m. Flame of fire. 

fur-shuileach, (AC) a. Keen-eyed. 2 (DMC) 
Observant, watchful. 

furt,(AC) see furtach. 

— ach, -aiche, a. Ready to assist, aiding, help- 
ing, relieving, comforting. à 

furtach, s.m. see furtachd. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Helping, relieving, com- 

forting, relief, aid. A’ f—, pr. pt. of furtaich. 

ail, -e, @ Helping, comforting, apt to 

help. 2 Anodyne. 

air,** s.m. Helper, reliever, comforter. 

d, s.f.ind. Relief, ease, help. 2 Conso- 
lation, comfort. 3**Deliverance, release. 4** 
Ease at the crisis of a sickness. F. is fòir, 
help and comfort. 

furta:eh, pr.pt. a’ furtachadh, Help,relieve,aid, 
assist, comtort. 2**Deliver, release. This 
verb requires the prep. air, simple or com- 
pound, after it. F. air an duine sin, deliver 
that man ; f. oirnne, deliver us. 

furtaiche, see furtachair. 

furtaichear, fut.pass. of furtaich, 

furtaichidh, fut.af. a. of furtaich. 

furtaichte, a. £ past pt. of furtaich. Comforted, 
helped, relieved, delivered. 

furthaiu, sf. Satiety, sufficiency. 

furthanuach,** œ. Plentiful. Gu f., plentifuliy. 

fusa, (for fasa) comp. of furasda. 

fusad,(for fasadh) 3rd, comp, of furasda. Degree 
of easiaess. 

fusachd,tt s.f Easiness, facility. 

fusadh, see fasa. 

fusaid, (for fasaid) 2nd. comp. of furasda. 

, see usaid. 

— ——— each, see usaideach. 

fusbaireachd, 3.f.ind. Deep ploughing or trench- 
ing. 

fusban,tt -ain, sm. Awkward bungler. 

fusgan, -ain, -an, S.M. Heather brush. 

futadh, -aidh, s.m. Blustering. 


futail,** a. Foppish, airy, showy. Gu f., fop- 

































































pishly. 
futalachd,** s.f.ind. Foppery, airiness, showi- 
ness. 
fütar, -air, see fùdar. 
futh,* s.m. Wen. 
futha, see fodha. 
futhad, see fothad. 
futhar, (CR) s.m. Mark or scar of à wound or 
sore. (pudhar.) 
futhar,(CR) s.m. Dog-days—Perthshire. F, an 
fhoghair, the height of autumn; latter half of 
Aug.—N.Arg. (DC) ; f, an earraich, the height 
of spring ; f. an t-samhraidh, the latter half of 
July—N. Argyll DC.) 
futhpa, see fopa. 














Gr E 





f., cvwrteously. ` RONA sounds most frequently like k in rook, hook, 
furmailteachd, s. f.ind. Civility, courteously, af-| as, rug, bore ; thug, gave; (pron. rook, hook.) 
fability, hospitableness. Gh, before a,0 or uv, has an aspirated power, 
Diaiti Original from 
JIGITIZED Ey Käch 
Tipo UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
INTERNET ARCHIVE Ge lee! Ge) 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


| 


G 466 


to which there is no correspondent sound in 
Enelish, but when followed by e or i, it 
sounds like y in ye, as, gheibh,wi//get. Gh, at 
the end of words or syllables is seldom pro- 
nounced at all, as, faigh, get ; rioghachd, a 
kingdom. | When g, is preceded by i, or fol- 
lowed by eor i, it has a mellow sound, like g 
in girl, as, gin, produce ; géire, sharpness. In 
conversation g is often elided in agam, agad, 
againn, agaibh. In Arran, it is elided also 
in Gilleasbuig, Eanruig, thàinig, Domhnas 
Càsg (Easter Sunday), and in sealg in là shealg 
na cubhaige ; is preserved in Sasgunn, though 
not in Sasunnach ; and in some instances it 
has become t or d after s at the end of a syl- 
lable, as uiste (for uisge, water) ; sothaisde- 
an (for sothaisgean, primrose.) 

g, (for ag) prep. At. This prep. when prefix- 
ed to infinitives or verbal nouns gives them 
the force or meaning of the present participle. 
'G is used between two vowels, as, tha mi 'g 
ol, I am (at) drinking ; cò seo 'g aom air 
‘luirg P who is this bending over his staf? 
though ag might well be written in all such 
instances in prose. When preceded by a con- 
sonant, or followed by a vowel, it is written 
entire, as, bha 'anam ag éirigh gun fhiamh, 
his soul was rising fearlessly. Ag is some- 
times used, even though followed by a con- 
sonant, as, gathanna liomhta ag tearnadh, 
polished darts descending. Between two con- 
sonants the g is often dropped, as Turloch 
&' caoidh a chloinne, 7. bewailing his chil- 
dren. 

g',conj. (for gu) 

g’, prep. (for gu.) ` H 

'g a, (for aig a) With whom, with which, to 
whom, to which. ’G am bheil an cridhe bris- 
te, who has the broken heart. 

'g a, (for aig a) At him, at her. "OG a lead- 
airt, drubbing him; °g am bheil cinnte air 
gach ni, who has complete certainty about every- 
thing 

gi a, (for aig a) To his, her or its, G’ a 
cheann, to his head, to its extremity (m.) ; g' 
a ceann, to her head, to its extremity (f.) 

ga,** conj. see ged. 

tga, adv. see c' a. 

ga, s.m. see gath. 

gab, -aib, s.m. Tattling mouth. 2 see gob. 

gabach ,* -aich, s.f. Tattling female.’ 

gabach,* -aiche, a. Garrulous, scolding, talka- 
tive, querulous. 2 see gobach. 

gabachd,** s.f.ind. Talkativeness. 2 Inconti- 
nence of tongue. 3 Inability to keep a secret. 

gabag,tt s.f. Chattering woman. 

gabagach, -aiche, see gabach. 

gabaidh,** s.f. Riddle. 

gabair, ean, s.m. Chattering talking fellow, 
prattler. 2 Chatterer (bird.) 3f{{Interpreter. 

eachd, s.f.ind. Talkativeness, impertinent 
tattle, loquacity. 2 Gibberish, 

gàbairt, see gàbart. 

tgabaist, see cabaiste. 

gabar, see gobhar. 

gàbart, sm. Big unwieldy person. 
used for ferrying sheep and cattle. 3 Trans- 
port, broad-bottomed sloop, gabart. [f gives 
gàbairt as nom.] 

gab-casgaidh, gaib-, s.m. One who is too ready 
Loan ak, 2 Sharp or snappish person. 

gabh, pr. pt. a’ gabhail, v.a. d n. 

Some idiomatic connections of gabh grouped 
under the various meanings : 
1 Take, accept, receive— 
G. seo, take this, accept of this ; ghabh iad 
am baile, they took possession of the town ; g. 





2 Open boat 


gabh 


cead, take leave ; g. mo leithsgeul, excuse me; 
g. naigheachd dheth, enquire of him for 
news ; gn. an caladh an long, the harbour 
received the ship; g. radharc, take a view; 
g. cothrom air, take advan.age or opportu- 
nity of ; g. a’ ghaoth do, disappear into air ; 
gh. e a’ ghaoth dha fhéin, he vanished into 
air, disappeared. i 

2 Contain, hold— 

G. biadh, fill out, as corn ; cha robh an t- 
arbhar a’ gabhail bìdh, the corn was not fll- 
ing out ; gabhaidh seo tuillidh, £his will hoid 
more; cho mór 's à ghabhas e, as big as it 
can manage. 

3 Sing, say, deliver— 

G. altachadh, say grace; g, ceòl, sing; g. 
òran, sing a song ; g. oraid, deliver an oration; 
guth dhaoine a’ gabhail ciùil, the voice of men 
singing. 

4 Emotions— 

G. comhairle, be advised, take counsel ; g. cù- 
ram, be concerned about, meditate about ; g. 
aithreachas, repent ; g. fearg, become angry ; 
g. iongantas, be surprised ; g. neònachas, be 
surprised ; g. truas de, pity. 

5 Infection— 

Gh. e a’ bhreac dheth, ke was infected of the 
small-pox by him. 

6 Assume, pretend— 

G. ort féin, pretend ; gh. e air féin, the pre- 
tended, he assumed. to himself, he presum- 
ed; gabh ort gu 'm fac thu mi, pretend 
that you saw me; a’ gabhail orra a bhi 
'gluasad ann an riochd na Gàidhlig, pos- 
ing as champions of the Gaelic cause. 

7 Burn, kindle, ferment— 

An caochan a’ gabhail, the wash fermenting; 
gabhaidh an teine, the fire will kindle ; gh. 
an t-aingeal, the fire kindled. 

8 Undertake, endeayour, be concerned with— 
G. gnothach ris, meddle with ; na g. gnoth- 
ach ris, do not meddle with him or it; g. 
iolla ris, g. ealla ris, look at it, but have no- 
thing else to do with it (iolla=a look, ealla 
—leiting alone) ; g. os làimh, undertake, en- 
gage, take in hand; g. mu, endeavour, go 
about ; gh. e mu'n òrdugh le toirt, he set 
himself thoroughly about obeying the order; 
gh. iad orra fhéin, they undertook. 

9 Arrange— 

Chuir thu as mo gh. mi, you have disappoint- 
ed, distracted me, made me wander from 
the point, caused me to go astray ; air a’ gh. 
sin biodh, let it be done on that understand- 
ing, let that be the arrangement. 

10 Must, compelled to— 

Ghabhainn a bhi ’falbh, I would require to 
be going. 

1l Enlist, engage as a servant— 

Gh. e'sna saighdearan, gh. e 'san arm, or 
gh. ean t-airgiod, he enlisted ; g. agamsa, 
engage with me; g. aig, engage with (a mas- 
ter) for hire. 

12 Make secure— 

Gabh aig, make snug ; g. aige, secure tt. 2 
modify a statement ; is math tha e air gabh- 
ail aige, it is well secured or seen to, 

13 Entertain, treat— 

Fhuair mi gabhail agam gu math 's gu ro 
mhath, I was most hospitadly entertained ; 
G. umam, see to me, take care of me, g. 
roimh, entertain’. SI receive or treat me kind- 
ly ; gh. e rium, he received me kindly. 

14 Acknowledye— ? 
G. ris, acknowledge him, receive him ; g. ris 
a’ phàisd, father the child ; cha do gh. e ris 
ai ghearan ach mall, he did not pay much 


Original from 
UNIVERSITY L 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


OF ILLINOIS AT 


gabh 


attention,did not concern himself greatly with 
the complaint. 

15 To worry— 
Tha mo chas a’ gabhail rium o cheann 
seachd bliadhna,my foot has troubled me for 
Seven years. 

18 Conceive, become pregnant— 
Gh. i ricloinn, she conceived. 

17 Beat, belabour— 


G. air, strike him ; gh. an t-amadan air féin, 


the fool struck himself ; ai gabhail dhomh, 
beating me ; gh. iad orra, they struck them; 
g.orm, strike me. 
18 Betake, repair, proceed, go, (motion)— 
G. mu ’n cuairt air, go round ; g. seachad, 
pass by ; g. suas, go up; g. air t aghaidh, 
pass on, go forward; g. an t-aonach, repair 
to the hill; g. chun a’ mhonaidh, betake 
yourself to the hill; g. chun an doruis ! be 
of, leave my presence ; g. gu fleadh na h- 
dizhe,repair to the virgin’s feast; g.do cheum, 
go thy way ; g. (an) rathad, take the road, 
march of ;gh.eroimhe, Ae went his way ; 
g.romhad ! begone ! g. romham, lead the way; 
g. roimh,intercept, check. 2 go forward or in 
advance ; g. vain! away, begone ! bho'n is 
e is ni do Chlann Néill na dòirneagan, 
ghabhadh iad d an ionnsuidh, since the 
Y of the MacNeills consists of pebbles, 
et them take to them ; mar tha 'n àird an ear 
|!  'san iar a’ gabhail fad o'chéil', as far as the 
east stretches away from the west; is fada 
bhuaidh sina ghabh mi, that is not at all 
what I mean, wish to convey (cf. the English 
idiom “ I will go farther and say...."); g. 
le, side with, be satisfied with; g. leis, side 
with him ; g. leis that will do; g. an ruaig, 
take to flight; g. (an) teicheadh, take to flight. 
19 Rest— 
G. mu thamh, go to rest; g. gu clos, be at 
eace, be quiet ; g. fois,rest thyself. 
3abh is also an auxiliary verb, ceannard nach 
g. lùbadh, a chief who cannot be made to 
yield ` cha ghabh sin deanamh, that cannot 
be done; gabhaidh sin deanamh, that can 
be done. 
gabh, s.m. Spear, hook, gaff— Dàin I. Ghobha, 
gabha-bheil, see gabhadh-bheil. 
ghbhach,** -aich, s.m. see gàbhadh. 
gabhach, -aiche, @. see gàbhaidh, 
bhachd,(AC) s.f. Greediness. 
eabbadach, -aich, a. Cunning, artful. 
gabhadair,** s.m. Accepter. 
gabbadan, -ain, -an, s.m. Receptacle. 2 Store- 
house. 3ffAccipient. 
gàbhadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Peril, danger, 
any kind of danger or emergency, hazardous 
situation, or hazard of such a nature that 
one's escape isa miracle, 2**Jeopardy. 3** 
Want. 4**Surprise, wonder. Ri am gabh- 
aidh, in time of need ; g. cuain, perils by sea ; 
an g. 's gach uair, in jeopardy every hour. 
gabhadh, 3rd. sing. & pl. imp. of gabh. G. e, 
~ let him take ; g. iad, let them take. 
gàbhadh-bheil,* s.m. Druidieal ordeal by fire. P 
gabha-dubh, $.7n. Balm-cricket. 2 (DC) Storm- 
riders,the undalations seen in rain accompani- 
ed by high wind. 
gabhagan,{ -ain, -an, 
thus petrosus. 2 Titling, 
gabhaibh, 2nd. pl. imp. of gabh, 


s.m. & f. Rock-pipit—an- 
tit, tit-lark. (111.347.) 
Take ye. 


— gàbhaidh, -e, a. Perilous,dangerous. 2 Strange, 


wonderful, odd. 3 Terrible, fearful. 4 Hard, 
severe. 5 Austere,stern,tyrannical,dreadful. 
6t+Tempestuous, boisterous, inclement, 7** 
Surprising. 8**Frugal. Is g. leam thu, I am 
surprised at you; duine g., an austere or tyran- 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


467 ebhalatas 





847. Gabhagan. 


nical fellow ; uair g., tempestuous weather ; àm- 
annan g., perilous times; bu gh. 'imeachd, 
dreadful was his conduct ; is g. an ni e, it ts 
a wonderful thing. 

gàbhaidh, gen.sing. of gàbhadh. 

gabhaidh, fut. af. a. of gabh. 

gabhaidheachd, * s. f. Austerity, tyrannical 
manner, tyranny. 2 Inclemency, boisterous- 
ness. 3 Dreadfulness, terribleuess. 4{fPe- 
rilousness. 

gabhail, -alach, -alaichean, s.f. &'m. Portion of 
work performed by cattle at one yoking. 2 
Lease, feu, tenure, 3 Farm. 4 Course, di- 
rection, bearing of à ship. 5 Tack, as a ship. 
6 Spoil, booty. 7 Conqnest. S**Barm. 9**Sei- 
zure, capture, taking. 12**Catching. 11** 
Accepting. 12**Receiving. 13**Kindling. 14 

f Colonization, 15 Stirrup-strap. Am 

bochd a’ gabhail seachad, the poor passing by; 
gun gh, ri saorsa, without accepting salvation; 
a’ g. na pìoba, smoking the pipe; air a’ gh. 
seo, on this tack ; mol a’ gh., keep a sharp look- 
out ; a chumas a g. gun dad luasgain, to pre- 
serve her course without deviation; chuir thu 
as mo gh. mi, you have disappointed me ; na 
cuir as a gh. e, do not disappoint him ; a’ g. 
d' a chéile, belabouring each other ; cuir an 
g., kindle, set on fire ; an robh g. mhath orra ? 
were they taking well 2?—said of fish taking bait. 
A’ g—, pr.pt. of gabh. 

gabhail, a. Receptive.—Dain I. Ghobha. 

gabhail, a. Austere, tyrannical—Dain / Ghobha. 
2(PM) Greedy— Uist. J 

gakhail-cine, s.f. Gavelkind, a tenure now only 
recognized in Kent by ‘which the owner at 
fifteen can sell the estate or devise it by will. 
The estate cannot escheat, and on an intes- 
tacy the lands descend from the father to all 
the sons in equal portions. 

gabhail-fearainn, s.f. Farm. 2 Lease. 

gabhail-fuachd (DMC) s.f. Catching cold. 

g(h)abhainn, 1st. sing. past subj. of gabh, I 
would take. 

gabhainn, see gamhainn. 2 see gobhainn. 

gabhal, -aibhle, -aibhlean, s.m. see gobhal, 

ach,-aiche, see gabhaltach. 

tach, -aich, s. m. Lessee (in Scotland, 

tacksman,) renter, farmer. 

tach, -aiche, a. Capacious. 2 Infectious. 

3 Contagious. 4**Ready to grasp or catch. 

Galar gabhaltach, æ contagious disease. 

tachd, s.f.ind. Capacity, largeness. 2 Con- 
tagion. 3 Infection. 4 Capriciousness. 5 
Readiness to grasp or catch. 6{{Inflective- 
ness. 

gabhaltaiche, comp. of gabhaltach. More or 
most capacious or infectious. 

.——,* s.m. Renter. 2 Farmer. 

gabhaltair,** s.m. Accepter. 

gabhaltas, -ais, s.m. Land rented from a land- 

















gabhaltas 


lord. 2 Land in tack. 3 Division of land 
among a tribe. 4 Conquest, invasion. 5 Land 
obtained by conquest. 6 Tenement. 

gabham, Ist. sing. pr. imp. of gabh. Let me take. 

gabhann, -ainn, s.m. Flattery, adulation, syco- 
phancy. 2 Gall. 3**Prating, tattling, gossip. 
4**Gaol, prison. 5 Henbane, see gafann. Lan 
de gh., full of smooth flattery ; is mil o ’n 
bheartach an g., sweet is the prating of the rich. 

-————— ach, -aiche, a. Flattering.  2**Tat- 
tling, cajoling, gossiping.  3**Of, or pertain- 
ing to flattery. 4**Like a prisoner. 5** Of, 
or belonging to a prison. Mar an ceudna g., 
also given to tattling. 

-—— ——-àiche, comp. of gabhannach. 

gàbhanta, æ. Gruesome. see gàbhaidh, 

gabhar, fut. pass. of gabh. Shall or will be ta- 
ken. Gabhar is often significant of motion, 
and in this sense it is used impersonally, with 
an active present and affirmative meaning, as 
g. suas leam, westwards or upwards I proceed- 
ed ; g. suas leinn gu mullach an t-sléibhe, we 
took to the top of the mountain. 

gabhar, -air, s.m. Light, illumination. 2 Con- 
flict. 3**Comfort. 4** s.f. Goal. 

gabhar, gaibhre, -air, s.f. Goat. 2 (AF) 
Hawk. 3(AF)Any old bird. 4(AF) Macker- 
el. 5 (AF) Shad (fish.) 

ach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to a goat. 
2 Skipping. 

——-—ag,(AF) s.f. Gurnard. 








348. Gabharag. 
gabhar-alluidh, s.f. Chamois. 


gabhar-athair, s.m. Snipe,—scolopa gallinago. 

gabhar-bhacach,(AF) s.f. Name given in some 
parts to the last handful of corn to be cut. 

gabhar-bhreae, -ic, s.f. Buck-snail. 

gabhar-cheann,(AF) s.f. Leader of goats. 

gabhar-chro, -oithean, see gabhar-lann. 

gabhar-fhiadh, (AF) sf. see g.-fhiadhain. 2cf 
old, Horse. 

—ain,(AF) s.f. Wild or rock goat. 

gabhar-fhiadhaich, s.f. Antelope. 

gabhar-lann, -lainn, s.f. Goat-pen. 

gabhar-mhór, s.f. Crayfish, crawfish. 2 Lobster. 

gabhar-oidhche, Snipe, s.f. see gabhar-athair, 
2 Nightjar. 

gabhd, -an, s.m.ind. Crafty trick, craft. 2 Lie, 
fallacy. 

———ach, -aiche, a. Cunning, tricky. 2 Giddy, 
coquettish.  3**Plausible.  4**Greedy. GI 
Lying. 6(WO) Trifling. 

ach,* -aich, s.f. Coquette, 2 Shrew. 

———achd,** s, f. Plausibleness, slyness, de- 
ceitfulness, 2 Low cunning. 3 Greediness. 
4TT Cheat. 

———adh, -aidh, sm. Cunning. 2 Low trick. 
Ri g., engaged in trickery. 

—-—aiche, comp. of gabhdach. More or most 
deceitful, plausible or cunning. Am fear ais 
g. den triùir, the most deceitful of the three. 

gabhdaichead, s. Slyness, cunning. 2 Degree 
of cunning. A’ dol an g., increasing in cun- 
ning. 

gabhdair, -ean, sm. Cunning, plausible, tricky 
fellow, cheat. 

gabhdaire,(WC) s.m. Trifler, fussy person who 
manages to accomplish nothing—W, of Ross. 











468 


gad 


| gabhdaireachd, s.f. Low cunning, habit of lying 
or using low artifices, plausibleness, 
seer rer s.f. Spear, javelin, lance. 2 Cow with 
calf, 


gabhlach, -aiche, a. see gobhlach. 

T— ———Adh, s.m. Propagation. 2 Genealogy, 
A’ g—, pr.pt. of gabhlaieh. 

-— — ——4A4l, -ain, see gobhlachan. 

gabhladh, see gobhal. 

tgabhlaich, v.a. Sprout, bear. 2 Propagate, 

gabhlaiche,** comp. of gobhlach. 

--—ad, see gobhlaichead. 

gabhlag,-aig, -an, see gobhlag. 

gabhlan, -ain, -an, s. m. Wandering man de- 








void of care. 3 Loquacious, cunning, tricky  - 


body. 4**Little branch. 4 see gobhlan. pror. 

gabhlanach, -aiche, a. Wandering, restless. 2 
Tricky. 38 Loquacious. 4 see gobhlanach. 
prov. 

——— — ——4,ff s.f. Idle roving. 

gabhlanaich,ff -nach, see gabhlanachd. 

gabhlas,** ais, see gamhlas, 
ach, a. see gamhlasach, 

gamhna, gen. sing. of gabhaian. 

gabhnach, -aich, see gamhnach. 

gabhrach, a. Abounding in goats. 

,** -aich, s.m. Flock of goats. 

gabhrag,-aig,-an, s.f. (AF) Flock of goats. 2 
Sheaf of-corn bound siightly near the top, and 
left standing in the field to dry. 

—an, n. pl. of gabhrag. 

—— ——— -bheag, £. f. Jack snipe—gullima scolo- 
paa. 

gabhran, -ain, s.m. Little goat. 

gabht,* s.m. Links—Cowal. 

a, past pt, of gabh. Taken. 2 Conceived, 
3 Captured. 4 Eugaged. Tha thu g. agam-sa, 
you are engaged with qme. 

——ach,** a. Ready to take or ame 2 

u g. 











Of a grasping or greedy disposition. 
gionach, grasping and greedy. 

———tach,** -aich, s.m. Person in want. 

gabhte, see gabhta. 

gabhuidh, see gabhaidh. 

gabhuinn, gabhna, see gamhuinn, 

gàbhunn, -uinn, s.m. Captation, claw. 

gabhunn,(CR) s.m. see gabhann. 

— ———aách,(CR) a. see gabhannach, 

gabla,** s.m. Gaelic spelling of cable. 

gac, v.n. Cackle, asa hen. (gloc.) 

gacail, s.f. Cackling (glocail.) 

gach, pron.indef. Mach,every, all, Gach coille, 
gach doire's gach eas, every wood, every grove 
and every cataract. [The prepositions ann, 4, 
le, riand gu, take s before gach. Gach cannot 
be aspirated. ] 

gachar,$ s.m. Wake-robin, lords-and-ladies, see 
cluas-chaoin. | è 

gachunnach, a. Harsh. 2 Applied in Eigg to 
a drink strong enough to make one gasp. 

gad, conj. see ged. 

gad, gen. gaid & goid, pl. gaid, goid & gadan, s.m. 
Withe, twisted twig. 2 Switch. 3(AH)Num- 
ber of fish,as carried home on a string or withe. 
Gad mór, equivalent to a large basket. 4 
Bend on anything. Tha gad air barr mo 
shlàite, there ts a bend on the point of my rod, 
as when;a fish is hooked and being drawn out 
of the water ; cha'n 'eil agam ach an g. air an 
robh an t-iasg, Ihave only the bend made by 
the fish (on which the fish was)—referring to 
a fish hooked and lost in landing—said when 
anything is lost suddenly (D My.) also used 
to indicate the disappointment of a person 
who has been over-reached or deceived. 
Seachd goid, seven withes; cha téid g. air 
gealladh,.a promise cannot De hand-cuffed ; g. 


Original fram 
UNIVERSITY. OF ILLINOIS 


E | 
| I| D AK | A-CHAMBALUGE | 
- x LJ am ) Le. = ell T Il d D 


n 


Ai 
D 


| 


gad 409 — gaibhtheach 


2o X0 LL UH REE LÁ eegener 
air sporan (lit. withe on purse) an ironical, 
name for a miser; is mithich a bhi bogadh! Sch 
nan gad, itis time to be steeping the withes— | 9 PA, 
a native Gaelic saying, meaning ‘‘ it is time 
to be going," belongs to the time when withes 
of birch or osier were used for halters and all 






the fastenings of horse-harness. These withes 


would become stiff an brittle if laid by for some Bs ARR NE) Lea 

time, and would therefore be steeped for a 077 NP Nes ZZ 

while before taking to horse—NGP. 27 WM RN Aa 
gad, v.a. Lop. 2 Pull. 3 Dig. ^ ZAC NS CSS 


gad, -a, -aichean, s.m. Iron bar. 2 Large, thick 
piece ofanything. 3*Stalk. 4 Inherent pro- 
pensity, in a bad sense. G. siabuinn, @ var 
of soap ; g. siùcair duibh, a stalk of liquorice; 
abe Mie a girth ; g. uchd, a breast-thong ; 
a droch g. aun, he has a had turn of mind ; 
rathad nan g., the railroad. 
gad (for ag do) At thy. 'G ad fhiosrachadh, 
taguiring for thee. 
gadachd, see gaduigheachd. 
gadag,-aig, -an, s.f. Originally a rope of twigs. 
2 Straw rope or halter. G. 's à dà cheaun 
sgavilte, a straw-rope with both ends (oose— 
applied to a slovenly woman. 
, aig, -an, s.f. Switch—Dain I. Ghobha. 
gadaiche, -an, s.m. Thief, robber. Mar gh., like 
a thief. 
gadaigheachd, s.f. Theft, robbery. 2 villiany. 
Air son a gh., on account of his robbery. 
gadair, gt. Hopple, tie fore-feet of a horse, to 
prevent its straying. 2łł Tie horses head to 
tail. prov. 
gadan, -ain, -an, s.m. dim. of gad. Little withe 
or twig. 2 n.pl. of gad, 
fzadan,**-ain, s.m. Voice. 2 Continued noise. 
¢———ach, -aiche, a. Noisy, causing a contin- 
ued noise, 
gadanach,tt a. Abounding in withes. 
gàd-droma,(MMcD) s.m. Ridge-pole of a roof. 
gàdh, -àidh, -àidhean, see gàthadh. T2 see guidh. 
gadhar,-air, s.m. Lurcher dog. 2 Cross-bred dog, 
being half greyhound and half foxnound. 3 
anciently Greyhound. 4 Mastiff. T5 see gaoir. 
G. is fiadhchon nan carn, the hounds and 
wolves of the rocks. 
-——ach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to lurch- 
ers or greyhounds. 2 see gaotharach. 
—--—an, see gadhran. 
gadhar bior-shuileach,(AF) s.m. Gazehound. 
gadhran, (AF) s.pl. Goats. 
gadhran,(AF) s.m. Lapdog, spaniel. 
gadluinne, -an, s.m. Slender, feeble fellow. 2 
Salmon after spawning. 
gadmunn, -uinn, s.m. Hair insect, nit. 2(DMC) 
Atom. 
-—— ———Aách, -aiche, @. Full of nits. 
gadradh, -aidh, s.m. Tying or fettering of hor- 
ses. 
gàdraisg,-e,-ean, s.f. Tumult, confusion. 2 
Drunken riots. 
each, -eiche, a. Tumultuous, confused. 
gadruich,(AC) pl. of gadaiche, 
gàdruisg, see gàdraisg. 
gaduiche, -ean, see gadaiche. 
KS see gals. 
gaet, s. Wound. see gaoid. 
tgaf, -a, s.m. Hook, any crooked instrument, 
tgafal, -ail, s.m. Nerve. 
gafann, -ainn, s.m. Henbane,—hyoscyamus ni- 
ger. (ill. 349.) 
gàg, -àig, -an, s.f. Cleft, chink. 2 Chap or fis- 
sure on the skin, caused by heat. 3 Painfal 
hack on the toes or sole of the foot. 4**Notch. 
5**Knot in timber. Cha’n ’eil aige ach ceum 
air ghàig, he takes an unwilling step. 
gig, pr. pt. a’ gàgadh, v. m. Split or go into 


DA 
s y 
4 "nu 
a ' 
Ch 
gef 4 


) “ai A 
















c 
849. Gafann. 
chinks or flaws. 2 Notch, 
gau,** -aig, s.m. Lisp, impediment in speech. 
Gag-beoil, æ lisp. 
gag, (DC) a. Tender-footed, footsore, walking 
gingerly. 
gàgach, -aiche, a. Abounding in clefts or chinks, 
2 Having rents in the skin. 3.Chapped. 4** 
Leaky. 
gagach,-aiche, œ. Stuttering, stammering in 
speech. 2(DMC) Slow, hesitating. 
,* -aich, s.f. Stuttering female. 
gagachd,* s.f.ind. see gagaiche. 
gàgadh,-aidh, s. m. Growing into chinks, fis- 
sures or rifts. 2**Splitting. 3**Leaking. 4 
Hsee gagaiche. A’ g—,pr. pt. of gag. 
gagaiche,s.f.ind. Stammering, defect in speech. 
2**O0ne who lisps or stammers in his speech, 
or who cannot pronounce certain letters. 
—, comp. of gagach. More or most sub- 
ject to stuttering or stammering. 
gagaid, s.f. Agate. 
gàgaidh, fut. af. à. of gag. 
gagail, s. Haw. 
gagail,** a. Stammering, lisping. 2 Cackling. 
G. nan'cearc, cackling of hens. 
gagaire, an, s.m. Stammerer, stutterer. 2(D 
MO) Idler, slow-going person. 
achd, s.f.ind. Stammering. 2 (DMC) 
. Hesitating. 
gagalan, (AF) s.m. Number of small articles 
stringed or otherwise hanging together as 
beads on a cord. 
gagan,(CR) s. m. Cackling—Arran. {In this 
sense in Gairloch 1st. a is long and nasalised 
—WO.] 2 Noisy speech. 3 Knot in timber. 
gagan, -ain, -an, s.m. Cluster or bunch, as of 
heath. 2 see gafann. Gaganan, clusters. 
gaganach, -aiche, oO Hanging in clusters or 
bunches, in ringlets, as hair. 
gaganach,** a. Knotted, as timber, 2 Noisy, 
cackling. 3 Garrulous. A fhraoich gh. ! thou 
knotted heath ! 
——-——,,** -aich, s.m. Noisy speech. 2 Gar- 
rulity. 
gaibheach,** -ich, s.m. Needy person. 2 Craver. 
3 Complainant. 
tgaibhinn, -e, -ean, s.f. Little study, closet. 
gaibhne, gen, sing. & n. pl. of gabnainn, see 
gobhainn. 
achd, see goibhneachd. 
——_——an, see goibhnean. 
gaibhre, gen.sing. & n.pl. of gabhar. 
gaibhteach, -eiche,s.m.Personin want. 2 Craver. 
3 Complainant. 
gaibhtheach, -eiche, œ. Stormy. 2 High, lofty. 














Digit ized by u " V ERSITY OF N DIST 


INTERNET ARCHIVE ARANA-CHAMDAIGI 
NR LIAIN rx s WC | IR n AA - 1 HA i BA 
- — e E LABS i d (es BK 


gaibhthealach 


gaibbthealach, -aiche, a. Exposed to want. 2 
Inconvenient. 3 Perplexing. 4 Wild, fierce. 

Sail, n.pl. of gad. 

gaid, gen.sing. & n.pl. of gad. 

gaid, v. see goid. 

——ean, -ein, s.m. (dim. of gad) Small band of 
twigs. 2 Small withe. 

gàidsear, s.m, Gaelic spelling of gauger. 

searachd, $.f. Gauging, business of an ex- 
ciseman, 

gaig,** s.m, Fop, proud coxcomb. 

gaige, s.f. Stammering, stuttering, lisping. 

gaighear,(AF) s.f. Bitch. 

gail, v.£& s. see goil. 

tgail, -e, s.f. Slaughter, bloodshed. 2 Bravery. 
4 Smoke, fume, vapour. 

gailbheach, -eiche, a. Stormy. 2 Wrathfnl, 
fierce, enraged. 3 Extraordinary, prodigious 
as to size or power. 4** Boisterous at sea. 
5* Enormous, as price. 6* Austere, as a per- 
son. 7* Terrible. Ur làimh ri lic ghailbhich, 
your hands about @ ponderous stone ; là g., & 
stormy day. 

——d,tt s.f.ind. Boisterousness. 

gail-bheinn, -e, -bheanntan, s.f. Great or rocky 
hil. 2 Huge billow. 3 see gaillionn. 

gailbhiche, comp. of gailbheach. 

——_———ad,** -id, ssm. Storminess, degree of 
storminess. Tha 'n là'dol an g., the day is 
growing more and more stormy. 

gailbhinn, see gaillionn. 

gailc,(OR) s. Excitement, agitation, flurry—W. 
of Ross. 2 Sad predicament. Chaidh e "na 
gh., he went into a flurry, became agitated or 
fturried. 

igailchinn,** s.f. Fine for manslaughter. 

gaile, -an, see goile. 

gailleachd, see goileachd. 

gaileadh,** -idh, sm. Evaporation. 

gaileag, (AF) s.f. Badger, 2 Cockle (fish,) 

gailean, -ein, see goilean. 

gaileiridh, Gaelic spelling of gallery. 

Tgailia, s. Headpiece. 

tgailin, -e, -ean, s.f. Parasite. 

Tgailineach, -eiche, o Flattering. 

gaill, s.f. see goill, 
aill-cheare, -chirc, -chearcan, s. f. Duck. 

Feuille: -àn, S.f. Rock. 

— ——ach,tt a. Large-cheeked. 

——-—üch, -ich, -ichean, s.m. Gum. 2 Jaw— 
Dain I. Ghobha. 3 Disease of the gums to 
which cattle are subject. 4 The joining of the 
outer and inner bark of trees. 5 Seam be- 
tween welt and sole of a shoe. 6O6ffSeam of 

21 see gailleach. 


shoe-uppers. 

gailleach, s. Barbel. 3 
(DMy) Gill of a fish— Lewis. 

gailleag, -ig, -an, s.f. Cuff, blow on the cheek, 
2 (Fionn) Caper—Mul?. A’ gearradh ghail- 
leag, cutting capers, romping. 3 (DMC) (gear- 
radh-ghailleig) Cracking of middle finger and 
thumb, usually done by children in a class to 
show that they know the answer to a question, 

gailleann, see gaillionn, 

gailleart,* s.f. Masculine woman, 

gaill-eun, -eoin, s.m. Strange or foreign bird. 

tgailliann,** ssm. Dart, arrow. 

gail-iasg, -éisg, -iasgan, s.m. Pike. 

gaillionn, -inn, s.f. Storm, tempest. 2 Impet- 

uous blast. 3(AH) Snow-storm, snowy wea- 

ther, ‘‘ white ground." OG nan sliabh, the 

mountain-storm ; mór-ghaillionn nan stoirm, 

the mighty force of storms ; gur gil' thu na 

'gh., whiter art thou than the snow-blast— 

Duanaire, 81. 

ach, -aiche, v. Wintry. 2 Stormy,tem. 
pestuous, 








Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE j 


470 


GE 


gàir 


galllseach, -ich, -ichean, s.m. Earwig. 2 Mouth 
overcharged. 3 Large mouthful of flesh. 
gaillseag, -eig, -an, s.f, Earwig. 
-————ach, a. Full of earwigs, like an ear 
wig. . 
gaiil-shion, -shine, s.m. see gaillionn. 
-—ach, see gaillionnach. 
Tgzaimhean,** ein, s.m. Skin, hide. 





gain,"**5f. Sand. 2 Clapping of hands, applause, 


Tgainbheach, see gainmheach. 
Tgain-cheap,z-chip, s.f. Pair of stocks, pillory. 
igaincoir, s.m. Archer. 
gaine, s.f. see gainne. 
G. éisg, the fin of a fish. 
gaineach, see gaineamh. 
-———— —, a. Finny. 
gaineachaidh, a. see gaineamhach. 
gaineamh, -eimh, s.f. Sand. 2 Gravel. 3 The 
sea-shore. 4 Sandy beach. Garbh gh., gravel, 
— — — —ach, -aiche, a. Of, or relating to, sand, 
gravel or sandy beaches. 2 Calcareous. 
—an,* s.m. Sandy bottom (of the sea.) 
— — — -art,** s.m. Sandstone. 
— —— -chlach, -chloiche, s.f. Sand-stone. 
— ———— -chlachach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging 
to, sand-stones. : 
eaineamhuinneach, see gainmheineach. 
gainear, see gainnear. 
tgaing,** s.f. Jet. 2 Agate. 
gaiumneach, see gaineamh, 
———— ——, à, Barren. 
gainmhein, -e, -ean, S$. f. Sandy beach. 2 
Grain ofsand. 3 (DMC) Particle, smallest 
portion. Cha’n fhaigh thu g. dheth, you won’ 
get a bit of it. 
——each, -eiche, a. Sandy. 
gainmhidh, see gaiumheach, @. 
Tgainn, -e, -ean, s.f. Nook. 
gainne, s. f. ind. Want, scarcity, fewness. 2 
Want, hunger. 8 Parsimony, mean saving. 
4 Famine. 
———, comp. of gann, 
gàinne, -an, s.f. Dart, arrow. 2 Shaft. 3 Reed. 
4H Arrow-head. 5**see gaine 2. 
gàinneach, a. Like a reed, arrow or shaft. 2 
Aboundiug in reeds. 3 Shafted. 
——,** s.m. Place where reeds grow. 
gainneanach,tf -aich, s.m. see gainnineach, 
gainnead, -id, s.m. Scarcity, scarceness, de 
gree of scarceness. 
gàinnear,** -eir, s.m. Archer. 2 Spearman. 
gainneasag, see gainnisg. : 
gainnineach, Ach, s.m. Scrub, miser. 
gainniseach,(DMC) @. Poor, half-starved, liv- 
ing in poverty. ; 
gainnisg,§ s.f. Common sedge—carez vulgaris. 
2(AC) Small divinity, dwelling among reeds 
and marshes on the borders of lakes and ri- 
vers, who moans and wails before storms for 
the deaths that are to follow. 
———eag, dim. of gainnisg. 
gainntear, -ir, s.m. see gainne, 
gainntir, -eir, ean s.f. Prison, place of confine- 
ment, gaol. 2 (DMC) Corner, narrow place, 
uncomfortable place for cattle. Sloc na 
gainntire, the prison dungeon. 
each, -eiche. æ. Like a prison, of, or be 
longing to, a prison. 2 Wanting, destitute, 
eachd,tf s.f. Imprisonment. d 
eachadh, -aidh, s. m. Incarcerating, in- 
carceration. A’ g—, pr.pt. of gainntirich. 
—— ——ich, pr. pt. a’ gainntirea h, v.g, Im- 
prison. 
—iche, -an, s.m. Prisoner. 2 Gaoler. 
gàinrich, v.a. Defile—Dàin I. Ghobha. 
gair, see gar. 
gair, see gaireach. 











Original fram 


2 see gàinne., 3 Fin. os 





gair 
ir, pr.pt. a’ gairsinn, v.n. see goir. 
ear [na t, AS gaireachdaich, a’ gàirsinn & a’ 
aireachdainn, v.n. Laugh. 2Shout, cry. 3 
ake a noise. 4 Resound. Gairidh am fith- 
each air do ghruaidh, the raven shall croak 
on thy check ; g. buàite, the roar of drowning 
people ; g. na fairge, the noise of the sea. 
gàir, -ean, s.m. Outcry, shout. 2 Din, murmur 
or noise of inany voices, whether of men or 
ép Ht 
“eu , E, see gàire. 
i», -6, 8.f. Greedy stomach. 2 Paunch or 
|.  intestines of a deer. 
——-—e, S. f. ind. Roughness, grossness, rude- 
ness, coarseness, harshness, 2 Fierceness. 
ge comp. of garbh. More or most gross, 
 «——ead, -eid, s.m. Roughness. 2 Degree of 
roushness,coarseness, hiwshness or grossness. 
8**Thickness. A’ dol an g., growing thicker 
and thicker. : 

-——-— ead, comp. of garbh, Is g. esin, it is the 
thicker for that. 

gairbhdheisinn,(CR) s. f. Disgust, repulsion, 
such as would be excited by the sight of fil- 

thy food, a mangled body, &c. Chuir e g. 
ori, he horrified me—W. of Ross. see gairi- 


sinn 1. 
fgairbheadach,tl -aich, s.m. Coarse garment. 
| gairbheal, s. m. Quarry. 2**Free-stone. 3 
Coarse sand, gravel. 
———ach, -aich, s.m. Stony or rocky ground. 
ach, -aiche, æ. Stony, gravelly, rocky. 
E —ta,** a. Gravelly. 
| gairbhean,(CR.5.m.Complaining,ailing—.A rran. 
2(DMO) Storm, 3(DMC) Roughness. 4(WC) 
Gills of fish. : 
-creagach, -aiche, s.m.  Bruise-wort, 
Ren. ra 
7 eil, s.m. see gaireal, 
E „> a. Rough-tempered, 
tgairbheoil, -e, œ. Large-limbed. 2 Of large 
body or size. 

















 gairbhtheann,-inn, s.m. Species of wild grass. | 


grass. 
gairbh-shian, -shein, sm, see garbh-shìon. 
gairceil, a. Bulky. 
gàircean, see gàirghin. 
gair-chatha,** see gaoir-chatha. 
gàir-chreag,** s.m. Echo. (mac-talla.) 
| gair-chuain, s.f. Noise of the sea. 
| gàird,** 8,f. Arm. 2 Hand. 
Tgàirde,"* s.f. see gàirdeachas. 
gairdeach, -eiche, o. Festive, joyous, glad. 
——adh, -aidh, s.m. Rejoicing, act of re- 
joieing, congratulating, making merry, A’ 
g—, pr.pt. of gairdich. 
Ecc a, Congratulatory,joyous, joyful, 
giad. 





ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in wild 








as, -ais, s.m. Joy, gladness, rejoic- 
ing, pleasure, gratification, congratulation. 
Guth gairdeachais, @ voice of joy; a’ dean- 
amh gàirdeachais, or ri gairdeachas, rejoicing. 

gàirdean, -ein, pl. -an & -deana, s. m. Arm. 2 
Hand. 3 in pl. Part of a spinning-wheel. 

ach, -aiche, a, Having long or powerful 
arms, large-armed, brawny. 

gatrdeas, see gàirdeachas. 

gairdein, gen.sing. of gàirdean. 

— ————each, -iche, a. see gàirdeanach. 

gairdich, pr. pt. a’ gàirdeachadh, v.n. Rejoice, 
be glad. 2 **Congratulate. 

gairdin, s.m. Gaelic spelling of garden. 

/ „aire, s. f. Nearness. An g. dhuit, near or nigh 

Leg, 

gàire, s.f.ind. Laugh, laughter, smile. Dean M 
laugh ; g. fanoid, a scornful laugh ; fiamh e. 





Digitized by 


| MT [- D N ET A nr E HI i r 
d ^ t k f k ! ka d CH L k Dëse P M 


471 


gàirich 

or snodha g., soft,more or less restrained laugh- 

ter ; glag g., or rochd g., guffaw, rough, rauc- 

ous laughter ; g. mu aobhar a’ ghuil, laughing 
at the cause of weeping ; g. ri do mhi-chialadh, 

laughing at your shame; cha’n ann do ’n 

ghuin a’ gh., smiles do not suit with pain. 

Tgaire,** s.f. Reparation, amendment. 2 Good 
fuck. 3 Auspices. 

gàireach, -eiche, a. Laughing, merry. 2 Noisy, 
sounding, murmuring, resonant, roaring, as 
the sea. 

——-——all, æ. see gaireachdail. 

———-daich, s.f. Laughter, act of laughing. A’ 
g—, pr. pt. of gàir. Ciod a’ gh. a th’ ort? 
what are you laughing at ? 

dail, oe Laughable, risible. 
gàireachdainn, see gàireachdaich. 
gaireachdair,t{ -ean, s.m. Laugher. 
gàireachraich, Poolewe for gàireachdaich. 
tgaireadh,** -idh, s.m. Vault. (gàradh) 

gaireal, -eil, 8.2. Freestone. 2 Gravel. 3 
Hard sand. 

ach, -aiche, a. Gravelly, abounding in 
gravel or freestone, stony. 

———ach, -aich, s.m. Stony ground. 

gaiream,** ist. sing. imp. of gàir, Let me 
laugh. 2 not for gairidh mi, fut. af. a. of 
gàir, as given by **—that should be gatrim. 

gaireas, -eis, see goireas. 

ach,* see goireasach. 

gair-éibhinn,{f s.m. Shout of joy. 

gàire-fanoid,** s.m. Seornful laugh. 

gaireil, e @. Snug. 2 Commodious, suitable, 
convenient. Gu f., snugly. 

gairetheann,* -ainn, s.m. Garbage. 

gair-fhitheach, -fhithiche, s.m. Raven. 
ture, 

gairg, see garg. 

gairg,** er Cormorant. 2 Diver. 

gairgo, comp. of garg. More or most fierce or 

art. 

——, 8.f.ind. Fierceness. 2 Bitterness of 
taste or flayour. 3 Sourness, sharpness. 4** 
Harshness, roughness, rudeness.  65**Satiri- 
calness, 

——achd, sf. see gairge. 

———ad, -eid, s.m. Degree of fierceness, bitter- 
ness or sourness. AT dol an g., growing more 
and more sour. 

gairgean, -ein, s.m. Broad-leaved wild garlic, 
ramsoms—allium ursinum, (ill. 350) 2(DMCO) 
Angry-looking or irritable person. 

gairgean, s.m. Dung, ordure, 2 Stale urine. 

-—ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in garlic, 

——-—— -creagach,§ s.m. Samphire—crithmum 
maritimum. (ill. 351.) 

-gàraidh,$ s.m. Garden garlic. 

——-—— -Muire,§ -ein-, s.m. Crow garlic, see 
garlag Muire. 

gairgeann,** -inn, s.m. Diver. 2 Cormorant, 

— ———— ach, a. Likea cormorant, abounding 
in cormorants. 2 Greedy. 

gair-gheal, a. Foam-white. 

Tzairgheala, s.m. Outcry. 

fgairghean, -ein, 3.f. Niece. see gair-inghean, 

gairghin,$ s. Crowfoot. 

gartghlan, (pron. gartlan)CR v.a. Weed—A rran. 

zairginn,** sf see gairgean. 2 Pilgrim's dress. 

gàir-ghuil, s.f. Lamentable weeping. 

gairgne, 8.f. see gairge. 

tgairguiomhach, -aiche, a. Bigoted. 

gairgre,** s.f. Pilgrim’s dress, 

gairich, -e, s.f. Shoutingfor joy. 2**Continued 

wailing. 3**Murmur. 4** Raging, roaring, as 

of the sea. G. a’ chuain, the raging of the sea; 

g. siuunsair, the skirling of a chanter, 

;** @ Shouting. 2 Loud. 3 Noisy. 4 





2 Vul- 








Lf E 





351. Gairgean-creagach. 
Roaring. 5 Raging. Sruth g. na h-oidhche, 
the roaring torrent of night. 
gairichdich, see gaireachdaich, 


gairid, giorra, d. see goirid. 

gairidean,** s.m. Periwinkle. 

gair-inghean,** s.f. Niece. 

gairios, -is, -an, see goireas. 

——-—ach, -aiche o, see goireasach. 

gairiseag,** -eig, -an, s.f. Wanton, prostitute. 

gairisinn, s. m. Horror, detestation, disgust. 
2 Lewdness. 3 Noisiness, Tha thu 'cur g. 
orm, you make me shudder, |** gives s.f.] 

gairisneach, -aiche, œ. Nasty, shocking, abom- 
inable. 2 Lewd, debauched. 3 Detestable, 
Gu g., bawdily. 

————— ——Q,** s.f. Lewdness, bawdiness, de- 
bauchery, indecency. 

gairisvich,** v.a. & n. Abhor, detest. 2 Shud- 
der with fear or horror. 

gairistinn, s.m. see gairisinn. 

gairleach-callaid, §s.m. Garlic mustard, sauce 
alone, see garbhraitheach. 

cairleag,* -eiz, s.f. Garlic. 

—— -Mhuire, see garlag-Muire. 

gairlear,(CR) Aberfeldy for gairneilear. 

gairm, pr.pt. a’ gairm, v.a. Call. 2 Invite. 3 
Crow as a cock. 4* Proclaim banns in a 
church. 5**Bawl, shout. 6**Qualify. 7** 
Name. 8 Call to beasts, hens, &c. G. air, 
call him : g. gaisgich o bhad 's o choille, calg 





Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


472 


gaise A. 
| warriors from thicket and wood. 
gairm, -e, pl.-ean & -annan, s.f. Call, calling. 
2 Act of calling. 3 Title, name. 4 Procla- 
mation of banns. 5**Noise. 6**Shoutiag. 7 
Qualification. A’ g—, pr. pt. of gairm. G.- 
phòsaidh, @ marriage-proclamation ; thugadh 
g., proclamation was made ; g.-choilich, a cock- 
crowing ; g. ghallan, the nsise of hounds in the 
chase— bitches giving tongue. 
——each, -aich, s.m. Vocative case in gram- 
mar, 2 Appellative. 3 Calling. 4 Invitation. 
gairmeadair, -ean, s.m. Crier, proclaimer. 
gairmeadh, -eidh, s.m. & pr. pt., prov. for gairm. 
gairmean, see garman. 
—ach, -aich, see gairmeach. 
gairmeanach,** a. Beaming. 
gairmear, -eir, s.m. Crier, advertiser, bell-man. 
/gairme-gallanaich, s.f. Youth’s shout. Le fuaim 
na gairme-gallanaich, with the sound of the 
young men’s shout. 
gairm-fhitheach,(AF) s.m. Crow. 
gairm-ghilleoáff s.m. Crier. | 
gairmheach, Suth’d for gainmheach, 
gairmionnach, -aich, see gairmeach. 
gairneag,** -eig, s.f. Noisy little stream. 
gairneal, -il, -an, s.m. Large chest used to hold 
meal, | 
gàirneid, s.f. The stone garnet. 
eairneil,(CR) Strathtay for gàirneilear. 
gàirneilear, Ar, -ean, s.m. Gardener. 

—achd, s.f. Gardening. 
gàirnlear,(CR) Strathtay for gàirneilear. 
gairreas,** s.m. Apparatus. 
gairrigeach, see carraigeach. 

EN -eich, -eichean, see gaorsach. 
airseachd, 

s aisea AG 1 see gaorsachd. 

zairsean, -ein, s.m. Scold, shrew. 

gairseil,** o Lewd, whorish, indecent. 2 
Nasty. 

gairsg, s.m. Horror. 2 Fiendish look. 3 Dis 
hevelled hair. 

gàirsgeal,** eil, s. m. Rabble, band of worth- 
less persons. ( 

gairsinn, see goirsinn. 

gairsleag,** s.f. Strumpet. 

yairsneach, -eiche, qd. see goirisneach, 

— —— —d, s.f. see goirispeachd. 

gairsneag, -eig, -an, S.J. Lewd female, bawd, 

gairt, see gart. 

gairte,** s.f. Narrow path. 

gairteag,** -eig,s.f. Crab tree—pyrus maius. 

Igairteil, -ean, s.m., see gartan. 

gairtheach,** s.m. Clamour. 

gair-theas, s.m. Scorching heat. 2 Reflected 
heat. 3 Glittering reflection of the sun, as 
from the surface of water. 

gàir-thonn, s.m. Noise of waves. 

gais,(CR) s.f. Loathing—Arran. 2 Wisdom. 3 
*Surfeit. 

gais, -e, -ean, S.f. Torrent, stream. 2 Surfeit. 
plenty, abundance. 
Generalship. 5 Spear, weapon. 6 Lace. 7 
Toil. 8 Spear-haft. 9 Flag-staff. 10 Potato 
disease.G. na brataich, the staff of the banner. 

gais, pr.pt. a’ gaiseadh, v. œ. Shrivel up, blast. 
corrupt, wither away. 2 Daunt. 

gaisde, -an, s.f. Gin, trap, snare. 2 Wisp of hay 
or straw. 3** Wile, cunning, trick. 

gaisde,** a. Armed, accoutred, 

an,** Gin, s.m. Cunning fellow, 2 De 
ceiver, cheat. 3 Snare. 

tgaisdiche,** s.m. Deceiver, 2"Painter. 

tgaisdidheach, -ich, s.m. see gaisgeach. ` 

gaise, Sr, Daunting. 2 Flaw, blemish, injury. 3 

see gaisge. 4**Withering, blasting. 5 Qualm. 

Cha do chuir e g., air, it did not daunt him in 








Original from 


3 Craft, cunning. 4. 


ee se ee Pe N 








UNIVERSITY OF ILEINOTS Al 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


& 


gaise AT8 galchind 
the least. SA, d galann,** -ainn, s.m. Enemy. 
+ gaiseach,** a. Blemished, injured. 2 Blasting, | galapainn, s.f. Gaelic spelling of galloping. 
withering. galapainn, v.a. & n. Gallop. 


d,** s.f. Qualmishness. galar, -air, pl, -a & -an, s.m. Disease, distem- 


gaiseadh, -idh, -ilheau, s.m. Defect in crops, 
state of their being blasted, shrivelled up, or 
corrupted. ` z** Flaw, injury. 3 Blemish- 
ing. 4(PM) Potato blight—Uist. A’ g—, pr. 
pt. of gais. Aotrom gun gh., lively without 
blemish ; buailidh se e 1e g., he will strike him 
with blasting. 

tgaisean, -ein, s.m. Scanty crop. 

gaisean,-ein, s. m. Bush. 2 Tuft or bunch of 
heath or broom, or of any other low-growing 
tufty plant. G. iosal, a low bush. 

ach, a. Tufty, bunchy, in tufts or bunch- 

Am fraoch g., the tufty heath. 

gaisge, sf. Bravery, valour, bolduess. 2 Feats 
of arms. 3**Might. 4**Slope. Do gh. féin, 
your own valour ; clannna g., the sons of bra- 
very. 

ach, Ach, s.m. Champion, hero, warrior. 

G. liath, ahvary warrior. 

achd, s.f.ind. Heroism, bravery, the doing 
of valiant deeds. 

gaisgealachd, sf. Heroism, valour, intrepidity. 

gaisgeanta, -einte, a. Heroic, warlike, valorous. 
Gu g., bravely. 

gaisgeil, -e, a. Heroic, warlike, valorous, brave. 
Is g. "ur mór-thionail cheud,brave are your ga- 
therings of hundreds. 

gaisgidh,** s.m. Stream, current, 

gaisidh, (an)js.m. Potato disease—Suth’d. 

gaisidh, see gaisgidh. 

gaisreadh, -idh, s.m. Warlike troops. 2 Attend- 
ants. 3(DC) Crew of a ship. 

gaist,** v.g. Ensnare, trepan, deceive, trick. 

gaiste, see gaistean & gaisteag. 

ach,** a. Kull of snares. 2 Entrapping. 3 
Cunning, wily. 

gaisteag,** -ein, -an, s.f. Snare, gin, trap. 2 
‘Frick, wile. 3**Cunning female. 

ach, æ. Cunning. 

an, -tein, -an, s.m. Straw. 2 Small bun- 
dle of straw or hay. 3 Small quantity of any- 
thing. t4 Deceiver, wily fellow. 

gaistean-cloich,** sm,  Tl'om-tit. 

gaitean,** -ein, s.m. Brief, abridgment. 

gaithean, -ein, pl. -an, s.m., dim. of gath. Little 
dart. 2 Straight branch. 3**Oar. A gaith- 
ean réidhe, Aer smooth oars. 

Sch Ft a. Abounding in little darts, &c. 

[tt spells this gaitheineach.] 





es. 




















per, malady. G. fad’ is eug oa bhun, @ long 
illness und death at its end ; cha galar aon 
duine e, it is not one man’s disease only—said 
to any one speaking of their troubles as though 
there were no worries in the world besides 
their own ; gure mo shlainte mo ghalar, it is 
my trouble that sustains me. 


g. araidh, cholera. 

v. ban-sith, sickness of the fairies. 

g. bonn, bruised soles, disease in hoof of cat- 
tle caused by walking on hard stony 
ground. 

g. buidhe, jaundice. 

g. buinneach, diarrhea. 

g. cam,, disease in cattle,whereby the affect- 
ed animal has a twist in its neck, and 
walks in a circle. 

g. chinn, headache. 

g. Gears or g. na beinne, red disease (in cat- 


e.) 
g. dibhe-ruithe, diabetes. 
g. donn, brown disease (in cattle.) 
g. Frangach, venereal. 
g. fuail, the gravel, dysury. 
g. gasda, flux, dysentry. 
g. gloig, mumps—Arran 
g, gloigeach, 7 
gluc gloc, throat-disease. ` 
goilleach, the mort. 
. greidh, fives, strangles. 
inne, bowel complaint. 
iongach, agnail. 
. lioil, the water disease. 
. lom, disease of cattle, whereby the skin be- 
comes corrupt and the hair falls off, 
g. mialach, phthyriasis, lousy disease. 
g. miosa, menstruation. 
g. mor, the plague, pestilence. 
tg. n-eclis,|| stomach disease. 
tg. noitid,li pregnancy. 
g. plocach, 
g. pluice, 
g. pluiceach, 
Tg. poil,|| epilepsy. 
g. sploiceach, (AH) mumps. 
g. sul, eye-disease. 
g, tarsuinn, disease in the head of sheep. 
g. teth, rot, clap. 
g. tholl, diarrhea. 


TR M 09 03 08 N O8 


quinsy, Mumps. 


gal,** -ail, s.m. Smoke, vapour. 2 Gale, puff. 3 : t 
| Blast or flame of straw. 4 Kindred. 5 g. tuiteamach, epilepsy. 
| Warfare. t6 Slaughter. 17 Valour. g. uasal, venereal. 


E ~ 48809. m 
e , 


. EE, 3 Chivalry. 
ga 


Tem Ro AD £I p^ og 

V L— Lie | i j 

INTERNET ARCHIV 
y> 


gal, see gul. 
gal, v.n. see gul. 
galabhas,** -ais, s.m. Parasite. 2 Glutton. 3 
Flatterer. 
alach, -àiche, æ. Valiant, brave. 2 see gulach. 
„aich, s.m. Valour, courage, fortitude. 
galad, st Familiar term of address to women 
and girls, used only in the vocative case, “a 
halad !" [Addressed to both boys and girls 
in Vist.) 2 (DMC)Term of sympathy or pity, 
A ghalad ! poor creature ! 
--——ach,** a. Girlish. 2 Queanish. 
----—achd, s.f. Girlishness, 2 Queanishness. 
galain, gen.sing. of galan. 
galan, -ain, -an, s.m. Gallon measure. 2 Noise, 
tumult. 3 see gallan. 
galan,** -ain, s. m. Sudden blast. 2 Sudden 
3 Tumultuous. 





anach, a. Stalky. 2 Noisy. 
4 prov. for gulanach. 
galan-greannchair, see gallan-greannchair, 


Digitized by 


Diseased, distempered. 2 
Caora gh., œ diseased sheep. 
2 Condi- 


galarach, -aiche, a. 

Causing disease. 
d, s.f. Tendency to disease. 
tion of being diseased. 

galaran, n.pl. of galar. 

galar-eolas, s.m. Nosology. 

galar-ghabhail,tt s.m. Infection. 

galba, see galbha. 

galbha,** a. Hard, vigorous, stout, brawny. 

, S. Rigour, hardness. 

idh, s.f. Heat, warmth. 
alc, pr. pt. a’ galcadh, v.a. Thicken cloth by 
fulling. 

—ach, a. Stout. 2 Warlike. 

—adair, -ean, s.m. Fuller of cloth. 

— adh, -aidh, s.m. **Champion. 2 Act of full- 
ing cloth. A’ g—, pr. pt. of galc. Muileann 
galcaidh, a fulling-mill. 

—anta, a. Thick, stout, strong. Fear g.,a@ man 
of stout form of body.. 

tgalchind, see galar-chinn. 








2H ug 


galg 


, see galgadh. 

arie en e Stout, warlike. 

——adh, -aidh, s.m. Champion. 

gall, -aill, gailleachan, s.m. Rock, stone. 
Stone vase or boiler. 

tgall, s.m. Cock. 2 Swan. 3 Milk. j 

Gall, Goill, s.m. Foreigner, stranger, especially 
a native of thesouth of Scotland, or a Scot 
that cannot speak Gaelic. Buaidh air clann- 
aibh nan Gall, a victory over foreigners ; gall 
mhuileann, wheel-miil. 

gallach, see gall-luch. 

gallachrann, see gall-chrann. 

galla, chan, s.f. Female dog, bitch. 

tgalladh, -aidh, s.m. Beauty, brightness. 
gallag. 

gallag, -aig, an, s.f. Little bitch. 

gallaidh, a. Hot. 

gallan, -ain, -an, s.m. Branch, stalk. 2 Youth, 
handsome or tall young man, 3**Rock. 4 
(AF) Whale— Lewis. 5ttStraight young tree. 
4 (DO) pi. Heroes. Tha "ne ag aomadh, 
the branch is bending. 

ach, -aiche, a, Full of boughs or branches, 
2 Youthful. 

gallan-gainmheich, see gallan-greannachair, 

gallan-greannach, see gallan-greannchair, 

————————— — —àáir,'$.f. Colt’s foot, see cluas- 
liath. 2* Burdock, 

gallan-mór, -móire, s,f. Butter-bur or pestilence- 
Wort-—peiasites vulgaris. 


2 see 








352. Gallan mór, 
gallantachd, Gaelic spelling of gallantry. 


galla-tholair, s. Brach. 

galla-tholl,(AF) s. Bot-worm. 

gall-bhalgach, -aich, s.f. French-pox, venereal. 
Gu soithich leis a’ gh., il of the venereal. 

gall-chno, -chnótha s.f. Walnut. 

gall-chrann, -ainn & -oinn, s.m. South-country 
plough, as distinguished from the kind for- 
merly used in Gaeldom. 

Galida, a. Foreign, strange. 2 Surly, poor- 
spirited. 3 Of, or pertaining to the South of 
Scotland, or its inhabitants, ‘‘Lowland.” 4 
Unable to speak the Gaelic language, 

galldaehd, s.f. English connection. 2 Asso- 
ciation with the English or * Lowland” Scots, 

gall-druma, -chan, s.f. Kettle-drum. 
gall-fheadan, -ain, s.m. Flageolet. 
gall-ghiuthas, -ais, s.m. Pine-tree, 

gall-Inch pl, -aidh, s.m. Rat, 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


474 


gàmal 

gall-mhuileann, -inn, -uilinean, s. ». Noutl» 
country mill, in contradistinction to the 
quern or native mill of Gaeldom. 


2|galloban, -ain, see galoban. 


gall-óglach,** -aich, s.m.Cuirassier. 2 Armour- 
bearer. 3 Freebooter of Gaeldom armed with 
Lochaber-axe or sword. The ceatharnach wore 
a sgian-dubh or dirk. A ehieftain's armour- 
bearer was called gall-óglach. He was chos- 
en on account of his bolduess and bravery,and 
his business was to prevent his einployer 
being taken by surprise. He had a double 
allowance of food, cailed beatha fir, or a cham- 
pion's portion. 

gall-pheasair,$ s.m. Vetches, lentils, see peas- 
air-an-arbhair. 2**Lupine. 
allrach, a. Infectious. 

gallrachadh, -aidh, s. m. Crucifying. 
menting. 3 Portending. 

gallradh, -aidh, s.m. Infection. 2 Disorder. 

gallraich,** na Punish. 2 Torture, 3 Portend. 

gall-sheileach,$ -ich, s.f. Cooper’s willow, osier 
willow, see fineamhuin. 

gall-sheilistear, -an, s. m. Flag bullrush. 2 
Sedge, see seisg. 

galltach, a. Tricky. 

galltanach, -aiche, a. Envious. | 

— ——-—4, sf, Hatred: 2 Envy. 

galltanas, -ais, s.m. Hatred. 2 Envy. Luchd 
galltanais, envious people. 

gall-tromp, truimp, s.f. Trumpet. 2 Clarion. 3 
Cornet. Fuaim na gall-truimp, the sound of 
the cornet, 

galluch, see gall-luch. 

gall-uinnseann,$ s. Quiekbeam —pyrus aria, 









853. EA A TEN 


gallunach, -aich, s.m. Soap. 

galluran, -ain, s.m. Wild angelica—«gepodium 
podagraria. 9?iiLingwort. 

galmas, -ais, s.f. In old Scots law, a satisfaction 
for slaughter. 

galnas, see galmas. | 

galoban, -ain, s.m. Dwarf. 

galraich, see gallraich. 

galraidh, s.f. Bodement. 

galuban, -ain, -an, s.m. Band that muffles the 
dugs of a mare, to prevent the foal from suck- 
ing. - 

’g am, (for ag mo) At my. 2 At their. Esan a 
tha "e am shàrachadh, he who oppresses me— 
lit. is at my oppressing. 

gamag,(DMy) s.f. Large mouthful, as of cattle 
among corn. 2 Man hurrying to get his food 
finished. Dh’ ith e 'na ghamagan e, Ae ate it 
in big mouthfuls. 

gamag, -aig, -an, s.f. Stride, span, long step or 
bound in running at full speed. 2(DC) Shoe- 

Jmaker’s nippers, strong nippers. 
gàmagach,tt o Striding, spanning. 
gamaineach, a Few, scarce. 

gamairle,** s.m, Fool. 

gàmal, sm see camhal. 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AH 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


2 Tor- S 


Sie -Sdr t. 


Ae nct 


ee ee ee oe 


2 - 
>. Takis EIL 











Tel 


i 
» x 
D 
D 


f 

















E = s LG" * San Loge "ës 
pn, EE, 
v dE te z Å ~ 


. gann; gainne [& goinne,] a. 


gamal 


gamal, au, san, Fool, stupid person. 
gamaltan,(DC) s.m. Sumph, slow-witted man. 
gaan, -ain, see gàmag. 
gamasach,** a. Proudin gait. 
tgamban, -ain,s.m. Leg, arm. 
*tgamh, -aimh, sm. Winter. 2 Cold. 3 Woman. 
gamhainn, gen. sing. -aimhne & -amhna, pl. 
-aimhne & -gamhna, s.m. Year-old calf. 2** 
Six-mouths-old cow. 3**Stirk, steer, young 
bullock. 4**Yearling deer. 5*Stupid fellow. 
G. tairbh, æa year-old bull ; g. ruadn, @ year- 
ling deer ; oidhche Shamhna, theirear gamhna 
ris na laoigh, oidheh' Fhéill-Eóin, theirear 
aighean ris na gamhna, on Hallowe'en the calf 
Ze called a stirk, on St. John's eve the stirk is 
called a heifer. 
gamhaldas, Suth’d for gamhlas. 
Tgamhann,** -ainn s.m. Stitch. 2 Ditch. 
gamhchogus,** -uis, s.m. Dent, notch. 
gamhlas, -ais, s.m. Malice, revenge, desire of 
reyeuging. 2 Aversion, hatred. 3* Envy. 
Ghluais mo gh., my hatred began to rise; 
luehd-gamhlais, envious people. 
-ach, -aiche, a. Envious, hating. 2 Of a 
revengeful disposition, vindictive. 
achd, s.f. Enviousness. 
gamhna, gen.sing. of gamhainn. 
gamhaach, -aich, -aichean, s. m. Farrow cow, 
cow with a year-old calf and still being milk- 
ed, stripper. 
gamhnach,* a. Farrow. Tha ig., she is farrow. 
— -aigh,(MMcD) s.f. Cow that has been 
one year without calving— Lewis. 
gamhuinn, see gaishainn. 
gàmus, s. m. (CR) Bullet-mould—W. of Ross. 
[camus or fos in other parts. ] 
'gan, (for ag an) 'Gan ruagadh, pursuing them. 
'gau, (prep. aig+art. or poss. pron. an.) 
gan, see gun. 
gauaid,** s.f. Railing, fence, hedge. 2 Fold. 
gandal,** -ail, sm. Gander, 
gangaid, -e, -ean, s.f. Falsehood, deceit. 2 Bus- 
tle. 3 Light-headed female, naughty female. 
4 Deceiver, prov. 5 **Mean trick, craft. 
each, -eiche, o False, deceitful. 2 
Light-headed, giddy, prov. 3**Mean. Gug., 
deceitfully. 
eachd, s.f. Craft, knavery, deceit. 2 
Light-headedness, prov. 3**Meanness, narrow- 
ness. 
gengaraid,(DC)s.f. Disorderly crowd of women. 
£angarais,**s.f. Rout (crowd.) 
Scarce. 2 Little, 


small. 3 Rare, few. 4**Difficult. 5** rare- 
ly Stout, thick. Sruth e, o scanty stream ; 
ach gaun, almost; bliadhna gh., œ year of 
Scarcity; ni g., arare thing ; mie nan anma 
ganna, sons of the pusillanimous souls ; gun 
lougautas g., with no smail wonder; is g. a’ 
ghaoth ris nach seòladh tu, light would be the 
- breeze that you couldn't sail in—applied to trim- 
mers and time-servers. 
tgann, s.m. Poverty. 2 Scarcity. 3 Jug. 4 Fort. 
gann, @. Scarce, scarcely, hardly. pi ep 
ràinig mi an uair ...., I had scarcely arrived 
....; ls gann a ni e feum, it will hard- 











y 
ganuail,** s.pl. Lattices. 
ganndar, o Scarce, rare. 
— — ——, -air, s.m. Scarcity. 2 Hunger. 
gaundas, -ais, see gamhlas. 
— ach, see gamhlasach. 
gann-fhortanach,1f -aiche, a. Unfortunate. 
nnlas, ais, -an, see gamhlas. 
ach, -aiche, see gamhlasach. 





gannraich,** s.f. Noise, tumult, din, clamour. | gaoirnealair, 
| saoirnean, tt sm. see gaorr, [ft gives -ein.] 


Mar gh. eun, like the noise of birds. 


Erd 


gaonean 


ganntachd, s.f. Scarcity. 2 Poverty. 

ganntair, see gainntir. 

ganntar,-air, see ganntachd, 

ach, -aiche, o Miserly, mean. 

ganntas, -ais, s.m. see ganntachd. 

gànradh, -aidh,-aidhean, s.m. Gander. 

gànraich, -e, s.f. Roaring noise, clamour, clatter. 
loud murmuring sound, as of billows or of 
birds, romping, screeching. 

—, v.n. Ciamour. 

ganraich,(PM) v. a. Bespatter with dirt, dis- 
grace.— Uist. 

gantair, see gainntir. 

fgaod, -aoid, s.f. Swan. 2 Goose. 3 Leech. 

fgaod, v.a. Wound. 2 Blemish. 

gaodadh, -aidh, s. m. Wounding, wound. 2 
Blemishing, blemish. 

gaodhar, see gadhar. 

gaog, -aoig, -an, s.m. Defect, lump or inequal- 
ity of fineness in yarn, or cloth. 2**Defect of 
any kind. 3**Evaporation. 4**Staleness. 5 
**Wlatness. 6**Squint of the eye. 

ach, -aiche, a. Unequally spun. 2 Having 
defects. 3 Flat, stale. 4 Squint-eyed. 

—ag, -aig, -an, s. f., dim. of gaog. Too much 
slenderness in a portion of thread. 

——an, -ain, s.m. See gaogag. 

tgaoi, s.f. Wisdom. 2 Falsehood. 

gaoid, e -ean, $.f. Blemish, defect. 2 Stain. 
3 Disease. 4* Flaw, particularly in cattle. 
5| Potato disease [with the art. œ] 6 rarely 
Wind, blasts, flatulence. Gun gh. gun ghalar, 
without blemish or disease. 

each, -aiche, æ. Defective. 

eanta, œ. Unsound at the core. 2 Idle, 

slothful, sluggish, 

eantachd, s.f. Idleness, slothfulness, slug- 

gishness. 

gaoideil, a. Diseased, tabid. 2 Blemished. 

gaoidhean, s.m. False colour, counterfeit. 

gaoil, gen. sing. of gaol. 

fgaoil, s. f. Family, kindred. |in this sense it 




















is then, pl. of gaol.) 2 Wound. 3 Violent 
anger, see goil. 
ean, -ein, -ean, Ss. M. Darling. [tt gives 


-ein as nom. | 

tgaoine, s.f. Goodness, honesty. 

gaoir, -e, -ean, sf. Noise. 2 Loud and contin- 
uous murmuring sound. 3 Pain, feeling of 
pain, 4* Noise of steam escaping, or of 
liquors fermenting, ‘‘ singing " of a kettle, 
noise of frying. 5* Spigot of a cask. 6**Cry 
of pain or alarm. 8 Cry of woe. 9(AH) De- 
risive cheering— Uist. 7**Throbbing pain of 
the toothache. Is goirt leam gaoir nam 
ban muileach, painful in my ears is the Mull 
women’s cry of woe ; g. eoin na tuinn, the noise 
of the sea-fowl ; g. 'sa mhaduinn, @ cry in the 
morning; g. "pn a chluais, @ tingling in his 
ear ; gaoir chatha, œ~ latile-cry ; thoir a’ gh. 
as a’ bhuideal, take the spigot out of the cask. 

gaoirbh, s.f. see gairbh. 

gaoir-chatha, s.f. Battle-cry, war-cry, shout set 
up on the eve of engaging in battle. 2 Din of 
arms. Cha chluinnteadh g., leibh, a remark 
made by anyone who is disturbed by the din of 
peoples’ voices. 

gaoirdean, see gairdean. 

———— ach, -aiche; a. see gàirdeanach. 

gaoireach, -eiche, a. Sounding,resounding, noisy. 

gaoirean, -ein, -an, s.m. Noisy, empty fellow. 

gaoirich, s. Wailing,loud muumuring noise. Air 
a h-uilinn ri gaoirich, leaning on her elbow, 
wailing.—Filidh, p. 85. 


gaoirneal, eil, } see gairneal. 


2H2 


Original from 


i= 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


Digitized by 


MIN TERNET ARCHIVE 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN, 


mg 





\ 
\ 


\ 


gaoirsg 


gaoirnean, -ein, see gaorr. 

gaoirreas,** s. see goireas. 

gaoirsg, see gairsg. 

gaoirsinn, see goirsinn. 

gaoir-theas,* sf. Gossamer, flickering sheet of 
cob-webs, seen on the grass in autumn, por- 
tending rain—called croisean Moire (Mary's 
crosses) in Uist. 2 Visibie throbbing near 
the ground ona very hot day. 

tgaois, -e, SP, Wisdom, prudence, discretion. 2 
Seience. 

gaoisd, -e, -ean, see gaoisid. 

gaoiseadach, tf -aiche, a. Hairy. 

gaolsdeacb, -eiche, see gaoisideach. 

gaoisdean, see gaoisnean. 

gaoiseach, -ich, s.f. The bolt that fixes a gun- 
barrel in the stock. 

gaoisean, see gaisean. 

————ach, see gaiseancah. 

gaoisid, -e, s. f. Horse-hair. 2 The hair of 
beasts, hair of mane and tail. 3 Hair of any 
part of the human body but the head. G. an 
eich ghlais, the grey horse’s hair. 

each, -eiche, a. Hairy,as a beast. 2 Hav- 
ing long or much hair. 

gaoisneach, -eiche, see gaoisideach. Le ’n gàir- 
deanaibh g., with their hairy arms. 

gaoisnean, -ein, einean, s.m. Single hair. 2 
Thin, slender person. 

gaoistean, -ein, -ean, s.m. Crafty, tricky fellow. 
2 see gaoisid, 

gaoith, sometimes used for gaoth. 

gaoith, a. see gaothaidh. 

gaoithe, gen.sing. of gaoth. 

-an, -ein, -einean, s.m. Fop, light-headed, 
giddy or superficial person, talkative fellow, 
windbag.  2**Changeling. 3 see gaothaire. 

gaoitheanach, -aiche, a. Airy, foppish, giddy. 

gaoitheanachd, s.f. Flatulence, giddiness. 
gaoithreag, -eig, -an, s.f. Blast, blowing. 2(DC) 
Wnirlwind— Vist. 
ach, -aiche, a. Of, or relating to blasts 
of wind or squalls. 
gaoithseach,* s.m. Sheaf 
little shock. [A shock consists of 12 sheaves, 
and takes its Gaelic name, adag from the 
sheaf that is fixed on the top like a little hat.] 
gaol, -aoil, s.m. Love, fondness, 2 Beloved ob- 
ject or person,  3**Liking.  4** rarely Kin- 
dred. 5ttLover. A ghaoil, my darling! ; a 
mhic mo ghaoil! my beloved son ! ; luchd mo 
ghaoil, my kin ; am fac’ thu mo gh. ? did you 
see my beloved one ? ; clann mo mhàthar ghaoil, 
my beloved mother's children ; a nighean mo 
ghaoil, my beloved maiden ; thug mi g. da ri- 
readh dhuit, Z loved you most truly ; an g., in 
love ; airg. an Ni Mhaith, for the love of God ; 
g. fola, love of relationship ; gheibhear bean- 
chagair, ach 's ainneamh bean-ghaoil, a Cear- 
wife can be got, but a love-wife is rare—“‘a 
ghaoil" is a warmer expression than “a 
chagair.” 

gaolach, -aiche, a. Lovely, dear, loving, beloy- 
ed, affectionate. G. am bron, lovely in grief; 
Ardar g., beloved Ardar. 

,-aàieh, s.m. Beloved object. 2 Term of 

kindly familiarity. A ghaolaich ! my dar- 

ling ; 2 my good fellow. 

, S.f. Affectionateness, 

gaolaich, gen.sing. of gaolach. 

e, comp. of gaolach. More or most loye- 
ly, loving or beloved. | 

gaolar,** o Amorous. 

gaolan,-ain, s.m. Beloved person,” 

gaor, see gaorr & gadhar. 

gaor.n,-ain, sm. Glutton, 2 Little glutton. 

gaorasglach,** s.m. Bog. 

















Di gitrzed D y 


A mn L ff 
ARCHIVE 


476 


put as thatch on alt 


gaothraich 


| gaor-bhronnach, a. Pot-bellied, 

£aornanach,(AC) æ. Fluxy. 

gaorr, -a, s.m. Gore. 2 Filth. 3 Feces, ordure 
on the intestines. [In part of Argyll pro- 
nounced with a northern ao Boite. in the 
North pronounced with ao broad, as in Ar- 
gyll. ** gives gen. as gaoirre.] | 

gaorr, pr. pt. a’ gaorradh, v. a. Gore, pierce, 
thrust into the side after the manner of cat- 
tle. 2 Cram, glut. 3* Lap. 

ach,tt a. Gory, filthy. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Thrust, act of thrusting. 
2 Glut, act of glutting, or cramming. 3(DMC) 
Fighting. A’ g—, pr. pt. of gaorr. A’ g. air 
a chéile, fighting one with another,more in play 
than in earnest. 

an, -ain, s.m. Little glutton. 2 Big belly. 

gaorsach, -aich, -aichean, s.f- Wanton girl. 3 
Slut. 3 Bawd, drivelling prostitute. 

-————d, s. f. ind. Wantonness, lewdness. 2 
Debauchery. 3*Prosticution. 

tgaorsta, s.f. Whirlwind. 

gaort, -oirt, -an, sm. see giort. 

gaos, -aois, s.m. Wisdom, prudence, 

gaosmhor, -oire, œ. Wise, prudent. 

gaoth, gaoithe, pl. -an & gaoithean [ Suth’d 
gaoitean,] s. 7. Wind. 2§ Flatulence [with 











the art. a’ gh—,| 3**Shooting pain, stitch. 4 


**Airiness.  5**Vanity. An ni a thig leisa’ 
ghaoith, falbhaidh e leis an uisge, what comes 


with the wind goes withthe rain; cuir ri gaoith, ` 


weather as a ship; 2 sow in windy weather ; g. 
chuairtein or ioma-gaoithe, œ whirlwind ; a’ 
ruith na gaoithe, on a vain pursuit ; coileach 
gaoithe, q weathercock ; gaoth an ear, the east 
wind ; a’ gh. deas, the south wind ; g. an iar, 
the west wind ; g. an ear-dheas, the south-east 
wind ; g. an iar-dheas, the south-west wind; 
g. an ear-thuath, the north-east wind ; g. an 
iar-thuath, the north-west wind ; g. ruadh, o 


blasting wind ; (cf. tuil ruadh, a devastating 


flood.) 
tgaoth, s.f. Dart. 2 Sea. 
, a Prudent. 
tgaotha, s. Streams left at lowjwater. 
gaothaeh, s. see gaothanachd. 
gaothach, -aiche, a. Windy. 


3 Theft. 





gaothaiche, -an, s.f. Hollow open reed. 2 Drone 


reed of a bagpipe. 3 Chanter reed. 
--, comp. of gaothach. More or most 
windy. 





gaothaidh, a Airy, 2 Flighty, giddy. 3 Windy. á j^ 


gaothaire, -an, 8.15. 
of a bagpipe. 2 Vent. 3 Vapour. 
windy talker. ő** Blowing reed. 

gaothan, see gaothanachd. 

gaothan, see gaoithean. 2 pl. of gaoth. 

——-ach, -aiche, a. see gaothach. 

—achd, s.f. Flatulence. 2 Giddiness. 

gaoth-an-tratha, s.f. Monsoon. 

gaothar, a. see gaothmhor. 

,$.m. see gadhar. 

ach, -aiche, a. see gadharach. 

achd, s.f. see gaothmhorachd. 

eaotharan, s.m. see gaothran. 

gaoth-innisean, ein, sm. Anemoscope. 

gaoth-mheidh, -e, -ean, s.f. Wind-gauge, ane» 
mometer. [better meidh-ghaoithe.] 

gaothmhor, -oire, a. Toon, 
Blustering. 3 Flatulent. 


4 Empty, 











4 Painful. Seach- 


aran na h-oidhche g., the wanderings of the — 


windy night. j 
——achd, s.f. Windiness. 2**Storminess, 
3**Flatulence. 4**Shooting pain. 5**Anguish. 
gaothrachadh, -aidh, s.m. Winnowing. A’ g—, 
pr.pt. of gaothraich. j 
Tgaothraich, pr.pt. a’ gaothrachadh, v.q. Winnow, 





Original fram 






gaothar,] Windy. 2 . 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOTS 
URBANA-CHAMPALHGMNE 


F 
i 


Wind-piece or mouth-piece 


vicc e c 


VETT 


— 52 


— 
D$ ul, Au 








garadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Den, cave. 


gaeturan 
aothran, -ain, -au. s.m. Fan. 2 Giddy fellow. 


— gaoth-ruadh,** -aidh, s.m. Blasting wind, mil- 


dew. 

gavth-sgeulachd, s.f. Description of the winds. 
aoth-thomhaisear. sm.  Auemometer. 

gàpaidh,** s. Riddle for winnowing. 

gar, pr.pt. a’ garadh, v.a. Warm, 2 Ferment. 
3 Cherish. G. thu féin, warm yourself ; gar- 
aidh see féin, he shall warm himself; g. do 
làmhan, warm your hands, 

gar, v.a. Gratify. 2 Accommodate. `` 

gar,tt s.f. Proximity. Am ghar, within hail of 
Qm. 

zar, gair, s.m. Accommodation. 2 Desert, me- 
rit, profit. 


. gar, conj. for ged nach. Gar an tig e, though he 


come not; gheibh mi baolum ort gar am marbh, 
I willget a knock at you though I kill (you) 
not— Duüanaire, 301. . Fn 
"ear, prep. + pron. "Gar toirt, bringing us ; 
'g ar létreadh, tormenting us. 
Ip ar, erroneously for aig+bhur, see 'g ur. 
àr, see gàradh. 
gar, qd. see gèarr. 
tgarab, see darab. 
garaban, -aig, s. m. Rude fellow, clown, boor. 
2(DMy) The rough part in the throat of fish 
as cod, ling, &c. 
——,a. Brave. 
ach, a. Rude, boorish, 
Raw, inexperienced. 
garabhan, -ain, s.m. Bran. 
garach,** -aich, s.m. Brawl. 
garach, -aich, a. Useful. 
an, s.m., dim. of garach. 
dail,** a. Huge. 
-——dalachd,** s.f. Hugeness. 
gàradair, ean, s.m. Gardener. 


clownish. 2 


2 see garrach, 








(o—— ———eachd,** s.f. Gardening. 


garadan,** -ain,s.m. Register, minute-book. 2 
Note-book. 
gàradh, -aidh, pl. -aidhean, -aidhnean, & gàr- 
achan, s. m. Garden. 2 Wall, dyke. 3 
Mound. 4**Gratuity. G. luibhean, a garden 
of herbs ; rinn mi garachan, I made gardens ; 
g. càil, a kitchen garden ; g. droighinn, a hedge 
of thorns ; g. cricne, limit, landmark, barrier; 
balla a’ gharaidh and g. an liosa, both mean 
the gurden-wall. 
garada,(MMcD) s. m. The second row of peats 
taken from à bank with the toirsgein. — Fà4d- 
adh a’ ghàraidh, a peat taken from the second 
row— Lewis. 
Tha 


garaiduean aig na sionnaich, the foxes have 
holes. [Garaidh is ofteu used as mom.] 

garadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s. m. Warming, act of 
warming. A’ g—. pr.pt. of gar. Dean do gh., 
warm yourself. 

ees hair (OB) s.m. Corn-yard, stackyard, 
—Sutk’ d. 

—— -an-arbh,(MMcL) s.m. Dyke surrounding 
arable land, 

«—— -baic,(WC) s.m. Peats laid out on the 

- edge of the bank, one over the other, in such 
@ way as to dry rapidly. 

-cinn,(DMC) s.m. The dyke separating 

the arable land from the moor or common 

pasture. 

-eriehe, s.m. Barrier. 
between two properties. 

-——— -droma,(MMcL) s.m. Turf-dyke. 





2 Boundary dyke 





ess -fàil (AC) s.m. Turf-dyke. 





-gléidht’, s.m. Defending wall. 2(AH) 
The embodiment of security, economy or par- 
simony. 


477 


garbhan 


snowed-up, since the snow of the mountains bu 
a defending wali around me so close.—Duan. 
aire, 57. 
-griocaig,(DMC) s.m. Tottering wall. 
-na-h-eaglais, s.m. Churchyard —A rran. 
-theud, (DMC) s.m.. Wire fence, 
- -tobhta, s.m. Turf-wall. 
garag, see garrag. 
garaich,* v. & 8. see gànraich. 
garaid,** -ean, s.f. Noise, clamour, confusion. 
2 Garrulous woman. 3 Gaelic spelling of 
garret. 
gàraidh, gen. sing. of gàradh. 
eachd,** s.f. Merit. 
tgarail,* a. Snug, comfortable. 2**Near, neigh- 














bouring. 3** Warm. 4Commodious.  51f 
Useful. 
garait, see garaid. 
garaitiche,** s.m. Garreteer. 
garalachd,* s. f. ind. Snugness. 
gar am, eva Although not. Gar an do 
gar an, thoisich........ , although .... did 


dé begin ` ma 's e gar an e, whether it is so or 

not. 

garan, -ain, -an, s.m. Grove, forest. 2 Thicket, 
underwood. 3 see guirean. 4 Crane. 

gar-athair, -ar, -6hraicnean, s.m. Grandfather. 

Tgarb,ls. Scabies. 

garbag,(AF)s./f. Flounder. 2 Plaice. 

garban, see garaban. 

ach, see garabanach. 

garbh, gairbh, o Thick, not slender. 2 Rough, 
of unequal surface. 3 Boisterous, stormy. 4 
Harsh, haughty, ungentle. 5 Hoarse, sound- 
ing harshly. 6 Coarse. 7 Rough, not fine. 8 
Fierce, terrible. Maide g., @ thick stick; 
duine g., o harsh, brawny, or vulgar man; 
àite g., & rough or rugged place : guth g., æ 
hoarse voice ; anart g., coarse linen ; oidhche 
gh., a boisterous night ; g. 'na chainnt, vulgar 
in his expressions ; a’ gh. chuid dhiubh, the 
majority of them ; ni na’s gairbhe na na leas- 
raidh, a thing that is thicker than the loins ; 
gu g,, roughly, severely ; tha sin g., that is 
dread ful. 

garbh, gairbh, s, m. Thick. 2**Scab. 3**War- 
fare, 4**Courage. An g.’s an caol, the thick 
and the thin ; g. agus mion na cùise, the gen- 
eral outlines besides the details of the matter. 

garbhacail, Lochbroom for garbhaiceil. 

garbhach,** -aich, s.m. Grandson. 
adh,fl -aidh, s.m. Asperation. 
d, s.f.ind. Thickness, coarseness,rough- 
ness, greatuess, 2**Asperity. 3**Rocky place. 
garbhad,* see gairbhead. 
garbhag, -aig, -an, s.f. Sprat. 
3 Garvie. 4 Plaice, spotted flounder. 
vory. 

garbhag-an-t-sléibhe, -aig-, s.f. Fir club-moss— 
lycopodium selago. [badge of the MacRaes.] 

garbhag-gharaidh, -aig, s.f. Garden savory— 
satureja hortensis. 

garbhag-nan-gleann,§ s.f. Club-moss, see crotal 
nam madadh ruadh. 

garbhaiceil (CR) s.f. Gulping, bolting, devour- 
ing food — W. of Ross. 

earohaich,** v.g. Roughen, asperate. 

garbhainn, o. Ill, sick, complaining—Arran, 

garbh-aite, pl. -àitean & -àiteachan, s.m. Rough 
place, rocky place. 

garbhalach,** o Rocky, stony. Anns a’ choire 
g., in the rocky dell. 

—— —--—,** -aich, s.m. Stony or rocky ground. 

--—d,** s.f.ind. Abruptness. 2 Craggi- 





2 Small herring. 
5**Sa- 


ness. 


O 'n chuir sneachda nan sléibhtean | garbh-allt, s.m. Impetuous torrent. 


gàradh-giéidht' orm cho teann, since I was | garbhan, -ain, -an, s.m. Gills of a fish. 2 Bran. 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


garbhan 


3 Orts of ill-ground meal. 4 Coarse meal, 

groat. 5* Grit. 6¢+Minnow. TttGarvie, sprat. 

S(AF) Sea-urchin—Lochcarron. 9**Dog-bolt. 

ach, -aiche, a. Coarse, rugged. 2 
Brawny, having brawn, like brawn. 3ffFull 
of orts. 4**Rude, inexperienced. 

ach, -aich, 8. m. Stout tall man. 2 
t{Sea-bream—Arran. 3(AF) Silver haddock. 

garbh-bhallach, -aiche, a. Having large limbs. 

garbh-bhuille,** s.f. Heavy blow. 

——— ach, -eiche, a. Fetching or strik- 
ing great blows. 

garbh-chath, s.m. Severe combat, heat of battle. 

garbh-chearbach, -aiche, o. Broad-skirted. 

garbh-chlachaireachd,** at (P) Fretwork. 

garbh-choimeasg,( MS) s.m. Balderdash. 

garbh-chludach,** -aich, s.m. Coarse blanket, 
coverlet. 

garbh-chnaimheach, -eiche, a. Large-boned. 

garbh-chomhrag, -aig, $.f. Furious engagement, 
fieree struggle, heat of battle. 

garbh-chreuchd, s.f. Deep wound, severe bruise. 

— ———ach, a. Inflicting deep wounds. 

2 Having deep or dangerous wounds or 
bruises. 

garbh-chrioch, -chriche, -an, s.f. Rugged coun- 
try. For ‘‘ Na Garbh-chriochan " see under 
criochan. 

garbh-chuan, -ain, chuantan, s. m. Rough or 
stormy sea. An crann nach lùb an g., the 
mast that will stand a sterm. 

garbh-chulaidh, -ean, s.f. Frieze coat. ` 

garbh-churaidh, s.m. Fierce warrior. 2 Strong- 
bodied warrior. 

garbh-dhabhach, -aich, -aichean, s, m. Tue 
mountainous interior of a country. 











478 





gàrlaichean 


aS ZA 
A ALS 





354. Garbhraitheach. 
garbhreac, s.f. Ducker (bird.) 


garbh-sgriobh,** v.a. Engross. 





air,** s.m. Engrosser. 


garbh-sheod, -sheòid, s.m. Fierce warrior. An- 


amannan nan g., the souls of the fierce war- 
riors. 
garbh-shian, see garbh-shion. 
garbh-shion, ine, s.m. Rough weather, storm. 
—tach, a. Stormy, blasty. Làg.,G 
stormy day. 
garbh-shleagh,** s.f. Thick spear. Gach g. is 
iùthaidh, each thick spear and arrow, 








gaibh-eas,** s.m. Cascade, rough torrent, bois- | garbh-shlios, -a, -an, s.m. Rough side of a hill — 


terous abyss or linn. 

garbh-fhras, -ais, -an, s.f. Boisterous or heavy 
shower. 

-——— ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in boister- 
ous showers, very rainy. Am mios g., the 
boisterous month. [February.] 

garbh-ghaineamh, -imh, s.m. Coarse gravel, 
coarse sand. 

garbh-ghaoisneach, -eiche, 
hair (of animals.) 

garbh-ghaoth, -gaoithe, s.f. Rough blast, fur- 
ious wind, hurricane. Mar gh. nam beann, 
like the furious mountain-wind. 

parbh-ghniomh, -ghniomharan,s.m. Mighty deed 
or feat. Do gh., thy feats in battle. 

garbh-ghrinneal,tt s.m. Gravel. 

garbh-ghucag, -aig, s.f. The bell or globule on 
the surface of whisky, taken to indicate its 
strength. 

garbh-ghuthach, -aiche, œ. Hoarse, rough or 
strony-voiced. 

garbhlach, -aich, s.m. The more rugged part of 
a couutry. 2 Stony or rocky bed of a river. 3 
*Rank moor-grass. 

garbh-làimhsieh,fi v.a. Bang, handle roughly. 

garbh-laoch, -laoich, s. m. Fierce warrior, im- 
petuous hero. Garbh-laoich as cruadalaiche 
beum, fierce warriors of the most deadly blows. 

garbh-leac,** s.f. Rugged part of a country. 

garbh-leas,** s.m. Shout. 

garbh-linn,** s.f. Rough sea, pool or stream. 

tgarbh-loc, s. Crag. 2 Thicket. 

garbh-luch, see gar-luch. 

garbh-lus, -luis, -an, s.m. Goose-grass, cleavers, 
hay-ruff, catch-weed—ygalium aparine. 

garbh-mac-fiadh, s.m. prov. for creamh. 

garbh-rabhadh, (DMC) s.m. Strongly-worded 
warning. 

garbhraitheach,§ s.m. Garlic mustard, sauce 
alone—erysinum alliaria. 


a. Having coarse 


Digitized by 


NTERNET ARCHIVE 


or country. 
——ach, -aiche, o Having a rough de- 
clivity. 
garbh-thonn,-thuinn,-an, s.m. Boisterous wave, 
breaker. 

—ach, -aiche, q. 
lowy, raging as the sea. 
garbh-uchd,** s. m. (dit. fierce breast) Fierce 
mind. 2 Rough or turbid bosom. G. nan 

speur, the turbid bosom of the sky. 

— ——————aàch, a. Having a rough breast. An 
cuan g., the rough-breasted sea. 

gàrcail, s.f. see garcan. 

gàrean, -ain, s.m. Querulous sounds of a hen. 

ach, o Querulous, as a hen. 

tgard, sm. Garden. 2 Fenced place. 3 Guard. 

gàrdraich,** s.pl. Troop, company. 

garg, gairge, a. Fierce, angry, wrathful. 2 
Bitter, tart, acrid. 3 Pungent. 4 Turbulent. 
5**Satirical, 6**Sore. 7 Irritating. 8t+Wild, 
terrible. Duine g., a turbulent person ; blas 
g., & pungent taste ; na's gairge, more acrid ; 
briathran g., rough words. 

gargachd, see gairge. 

gargad,-aid, see gairgead. 

gargaich,** v.a. Acidate. 


Surgy, stormy, bil- 





gargail,** q. Fierce, keen. An laoch g., the flerce ` 


warrior. 
gargalachd, s.f. Acrimony. 
gargan,** -ain, s.m. Dung, ordure, manure. 
garg-chòmhrag, -aig, -an, s.f. Fierce engage- 
ment. 
garg-chosgach,** a, Ant-acid. 


garg-chronachadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of rebuking / 


severely. 2 Harsh rebuke or reprimand. 
garg-chronaich,** v.a. Rebuke severely. 
seanair, do not rebuke an elder. 


gàrlach, -aich, -aichean, see gàrlaoch. 


garlag-Muire,$ s.f. Crow-garlic—allium vineale. T 
E 


gàrlaichean, n.pl. of gàrlach. 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


Na g. 1 











gàrlag 479 gasan 


garlag, see gairgean. d the idea dwarfish is inferred—Déin I.Ghobha, 
garlaoch, -aoich, s. m. Screaming infant. 2|garrochan,(AF) s.m. Angler (fish. ) 

Little villain or rogue. 3 Dwarf. 4 Starv-| gai rthaich, -ean, S.f. see gàrthaich. 

ing child, 5 Cipher (useless fellow.) 6 **| garrunach, -aiche, @. Dirty, nasty, shoeking, 

Bastard. 7**Term of great personal contempt.| horrible. 

8(AF) see gar-luch. 9* Most impertinent fel- | tgarsau, -ain, s.m. Lad. (Irish, garsoon.) 

low. 10(DMC) Weakling in body or mind, 11] gart, -airt & -a, S.M. Gloom, surly aspect,threat- 

(DMC) Coward. ening look, G. a’ chuain, the threatening as- 
-gar-luch, -lucha, an, s.m. Mole. 2 Rat. pect of the sea. 
——— 28, -aig, s.f. Young mole. 2 Young rat. | gart, -airt, s.m. Standing corn. 2 First shoots 

8 Little mele or rat. -| of sown corn. 3* Vineyard.  4**Garden en- 
gar-luchaidh, dim. of gar-luch, closure, 5(CR) Field, corn-field, field of stand- 
garmach, -aiche, see gairmeach. ing corn. 6(DMC) Belt, 
garmadair, see gairmeadair. fgart, -a, -an, s. m. Head. 2 Resistance. 8 
ga"madh, see gairmeadh. " Liberality. 
girmainn, see garman. gartain, gen.sing. & n. pl. of gartan. 
garmaisg,(AC) s. Sprite. fgartan, -ain, -an, s.m. Bonnet, cap. 2 see 
garman, -ain, -an, s. m. Weaver’s beam. 2 garra-gart. 

Post, pillar. 3 Gallows. gartan, -ain, pl. -an & -ain, s.m. Garter. Osain 
garman-bhall,* sm. Windlass, ghoirid is gartain, short hose and garters. 
garman-uchd,(AC) s.m. Breast-beam— A rgyll, gartan,(CR) s,m. Tick, insect found on deer and 























t gar-mhac, -mhic, s.m, Grandson. dogs, but larger on cattte. 
W fgar-mhàthair, -mhathar, s.f. Grandmother. ach, -aiche, a. Wearing garters. 2 Of, 
js garmunn, -uinne, see garman. Dhealbh e a| or belonging to garters. 3 Like a garter, Osain 


gharmuinne, he formed its pillars. 
garBanach,(AC) æ. Pellety. 
gàrnardaich,(CR) art Yawning—Suth’d. 
var-ogha, sm, Grandchild’s grandchild, 
.  fgaroid, -e, s.f. Splutter, noise, 
— SAIT, see gaorr. 
= garr, -a, s.m. Gorbelly. 2 The belly of a spoil- 
ed child or starveling. 
+ = ach, -aiche, a. Gorbellied,greedy, voracious. 
Of 2 Having a bad odour. 
d — ach, -aich, -aichean, s.m. Glutton, gorbelly. 
" 


gh., gartered hose. e 

achadh, -aidh, s.m. Gartering. 

aich,** v.a. Garter. 

aichte, past pt. of gartanaich. 

gartar, see gartmhor. 

gart-eun, -eoin, s.m. Quail. 

gart ghlainn, see gart-ghlan. 

gart-ghlainte, past pt. of gart-ghlan. Weeded, 
cleared of weeds. 

gart-ghlan, pr.pt. a’ gart-ghlanadh, v.a. Weed, 
clear of weeds. 2**Examine. 

-—adh, -aidh, s. m. Weeding, act of 

weeding. 2 Clearing from small stones. 3** 














2 Dirty little worthless creature. 3ffWretch. 
4* Gorbellied child. 5* Most impertinent fel- 


AA low. 6 Carrion-crow, see feannag. Examining. A’ g—, pr. pt. of gart-ghian. 
.—.. garrachadh, -aidh, s.m. Soiling, dirtying. A’|tgartha, see gàir and gairm. 
^ M g—, pr.pt. of garraich. gàrthaich,s.f. Loud tumultuous shout, clamour, 


— A garraehdadh,(WOC) s.m. Rebuke shouted or ut- 
l tered roughly. Thoir g. air,rebuke him sharply. 
garrachdail,t+ a. Rough, rugged, coarse. 
garrach-glas, see garrag-ghlas. 

garradair, -ean, see gàradair. 

- gàrradh, see gàradh. Ria h-uchd bha g. gu 
US h-àrd mar bhruaich, there was a wall (of waves) 
d like à, brae to her breast.—Dain I. Ghabha. 

= garag, -aig, -an, sm. & f. see feannag. 2 Un- 
ff fledzed bird, young bird. 3 (AF) Dog ruffled 
Cu after fighting. 

E garrag, -aig, -an, s.f. Sudden yell, unseemly 
p ow 


any loud noise, continued din. Fearg agus g- 
wrath and clamour. 

garthal,** y. Snug, warm, comfortable. 

gartlainn,* a see gart-ghlan. 

gartlann,* sam. Weeds. 2 Weed-hook, hoe, 

gartlann, -ainn, -an, s.m. Corn-yard. 

gartmhoire, comp. of gartmhor. 

— — — ——Acehd, s.f. Munificence, liberality. 

Tgartmhor, a. Munificent. 

garturan, (AF) s.m. Dog-louse. 

garuidh, -ean, see gàradh. 

garunnach,** œ. Dirty, horrible, shocking. 

gas, -aise & -ois, pl. -an & gaisean, s. f. Stalk, 
stem of a herb. 2 Bough, twig. 3 Bunch. 
4 Young boy.  5iiMilitary servant,  6*Par- 
ticle. 7 Broom, brush. 8**Copse. G. a 
sguabadh an taighe, a@ broom to sweep the 
house; g. càil, æ stock of kale ; gach g., every 
particle ; o chàrn nan g., from the copsy rock, 

tgas, -ais, s.m. Strength. 2 Wrath. 

gas, adv., conj. & prep. see gus. | 

gas,** v.n. Shout. 2 Sprout, branch. 3 Look. 

tgasach, @ Angry, indignant. 

gasach, -aiche, o. Branchy, bushy, having many 
boughs, tufty, bunchy, copsy. 

————d,** s.f. Branchiness, bushiness, tufti- 
ness, bunchiness. 

gasag, aig, -an, GE, dim of gas. Little branch, 
stalk, stem or bough. 

ach,tt a. Abounding in little stalks, Ze. 

gàsaid, s.f. Fray—Dain I. Ghobha. ?(WC)War- 
story. 3 Gaelic spelling of gazette. 

gasair,* v.g. Line, as a bitch. 

gasan, -ain, -an, s.m., dim. of gas. Little branch. 
2 Young man, stripling, youth. 3 Tuft. 4** 
Little copse. 5**Tendril. 6ffPert youth. 7 
(DMC) Courtier, one who courts. 


garragadaich,(DU)'s.f, Emitting of hoarse yells. 

———--—_,, pr pt. a’ garragadaich, v.a. Emit 
—— hoarse yells. 

— garra-gart,(CR) s.m. Corn craik—W. of Ross. 
mee ~an, see garra-gart. 
|. garrag-gh!as, see feannag-ghlas. 

. garraich, pr.pt. a’ garrachadh, v.a. Soil, foul. 
Tha mi oir mo gharrachadh, I am dirtied— 
My.) TE AUR 
= garraicleis, -e, s.f. Noise of wild geese or swans. 
garraid, s.f. Splutter, noise. 2 Inquiry. 
garran, -ain, -an, see gearran. 
= Barran,** -ain, -an, s.m. Den. 2 Thicket, grove. 
| 3 Copse, underwood. 4 Gorbelly, glutton. 
ach, a. Woody, having groves, thickets 

or copses. 2 Having dens. 

|. garran-gaineamhaich, s.m. Angler (small fish.) 
= garran-gaineimh, see garran-gaineamhaich. 

. garr-bhuaic, s.f. The morbid ooze in the skin 
= ofa sheep. 2 Filth about a sheep-fold. 3** 
—- Noise, clamour. 4**Assembly. 

ee ——each, -eiche, a. Covered with filth 

or sheep's dung. 2** Noisy, clamorous, 

 ‘garriaig; s.f. Spurious breed. 2 In some places 


















Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
S INTERNET ARCHIVE URBANA-CHAMI 


PAIGN 


£asanach 480 ge 
gasanach, og, Abounding in little branches, ari -aim, -an, s.m. dim. of gath. Little sting, 


youths, &e. 

gasar,* -air, -an, s.m. Pert fellow. 

gasbadan,** -ain, see gasbaid. 

gasbaid,** s.f. Wasp. 2 Hornet. 

gasbuidean, see gasbaid. 

gasda, a. Excellent. 2 Handsome, beautiful. 
3 Clever, expert, ingenious, skilful. 4 Gene- 
rous, open-handed. 5**Chaste.  6**Gallant, 
brave. 7**Neat. A bhean gh., his beautiful 
wife; is gasd’? am balach thu, you are a 
fine fellow ; am bheil thu gu g. (or gu math) ? 
are you quite well ? duine g., an open-hamded 
and open-minded man—Reay country; also a 
well-shaped or handsome man; ni g., a fine 
thing. 

-—chd, s.f.ind. Excellency, beauty. 2 Cle- 
verness, expertness, skilfulness. 3 Bravery. 
4 Neatness. 5(MS) Affectedness. 6 (DMC) 
Jesting with a view to irritate. Bha e mor 
"na gh., he was very brave. 

gasdag, -aig, -an, s.f. Wile, trick, snare. 

gasdair,** s.m. Active man. 2 Prater. 

gasg, -aisg & -a, pl. -aisg & an, s.m. Tail, ap- 
pendage. 

f——ach, a. Having a tail. 

——ag,t-aig, -an, S.f. Step, stride—Badenoch. 

gasgan, -ain, p}. -ain & -an, sm. Puppy (dog.) 
2 Puppy (petulant fellow.) 3 Straight sap- 
ling. 4 Tail, extremity. 5 Place where a 
plateau runs to an acute angle, and narrows 
down to the vanishing point. 6 Rushy hol- 
low—Gairloch. 7DU ) Scrubber made of heath- 
er for cleaning cooking-pots &c. [dim. of gasg.] 

——— —&ch, -aich, s.m. see gasgan., 2**Macaroni. 

— ach, -aiche, a. Pert, petulant, conceited. 
2 Many-ringleted-—Agus ho Mhérag. 

-coin,(AF) s.m. Puppy dog. 

gasgara,** s.pl. The posteriors. 

gasrach, -aiche, o. Salacious. 2**Proud. 3** 
Fiery, hot-tempered. 

gasradh, -aidh, s.m. Salaeity in female dogs. 2 
see gasraidh. 

gasraidh, s.f. Mean company, people, crowd, 
rabble. 2**Domestic soldiers. 3 Mercenary 
soidiers. 4**Salaciousness. A’ bhat’ isa g., 
the vessel and her crew ` galla air gh., a bitch 
on heat. 

gast, see gasda. 

past,** sf. Old woman. 2 Whore, 3 Snare. 
4 Wile. 5 Puff, blast. 

pastachd, see gasdachd. 

pastag,** ai, s. Jf. Little slut, 2 Whore. 3 
Trick, wile. 

gat, -a, -aichean, see gad. 

gata, see gàd. ` 

gata,(AF)s. Pig. f 

gatach,(DMy) a. Lazy. Duineg., an awkward 
or lazy man. 

gatachan, -ain, -an, s.m. dim. of gat. 

gatachan,** -ain, s.m. Little boy. 

gataire,(DMy) s.f. Slothfulness. 

gath, -a, pl. -an, -annan & -achan, s.m,’ Sting. 
2 Dart, arrow, javelin of any kind. 3 Ray, 
ray of light, sunbeam. 4 Beard. 5 Inner row 
of sheaves ina corn-stack, 6* Snub. 7 Barb 
of an arrow. 8**Knot in wood. 9 Spoke of 
a cycle-wheel. G. an t-seillein, the bee's sting; 
g. gréine, sunbeam, also one of the names of 
Fingal’s banner ; gath dubh, foundation shea- 
ves ; g. òige a’ dol seachad, the ray of youth 
passing by ; g. na gealaich, the mvonbeam ; g. 
tannaisg, 0 spectre’s spear. 

gàth,$ s.m. [withart. an.] Ivy, see eidheann. 

gathach, -aiche, a. Of, or pertaining to, darts, 
javelins or stings. 2 Aculeate, prickly. 

gathaichte, past pt. Barbed. 





Di 


jiti by 
erat EOT E FA 
i 1 ^ 1 U 
UTERNET ARCHIVE 


ach, -aiche, a. see gathach. 
-dealain, see gathan-omalr, 
giuthais, s.m. Shoot of fir. 

- -omair, s.pl. Róntgen rays. (Dark or 
invisible rays, emitted under the influence of 
an electric current. ) a | 

gath-bhalg, -bhuilg, s.m. Quiver. 

gath-bolg,** s.f. Fiery dart. 

gath-buafach, -aich, s.m. Poisoned dart. 

gath-buidhe,§ s.m. Large-flowered hemp-nettle, 
—galeopsis versicolor. [Preceded by art. an. 

gath-cuip, -e, -an-culp, s.m. Medical tent, ro 
put into a wound. 

gath-diurd,(WC) s.m. Small peg of wood on 
which bobbin in weaver’s shuttle revolves. 

gath-dorain, s.m. Gaff. 

gath-doinionn,(AH) s.m. Stump of a rainbow, 
seen on the horizon in stormy weather called 
a dog-tooth—Mid Argyll. see fadadh-cruaidh. 

gath-dubh, -uibhe, -an-dubha, s. m. Beard of 
oats. 2in pl. The storm-riders, the dark un- 
dulations seen in falling rain, when gusts of 
wind compress and scatter the rain like the 
waves of the sea. 3 Foundation sheaf of a 
stack. 4(AF) Midge. Cho luath ris na gath- 
an-dubha, as swift as the sturm-riders ; cho 
lìonmhor ris na gathan-dubha, as numerous Gë 
the black darts—variously interpreted, and 
may be held descriptive of midges darting te 
and fro in myriads, or of the black spikes of 
small oats.—NGP. 
ath-dubh,§ s.m. Common hemp-nettle—galeop- 
gis tetrahit. [Preceded by art. an.) 








855. Gath-dubh. 

gath-fruighe,** s.m. Poisoned arrow. 

gath-gealaich,** sr. Moonbeam. Mar gh., like 
a moonbeam. 

gath-gréine, s.f. Sunbeam. 2 One of the names 
of Fingal’s banner. B’ ise ane am measg  — 
bhan, she was a sunbeam among women. ii 

gath-làir, s.m. Direct spoke of a cycle-wheel. 

gath-linn,** s.m. North Polar star. 

gath-mér,§ see an gath buidhe. 

gath-muign, see gath-muinge. 

gath-muinge, -an-, s.m. Mane. 2(DMy) The end 
of mane next the shoulders. 

gath-muingeach, a. Maned. 4 

cath-muinne, -an-muinne, 8.7. see gath-muinge. 

gath-riaghailt,-e, -an-, s.m. Measuring- 2 
irRadius of a circle. 

eath-soluis,** s.m. Sunbeam. 2 Ray of light. 3 
Pencil of rays. 1 f 

gath-tearradh,** s.f. Whitlow. 2 Agnail. 

eath-teth,** s.m. Fiery dart. 

ge, (ge b'e) pron.indef. Whoever, whatever. Ge 





Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 3 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 3 


à ge 
as air bith, (ce or cia as air bith) whencesoever- 

ge, conj, see ged. Ge is always used before aa 
adjecoive or personal pronoun, as, ge inór is 
ge guc, although great and wise; because ged 
is composed of ye do—do the particie preceding 
the rest. 

gé, see cé. 

geabhag,(C&) s.f. Twist, distortion—Perthsh. 

ach, (CR) a. Awry, askew— Perthshire. 

geabhair, -ean, 8.M, Carper. 

geabhroe,(AF) s. Sea-swallow. 































^ geacach,f a. Sententious, pert. 

d gead, -id, -an, s. f. small spot of arable land, 
M ridge, ''lazy-bed." 2* Bed ina garden. 3 
H Lock of hair. 4 Star or spot in a horse’s fore- 


A head. 5 Buttock, haunch. 6**Pike (fish.) 
[s gead, pr.pt. a’ geadadh, v.g. Clip off the hair, 
E as of a horse. 
» —ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in little fields. 2 
E Having the hair in tufts or bunches. ac" 
b». Patched, 4**Spotted, 6**Ridgy. 6**Like a 
D pike, abounding in pikes. 
' — ath, -aidh, s.m. Act of cutting off the hair. 
or 2 (DMy) Corn when not ripe enough to be 
af cub. pet 2 
> g—, pr. pt. oi gea 
—- a -eig, -an, S.f., dim. of gead, Small spot 
or ridge of arable land. 2 (P)Large trout. 3 
(AH) Grilse or salmon, three or four years old 
when returning from its first season in the sea. 
**4 Young pike. 5 ttLock of hair. 
ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in small spots 
of arable land or ridges. 2 Abounding in 
large trout, 3**SpolLed, patched. 
geadan, -ain, -an, S.M., dim. of gead. Small 
tuft or bunch of hair. 
— ———aàeh, -aiche, a. Abounding in tufts or 
bunches of hair. 


E eU. 


bi 
3 
"3 
E 
Da 
D S 
d PS 
" 3 
? D Lus 





geadas, -ais, -an, 


when old.) 2 Tufty head. 
s,* -ais, s.m. Coquetry. 
geadasach, -aiche, 
pikes. 3 Of, or belonging to pikes. 
tish, flirting. 
geadasg, see geadas. 
gead-cheann, -chinn, $.m. Tufty head. 
—~ach, -aiche, 8.5. Tufty-headed. 





Digitized by 


TERNET ARCHIVE ! 


Il 





481 


gèadh, -eóidh, s.m. & f. txoose. 


geadn,* v.a. 


s. m. Pike fish (called jack 
when young, pickerel when larger, and luce 


a. Tufted. 2 Abounding in 
4*Coquet- 


geala / 





2 Lump of the 
finest part of meal, made by children. 3 Tai- 
lor’s guose (iron.) Ugh-na circe dola shireadh 
ugh a’ gheóidh, the hen-egg going to seek the 
goose egg —said when poor peopie give smali 
gifts to be doubly repaid. 

Propel a boat by means of a boat- 
hook or pole. 


geadh,(DU) s.m. Iron rod about 6 ft. in length 


with end bent into an oval to serve as a han- 
dle, used for determining the presence of fir- 
trees in a peat-moss. 


geadha, -n & chan, s.m. Boat-hook, boat-pole, 


see bata, Nos. 3 & 4, p. 76. 
eéadhach, -aiche, a. Abounding in geese. 
,-aich s.m. Goose-quill, 
geadhachail,* s.pl. Domestic jobs or messages. 
geadha!l,* st, Field, “park.” 2 Ploughed field, 
geadh-amaill, s.m. Iron band round a swingle- 





tree. 
gèadh bheag fhionn,ff s.m. Barnacle (species of 
fungus.) 
geadh-bhlar,{ s.m. 
albifrons. 


White-fronted goose—anser 





357. Géadh-bhlar. 

‘géadh-dubh, s.m. Solan goose. 

geadh-gaob,(AC) sm. Raiu-goose. 

geadh-glas,q s. m. Grey-legged goose or grey- 
leg—anser ferus. 

gèadh-got, T s.m. Brent goose—anser greuta. 


gèadh-lann, -lainn, -an, $. mM, Inclosure for 


geese. 2 Goose-quill. ae 
géadh-taizhe,(DMC) s.m. Tame goose, as distinct 
from a wild goose (géadh fiadhaich.) 
gead-iasg, see geadas. 
fgeadt, -an, s.m. Atom. 
geag, see geug. 
——ach, see geugach. 

— an, s.m. Kind of ear-mark on sheep, see un- 
der comharradh-eluais. 
geal, -a, -achan, see deal. 
geal, gile, a. White. 2* Fond of. 3 Clear, 
bright, radiant, glistening. 4++Pure. Cha’n 
'eil e g. da, he is not fond of him; a lamh gh., 
her white hand ; la g. (cold. là brèagh) æ fine 
day ; mo laoigh geal ! an address of much af- 
fection among the Gael ; mar charraig ghil, like 
a white rock; eich gheala, white horses ; mo 
ghille geal, my brave fellow ; foghar g. grian- 
ach, œ finesunny autumn ; is g. an airidh air 
an aran sgalagan a chliathaidh, well worthy 
of their bread are the farm-servants of the har- 
row ; is g, a choisinn e adhuais, how well he 
earned ihe reward he won! ; cha ehuir thu an 
g. air an dubh dhomh-sa, you shall noi make 

me think that black is white. 

geal, gil, s.m. Anything white. 2 Mark to shoot 
at.  3*The white part of anything. 4(DU) 
anotherfish ofthe same 


Slice from the flank of 
G. na süla, the white of 


species, used as bait. 
the eye. 
geala, see gealadh. 


geala-bigein 

geaia-bigein, see gealag-bhuachair. 

geula-bhreac, s.m. Saimon-trout. 

geaia-bhricein,(AF) s.m. Sea-trout. 

gealach,-aica, s.f. Lhe moon. [with art. a’ gkh—.] 
sud agaibh a’ ghealach ur—Righ nan Dal ’g 
a beannachadh ! there is the new noon —the 
king of the elements bless 3t ; said in the Hep- 
rides, in Protestant as well as Catholic dis- 
tricts when one notices the new moon for the 
first time; gealach a’ bhruic the badger's moon, 
1. e. the October moon, during whose light the 
badger is said to dry grass for its nest ; [in 
Suth’d the October moon is known as ** geal- 
ach bhuidhe buain a’ choire,” the yellow moon 
of the oat-harvest ;] atharrachadh nan sion ri 
g. a’ bhruic, change of weather with the bad- 
ger’s moon; g. air na sléibhtean, the moon 
on the hills ; mar a’ ghealaich, like the moon ; 
triall na gealaich, the moon’s path ; a’ gh. 
ur (an solus ur), the new moon ; g. bhuidhe na 
Féill Mìcheil, the yellow moon of Michaelmas; 
g. fhionn na Heil Mìcheil, the fair moon of 
Michaeimas ; g. bhuidue nam broc, the yellow 
moon of the badgers; g. bhuidhe an abachaidh, 
the yellow (September) moon that helps to ri- 
pen the corn—AH. ; 

gealachadh, -aidb, s.m. Whitening, bleaching. 
2 Act of whitenivg or bleaching. A’ g—, pr.pt. 
of gealaich. Blàr gealachaidh, & bleaching 
ground. 

gealachag, see gealag. 

gealachail, -e, a. Lunar. 

gealachair,** s.m.. Bleacher, 

gealacnad,ifs.f. Wniteness. 

gealada.r,f] -ean, s.m, Bleacher. 





gealadh, -aidh, s.m. Blight. 2**Act of whiten- 
ing. 8**Whiteness. 4**see deal. 
gealadhain, see gealdhain. 


geal-adhaire,** sm. Animal with a white horn. 
2 Name given to a white-horned cow. 

geal-adnareach, -iche, a. White-horned. 

gealag, -aiz, an, s.f. Sea-trout, 2 White trout. 
3 Salmon-trout. 4 Whiting. 5* Grilse. 6 
LAF) White-throat (bird,) see gealan-coille. 7 
White pike. 8(AF) Leech. 9(AF) Eel. 

ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in salmon, 
trout or grilse. 

gealagair,(AF) s.m. Leech. 
ealazan, -ain, -an, 8. m. 
White ofthe eye. 3 n.pl. of gealag. 4(AF) 
see gealag. G. an uighe, the white of the egg; 
g. na Sula, the white of the eye. i 

gealag-an-t-sneachd,s.m. Snow-bunting, see eun 
an-t-sueachd. 

gealagan-uighe, s.m. The white of an egg. 

gealag-bheinne,(AF) sf. Ptarmigan - 





dD? 


White of an egg. 





358. Gealag-bhuachair. j : 1 1 
gealag-bhuachair, -aig-, -an-buachair, sf, Bun- , gealan-lin,T s.m. Common linnet—linota canna 
i 


ting -Yemberiza miliaria. 


Digitized by . 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


482 


gealan-lin 





259. Gealag-dhubh-cheannach. 
gealag-dhubh-cheannach,* s.f. Black-headed- or 
reed-bunting—emberiza .schoeniclus. UNE 
gealag-làir,$ ar, Snowdrop—ga/anthus nivalis. 





260. Gealag-lair. 


ealag-ldin,§ see gealag-dhubh-cheannach. . 
Ph o pr .pt. a’ gealachadh, v.&. dé n. Whit- 
en, bleach, make or become white, blanch. 
, gen. sing. of gealach. 





ear, fut. pass, of gealaich. Shall be 
bleached. S i 
-— ——te, past pt. of gealaich. Whitened, 


b'eached. Anart g., bleached linen. 
gualain, gen. sing. & n. pl. of gealan. 
tgealairgidh, s.f. Prickle. i 
gealan, -ain, -àn, S.M. White of an eye, 2 White 
ofan egg. 3 **Sparrow. 4 Linnet, see geal- 
an-lin. 





261. Gealan-coille. 


eealan-coille,{ s.m. White-throat—curruca cine 
eren 


bina. 


Original from 





UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGNM 





gealbhan 483 geall-cinnidh 





865. Gealbhonn-nan-craobh, 
gealbhonn-nan-craobh,fi s. m, ‘iree-sparrow— 
passer montanus. 
$62. Gealan-lin. gealbhonn-sgiobuill,** s.m. Bunting. 


K i ; gealbh-roc,(AF) s. Sea-swallow. 
gealbhan, -ain,-an, s.m. Fire. 2 Little fire on | ees). bhreilesch, a. White-bosomed. 





the hearth. 3 Fire for drying corn. 4**Com- tgealc, see gealaich. 
mon fire, bon-fire. 3 gealcadh, -aidh, s.m. Whiteness. 
eS geal-chasach, -aiche, a. White-legged or -footed. 
dë -eiche, æ. White-buttocked, of 
eer. 

geal-chlaidheamh,** -eimh, s.m. Bright sword. 

gealdhain,(AH) s.f. Lull or intermission in a 
rain-storm. 

gealdruidh,** s. Round-leaved sundew. 

geal-ghlac,** -aic, s.m. Fair hand. A ribhinn 
nan g. ! thou fair-handed maiden ! 

geal-ghréine (an), sm. Fingal's banner. 

geal-gheugach (an), s.m. Fingal's banner, [Cor- 
rupt word occuring in ballads. ] 

geall, gill, sm. Pledge. 2* Mortgage. 3 Bet, 
wager. 4 Prize, reward. 5 Desire, love. 6 
Notch. Thoir dhomh g., pve me d pledge ; 
cuir g., lay a bet ; mo gheall-sa nach faic thu 
e, I pledge my word you will not see him ; tha e 
an g. oirre, he is excessively fond of her ; is iom- 

363. Gealbhonn. | adh fear a tha ’n g. air drama, many are they 


: who like their dram ; thiginn e ad choimhead 
RE repr ati -an, s, m. House-sparrow | seed bhitheadh na tri gill ’san aon mhaide, Z 





eral . 2 (AF) Linnet. 3(AF) gone tse to se you ee there were 

wallow. . three notches on the one stick—referring to tbe 

gealbhonn-cuilionn, s.m. lr tga oed old practice of listing engagements by means 

eegen A m 5 Linnet fuc Bite k of notches made on sticks ; tha e an g. na’s 
bhonn-lin, s. ; ^ 


fhiach e, everything he has is at stake ; 2 he is 
dying, or nearly dead; lành an earball a’ 
ghill, holding the pledge by the tail —NGP. 

geall, pr. pt. a’ gealltainn & a’ gealladh, v. @ 
Promise, wager. 2 Pledge, vow. Geallaidb 
iad gealladh, they shall vow a vow. 

-——achas,* -ais, s.m. Prospect, success. 

-—adh, -aidh, -aidhnean, s.m. Promise, vow. 
2 Mortgage. 3 Promising, vowing. 4 Betting. 
5 Pledging. G. breige, a false promise ; g. 
gun à chomb-ghealladh, o promise without iti 
fulfilment ; bheir mi mo gh. dhuit, I promise 
you; tir a’ gheallaidh, the land of promise 
A’ g—, pr.pt. of geall. 

gealladh-pósaidh,* s.m. Betrothment. 

geal-làmh, -làimh, s.f. Fair hand. 

geall-barantais, gill-, pl. gill-bh-, sm. Pledge." 

Mortgage. 3 Bet. 

geall-cheannaiche,ft an, s.m. Pawnbroker. 

geall-chinn, see geall-cinnidh. 

geall-cinnidh, s.m. Fine paid by one guilty o! 
manslaughter to kinsmen of deceased. That 
of an earl was 662 cows, of a thane or earl’s 
son 44 cows, 20 pence and two-thirds of ar 
obolus or bodle, of a thane’s son 11 cows anc 
2 pence, and so on, according to the rank of 





$65. Gealbhonn-nam-preas. 


onn-nam-preas,f s.m. Hedge-sparrow— | deceased. For fines in cases of murder, see 
accentor modularis. under eirie. 
Original from 
Digitized by ! UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


INTERNET ARCHIVE URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


geall-daingneachaidh 
feall-daingneachaidh, gill-, 
nest, earnest-money. 
geali-daiugnieh, pr. pt. a’ geall-daingneachadh, 
v.a. Pledge, promise. 
—————--————-, $. See geall-daingneachaidh. 
geall-diolaidh,ff s.m. Mortgage. 
geall-fhiachan, s.m. Morigage. 
geall-meas, s.m. Compensation for anything car- 
ried away or destroyed. 2**iistimate. 
geallmhor, -oire, æ. Desirous, fond, 
—achd, s. f. ind. Desire, fondness. 2 
Aspiration. 3ffPromising. 
geallmhuin,** s.f. Promise, promising. 
geall-réis,( WC) s.:». Racing competition, games. 
gvall-spréidh (no cruidh), (WU)s in. Cattle-show. 
geall-strito,(Ms) s. Agonisim, 
-—each,(MS) s.m. Agonistes. 
geallta, a. & past pt. of geall. Promised, vow- 
ed, pledged. 2 Betted. 
gealltainn, s.m. ind. Promising, act of promis- 
ing, vowing, pledging. A’ g—, pr. pt. of veal. 
—each,** a. Promissory. 
——te,** past pt. Affianced, affied. 
gealltanach, -aich, s.m. One making promises. 
———————,-aiche, a. Promising. 2 Hopefal. 
3 Auguring Well, boding. 4(DMC) Desirous, 
fond. Tha mi glé g. air, I am very fond of it. 
gealitanas, -ais, s.m. Promise, pledge. 
geall-treibhaidh,(WC) s.m. Ploughing-match. 
gealltuineas,** -eis, see gealltauas. 
geal-sheileach,§ s.m. Sallow tree, see sùileag. 
geal-shion, s.f. Hail. 
geal.shüil, -shüla, -shüilean, s. m. White eye, 
moon eye. 
—each, -eiche, 
eyed. 
gealt, geilt, see geilt, 
gealta, past pt. Whitened, bleached. 
ch, -aiche, «. Cowardly, timorous, fearful. 
2**Skittish. 31IJealous. 4ffAsbtunished. 
Thill e g. gu dluü.h, Ae turned fearful and fast; 
gu g., timidly. 
chd, s.f.cnd. Cowardice, timorousness, ti- 
midity. 2** Skittishness. 3 (M5) Baseiiess. 
Eadar nàir’ agus g., between shame and timid- 
ness. 
gealtaich,tt v.a. Intimidate. 
e, see gealtachd. 2 see gealtair. 
-—— ————e, comp. of gealbacu. More or mosi 
cowardly or timid. 
gealtainte, past pt. see gealltainnte. 
gealtair, -ean, s.m. Coward,tinid fellow. ’S trie 
abha claidheamh fad’ an làimh gealtair, ofi 
has a long sword been in a coward s hand. 
each,** a. Cowardly, timorous. 
eachd, s.f. see gealtachd. 
gealtan, s.m. Harlequin. l 
2eal-tholl, -thuill, -an-tolla, see deal-each. 
gealtran,** -ain, sm. Coward, timid person. 
geamach,** o Blear-eyed. 
geaman,**-ain, s.m. Servant, useful person. 
ach,** -aich, s.m. Servant, lacyuey. 2 
Stoul young fellow. 
geamann, s. Gammoning-iron,see I p. 73. 2 
Kuighthead, see K2, p. 73. 
geamanta, (DMO) a. Tricky, crafty. 
Tg2amh,** -cimh, s.f. Branch. 2 Slip. 
genimlia,*® s.m. Pledge, compensation. Cha bu 
g. leam, it wouid be no compensation to me; 
am bu gh. dhomhs’ air an t-saoghail ? would 
the whole world be a compensation to me ? ; cha 
bu gh. leam sin air fichead not, I wouwldznol do 
tha? for twenty pounds. 
geamhal, geimhle, geimhlean & geamhlan, s. m. 
see geimheal. 
KSC ur,** -air, s.m. Blade of corn. 
lade. 


s.m. Pledge, ear- 











a. White eyed, moon- 











as 


2 Corn in 


geanasach 


geamhd,* see geamhta. 
———a, s. Thick, short block. 
geamhlach,** a. Sandblind. 
geaimh!adh, -aidh, see geimhleadh. 
geamniag, -»ig, -an, see geimhleag. 
geamhloch, see geamhlach. 
geainhraen,* -aiche, s.f. Winter park. 
—- ath, -vidh, s.m. Winteiing, feeding 
during wiater, as sheep or cattle, 2** Win- 








ter quarters. 3 Feeding stuff for winter. <A’ 
g—, pr.pt. of geamhraich. 
— ————- — ail, see geamnhrail. 
geamhradail, -e,@ see geamhrail. 
geamhradh, -aidh, -aidhean, s. m. Winter. 


Roimh ghaoith a’ gheamhraidh, before the 
winds of winter; bó gheamhraidh, (or mart 
geamuraidh), æ wintermart, heifer slain for 
winter food, | 

geamiiraich, pr.pt. a’ geamhrachadh, v.a. & n. 
Wiater, pass or spend the winter. 2 Winter, 
provide food for the winter. 

————— ——te, past pt. Wintered. 

geamhrail,-e,g. Wintry. 2 Cold. 3 Stormy. 

geamhranta, -ainte, d. see geamhrail. 

Z2amh-shüileaeh,** a. Piuk-cyed. 

rtgeamht, ssm. Boy—A rzytl. 

tgeamhta, -n, -chau, sm. Anything short and 
thick. 2tft'Thick-set person. 3fHJunk. 

T -————-ch, -aiche, a. Short and thick. 

t ——ir, -ean, s.m. Short thick person. 

geamnachd, s.f. see geamuaidheachd. 

geamuaidh, -e, @. Chaste. 2 Absle.nious, so- 
per. 3 Womanly, modest. 4 Continent. 

———eachd, s.f.ind, Chastity. 2 Sober- 
ness. 3 Womanliness. 4 Modesty. 3 Con- 
tinence. 

geamnuidh, see geamnaidh. 

—— —--.———eaend, see geamuaidheachd. 

gean, V.a. see gin. 

gean, -a, s.m. Good humour, cheerfulness, 2 
Mood or frame of mind. 3 Favour, love, fond- 
ness. 4 Approbation. 5 Pleasure. 6 Smile, 
7 Greed. Cna bhi g. air Cloinn-Dómunuill 
gus am faigh iad an diota, the MacDonalds are 
never happy till they get their dinner—N.G.P. 
applies this saying to the Grants, MaeKenzies, 
&c., in the ease of the MacDonalds, however, 
tne dinner they were supposed to long for was 
a taste of the Campbell blood ; g. math, good 
wil! ; làithean ar g., the days of our pleasure ; 
droch gh., bad humour. 

fzean,** -ein, s.f. Woman. 

sgeanach, -aiche, o Of a pleasant or cheerful 
humour. Z** Fond. Bitheamaid maranach, 
g., let us be hospitable and good-humoured. 

, -aich, s.m. & o see gionachd and gion- 








ach. 

— — —d,** s.f. Chastity. 2 Womanliness. 3 
Continence. 

geanaiche, comp. of geanach. 

geanail, -e, a. Cheerful, pleasant. 2 Graceful, 
comely, 3 Womanly, modest. 4 Fond. 5) 
(DMC) In good humour. 6(MS) Humane, 
kind. 

tGéanair, s.m. Month of January 

cennais.$ s. Wild cherry or gean tree,—prunus 
avium. 

geanalachd, s.f./nl. Comeliness, gracefulness. 
2 Pleasantness. 3 Womanliness. 4 Modesty. 
A MS) Acceptability. 6tt Cheerfulness, good 
humour.’ 

goauaias,(MS) Ais, s.m. Acceptability. 

veanuita,(MS) a. Acceptable, 

treananth, -aimh, s.m. Sword. 

geanas,**-ais, sm. Chastity. 2 Pleasant hu- 
mour, 

Chaste. 2 Continent. 3 In 


-— —-—üch,"* a 


Original fram 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


UNIVERSITY-OF ILLINOIS AT 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


veanasach 485 _ gearra-bhonn 

—— n— e — 1 M 
a pleasant humour. ; Rugged, ` 

geanasachd,** sf. Chasteness, purity. 9 Con. | genrbaz,** -aig, et, Seab, 
tinence, 8 Womanliness. gearbh,** s, Serb, 


geang,** v.a. tStrike, heat. 
horse. 

geang, -an, sm. Kick, as ofa horse. 

geaus, Gaelic spelling of gang. 

geangacnh,tt -aich, s.m. Crooked dumpy person. 

--—————-, -aicha, a. Crooked. 2 Thick and 
short. 3 Apt to strike. 4 Apt to kick, as a 
horse, 

--— — — d, s.f. Comeliness, beauty. 2 Striking. 

geanm, see geamnaidheachd. 

gean-math, s. m. Goodwill, good pleasure. 2 
Gratuity, donation, bounty. Mar gh., as a 
matter of bounty; cha’n ’eil do gh. ort, you 
are not in good humour. : 

geanm-chnó, -than, s.f. Chestnut. De chraoibh 
nan g., of (h^ chestnut tree. 

geanmhniuneach, a Joyful, merry. 

geanmnachì, see geamnaidheachd, 

geanmnaidh, see geainaidh, 

——_————-eachd, see geamnaidheachd. 

geann, see gcinn, 

geannair.-ean, s. m. Hammer. 2 Mallet. 3 
Kind of wedge. 

eachd, s,f.ind. Hammering. 2 Sharp- 





ening. 
geanta, a. see geamnaidh. 
^ chd,* s.7. Abstinence, 2 Modesty. 3 





Self-command, continence. G. na faoilinn, 
the absiinence of the sea-mew—which eats a 
full-grown fish at a gulp, and makes three 
portions of a sprat. 

gear, see geur. 

gear, see geàrr. 

gearain, gen. sing. of gearan. 

gearain, pr.pt. a’ gearan, v.n. Complain, mur- 
mur, grumble, moan, 2 Accuse, complain a- 
gainst, appeal. 3 Remonstrate. 

gearait, s.f. Virgin, 2 Saint. 3 Warrior. 

tgearait, a. Holy. 2 Prudeut. 

gearan,| s. m. Dog-lichen, see lus-ghoinnich. 
[** gives Dog's-ear. | 

gearan, -ain, -an, s.m. Complaint, murmur, dis- 
content, murmuring. 2 Supplication, remon- 
strance. 3 Appeal. 4 Sigh, groan, moan. 5 
Accusation. 6**Cry. Dean do g. ris, apply to 
him for redress ; cha ruig thu leas a bhi 'g., 
you need not complain ; fulaing dhomh mo gh. 
a dheanamh riut-sa, permit me to appeal to 
you; cha’n 'eil stàth dhuit a bhi 'g. ris, it serves 
no end to appeal to him; rinn iad g., they 
murmured ; ri g., complaining ; bha e 'g. 
feadh na h-oidhche, he was moaning during the 
night. A’ g—, pr.pt. of gearain, » 

gearanach, -aiche, a. Complaining, plaintive, 
discontented, apt to complain, querulous, 2 
Sighing, groaning.  3**Sad. 4**Ailing. An" 
Accusative. Sgeul mu na daoine g., news 
about the men who are apt to complain. 

-—d,tt s.f.ind. Dolefulness. 

gearanaich, pr.pt. a’ gearanaich, v.n. see gear- 
ain. 2** Condole. 

-—e, s.m. Accuser. 
murer. 

gearasdan,t -ain, -an, s.m. Garrison. G. Inbhir- 
lóchaidh, Fort William fort (lit. the garrison of 
Inverlochy) ; is mis’ am bodach liath a bha 
riamh anns a’ gh., I am the gray-headed old 
carle who has ever held the fort—a phrase in a 
boys’ game, now applied to a person who has 
been long ina responsible position. 

—*gearb, s. Scab, scar. 2 Mange, itch. 3 Tu- 
mour. 4 Bran. 

+ ,v.a. d n. Grieve. 


2 Bemoaner, mur- 








2 Hurt, wound, 


2(DMy) Kick, as a 


g arbhul, T -uil, & m, see gearra-bhall, 

Bësch -aiche, s.m., Nestling, unfledged 
HPA, 

genrenig."* &.f. Brood. 

gearcau,*"* sm. Nestling, 

tgear-chuis, &,f. see geur-chuis. 

trear-chuiseach, -eiche, œ. see geur-chuiseach. 

ceard,** s.m. Gaelic spelling of guard, Bi air 
do gh., be om your guard; geàrdan an righ, 
the king's guards. [Anglo-Gaelic from Arm: 
strong. ] 

gearg,"* -eirg, 8f. Botch. 2 Boil. 3 Suppura- 


jon. 

geargach,** æ. Like a botch or boil. 2 In & 
state of suppuration. 

gear-leanmhuinn, see geur-leanmhuinn, 

geàrr, pr. pt. a’ FUA ex oo, Cut. 2 Bite, 
gnaw. 3 Taunt, satirize. 4* Describe, as a 
circle. 6**Kngrave. 6 Shear, as grass. 7 
(DU) Emasculate an animal, geld. 
g. as, cut off, g. a bbàn, cut down, 
g. goirid, cut short, g. sios, cut down, 
g. sürdag, frisk, trip; a’ gearradh shürdag, 
frisking ; g. tarsuing an achaidh, take œ short 
ext across the field. 

geàrr, -a, -an, s.f. Hare, prov. 2 Weir for catch- 
ing fish. 

geàrr, ist. comp. giorra, 2nd. comp. giorraid, 2rd. 
comp. giorrad, æ. Short, not long. 2 Of short 
continuance, transient. 3 Laconic. 4 Defici- 
ent. 5 Not reaching the intended part. 6 
(AC) Thick-set, squat, strong. G. gu’nrobh 
'aois, short be his life; isg. a dhearrsadh, 
transient is his shining ; thàiuig iad g. air, they 
came short of it ; cainnt g. tharbhach, (aconic 
and pithy language ; is gh. gus am bi am 
minnean na’s miosa na ’n t-seana bhoe, the 
kid will soon be worse than the old buck; au 
uine gh., in æ short time; cù g., a short-tailed 
dog ; is g. gu bàs fear de a mhuinntir, someone 
of his people will soon be dead, 

geàrr,* s.m. Abridgement. 2 (AC) Grilse. G. 
a’ ghnothaich, an abridged statement of the 
affair; an còrr 's an g., the odds and ends— 
the two extremes. 

gearra-bhall,(AC) s.m. Gair-fowl, great auk— 
alca impennis. 





Te E wl 
— a 
LEE 


366, Gearra-bhall. 
gearra-bhoc,(CR) s. m. Sea-urchin—Lochbroom. 
geàrra-bhodaeh, s.m, see geàrr-bhodach. 


— 


gearbach,** o Scabbed. 2 Mangy, itchy. 3| geàrra-bhonn,* see geàrr-bhonn. 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


Or igil al from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


gearradaireachd 


vire. 2 Satirical poems. Anns a’ ghearrad- 
aireachd gheur, using cutting expressions— 
Rob Donn. 

gearra-breac, (AC) s. m. Lesser black-headed 
guillemot. , 

geàrrach, -aich, -aichean, s.f. Tsee turtur. 2 
Flux, diarrhoea, 2 Dysentery. 3 Gripe. [With 
the article a’ gh—.]  Geàrrach-fola, hemorr- 


age. 

Mio d IU s.m. Harrow-rope, short trace 
attaching a harrow to the swingle-tree — W. of 
Ross. 

gearra-chasach,** æ. Duck-legged. 

gearra-chlamhan, see clamhan-geàrr. , 

ceàrra-chomharradh,** s.m. Apostrophe. 

gearra-chot’, see cota-gearr, 
gearr-a’-chuain,(AC) s.m. Grilse, 
gearra-chuibh,* s,f. Muzzle-bar for two horses. 
gearradair, -ean, s.m. Cutter, hewer. 2 Carver, 
one who carves. 3 Satirist. 4**Engraver. 5 
Lapidary. 6* Cutler. Gearradairean-chlach, 
stonz-hewers, lapidavries. 
—eachd, s.f.ind. Cutting, act of cutting. 
2 Satire. 3 Business of a lapidary. 
gearradan,** -ain, s.m. Register. 2 Note-book. 
gearradh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Cut, cutting, 
act of cutting. 2 Satirizing. 3**Biting,gnaw- 
ing. 4**Hewing, slicing. 5** Mowing. 6** 
Carving, engraving.  7**Taunt. ` 8** Tear, 
rent.  9** Toll, tribute, tax. 10 Cutting in 
pipe-music. 11 Kar-mark on sheep, see un- 
der comharradh-eluaise. 12*Bowel-complaint, 
fiux. 13 (DMC) Morsel, small bit of anything. 
14 (DMC) Cutting of seaweed. 15 (DMC) Sar- 
casm. Nach ioc iad g.P will they not pay toll ? 
air a bheul bha gearraidhean, on its mouth 
were gravings ; cha’n fhaigh thu g. dheth, you 
won't get a bit of it ; an am a’ ghearraidh, at 
the time of cutting the seaweed. A’ g—, pr.pt. 
of gearr. 

nn -aidh,-aidhean, s.m. Summer grazing- 
place for cattle— Lewis. [Gearraidh is also 
used as the no?n.] 

gearradh-arm, -airin, s.m, Armorial bearings. 

zearradh-breac, -brie, pl. -aidhean-breaca, s.m. 
Ringed guillemot—uria lacrymaus. 2 (AF) 
Bedshank. 3 Guillemot, see eun-dubh-an- 
sgadain. 







Íx bikes. 
AET ORIS Re os 
ARE cg En EC ee 
ef ie Bee do: Aig 
ey Ns Ue US EC 
ire D RE. fry. 

: E te Ue OP ee i OR 
py gh eos ao as eh Le 


GE ee 
y CR, e T 
tz SE S we i 
ch Kee ee ee a> SÉ 
POLS kee TE A 














Le 








367. Gearradh-breac. 
gearradh-cainute,(DMO) s.m. Loquacity. °S ann 
ort than g., how loquacious you are-—you have 
too much to say. 
gearradh-choileir,-ean,s.m. Cut-throat,assassin. 
gearradh-crocan, s. m.  Ear-mark on sheep, see 
uuder comharradh-cluaise. 
gearrach-dialtaig,(DU) s.m. Cut at the base of 
the toes. 
gearradh-dubh-nan-allt,(AF) s.m. Water rail. 
gearradh-fedirnein,|] s.m. Grass-cut. 
gearradh-ghobaich,(MMcL) s.f. Sharp wit. 
gearradh-glas,(AF) s.m. Black guillemot. 
gearradh-zort, -aidh-ghort,’ pl. -aidhean-gorta & 
-adh-goirt, s. m.  Quail—coturniz vulgaris. 
Thàinig na gearradh-goirt, the quails came. 
gearradh-uchd, ssm. Dewlap. 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


486 
gearradaireachd, s. f. Keen, cutting talk, sa` | gearrag, -àg, -an, sf. Wafer. 


Em "ISPWNEUNNET 


gearr-earblach 


2 Young ha 

leveret. 3**Thin scone. 4** Runs ege 
destiny. Geàrragan neo-ghortaichte, unleaven- 
ed wafers. 

gearragach, tf a. Abhounding in young hares. 

gearragan,** -ain, sm. Wafer. 

gearra-gort, see gearradh-gort. 

gearralch, oo see giorraich. 

gearraidh,* see geàrr. 2 Mole. 3 Rat. 

gearraidh,(DC) s.m. Point or knuckle-end of 
land, often used in place-names in Uist, as 
Hougharry, Tigharry, gearraidh dubh, &c. 2 
Green pasture-land about a township. 3 The 
land between the machair and monadh, the 
strip where the houses stand— Lewis. 4 Fen- 
ced field. 5 (CR) Enclosed grazing between 
the arable land and the open moor, 6(DMO) 
Common grazing and arable land between the 
woor and the crofts. 7 (PJM) Place where 
the sheilings are built. 

———ean, n.pl. of gearradh. Air na h-uile 
lànhan bithidh gearraidhean, on all hands 
there shall be cuttings. 

gearraiseach, -eich, s.m. The chain or rope from 
the swingle-tree to the horses. 2(CR) Hare— 
Suth'd. 3 Swingle-chain, the chain between 
the swingle-tree and the plough or harrows. 

gearra-mhuc, s.f. Guinea-pig. 

gearran, -ain, s.m. Gelding, horse, hack, ‘‘gar- 
ron.'" ..2 Tit. 

Gearran, ain, -an, sm. Period as to the dura- 
tion of which authorities vary considerably. 
ii, tt, McL & D, and * all say it is from 15 
Mar. to 11 Apl. inclusive. (OS.) Dr. Norman 
MacLeod, in Teachdaire Ùr Gàidhealach, ap- 
plies it to the Month of February. 2 The 
nine days after ‘‘ faoileach.” Mios faoilich, 
naoidh là Gearrain—Old saying. 3 (TS) Last 
half of February. [Preceded by the art. a.) 





gearranach, -aiche, a. Horse-like, of or relating ` 


to, geldings. 2 Clownish. 

cler il ane: c -analach, s. f. Asthma, broken 
wind. 

gearr-analach, a. Asthmatic, broken-winded, 
Each e, o broken-winded horse. 

gearran-ard, s.m. Hobby (bird), see obag. 

gearran-olach,(AF) s.m. Foal. 

gearrar, fut. pass. of gearr. Shall be cut. 

gearrastain, Duanaire, 48, is for gearasdan., 

geàrr-bhall, see gearra-bhall. 

gcàrr-bhliadhnach,** s.m. One-year-old animal. 

gearr-bhochdan,§ s.m. Sea-gillyflower, see fear- 
saideag. 

geart bU E -aich, s.m. Young middle-sized 
cod. 

geàrr-bhonn, -uinn, -uinnean, s. m. The half 
sole of a shoe. 

'eàrr-bhórd, s.m. Keel-board ofja boat, (G8,p.73.) 

gearr-Lhriathrach, ff -aiche, a. Sententious. 

geàrr-bhrigheach, a. Compendious. 

gearrcach,(AF) s.m. Turtle-cove, see turtur. 

geàrr-chasach, œ. Short-legged. 2 Short-footed. 

geàrr-chlamhan, see clamhan. 

gearr-choileir,** s.m. Assailant. 

gearr-chot’, see cota-gearr. 

geàrr-chù, (AF) s.m. WoM. . 

gearr-chuisle,** s.f. Venesection, phlebotomy. 

gcàrr-daol, see céard-dubhan. 

—ag, see céarl-dubhan. 

——an, see céard-dubhan. : 

gearr-dheare, sf. Cranberry. 2 Barberry, see 
jus-nan-deare. 3**Bilberry. 

—— ——— ———Aag, sf. Barberry. 

geàrr-dlhuan, s.m. Epigram. 

geàrr-dubhan, see céard-dubhan. 

geàrr-earbull, -uill, s.m. Bobtail. j 

gearr-earblach, -aiche;q. Short-tailed,bobtailed, 








Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS Ñ 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 








el Asch = 


wy m 


Ae 


geàrr-eartlach 





docked. 


gearr-fhacail,(AH) s.pl. Railiery, chaff, badin- 
[Distinct from geur- 


by age, banter, ready wit. 
fhacail.] 


cai, scurrilous, 


geàrr-fhiadh, -fhéidh, ei Hare. 


a D WW 
- m * 


ach, a. Short-haired, as cattle. 








abstract, brief. 


COE. Se 


^. A geàrr-gheal((AF) s. Mountain hare. 
eearr-ghlas, see gearradh-glas. 
geàrr-ghobach, 
banterer. : 
sharp witted people of Muckairn. 
fxearr-ghuin, s. Borse-leech. 


i geàrr-ghunna, pl. chan, s.f. Short gun, carbine. 


 gearr-luch, see gar-luch. 
| . geàrr-mh 


C woman. 


|. geàrr-mhagadh,** -aidh, s.m. Satire, sarcasm, 


B irony, bitter jest. 

|. geàrr-mhàsach, -aiche, a. Short-bottomed. 
ia gearr-mharnach, -aiche, a. Short-flanked. 
K 

8 

lr 


geàrr-mhineachadh, -aidh, s.m. Short explana- 


| tioa. 
 Seärr-miola-dearg, (AF) s.m. Pig. 
|. geàrr-osan, -ain, s.m. Sock. 

—. gearr-phoc,** s.m. Satchel. 


gearr-sgian, -sgine & -sgéine, pl. -an & sgeanan, 


— — &f. Dirk. 2**Stiletto. 
|. geàrr-sgriobhadh,"** s.m. Shorthand. 
.. geàrr-shaoghal, -ail, s,m. Short life. 


K .— — ——ach, -aiche, a. Short-lived, of a 





|». few days. e 
f achd, s.f. Short-livedness. 





| gearr-sheabhag,{ s./. Ger falcon, see seabhag- 


mhór-na-seilse. A 
gearr-sheallach, -aiche, a. Short-sighted. 


gearr-shealladh,tt -aidh, s.m. Short-sightedness. 


geàrr-shüileach, -aiche, a. Short-sighted. 


/ geàrr-smachd, s.f. Severity. 2 Wrath. 3 Over- 


bearance. y 
gearr-sporan, -ain, s.m. Cut-purse. 


- geàrr-suim, -e, $.f, Entrance-money. 2 Differ- | e 


2**Shorn. 3 
5**Carved. 6**Sliced. 
7(DU) Satirical, sharp-witted. G. air na clar- 
aibh, graven on the tables; feur g., mown grass; 


ence in money. d 
gearrta, past pt. of gearr. 
+ **Mown. 4**Graven. 


Cut. 


g. fuar, piercingly cold. ` | 
|J gearrtach, -aiche, a. Incisive. 
» gearrthach, see gearrach. 4 d 
 Searsum, -uim,* s.m, see gearr-suim. 
— 1geart, s.m. Milk. 


J geartach,* sif. Trip, excursion, short time. G. 


do ’n Ghalltachd, a trip to the low country. 


|. geas, -eis & -a, pl. an, s. f. Charm. 2 Sorcery, 
4 Metamorpho- 

Lu sis. 5 Religious vow. 6**Guess, conjecture. 
— Nighean righ fo gheasaibh, o princess meta- 
|» morphosed ; chaidh e fo gheasaibh, he was 


enchantment. 3 Oath, vow. 


metamorphosed ; tha mia’ cur mar gheasaibh 


| leis an cuan fo 'gheasaibh, he thought the 

| ocean his own under his spells—applied to per- 

|. sons with an overweening or insane idea of 

|— their own importance—NGP. 

| geas, v. Gaelic spelling of guess. ` 

| geasach,** a. Enchanting, charming. 2 Guess- 
ing, conjecturing. 3 Like a eharm or enchant- 
meiit. 


gearr-fhaclach, œ. Witty, nimble-witted, quizzi- 


Mar gh. air 
mullach sléibhe, like a hare on the mountain 





tops. 
geàrr-fhionn, s.m. Short hair, as of quadrupeds, | geasadan,** -ain, s.m. Shrub. 


gearr-fhoirm,** s. Compendium, abridgement, 
gearr-ghath, -a, -an, s.m. Short spear, javelin. | - 
—_—_———ach, -aiche, a. Having a short spear. 


sam, Sharp witted person, wit, 
Geàrra-ghobaich Mhucàrna, the 
geasdas, ** s.f. Pike. 
geasrag, -aig, see giseag. 


ach,** a. Satirical, sarcastic, ironi- 
cal. Té ghobach, gn., a gabbling, sarcastic 


geat,(AF) s. 
geat, s.m. see gead. 
geata, pl. -n & -chan, s.m. Gate. 2 Sort of play 


Tgeibheal, -il, s.m, see geall & geimheal. 


geibhionn, see geimhlean, 
eibhis,** s.f. VetHeyt- 
geibhleach, a. 





ort, I solemnly charge yov ; shaoii leis gwm bu |g 


487 géill 


geasachail,tf -e, a. Incantatory. 
geasachd,** s.f. Enchantment, charm, conjura- 


tion. 2 Vow. 3(MS) Astrology. 4 Supersti- 
tion. C dit’ an robh an fhàinne g.? where 
was the enchanted ring ? 


tgeasadach, s.m. Peacock—Dean of Lismore. 
geasadair,-ean, s.m. Wizard, charmer, conjurs 


er, sorcerer. 
—eachd, s.f. Enchantment, sorcery. 
2**Arrow. 3*9% 


Lance. 


geasa-dioma, s.m. Kind of Druidic sorcery. (?) 
geasag, see giseag. 


ach, see giseagach. 





geasalanachd,(DMC) s.f. Superstition. 
geasan, n.pl. of geas. 


,** -ain, s.m. Oath. 2 Charm. 2 Sorcery. 
4(AF) Saith. Nathraichean air nach luidh g. 
serpents that cannot be charmed, 

G. og, a jack. 





ach, o. see giseagach. 
achd, see giseagachd. 


Tgeast, eist, s.m. Gaelic speliiug of yeast. 
}--——al,** -ail, sm. Deed. 2 Fact. 


3 Want, 
necessity. 
Curds. 


8*Stick. 
gate. 


Dhùin iad an geata, they shut the 


geatach,ff -aiche, a. Gated. 
geatachan, n.pl. of geata. 
geatadh, -aidh, s.m. see geata. 


i i Geataidh an 
ionracais, the gates of righteousness. 


geatair,** s.m. Small cake. 
geatha, s.m. see geadha. 
geathadaich,tt s.f. Hopping, jogging. 
geatrach,** a, Fearful, timid. 

ge b’e, tt conj. (for ce b’e) Whoever, whatever. 
ged, conj. Though, although. 


2**But. Ged a 
chrochar mi, though I were hanged‘; ged tha, 
though it be, notwithstanding. [Does not as- 
pirate adjectives, but aspirates all initial con- 
sonants of verbs, except bu—ged being ge+do, 
it is do that aspirates.] 

2 (M 
McD) Gable of a house. 3 Side rope of a her- 
ring-net. 
2**Great distress. 


see geimhleach. 
- —adh, -aidh, see geimhleachd, 


geibhlean, see geimhlean. 
geibhlich, see geimhlich. 
tgeibleid,** -ean, s.f. Sloven, slattern, drabbish 


female. 2 (DMC) Disabled female. 


each,** a, Sloveniy, drabbish. Gu g., 


drabbishly. * 
——each,(DMC) s.m. Disabled man. 


eachd,** s.f. Slovenliness, drabbish- 
ne 


SS. 
Tgeideal,** -eil, s.m. Fan. 
Tgeidhne, s.f- Violence. 
geigean, Uist for ceigean. 
geil,(AC) s. Fountain, well, spring. 
geilb, -ean, s.f. 
geilbhean, s.m. Fawner—Badenoch. 
géile, gen.sing. of giall. 
eilios,**s.m. Traftic, commerce, intercourse. 
géill, pr.pt. a’ géilleachdainn, a’ géilleadh, & a” 


see; gilb. 


géilltinn, v.n. Yield, submit, cede. 2 Serve, 
obey, do homage. 3**Fail. 4(DMC) Break 
gradually under strain or pressure. Dorcha, 


doirionnta, dubh, a’ chiad trì làithean de 'n 
Gheamhradh, ge b'e 5heir géill do'n spréidn, 
cha tugainn fhéin gu Samhradh, dark, sullen, 
and black, the first three days of winter, who- 


Original from 


A VIEDCITX FE III IMKIEgJ C AT 
LU d M [POTITI LI | LL | d LJ be = | 


— T 
ii 


URBANA-CHAMPAIG 


Digitized by 


me INTERNET ARCHIVE 
7. 


géill 


M49 Jorge UD AD YN 
ever depends on the cattle, I would not till sum- 
mer— i would not rely much upon the cattle 
succeeding, although it was considered a good 
sign to have the winter beginning with dark 
weather ; tha mi a’ géilleachdainn da sin, I 
admit that ; dha "ng, mór ghaillionn, to whom 
yields the great tempest ; a’ geilleachdainn d 
a reachd, yielding assent to his law. 

géill, -e, s.f. Yielding, submission, obedience. 2 
Homage, 3 see ciall. 4 **Lhe thing yielded 
or given up. 5 Admission. Na toir g. da 
leithid sin, yield to no such thing ; 2 do not be- 
lieve it ; 3 do not rely on it ; na toir g. dha, do 
not believe him; bheir e leis ar géill, he will 
take away our captives. 

tgeille, s.pl. see geimhle. 

géilleachdainn, s.f. & pr. pt. of geill. Yielding, 
obeying, serving. A’ g.d'a reachd, yielding 
to, or admitting the uprightness of his law ; có 
a bhios a’ g. dha-san ? who will pay any heed 
to him 2 

géilleadh, -idh, s.m. d pr. pt. of géill, see géill- 
tion. Citinichidh g., yielding pacrfies. 

géillidh, fut.af.a. of géill. 

géilligean, s. pl. Fat, tlabby jaws, prov. 2(DM 


C) Tufts of feathers on the lower part of a 


fowl’s head. 

géillios,** et, Kindness, friendship. 2 Submis- 
sion. 

géilltinn, $.f. Yielding,obeying, serving. A’ g—, 
pr.pt. of géill, 





368. Gewinhin. 
seilmhin,** s. Pilchard. 
reilt, -e, s.7. Terror, fear, dread. 2**Cowardice. 
2**-kittishness. 4 Timidity. Criothnaich le 
g., shake with fear; na biodh g. orm, let me not 
be afraid. ) 
reilt, s.m. & f. (AF) Untamable animal. 2** 
Wild man or woman. 3 One who dwells in 
woods ordáeserts. 4 Bird— Dean of Lismore. 


———— 


, a. Mad. 

——-chrith, sf. Quaking with fear, extreme 
terror. 

——each,tt a. Fearful, in terror. 2 Timid. 

—— -ghlacte, a. Afraid. 

— ich, v.d. & n. Terrify, intimidate. 

—— -uisge, s.f. Hydrophobia. 

geiltrich,(MS) v.a. Deaurate. 

geiltrigeadh, s.m. Enamel. 

geiltrig,(MS) pr.pt. a’ geiltrigeadh, v.a Enamel. 

geiltrizich,(MS) v.a. Enamel. 

géim, v. d s. see geum., 

geimeartach, q. Swift. 

geimh, -e, $.f. see giomh. 

eal, -eil, -mhlean, s.m. 
Custody. 

geimhean,** -ein, s.m. 

geimhle, see geimheal. 

geimhleach,** o Fettering, 
Oppressive. 3 Enslaving. 

—--—, -lich, s.m. Slave, captive. 

geimhleach,(AH) s.m. Man who eats or other- 
wise helps himself to excess. 

geimhleachd,** s. f. Bondage, slavery. 2 Chain, 
fetter. Ann an g., in bondage, in chains. 

geimhleadh, -eidh, s.m. Chaining, binding with 
chains. A’ g—, pr.pt. of geimhlieh. 

géimhleag,t -eig, -an, 
R) Iron lever—W. of Ross. 


Fetter, chain. 2 





Restraint, bondage. 


like a fetter. 2 





Digitized by 


NTERNET ARCHIV 


488 


Agen 


s.f. Crowbar, lever. 2(C |! 


géiread 


géimbleagach,** a, Like a lever. 

geimhlean, n. pl. of geimheal. 2 Custody. Le 
geimhlibh umha, with fetters of brass. 

geimhlich, pr.pt. a’ geimhleachadh, go, Chain, 
bind with chains, z**#etter. 3**Enslave. 4 
** Mortgage. 

———-—te, past pt. of geimhlich. Chain 
bound with chains. 2 ERC ji. 

geimhneachd, see geamnaidheachd. 

geimnich, see geumnaich. 

geimnidh, see geamnaidh. - 

-— — —-eachd, see geamnaidheachd,. 

Tgein, s.m. Sword. 

gein, v.d. see gin, 

geine,((AF) s. Swan. 

geinealaich, v.a. see ginealaich. 

geiueamhuiun, see gineamhuinn. 

gvinearalt,** s.m. Gaelic spelling of general. 

geineil, æ. see gineil. 

geingeach, see geinneach. 

geinide,(AC) comp. of geamnaidh. More chaste. 

geinn, -e, -ean, s.m. Wedge. 2 Wooden wedge 
for fastening cow-fetter. 3 Large or thick 
piece of fanything, chunk. 4* Anything firm. 
ls e geinn dheth fhéin a sgoltas an darach, it 
requires a, wedge made of oak to split oak. 

geiun, pr. pt. a’ geinneadh, v.a. Wedge, tighten 
by means of wedges. 2 Press, squeeze. 

each, -eiche, a. Abounding in, or supplied 

with wedges. 2 Wedged. 3**Cuneiform. 4** 

Pinned. 5 Firm, stout, strong, compact. 

eadh, -idh, s.m. Wedging. 2 Pressing, 

squeezing. A’ g—, pr.pt. of geinn. 

eag, -eig, -ean, 

2**Little wedge. 3 Bud, germ. 

as of a coat. 

eagach,** a. Short, squat, 2 Full of lit- 

tle wedges. 

eal,** -il, s.m. Cuneiform phalanx, order 

of battle in the form of a wedge. 











4 Button, 











pactness. 

eanta, d. Dumpy, firm, stout. 

ear,** -eir, see geannair. 

earachd, s.f. see geannaireachd. 

eil,-e, d. see geinneach. 

——+ich, tf 9.0, Plus. 

——te, past pt. of geinn. Wedged, tightened 
by means of wedges. 

geinnte, s.m. Uist for geinn. 

geintear, -eir, s.m. Planter, sower. 

geintileach, -ich, s.m. Gentile, 

—,a. Gentile, pagan, heathen. 

-—d, s.f. Paganism, heathenism, idol- 




















atry. 
geintileas, -eis, 
geintleach, -ich, 
geintleachas, -ais, 


see geintileachd. 
see geintileacn. 
see geintileachd. 
geir, -e, s.f. Tallow, grease. 2 Suet. G. carb- 
ach, cart grease. is coma leam comunn gille 
na geire, ge math a thoiseach, bu ro ole à 
dheireadh, J like not the tallow lad's company, 
however good at first, very bat at last—N.G.P. 
says * a Lewis and Long 
which no explanation has been given. di 
géire, s.f.ind, Sharpness, subtlety. 2 Intellect- 
uality, acuteness, discernment. 
bitterness. Ly 
5 Sharpness of edge. 6 Witticisin. 
géire, comp. of geur. Sharper, sharpest. ` 2 
Sourer, sourest. Triath a's g. cruaidh, chief 
of the sharpest sword. — — . 
veireach, -aiche, @. Abounding in tallow,greasy. 
o Full of suet or fat. 
ogiread, -id, s.m. Sharpness. 
the sharper for that. 


3 Sourness, 


Isg. e sin, ii ts 


—————————————————— 
i ————————————— 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOISA 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGNIM 


s.f. Stout little woman. 


ealachd,** s.f. Stoutness, firmness, com 


pagan, heathen, ` 


geir, v.a. Grease, besmear or anoint with grease. E 


Island saying of 


4 Gaelic spelling of gear, appliances. . e 








E e, 





géireanachd ` 459 geug 


géireanachd, s,f. Satirical turn, bickering sort |geochail, pr. pt. Snivelling. 

of wit, geochdach, see geòcach. 
géireas, see géire. geodal,(DMy) s. m. Flattery. Tha mi edlach 
géir-inntleachd,** s. f. see geur-innleachd. air dogh., L am acquainted with your flattery. 
geir-mhuc, s.f. Lard. geodh, see geidha. 
geirneau, ein, s.m. Gin, trap, snare. a, -n,-chan, s.m, Creek or cove formed by 

ach, o. Full of traps or gins. 2 Like a surrounding rocks, 2**Bay. Thug iad an 

trap or giu. aire do gh., they observed æ creek. 
geirse, s.f. Madness—Suth’d. ach, -aiche, v. Abounding in creeks or 
———ach, -ich, s.f. Young girl. hollow rocks, gulfy. 
ag, -eig, 8.7. Young girl. geodh-lann, see géadh-lann. 
Séis, s.f. Spear, javelin, 2 Fishing spear. 3|geoic, see geoc, 

(AC) Milk, milk produce. 4 Gestation. geoic, see gedc. 2 Blair Athole for geabhag, 
geis,"* s.f. Custom, 2 Swan. 3 Prohibition. 3 -——each, see geòcach. 























- 
IS 











see geas. geóidh, gen.sing. & n.pl. of geadh. 
fgeiseadh,**-idh, s.m. see geas. 2 Imposing | gedileam,* see goileam, 
tribute, -————aiche,* see gedlamaiche. 


géisg, -e, -ean, see giosg. 

-——,.n. see giosg. 

"——€ach, d. see giosgach. 

SPA a idb, see gìosgadh. 

tgeisneach,** o, Vnchanted, like a charm. 2 
Enchanting. 3 Conjuring. 

gemcac, s. Distortion of the features—Suth’d. 

. ?(DMK) Black eye. 

Tgen, s.m. Sword. 2 Hurt, wound (guin.) 

geó, see geodha, 

geob, -a, -an, s.m. Wry mouth. 2* Little mouth. 
3*Gaping mouth. 4 Creek. 

geób, pr.pt. a’ gedbadh [& a’ geobail], v.n. Make 
wry mouths. 2 Gape with the mouth, as fish 
when losing the vital spark. 

——ach, -aicne, a. Wry-mouthed, 

——adh, -aidh, s.m. Making a wry mouth. A’ 
g—,; pr.pt. of gedb, 

geóbail,* s.m. Gape. A’ g—, pr.pt. of geob. 

geobraich,f] s.f. Idle talk. 

Spo, -a, -an, s.m. Wry neck. 

geoc,* s.f. see gedcaireachd. 

geocach, -aiche, a. Wry-necked. 

geocach, -aiche, a. Gluttonous, ravenous, vora- 
cious. 2**Parasitical. a**Strolling, 4 Blair 
Athole for geabhagach. 

, -aich, s.m. see geòcair, 

d, see gedcaireachd. 

geocaich,** v.n, Gormandize. 2 Devour. 3 
Stroll. 

-—e, &.f.ind. Insatiableness. 

geocail,* o see geòcach. 

geócair, -ean, s.m. Glutton, 9 Spendthrift. 3 
**Parasite. 4 Vagabond. 5 Rebeller. 6 De- 
bauchee. 


geoin,** s,f. Fool, foolish person. 2 Confused 
noise, 8 Derision, 4 Assurance, proof. 
geoire, comp. of geur. Sharper, sharpest. 
———ail, 3rd. comp. of geur. Degree of bitter- 
ness or sharpness, 
geoirean,(DU) s.m. Common sorrel—rumex ace- 
tosa & rumex acetosella. 
geoirid, 2nd. comp. of geur., 
geois, s.f. Flat belly. 
geòla, chan, s.f. Yawl, see p. 78. 2 Ship’s boat. 
3 Small barge. G. chaol, æ river-cutter. 
geolach, a, Pertaining to a yawl or ship’s boat. 
, “aich, s.m. Wooden frame on which a 
coffin is borne at funerals, bier, prov. 2 Band- 
age put round the shoulders and arms of the 
dead in former times, shoulder-belt, G. ort ! 
a form of imprecation (lit. the death-belt on 
thee !) 
geóoladh, see geòla. 
geólag, -aig, -an, s.f.dim. of geòla. Little boat 
or yawl. 
geolam,* -aim, see goileam. 
—-—ajiche, see goileamaiche. 
geolan, -ain, -an, s.m. Fan. 
geol-mhac,** s.m. Jowl. 
geon,* s.m. Avidity, keennes', 
Tgeon, -oin, s.m. Oath. 2 Security. 3 Proof. 
geonaidh, see gonaidh. 
geonail,* œ. Keen with avidity. 
geop, (DU) sm. Fast talk, generally unintelli- 
gible. 
geopraich, s.f. Torrent of idle talk. 
georas, -ais, s.m, Sorbus (plant.) 
geosach, -aich, s.m. see cedsach. 
geosadan, -ain, -an, s. m. see gaoisnean,  9** 
Shaft. 3**Arrow. 4 Stalk. 
tgeosan, -ain, s.m. Belly. 2 Glutton, 
geosgail,* s.f. Blustering talk. 
geostan,(CR) s.m. Ragwort—Arran. 
geota, s. Stagnant water and mud— Islay, 
geotair,(WC) Poolewe for geóta. 
geotan, -ain, -an, s.f. Spot of arable ground. 2 
*Driblet. 3 Trifling sum or debt, 4 Item. 5 
Small quantity. 6 Pendicle. A’ cruinneach- 
adh gh., collecting trifling debts. 
geotar,(DU) :s.m. Gutters (mud and water)— 
Gairloch, de, 
geotha, chan, see geddha. 
geothach, a. see geodhach. 
—aán, n.pl. of gedtha, for geddhachan. 
geothadh, see geódha. 
geuban, -ain, see giaban. 
ach, see giabanach. 
geug, -éige, -an, s.f. Branch, sapling. 2 Young 
superfine female, nymph. 3**Man’s arms, dit 
Sun’s ray. 5(DMC) Sprig. Barr-geug, belle ; fo 
dhubhar a geugan, under the shadow of her 
branches ; a’ gh. aillidh, the beauteous moid;ig. 
fraoich, o sprig of heather. 
——, v.n. Branch, sprout, propagate. 
2 




















869. Geocair. 


geocair, T -ean, s.m. Wry-neck—yunz torquilla. 
—  &geocaireach, -eiche, a. Intemperate, gluttonous. 





—d, s.f.ind. Gluttony, debauchery, 
2 Depravity, d hevelry. 


Original from 


Digitized t UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
ANDIIZEd By h 


INTERNET ARCHIVE URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


geugach 


-—ach, -aiche, a. Branchy, abounding in 


490 


/ geur-mheasach 
1 2 Search minutely. 





branches, ramifying. 2 Having long branch-| geur-ambharc,-airc,s.m, Sharp or minute search,. 


es. Air craoibh gheugaich, on @ branching tree. 
im. of geug. Little | geuranach,-aiche, a. Sarcastic. 2 Argument- 


Abounding in little 


——ag, -aig, -an, S. f., d 
branch. 2 Little girl. 
——agach, -aiche, &. 
branehes, or 2 Little girls. 
—ail, d. see geugach. 
——aire,** s.m, Brancher. 
—— -dhuilleagach,* s.f. Frond. 
geuire,(AC) for géire, comp. of geur. 
geulran, -ain, see geolan. 


geum, -éim & -a, -an, s.m. Low, bellow. 2 Low- 
ing of a cow. 3 Roar. 4 (MS)Blatter. An dean 


damh e P will the ox bellow ? 

, pr.pt. a’ geumnaich, v.n. Low, as a cow. 

2 Bellow. 3 Roar. 

nach, -aiche, a. Lowing. 

naich, s.f. Lowing, act of lowing. 2 Bel- 

lowing. 3 Roaring. A’ g—, pr.pt. of geum. 
G. a’ chruidh, the lowing of the cattle ; anns 
a’ gheumnaich, bellowing. 

geumraich, Gairloch, &c. for geuranaich. 

geur, a. 1st. comp. géire or gedire, 2nd. comp. 
géirid or geoirid, 3rd. comp. geurad, géiread or 
georad. Sharp,sharp-pointed oredged. 2 Acute 
in mind, shrewd, ingenious. 3 Acute of vi- 
sion, sharp-sighted. 4 Quick of hearing. 5 

` Severe, cruel. 6 Rigid. 7 Painful, affiicting. 
8 Fierce, ardent, fiery, eager, keen, vehement, 
9 Sharp set. 10 Shrill, penetrating. 11 Acrid, 
sour, bitter, tart, sharp, acid. 12 Sarcastie. 
Ann am briathraibh g., in bitter words ; an 
iomaguin gh., in keen affliction; fuaim g., a 
shrill sound ; gug., sharply, severely, quickly; 
sgian gh., œ sharp knife ; sleagh gh., a sharp- 
pointed spear ` duine g., @ shrewd, ingenious 
fellow ; sùil gh., a keen eye ; blas g., a bitter 
or acrid taste; bainne g., milk of an acrid 
taste ; fion g., vinegar, sour wine; tha e tuil- 
lidh ’s g., he is too severe or keen ; cho g. ri 
sigh nan sealbhag, as sour as sorrel juice ; a 
geur-amharc, looking keenly ; is g. fiacaill á 
fraoch, see under fiacaill.. 

geur, géire, s.m. Edge, sharpness. 

geura, see geurad. 

geurach, -aiche, a. see geur. 

,* s.f. Agrimony (plant.) 

adh, -aidh, s.m.Sharpening,act of sharp- 

ening. 2**Setting, as of a bladed instrument. 

3**Souring, growing sour or bitter. 4 (MS) 

Attenuation. A’ g—, pr. pt. of geuraich. 

d,* s.f. see geurad. 

geur-achmhasanaich,f{ v.a. Scold, chide. 

geurad, -aid, s.m. & 3rd. comp. of geur. Sharp- 
ness, sourness, pungeney. acerbity, acetosity, 
2 Acuteness, sharpness. 3 Degree of sharp- 
ness or sourness. A’ dol an g., growing 
sharper or sourer. 

geuradas,(MS) -ais, sm. Acumen. 

geuradh,** -raidh, s.m. Edge of a bladed weapon. 
2 Sharp point. 3 (AH) Ridge of a hill. G. 
na cruaidhe, the sharp edge;of.the steel (sword.) 

geurag,** s.f. Acid. 2(DMC) Keen appetite. 

-bhileach, Ach, s.f. Agrimony. 

geuraich, pr.pt. a’ geurachadh, v. a. Sharpen. 
2 Hone, whet. 3 Sour. 4 Embitter. 5 Make 























rigid. 6 Make smart, quick or cleyer. 7 ** 
Acidulate. A’ g. na sgéine, sharpening the 


knife ;tha’m baiune a’ g., the milk is souring. 
geuraichte, past pt. of geuraich. Sharpened. 

2 Set. 8 Soured. 4(MS) Attenuated. 
geuraid, 2nd. comp. of geur, 
geur-aire, s. f. Marked attention, 

attention. Thoir g., mark well. 
geuralachd, see geurad. 
eeur-ambairc, ** v.n. Look sharply or minutelye 


particular 


Digiti 


TERNA ee Af 
à VB ^h EN | i 
d KA d ij d 1 Li 


sharp look-out. 


ative, full of arguments. 3**Witty. 

———d, s.f. Argumentation. 2 Passing of 
witticisms or repartees. BA 
geur-bheachd,1f -an, s.f: Judgment. 
geur-bhile,** s.f. Foul mouth. 2 Sour leaf or 



















blade. 
——-——ach,§ s.f. Agrimony, see muir-dhroigh- - 
inn. 

——ach, @ Bitter in speech, acrimoni- 
ous. 2 Havinga pointed leaf or blade. 3 


Having am acrid leaf or blade. 
geur-bhileag, -eig, s.f. Sour leaf or blade. 
geur-bhreithneachadh,]f -aidh, s.m. Criticism. 
geur-bhreithnich, v.a. Criticize. 
geur-chluas, Ais, s.f. Quick hearing. 2 Sharp 
ear. 3 Short notice. 
--——acil, -aiche, 
2 Having pointed ears. 
geur-chosgach,** æ. Anti-acid. 
geur-chronaich, St v.a. Chide. 
genr-chuis, e, s. f. Subtlety. 2 Sagacity. 3* 
Acuteness, ingenuity. 4(Ms) Aptness, genius... 
5* Mental energy. Fear pa geur-chuise, 
the cunning fellow. 
—each, -eiche, a. Ingenious, shrewd, 
inventive. 2: Penetrative, sharp. 3 Subtle. 
4 Strict, rigorous. 
geur-dheare,$ s. 
dearc. ; 
geur-fhacal, -ail, -clan, s.m. Witticism, gibe. 
———ach, -aiche, see geur-fhaclach. 
geur-fhaclaeh, -aiche, a. Witty, satirical. 
geur-fhiaclach, a Sharp-toothed. 2 serrated} 
Corran g., œ serrated sickle. 
geur-fhios,if -a, s.m. Familiar aquaintance. 
— — — — ,** s,f. Intelligence, clear knowledge.. 
——rach, -aiche, a. Fully knowing. 2 
Thoroughly intelligent. ELM 
geur-fhradharcachd,tf s.f.ind. Perspicuity. 
geur-fhuathachadh,ft -aidh, s.m. Abhorrence. 
geur-fhuathaich,ț} v.a. Abhor. : 
geur-ghaoth, sf. Sharp or bitiug wind. . 
geur-ghath, -a, -an, 8.. Sharp dart or sling. 
-—ach, -aiche, &. Armed with sharp darts 
or stings. f 
geur-ghoimh, s.f. Severe pain, throb of anguish. 
——each, a. In severe pain, thrubolng 
with pain. 2 Causing severe pain. 
geur-ghoith, see geur-ghoimh. 
| ^eur-jnuin,** s. Agony. 
geur-innleachd, -an, St, Subtlety. 2 Cleyerness, 





æ. Quick of hearing. 


Whortleberry, see lus-nan- 




















iugenuity. 3 Invention, contrivance.’ 
- ach, -aiche, a. Subtle. 2 Invent- 
ive. 3 Sagacious. 


geur-laun,** -lainn, s.m. Sharpsword. 2 
Sheep-louse. 
swords. ; 

—ach, e. Wearing or armed with a sharp 
sword. 

geur-lean, pr.pt. a geur-leanmhuinn, v.®. Per- 
secute. 2 Harass. 3 Pursue hotly. x 

— —..——achd, s.f. Persecution. 2 Hot pursuit. 

——-.——-qmhuinn, -ean, s.m. Persecution, act of 
persecuting. 2 Hot pursuit, Dean g., perse- 
cute; g. no gort, persecution or famine. A’ g—, 
pr.pt. of geur-leau. f 

--—mhuinneach,** @. Persecuting, prone 

to persecute. 2 Like, of, or pertaining to per- 

secution. 

-—mnhuinniche,** s.m. Persecutor. 

geur-mhagadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Sarcasm,- 
bitter jest. | 
gcuz-mhoasacb, -aiche, a. Neat. 


(AF) 
Iomairt gh., the play of sharp 











UNIV 


iT IA Fg s UE 
VE 311 1 LE NOI 3 B | 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


geur-mhothachadh 


geur-mhothachadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Lively 


feeling, lively perception. 2 Full conviction. 


geur-oisinn, s.f. Acute angle. 


geur-rannsachadh, -aidh, s.m. Diligent search- 


ing, act of searching diligently. 2[[Criticism. 
A’ g—, pr.pt, of geur-rannsaich. 
geur-rannsaich, pr.pt. a’ geur-rannsachadh, oo. 
Search diligently. 
geur-sheallach, a. Sharp-sighted, clear-sighted. 
geur-shrónach, -aiche, a. Sharp-nosed. 
geur-shuil, s.f. Sharp, keen, or penetrating eye. 


—— —— —each, -eiche, a. Sharp-sighted, having 


a quick eye. 

——eachd,fI s.f.ind. Perspicuity. 

geur- smachd, -a, s.m. Severity. 

————— ach, -aiche, o Severe,stern. 2 
Rigid. 


geur-theann, a. Rigid. 
paur oe athe s.m. Keen aspiration, 
geur-thuigseach,ff -eiche 
geur-thurail, -e, Eë Acute. 


gh, serted here, see under g. 

gheabh, for gheibh. 

gbeibh, fut. af. of irr. v. faigh. Shall get. 

——-—eada, 2nd. & 3rd. sing., past subj. of faigh. 
Would get. 

eamaid, Ist, pl. past subj. of faigh. 

would get. 

ear, fut. ind. pass. of faigh. 
gheibhear thu, you will do weil; also used in 
a present sense, bravo ! you are doing well. 

e Ist. sing. past subj. of faigh. I would 
geb. 

——-—teadh, past subj. pass. of faigh. Might, 
could, would or should be found, 

ghios, for a dh’ fhios. 

gi, see ged. 

giaban, -ain, -an, s.m. Gizzard, fowl's stomach. 

ach, -aiche, a. Of,orrelating to gizzards. 
2 Having a large gizzard. 

giabhair, s.f. Prostitute. 

eachd, s.f. Prostitution. 

giadh, see gèadh. | 

giadh-gaob, see géadh-gaob, 

gial, see giall. 

gialach, see giallach. 

tgiall, -a, -an, s. Hostage, pledge. 

giall, -a & geille, -an, s.f. Jaw, cheek. 2 Gill of a 
fish. 3 Cheek or jaw of a boat, see H2, p.73. 
Bhuail thu an g., thou hast struck their cheeks; 
cuamii-géille, a jaw-bone, 

—— ich, -aiche, a. Having gills, cheeks, or 
j 2 Of, or connected with, gills, cheeks, 

















jaws. 
or jaws. 3 Having large gills, cheeks or jaws. 
—— -bhrat, -ait, s.m. Neck-cloth, cravat. 
giaman, see geaman. 
ach,(DMC) s. m. Good specimen of any 
creature. "See a th’ annad, you are a stal- 
wart fellow ; g. bric, a splendid trout, 
giamh, -eimh & (ta, an, s. m. Defect, fault, 
blemish. 2 Fear. 3** see ciabh. 
ach, -aiche, a. Faulty, defective. 2 
Fearful, fearing. 
achd,** s.f.ind. Faultiness, defective- 
ness. 2 Timidity. 
gianach,** -aiche, æ. Lazy, inactive. 
— — ——as8,** -ais, s.m. Laziness, inactivity, in- 
dolence. 
gianair,** -ean, s.m. Sluggard. 
Ze eachd,** s.f. Sluggishness. 
glar, see geur. 
— gibeach, -eiche, a. Rough, hairy. 2 Having the 
- hairin bunches, 3 Fringed. 4 Pretty. 5 
Neat, tidy. 6(DU) Having ragged, untidy 
clothes, 7(AH)Spry, active, agile. An fhairge 
gh., the rough sea. 














Digitized by 


IKITEBNMET ARBCUIE 
| | 4 ) E D N E ] i^ rA L. H | y » U 


491 












For words beginning with gh, and not in 


We 





Is math a 


—-——— -suiriche,** s.m. 
gibearnach, 





gibne 


Neatness, tidiness, Spruce- 
ness. 2 Hairiness,rough- 








aS, -ais, S.7n. 

-———d, s/f. 
ness. 

gibeag, -eig,-an, s.f. Rag. 2 Bundle, bunch, 
particularly of flax. 3 Little sheaf. 4 Fri e, 
Hounce. 5** Largesse, boon. 6**Gipsy. 7 
(DMO) Ringlet or tuft of hair or wool. 2(DM 
C) Shaggy little animal. 9(PJM) Small neat 
woman. Mogh. air an ürlar, my neat one on 
the (dancing) floor. 

ach, -aiche, v. Ragged. 2 Abounding in 
excrescences. 3 In little sheaves or bundles 
4** Having a fringe or flounce. 5(DMC),Shag- 
gy, having long hair or wool.= 

gibeagachadh,** -aidh, s.m. Tying up in small 
bundles, as of unmilled flax. 2 Fringing, 

gibeagaich, pr.pt. a’ gibeagachadh, oo Tie in 
small bunches or handfuls, as unmilled flax. 
2 Fringe. 

gibeagan,{ -ain, s.m. Ruff—machetes pugnaz. 2 
**Iringe. 








370. Gibeagan. 
gibeal, -il, -an, s.m. see gioball. 
gibean, -ein, -ean, s.m. Hunch on the back. 9 
Grease from the solan goose's stomach—Sé. 
Kilda. 3 Kind of pudding made in the Heb- 
rides. 4tlPiece of flesh. 5 (DU) Poor ragged 
fellow. 6(DMC) Person soaked through and 


dripping with rain, 7(DMO) Tuft. 

acht a. Abounding in pieces of flesh. 

Bur. 

s.m. John MacFadyen, author of 
Sgeulaiche-nan-caol, says erroneously transla- 
ted '' cuttle-fish ? by Gaelic Dictionaries, in- 
stead of ‘‘ squid, or ink fish." The latter, al- 
though belonging to the same family, has lit- 
tle or no resemblance to the former, except 
that it has feelers and can squirt black liquid. 
It is about a foot long, and bas one jointless 
bone not unlike a shoe-horn in shape. 

feibnis, s.f. Valley, glen. 

gibhte,** s.f. Gaelic spelling of gift. 

———alachd,** s. f. Condition of being gifted 
with good qualities. 

———amas,** -ais, sm. Donation, gift. 

——ach,ff -eiche, a. Belonging to gifts. [This 
and the last three are given by ** and 11, but 
are all English.] 

gibiche, s.m. see gibichead. 

———ad, -id, s.m. Raggedness, shagginess, 
roughness, degree of roughness. 2 Neatness. 
3 Prettiness. <A’ dol an g., growing rougher 
and rougher. 

Giblean, -ein, s.m. Month of April. [Preceded 
by the art. on, 

Giblin, see Giblean. 

giblion, s.m. Entrails of a goose. 

gibne,** s, Thread. 2 Greyhound, 3 Cub. 4 
Cupping-horn, 

212 





Oriair 


i| tr mre 
| E 

= A. = 

d Fa = LE 3 SE E AT 
kä ms Y | VII ] 3 jM 
LET * = Ver El nga i 


BANA-CHAMPAIGN 


UNI IS 


—= 
= 
KA 


U 


gibneach 


gibneach, -ich, 8. m. see gibearnach. 2(AF), 


Sea-urchin. 

gibue-gortach,(AF) s.m. Greyhound, cub. 

gibne-praiseach,(A F) s.m. Greyhound, cub. 

gid, gen.sing. & n.pl. of gead. 

gidh, see gidheadh. [although. 

gidheadh, eonj. Yet, 2 Though, 

gidhis, see gighis. 

gidhisear, see gighisear. 

gidhrean, see giodnran. 

gig,** s.f. Tickling. 

gigeach,(MMeL) a. 

gigeal, see diolgadh. e 

gigean, -ein, -an, s.m. Dwarf. 2 Term of con- 
tempt. 31 Little mass. 

gigeanach, -aiche, e. Dwarfish. 

gigearsaich, s.f. Levity. 

gigein, see gigean. ANT 

gighis, -ean, s.f. Masquerade, mask, disguise. 

— —— ear,** -eir, 3.m. Man in à mask, masque- 
rader. 

—  — earachd,** sf.ind. Masquerading, mask- 
ing, going about in a mask. 

Zeil, s.f. Water. 

gil, gen. sing. of geal. 

gil (AC) s.f. Watercourse on a mountain-side. 2 
Rift. 3 The moon. 

gilb, -e, -ean, s.f. Chisel. 

gilb-chruaidh,tf s. f. Cold-chisel, steel chisel. 

gilb-chruinn, s.f. Gouge. 

gilbeach,tt a. Abounding 1n chisels. 

gilb-thollaidh, s.f. Mortice-chisel. 

gilceag,(AH) s.f. Little finger or toe. 

gile, s.f. nd. Whiteness,fairness, clearness. Gile 
an anairt, the whiteness of the linen. 

gile, comp. of geal. Whiter, whitest. 
whiter. 

gileab, see gilb. 

gilead, -id, s.m. Whiteness, degree of whiteness. 

gileim, see giolam. 

gile-ghréine (a gh—), 
Fingal’s banner. 

gill, gen.sing. & n.pl. of geall. 

gille, -an, s.m. Boy, lad, youth. 2 Man-servant. 
3 Ploughman. 4 Bachelor—Arran. [Gille is 
used in addressing a young man or youth, as 
ciamar tha thu 'ille P how are you (ad 2]; g. 
muinntir, æ family- or farm-servant ; dh'thàs 
na gillean, the boys grew ; leanabh-gille, a 


nevertheless. 


Hard-muscled. 


2* Gouge. 


Na’s g., 


$.f. One of the names of 


male child ; na leig do làmh air A gh., do not | 


harm the lad ; g. firein ise ‘fas dh’ itheadh e 
war mheileadh bra, a growing lad would eat 
as much as quern would grind. 

gilleacha-fionn, s.m. see gille-fionn. 

gilleachas,** -ais, s.m. Agency. 

gilleachafionntruinn, see gille-fionn, 

gilleachd,** sf. Service. 2 Management of an 
affair. 3 Conduct. 

gilleadas,** ais, s.m. Bachelorship. 2 Celibacy. 

gilleagan, -ain, -an, s.m. Doll. 

gille-airm,** s.m. Armour-bearer. 

gillean,** -ein, s.m, Eunuch. 

, ^. pl. of gille. 

gilleas,** s.m, Condition of a manserva-. 

gilis-boidhre,(AF) s.m. Fox. 

gille-bhrog,** s.m. Shoeblack. 

gille-Brighde, -ean-,s.m. Oyster-catcher, sea-piet 
—hometopus ostralegus. [see illust. 371.] 

gille-bridein,1 s.m. see gille-Brighde. 

gille-Caluim, s.m. Sword-dance. So called from 
the first two words of a song generally asso- 
ciated with the tune to which it is danced. 

gille-cas-fliuch,** s.m. Attendant of a chieftain 
who carried his master over streams, and 
when necessary, into and out of boats. 

gille-cleas, s.m, Play-actor. 

gille-coise, -ean-, s,m. Footman. 





Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


492 








Zei D 
` 


371. Gille- Brigde. 
gille-comh-sreathainn,** &. m. Attendant of æ 
chieftain who took care of his master’s horse. 
gille-cràigein( AF) am. Frog. 2 Toad. 
gilje-cuim,tt s.m. Body-servant. 
gille-cum-sréine, see gille-comh-sreathainn. 
gille-cupa, -an-, s.m, Cup-bearer. 
gille cupain,” see gille-cupa. 
gille-driüchd, (plant) see lus-na-fearnaich. 
gille-each, -an-, s.m. Groom. 2 Stable-boy. $ 
(DMK) Ploughman. 


gille-feadaig, T s.m. Dunlin, (bird) see pollaran. 


gille-fiondrainn, see gille-fionn. 

gille-fionn, -an-fionna, s.m. Large periwinkle, 
white buckie, whelk. (pl. also gilleacha-fionn 
—AF.j 2(DMK) Small white periwinkle— W. 
coast of Ross. 

gille-fionn-brinn, see gille-fionn. 

gille-fionn-truim, see gille-fionn. 

gille-fiunnd, see gille-fionn. 

gille-flidir,(DU) s.m. Message-boy, courier. 

gille-gnothaich,* s.m. Messenger. 

gille-gormain, see gille-guirmein. 

gille-gràidh,** s.m. Secretary, chief servant. 

gille-greasaid, -ean-aid, s.m. see gille-greasaidh. 

gille-greasaidh, -an-aidh, s.m. Postilion. 2 Coop- 
er's hammer or driver. 

gille-guirmein,$ -ean, s.m. Field-scabious, corn- 


field knautia—kmnautia arvensis. 2$ Blue-bot- 
tle, see gorman. 
Mc 
NA S 
SS OS 
AN SS 
f VOA 
A 
WW A | ; 
ES à 
- N 3 





872. Gille-guirmein. 
gille-marcachd, see gille-greasaidh, 1. 
gille-martuinn, -ean-, s.m. Fox. 
gille-mirein, -ean-, s.m. 'Tee-totum, 
eille-müchain, s.m. Chimney-sweep. 
gille-mu-leann, see gille-mu-lunn. 
gille-mu-lunn,$ s. m. The seaweed sea-laces— 

chorda filum. This plant is frequently from 
20 ft, to 40 £t. in length. 


whitligig. 


Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS A 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN - 


-— 


' gineadair, -ean,s m. Progenitor, parent. 


gile mu-lunng 493 gioblait 


gille-mu-lunng, Gairloch, dc, for gille-mu-]unn. G. taghta. a chosen generation, 
gille-na-eubhaige,*] (bird) see geocair. eoe f, gf. (SEO ginealach. 8 
gille-neamhag(AF) s.m. Water-adder. ginealaich. oa see gin. 2 Grow, as corn in 
gille-og,(AF) s.m. Salmon. shocks 3**Vegetate  4** Branch out, as a 
gille-piobair,"* se m. Piper’s attendant, who tree or family, 
carried the pipes when not being played upon. tgimeamhair, s.m. January. : 
He formed one of a chieftain’s train in for-|gineamhuinu. s.m. Begetting. state of being 
mer times, for the piper being then acknow-| begotten. 2 Conception. 3 Producing. 4 
ledged as a gentleman and not, as at present,| Sprouting. , 5 Production, 6 Birth. 7 Bud, 
a servant, thought it degrading to carry the| sprout A £—. pr.pt. of gin. O "n gh, 
jastrument about with him. from the conception. 
gille-pinn, s.m. Clerk. each, -ich, o see ginteacb. 
gille-ruadi,(AF) s.m. Salmon parr. ~-——eachd,** s.f, Productiveness, state 
| of being prolific, generativeness, genitiveness. 
J ginean,;-ein, an, s.m. & f. Diminutive creature. 
2 Fostus. 
ta, @ Easy of growth, prolific. 
tachd, s.f. State of being prolific, geni- 
tiveness, generativeness, 
gineideach,"* -eiche, a. Prolific, generative, 
productive. 
gimeil,** o Prolific, genial, gemerative. 2 
Stout, compact. 
gingein, s.m. Cask, barrel. 2t Thick-set person. 
gini, Gaelic'spelling of guinea. 
ginis,(TS) s.f Gean. 
V le: tginneal, .il, an, s.m. see geinn. 
gille-shalm, -an-, see fear-togail-fuinn. ginte, past pt. of gin. Begotten. 
gille-stabuill, s.m. Stable-man, à ginteach, -ich, s.m. The genitive case, 
gille-suiridhe, -an-, s.m. Courtier suitor. ?2f1|. » @ Breeding, breede, 2 Buddy. 3 
Lover’s spokesman. 3(MMcL) Best man. 4 Prolific. 
Flatterer. ` ` k gintealach, -ich, o see geintileach. 
gille-truis-airnis, s. m. Courier, messenger. 2|pintealas, -ais, s.m. see geintileaehd. 
Attendant of a chieftain who carried his bag- gintear,** -ir, s.m. Father, parent. 2(MS) An- 
gage or wallet. cestor Umhal do d’ ghintearaibh talmhaidh, 
gilin,(AF) s.m. Horse. obedient to thy earthly parents. 
giim, -ean, s.m. Buzzard, _ gintinn, s.m.ind. Begetting, procreating, produ- 
gilmean, -ein, -an, s.m. Dainty, spruce, talka- cing. A’ g—, pr.pt. of gin. 
tive fellow, flatterer, fop. 2tfSycophant. 3 Tg10b," s.f. Shag, hairiness. 2**Tail 3**Rug. 
(DMC) Small green knoll or patch of ground, 4tf Gluttony. 
ach, -aiche, o Dainty, spruce, trim, ,** s.m, Pluck, pull. 
foppish. Gu g., sprucely. , ,** og Pull, pluck, 
fgimleach, -ich, s.m. One fettered or chained. —ach, -aiche, o see gibeach. 
gimleid, -ean, s.f. Gimlet. = t——ach, -aich, s.f. Coarse rug. 
each, tt a. Abounding in gimlets, giobach,** s.m. Fur. 
gin, pr.pt. a gintinn a’ gineadh & a’ gineamh- |giobachas, Ais. see gibeachas. 
uinn, po Beget, produce. O ‘na ghine- giobadh, -aidh, s.m. Pull, tug. 
adh e, since he was begotten ; mu 'n do ghin- | giobag,** -aig, s.f. see gibeag. | 
eadh na cnuic, before the hills were produced S ach, o see gibeagach. 
ghin an crodh, the cattle gendered. ——— achadh, see gibeagachadh. 
gin, s.f, Anyone. 2** Being, substance, pro- -——aich, see gibeagaich. 
duction. 3**Sort, kind. ‘Gin sam bith, any an, -ain, s.m. see gibeagan. 2n.pl of 
one whatever ; chan ’eil gin ann, there is not giobag. 
any . cha d’ thàinig g., no one came ; am bheil giobairneach,* s.m. see gibearnach. 2 Solan 
g agad? have you any ? goose—Uist Bards, | 
Ten, s. Mouth. giobaiche, see gibichead. 
gin, s.f. Gender. : -——————ad, see gibichead. 
gineadach,** a. Creative. giobalag,(CR) s. f. Overwrought woman, 2 
gineadailjff eo Procreant, Down-trodden woman—W. of Ross-shire. 
gioball, -aill, s.m. Vesture. 2 Canvas. 3 Cast 
clothes. 4 Fur, hair. 6 Rag, clout. 6tChap, 
odd fellow, term of disrespect. 7* Odd lady. 
8* Mantle, shawl. Mar gh. sean, like an old 
garment. À 
ach. -aiche, o Full of hairs, hairy. 2 
Ragged. 3**Rough. 
-— ach, aich, s.m. Ragged person. 2 Rough 
or hairy man, n. 
achd, s.f.ind. Raggedness. 2 Hairiness, 
roughness. 
gioban,(AF) s.m. Sand-eel, 
gioban-lortach,(AF) s.m. Oil from the fat of 
the solan goose, used as a cure for various 
ills in man and beast. 
gioban-suiriche,** s.m. Bur. 
giobarsaich,* s.f. see gibichead. 
gioblait,(DMC) s.f. Person wearing a long rage 
























c 











872. Gille-ruadh. 
gille-ruithe, -an-, s.m. Courier, runner. 2**Foot- 
man. 3** Postman. [barn. 
gille-sabhail, (AH) s.m. Man that works in a 
gllle-sguain, s.m. Train-bearer. 




















gineadalachd, s.f.ind. Procreativeness 

gineadan,** s.pl. The genitals, 

gineadh, idh, s.m. Begetting. 2**Cast. 4° 
g—, pr.pt. of gin. [Used only in its aspira. 
ted and passive form—[r.] 

gineag, -aig, s.f. Acrospire. 2 Tendril, twig, 
sprout. 3**Germ, 4**Scion. 

ach,** a, Having germs or sprouts. 2 Like 
a germ or sprout, 

giveal, el, an, s.m d f. Offspring, race, lin- 
eage. 2**Children, 3 Generation. 4*Growth 
of corn in the stack or shock. Do gh., your 
ofspring ; a’ gh. dhubh, the black race ; danns- 
aidh an g., their children shall dance. 

ginealach, -aich, -aichean, s.m. [s.f. in Suth’d 
proper—DMu] Race, oftspring, generation, 
single succession. 2 Genealogy, pedigree, 











Digitized. by 


ET m de? e neo A A A Ze A RAGA e A 
INTERNET ARCHIVE URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


a= 


gioblait 4 


MM ECRIRE ADR 14 c MM cota webs h xcu oete 
ced garment. 

giobull, -uill, see gioball. 

gioburlag,(MMcL) s.f. Little. insignificant 
untidy woman, slut. 

giodal, -ail, prov. for miod 

ach, -aiche, @ prov. 

achd, see miodalachd. 

giodalaiche, prov for miodalaiche. 

giodar, -air, s.m. Dung, ordure. prov. : 

ach, -aiche, a. Full of, or covered with 
dung. 

giodh, see gidheadh & g 


and 


al. 
for miodalach. 











ed. 


giodhran, -ain, -an, s.m. Barnacle (fish.) 2 In. 
strument placed on the nose of an unruly 
horse. 3 Barnacle goose. 


ak 
De F; V, 





374. Giodhran (1.) 
giodhrnan, 


s iodhrsan, } see giodhran. 

ygiofach,** a. Dutiful. 2 Officious. $ Attentive. 

d, s.f. Dutifulmess. 2 Attentiveness, 3 

Officiousness. ' 

Tgiofag, -aig, -an, s.f. Female client. 2 Officious 
woman, gipsy. 

Feiofair, sym. Client. 

+ eachd, s.f. Officiousness. 

giog, s. Prickle of the teazle. 

giog, pr.pt. a’ giogadh, v.n. Cringe, fawn, flat- 
ter. 2* Peep, steala look at. Gh, e staigh 
air an uinneig, Ae peeped wn at the window : 
cha ghiogainn do dhuine, I would not cringe to 
any man. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Prone to flatter, ‘cringe or 
fawn. 2 Cringing, fawning. 

tgiogach, -aich, s.m. Budget, bag. 

giogadh, -aidh, s.m. Cringing, act of cringing. 
fiattering or fawning. A’ g—, pr.pt. of giog. 

T2ziogail, v.g. Follow, pursue. 

giogaileid,(MS) s.f. Guiglet. 

giogaill, v.g. see diogail. 2(MS) Giggle 








giogair,* s.m. Cringer, fawner. 2**Uneasy 
person. 
giogal, s.m. see diogladh. 2**Pursuit. 


gìogan, -ain, -an, s.m Thistle 2 (CR) Sea- 
urehin— W. of Ross. 3** Flattery, 4 (MS) 
Bur. 5(DMC) Brooch in the side of a Glen- 
garry bonnet. Bog-gh., sow-thistle, see cluar- 
an. 





——ach, -aiche, a. Full of thistles. 2 Flatter- 
ing. 
giogladh, -aidh, s.m. Pursuing, 2 see diogladh. 


Digitized by 


NTERNET ARCHIV 


|giole,* v.a. & n. Bend, stoop. 


91 gionaiche 
eioirneanach, see giornanach,.. 
giol,* af see deal. 
| gioladh,** -aidh, s.m. Leaping nimbly. 
giolag, see euilc. 
giolaid,** s.f. Inlet, little creek. 
giolam, -aim, s.m. Tattling. G. goileam, tittle 
tattle 
ach, -aiche, a. Prone to tattling 2**Gab- 
bling, prating 
achd, s.f.ind. Tattling. 
—an, -A. 1, -an, s.m. Little petulant fellow. 
2** Tattler, prater. 
anachd,** s.f. Tattling, prating. 
giol-bhéist,** sf Naiad. 





















2 Aim ab, 3 
4**Make a sudden darting 
5óffPop. Giolcam ort, let me try 


**Move nimbly. 
movement. 
to hit you. 
1——, -an, s.m, **Broom. 2 see cuilce. 
giolcach, a. & s.f see cuilceach. 
— — —— -sléibhe, s.m. Broom, see bealaidh, 
gioleadh, -aidh, s.m. Nimble motion. 2 Bolting 
forward. 3 Flippanoy. 
tgiolcag, see giolc. 
giolcaidh, -e, œ. see cuilceach. 
giolcail, a. Broomy. 2 see cuilceach. 
gioleair, -ean, s.m. Flippant fellow. 2 Inéruder. 
— — ——eachd, s.f.ind. Flippancy, garrulity. 
giolcam-daobhram, aim, s.m. The smallest sup- 
posable living thing, animalcule. 
giolcanach,** a. Flippant. 
——_——-—d,** s.f. Flippancy. 
giolla, -an, s.m. see gille. 2 Ploughman—Arran, 
——ch, -aiche, a. see giullach. 
—-—chd, s.f. see giullachd, 
giollaich, see giullaich. 
d, see giullachd. 
giollan, see giullan. 
giolman, -ain, see g10laman. 
—— ——aàch, see giolamach. 
— ———achd, s.f. see giolamachd. 
giol-tholl,* s.f. see deal-each. 
giomach, -aich, s.m. Lobster 
ail, -e, a Lobster-like. 
-cuain, see giomach-spàinteach. 
-spàinteach,(AF) s.m Crayfish. 
—— ———— .uisge,*see giomach-spainteach. 
gioma-goc-ard,( AH) s.m. Act of sett.ng a child 
astraddle on one's neck, with its legs hanging 
in front, cocky-ridy. *‘Gioma-goc ° is always 
used without '* àrd " in the Strathglass and 
Beauly districts, — WC. 


a 


giomaich, gen.sing d n. pl. of giomach. 
gìomanach, ich, s.m. Hunter, sportsman. 2* 
Masterly fellow in anything, 38ttGun, G.a’ 


ghunna, the masterly marksman, 

giomh, a, s.m. see giamh, 

giomhach, @ see giamhach. 
— — —d, see giambachd. 

giomhas, ais, s.m. Fringe. 

eiomhanach,(DC) s. m. One who is timid, "S 
ordugh teann ag iarraidh sìthne 'cur nan g. 
‘nan éigin, and aq strict order to procure vent- 
son, placing the timid (deer) within danger— 
Donn, Ban, 5th. ed. p. 46. 

giomlaid,* see gimleid. | 

gion,* s.m, Excessive love or desire, appetite. 2 
Avarice. 3Swallow. Tha mo gh. ort, I am 
excesswely fond of you. 

—ach, -aich, see gionachd. 

—— ach, niche, a. Greedy, avari 
ous, ravenous, 2 Appetised. 
4 Keen. 

—achd,* s.f. Greed, hunger, gluttony, avide 
ity, vosacity, avarice. 2 Ambition, 

——aiche, s.m. see gionachd. 

—aiche, comp. of gionach, 


<. 


cious, glutton- 
3 Ambitious. 


"Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS. A 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


gionaichead 


gionaichead,** s.m. Avidiby. 

gionair, -ean, s.m. Glutton, greedy-gut. 

Gion-bhair,** s.m. January. é 

gionc, see gion-chu. 

gíion-chu,(AF)s.m. Dog, greedy or ravenous dog. 
Cha'n fhàg g. an druaip, the greedy dog won't 
leave even dregs. 

giontuiun, see gintinn. 

gioradan, -ain, -an, s.m. Periwinkle, sea-snail. 
2(AF) Lamprey. 

giorag, -aig, -an, s. E Dread, fear, panic, af- 
fright. 2 Noise, tumult, 3** Cause of dread 
or fear. 4 Babble. (PJM) Sudden start. 
Nàmhaid gun gh., a fearless enemy : fo gh., 
troubled, afraid , chuir thu g. vrm, you gave 
me a start, 

———uüch, -aiche, a. Timid, fearful, panic- 
struck. 2 Noisy, talkative. 3** Distrustful, 
jealous. G. roimh lotaibh, afrad of wounds 

aich,(MS) v.a, Affright, appeal 

———aiche,** s.m. Chatterer. 

an,**-ain, s.m. Babbler. 

gioraic,( AF) s. Greyhound. 

gioraig, v.a. Babble. 

gioraman, -ain, s.m. Hungry fellow, greedy-gut. 

gioramhach,** æ. Greedy ‚gluttonous, insatiable, 
covetous. 

——d,** s.f. Greediness, gluttony, cove- 
tousness. 

giornanach,(AC) e, Spiral. 

giornailear, see girneilear. 

giorr,** v.a. Glut, sate, 

giorra, comp. of geàrr & goirid. Shorter, short- 
est, 2 Sooner, nearer. 3 Morelately. Na's 
g., Shorter ; isea’s g. de 'n triùir, ke is the 
shortest of the three ;is g. a chunnaie mi 
Domhnall na thusa, I have seen Donald more 
lately than you have; is geàrr bhuam am bas, 
lam near death—said by the devil when some- 
one had ill-treated him, and he received the 
reply, gu ma giorra bhuat na sin e, may you 
be nearer it than that. 

.S.f. see giorrad. 

giorrach, -aich, s.m. Short and dry heath or hair. 
2**Stubble. 

adh, -aidh, s. m. 

shortening, abbreviation, 

giorraich. 

an,** .ain. s.m Abridger, curtailer. 2 

Abridgement, 

sf. see giorrad 

giorrad, -aid, s.m. Shortness, degree of short- 
ness 2* Fewness 3 Abridgement. G. làith- 
ean nog. shaoghail, fewness of days, shortness 
of fe, athaobba ghtorraid, by reason ofits 
shortness. 

giorradair see giorraiche, 

giorradan, .ain, an, s.m. Compendium, abbre- 
viation. 2** Kind of periwinkle, see faochag. 

giorrag, see giorag. 

giorraich, pr.pt. a’ giorrachadh, v.g. Shorten, 
abbreviate, curtail. 

*—— ———-e, -an, s.m. Curtailer. 

te, past pt. of giorraich. Shortened, 
abbreviated, curtailed, docked. 

giorraid, s.m. see giorrad. Is giorraid efsin, it 
is the shorter of that. 

giorraiseach,(CR) s.m.jHare—Farr & W. of Ross. 

tgiorraisg, -e, œ. Inconsiderate, imprudent. 

glorra-shaoghail,tts.f Short life. G. ort! (a 
_malediction) short life to you! 

giorrta, see giorraichte. 

giorruin, see giodhran. 

giorsadh,tt s.m. Pinching of the skin by salt- 
waber or cold. 

giort, -a, -an & -achan, s.f. Saddle-girth, belly- 
band. 2 Haunch, buttocks. 3(DC)Edge,rim. 











Shortening, act of 
A' g—, pr. pt. of 














Digitized by 


ITTTETEXEIT om a p". jJ 
i LE A rh oM | VI 
d 3k PAIX ui 


495 


egith 

giort,** v.a. Gird, tie, lace. 

——ach, -aiche, a, Of, or belonging to girths. 2 
Having many girths. 

giortag, s.f. Buttoek. Na laoigh bhreaca, bhall- 

ach, le ’n giortagan the spotted and dappled 

young deer with their white buttocks—Beinn 





Doran. 
giortaich, v.g, Gird, tie with girths. 
- te, past part. of giortaich. Girded, girt. 


giortaideach,** a. Having large buttocks. 

tgiortail, v.g. Patch, mend. 

giort-gheal, a. White-edged. 

fgiosg, s.f. Yeast, balm. 

giosg,* pr.pt. a’ giosgail, v.n. Creak. 2 Crash 
G t’ fhiaclan, gnash your teeth. [dìosg in Uist.) 

-——. s.m. Creaking noise, creak, roar. 

giosgach,** -aich, s.m. Wavering. 2 Wavering 
fellow. 

, a. Crashing. 2 Causing a crashing or 

creaking sound. 

giosgadh,** -aidh, s. m. Crashing. 2 Creaking, 
A’ g—, pr.pt. of giosg. Crainn a’ g. le dealan, 
trees crashing with lightning. 

giosgail,** a. Crashing. 2 Causing a crashing 
or creaking scund. 

— — —,* s.f. Creaking, gnashing. 
clangour. A’ g—, pr.pt. of giosg. 

giosgain,** s.m. Barm. 

gìosgan, -ain, s.m. Gnashing. 2 The creaking 
noise of hinges or wheels, G. fhiacal, gnash- 
ing of teeth. [diosganin Uist.] 

———ach,** -aich, s.m. Waddler. 

aich, s.f. see giosgan. 

tgiost,** Gaelic form of yeast, 

tgiostaireas,** eis, s.m. Old age. 

giostal, -ail, see geastal. 

giotadh,** -aidh, s.m. Appendage. 2 Depend- 


2 Roaring, 


ance, 

giotanach,(DC) s.m. Sorner (term of contempt,) 

gir,-ean, s.f. see githir. ` j 

gircean, s.m. Pigmy. 2 Fribbler. 3 Shrimp, 

gircean,** s.m. Grig. 

—ach,** a. Pigmean, diminutive. 

—— —achd,** s.f. Diminutiveness. 

giread(AF) s.m. Pike (fish.) 

girenan, s.m. see géadh-got. 

girlinn, s.f. see giodhran. 

girneilear,(MS) s.m. Granary. 2>Hutch. 

girt,-ean, s.m. Defence, protection, bulwark. 
2 see giort. 

girteach, -eiche, œ see giortach, i 1 

girteag, -eig, -an, s.f. dim. of girt. Little girth. 
2 Light spot or streak on the hand. 

girtich,** Gird. 2 Defend. P 

gis,* see giseag 2 see geas. 3 Gaelic spelling 
of guess. [Armstrong gives '' feuch an gis thu 
e, try and guess it, ' and '' doctair bi gis, œ 
quack," (a doctor by guess !!) but the only 
three words of which the latter 1s composed 
being English ones in Gaelic dress we must 
conclude that it was concocted by one who 
was a Gaelic scholar '' by guess."'j 

gise, Gaelic spelling of guise. Wi 

giseag, -eig, -an, s.f. Charm, spell, superstitious 
ceremony. 2(DMO) Witchcraft—Sutherland- 
shire. 3(DU) Kiss—Gatrloch. 


giseagach, -aiche, a. Superstitious. 2 Like a 
charm. 3**Ceremonious. Gu g., superstiti- 
ously. 


giseagachd, s.f Superstitiousness. 2 Supersti- 
tious ceremonies. 

giseal, eil, s.m. Line. a Á 

gisear,** s.m. Disguiser. Gaelic form of guiser. 

gisreag, see giseag. 

gisreagach, see giseagach. i 

gith, -ean, s.m. Shower. 2 Series, numbers. 3 

Pain in the wrist caused by spraining, and 


INTERNET 


eith 
common among seamen, reapers, navvies, &e. 
4 Humour. 5tfBlast. 6(AH) .Snow-shower, 
gith,** s. Maggot. 
githear,(MMcL) s.m. same as gith 3. | 
githeilis, s.f.ind. Running to and fro on trifling , 
errands. | 
githil, Reay country for githir. | 
githir, -ean, s.m. Pain in the wrist, see gith, 3, 
giuban, see giubhan. 
giubhal, -ail, s.m. Chirping of birds 
giubhan, -ain, s.m. Fly. 
giubhas, see giuthas. 
giubhasach, -aich, see giuthasach. 
giugaire, see giogair. 


496 


giuthas bàn 


youth. 3 Servant. Maide giullain, & boy's 
staff. 

giumhas,-ais, s.m. see giuthas. 

gi umpa eel: -aichean, s.f. Adulation, flat- 
ery. 

eum ‘gail, v.a. Flatter, fawn ucon. 

giumsgaileach, -eiche, a. Flattering, fawning’ 
upon. 5 

giunnach, -aich, s.m. Hair, 

giùr, see giùran. 

giùrain, gen.sing. & n.pl. of giùran. 

giurainnean,(MS) s.m. see giodùran 1. 

giuram, -aim, s.m. QCoimplainiag or mournful 
noise, 


giüd, gen. gitide & -a, pl. an, s.m. Wile, strata- giùran, -ain,-an, s.m. Fennel (plant.)—yseni- 


gem, evil contrivance, deceit. 2(DMC)Worth-: | 
less fellow. 

giüdach,tt a. Abounding in deceits or strata- 
gems. 

giudal, -ail, s.m. Prattle, tattle. 

giüg, v.a. Cringe, flatter. 

giügach,* -aiche, a. Drooping 2 Bending awk- 
wardly with the head on one side. 3ttCring- 
ing, fawning. 4}{Starving. 5**Jolt-headed. 
6** Drooping with cold. 

giüig, -e, -ean, s.f. Drooping of the head to one 
side, as of a person sheltering himself from 
rain 2 Chilly attitude. 3 Shrinking of the 
body from cold. 4 Crouch, 5 Jolt-head. 6 
iLangour. 

sivigire, tt s.m. Cringer, coward, spiritless fel- 
ow. 

giuir, -e, s.f. Gill of a salmon or trout. [* gives 
same as gitig. | 

giuirideach,*-ich, s.m. Cringing, drooping, mis- 
erable-looking person 

giuirne, s.f. Rocky hillock or knoll, on the side 
or summit of a mountain. 

giùlain, pr.pt. a’ giùlan, v.a.'& n. Carry, bear. 
acquit. 2 Endure. 3 Permit, 4 Support 6 
Conduct. 6 Behave. G.an gunna seo, carry 
this gun ; g. thu fhéin, conduct or behave your- 
self ; cha'n urrainn mi sin a gh., Z cannot bear 
that ; g. leam, put up with me. 

giülan,-ain, -an, s.m. Bearing, act of bearing, 
carrying. 2 Enduring, suffering. 3 Permit- 
ting. 4 Supporting. 5 Tolerating. 6 Beha- 
ving. "7 Conduct, behaviour, 8 Corpse. 9 
Bier. 16(PJM) Funeral. Do gh. fbéin you 
own conduct ; a’ g. a chlàrsaich, carrying his 
harp ; atharrachadh giùlain. æ change of con- 
duct. A’ g—, pr. pt. of giùlain, 

giulanair, s.m. Bearer. 

giülanta, a Well-behaved. 

giulla, -n, $.m. see giullan. 
fisbing from a boat. 

giullach, -aiche, a. Havingimany male servants. 
2 Genial. 3 Fostering, cherishing. 

giullachadh, -aidh, s.m. Cherishing, fostering, 
nursing, 

giullachd, s.f. Management. 2 Usage. 3 Con- 
duct, 4 Serving, guiding. 5* Preparing, 
dressing. 6 Improving. 7 Manufacturing 8 
Nourishment, ‘nursing. 9 (DMC) Treatment. 
10(MS) Economy. A’ g—, pr. pt. of giull- 
aich. Ruigidh anro-gh. air an ro-ghalar, 
good nursing will remove a bad complaint ; a’ 
g. leathrach, dressing leather ; a’ e, bhuntàta, 
dressing potatoes in the field ; a’ g. lin, dressing 
dint ; rinn a droch gh. air, he treated him bad- 
ly; cha’n’eil thu eòlach air a’ gh.-each, you 
are not skilled in horse management. 

giullaich, pr.pt. a’ giullachd, v.a. Manage well, 
use Well, 2 Cherish. 3 Dress, prepare. 4** 
Foster, rear. Giullaichidh e i, he shall foster 


her. 
giullan, -ain, -an, sm. Boy, little boy. 2 Lad, 


2 (MMcD) Fly- 


Digitized by 
ARCHIV 


AP 


culum vulgare. 2 Gills of a fisn. 
giodhran Bric le ball-bhreac gh., 
Spotted gills. i 

giùran, s.m. Barnacle, see giodhran. 

erie s.m. Beetle, horned beetle, butter, 

y. 

giüirne-mu-ghiüirn, s. Auger-dust. Có dhiubh is 
fhasa, bata a dheanamh de "pn gnuairne-mu- 
ghuairn, no cuaille de u guiùirne-mu-għiùirn P 
whether is it easier to make a stick of the quill- 
pith or acudgel of the auger-dust * —auother ver- 
sion of Tweedledum and Tweedledee, the phra- 
ses used having reference to the use of a turn- 
ing latne. 

gius, s.f Sow, pig. 

gius, int. Call to a pi 

giüsach, -aich, see giüthsach. 

giusaidh, s.f. Sow, pig. Lem in E. Perthshire, 
as, an do bhiadh sibh an g. P have you fed the 
pig ! ; but the pronoun may be jem., às, au d’ 
thug sibh a biadh do ’n gli. ? have you given 
the pig her food 2 | 

giusaidb, «nt Call to a pig. 

fgiusta, s.m. Can. tankard 

giustag,** .aig, s.f. 'l'hick-bodied girl. 

giustal, -ail. S. m. Games or athletic exercises 


3 prov. tor 
trout with 


used by the Gael of old at their public meet- 
ings. 
giut.(AH) s.m. Dodge, wile. trick. 
giütair,( AH) -ean, sm. Crafty person. 
——.—eachd,(AH) s.f. Craftiness. ` 
giüuhail, v,a. Cackle. 
Cackle. 


giüthail, $. 





875. Giuthas. 

giuthas, ais, s.m. Tbe Scots fir—pinus sylves- 
tris. G. nam mor-shhabh, the frs of the moun- 
tains. [Badge of Clan Alpine. Badge of the 
Farquharsons. The foxglove was also worn by 
the Farquharsons when in season. | 

giuthasach, -aiche, a. Abounding in fir or 
pine. 2 Like fir, piny. 

giuthas ban,(MMcL) s.m. Silver pine, 


Original trom 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS A 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


giuthas blair 


£iuthas blair,(WU)s.an. Bog-fir. | 
 giuthas dearg,(MMcL) s.m. ted pine. 
- giuvhas-geal,$-ais-gil, S. m. Silver pine—pinus 
mieed [first planted ab Iaverary custie, 1682. | 
J giuthas-iearaig, s.m. see learag. 
giutnas-Lochlannach,$ s.m. spruce flr.—abies 
|. Communis. $ 
giuthas-Sasunnaci,s s.m. Weymouth pine—-pin- 
us Strobus. [4t. nglish pine,—it is nob-an 
English but a N. American tree.] 
giuchsach, a. see giutuasach ` ; 
= giùthsach, -aich, s.f. Fir or pine forest. Teine 
' anus a’ ghiùthsaich chòrr, ire in the stately 
mune wood, 
glabair, s.m. Blab. 
— gabhbaig, Arran for gloic. 
= glabhchdaire,tt s. m. Nonsensical talker, blad- 
. dersKite. 
giac, pr.pt. a’ glacail & a’ glacadh, v.a, Take, 
seize, catch. 2 Snatch. 38 Apprehend. 4 
| Feel. 5 Receive, accept. 6 ttResume. Ghlac 
y iad a’ phoit ruadh,they seized the still ; gh, iad 
" e, they took him prisoner ; esan a galacas 
V baile, he who takes a town ; g. thusa foighi- 
diun, 's glacaidh tu iasg, you have (get) pa- 
—stience and you Ul get fish. 
= gla, glaice, -an, s.f. Hollow valley, defile, nar- 
row yalley. 2 Hollow of the hand. 3 Bosom. 
4 Embrace. 5 Handful. 6 As much of any- 
thing as can be caught between the thumb and 
middle flnger. 7 The span between the thumb 
aud middle finger. 8S(AC) Handful of corn cut 
at one stroke of the reaping hook. 9 Grasp. 
-— 30 Prong, fork, see bàta, p. 76. 11 Quiver. 12 
"^ <Apprebension. "Sa gutaic seo, in this hollow; 
|J. g na beiane, the defe of the mountain ; fuar 
-— ghb, a’ bhais, the cold embrace of death ; is gann 
i a cuitear tom no g., scarcely could hill or dell 
M be seen ; an glacaioh a chéile, wrestling with 
|... each other ; sgaoil e a gnlacan, he spread his 
@rms ; mile marbh-phaisg air an t-sabaid 
'ehaidh teadh ghlac mi m’ oarachd, a thousand 
Shrouds on the fight that proceeded whilst I 
realized my aloneness—Duanaire, 179. 
glacach,tt -aich, sm. Swelling in the hollow of 
the hand. 2 Sprain of the haud. 3*Palmful, 
baudful. 4 Form of consumption. 
glacach, -aiche, a. Full of hollows or narrow 
vaileys. 2 Grasping, snatching, catching. 3 
4. Ready to seize. 4 Forked. 5fTOf, or pertain- 
ing to, the hollow of the hand. 
glacadh-an-éig, s,m. Death-decline. 
glacadair,-ean, s.m. Catcher, seizer, one who 
catches or seizes. 2 Receiver. 
— glacadan, -ain, -an, s.m. Repository, receptacle. 
2 Trap. 
— glacada, -aidh, s. m. Taking, seizing, act of 





X € 


CUT SER" 
x re E a 


m 


z mum 


— 


A 








n 


= Seizing, snatching, catching. 2 Receiving. 3 
Grasp. 4 Forked part. 5 Acceptance. 6 


Feeling. 7 Attachment. A’ g—, pr.pt. of glac, 

— glacadh-ehléibh, s.m. Catching or stitch in the 

— Side. The name for massage as formerly prac- 

tised in Gaeldom for consumption was ‘a’ 

toirt nan clachau-eléibh dhe ’n ghille," taking 

the creel stones off the lad—Gael. Soc. Inv., xiv, 
301. 

glacag, -aig, -an. s f., dim. of glac. Little valley 


or dell. 2 Little handful. 3 Little palm. 4 
Bundle. 5 Trigger. Glacagan dìomhair, lone- 
ly dells. 


glacagach, aiche, a. Full of little valleys. 
— glaeaicnean-cléibh,l s.pl. Pleurodynia.  [Pre- 
— -— eeded by the art. na ] 
glacaid, -e, -ean, s.f Handful. Thug an talamh 
mach "oa ghlacaidibh, the earth produced in 
handfuls. 


glacaidh, gen.sing. of glacadh. 2 fut. af. a. of 


Digitized by 


BUNTERNET ARCHIVE 


497 


glag-fhéath 


giac. 

| gacail, (MS) a. Acute. 

glacail, -¢, s.m. see glacadh. 

glacair, can, s.m. One who seizes or catches, 
catcher, seizer, appreneader. 

| glaeaireachd, s.find. Seizere, impressment,act 

| of seizing or im,pressiag. 2 Handling. 

' glacais, sJ. Grasping, wrestling, grappling. 

glacaiseacu, d. Grasping, wrestling, grappling. 
2 Athletic, 

zlacamhui!l,/ MS) x. Apprehensive. 

zlacan, -aiu, s.m. Little palm. 2 Little grasp. 
3 Little dell. 4 Buadle. 5 Prong, fork. 

slacanach, -aiche, o Full oí little valleys. 2 
Forked, as a tree. 

glacar, fut. pass. of glac. Shall be caught. 

zlaclach, -aich, s.m. Handful. 2 Bundle, 

glac-leabhar, -bhraieueau, s.in. Pocket-book. 2 
Portable book. 3 Manual. 

glacinhor, -oire, a. Holding fast, grasping firmly. 
2ttCatehiug, seizing. 3 Fit to catch, 

glac-nan-cuileag, 8$, Mm. Spotted flycatcher, see 
breacan-glas. 

glacta, see glacte. i 

glacte, past pl. of glac. Caught, seized, appre- 
hended. Uha d'fhuair coigreach riamh mi g., 


a stranger never found me captive. [see note 
on p. 53.] 
Tgladair, -ean, s.m. Gladiator. [ing. 


gladaireaehd, s.f. Gladiatorship. 2 Sword fenc- 

oladamair, see gladamau. 

gladaman,(AF) s.m. Wolf. 

glafaid,tt -e, s.f. see glafaruach. 

glafair, s.m. Bavbicr. 2(AH) Biustering, noisy, 
overbearing feliow. 

giafar, ff -aire, œ. Nvisy, chattering, 

elafarnach, -aicn, s.m. Noise, aiu. 
ehattiag. y 

glag, -aig, s.m. The noise of anything falling, 
particularly of a carcase. 2 Horse-laugh. 3 
Babble, loud talk. 4 see clag. 5( DMC) Any 
rattling noise, ’Na ghlag-puaiseanaidh, in 
a dead faini ; 'na ghlag-starraidh, falling on 
his back with @ crüsa. | 

glaguca, -aiche, a. Clumsy, tottering, unsteady. 
2 Noisy, loquacious, garrulous, gauvbling, bab- 
bling. 3 see Clagacn. 

glagadaich, s.f. Loud talk, vociferation. 2 Sera- 
ping, scratening. 3TtConiinuous Knocking. 4 
(DMC) Noise made by a cart on a rough road. 
G. nam faoileag, the noise of the gulls. 

glagaid, -ean, s f. Clamorous noisy woman,blus- 
Ceriug femane. 

elagain, v.v. Cackle. d 

giagalr, -ean, s.m. Impertinent talker. 2 Noisy 
garrulous fellow, blusterer. 3 Racket, for 
games like tennis. 

glagaireach,tt a. Obstreperous. l 

glagaireachd, s.f.ind. Foolish or impertinent 
taik. 2 Noisiness, garrulity. 

glagais, s.f. Loyuacity, gabbling, verbosity,prat- 
tle. 2(AH) Intricate machinery, especially 
when not ia working order. °S ann ort tha a’ 
gh., how you do prattie ! A 

giagan, -ain, -au, s.m. Clapper of a mill or bell. 
2 Knoeker of a door. 3 Rattle. G. doruis, 
the knocker of a door. 

glaganach, -aiche, a. Noisy, rattling, 2 Like a 
door-knocker, or 3 mill-ciapper. see clagan- 
ach. 

glagan-gnathaichte(DC) s.m. Constant theme of 
talk. 2 Continuous jeering. 

giagarra, œ. Sluggish, dull, slow. 2 Flowing. 
3 Loud, noisy, garrulous. Gu g., loudly. 

glagarsaich,* s.j. Crashing, elangour, bluster- 
ing, horse-laughter. 

glag-fhéath,(DC) s.m. Sudden calm in stormy 


2 Pratiog, 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINGIS AT 
PAIGN 


ARA 


IA IV 


| 
NA- CH 


Pi 
LI 


URBA 


glag-fhéath 


weather— Uist. 
glag-gaire,tt s.m. Horse laugh, guffaw. 
glaghaic,tt see gloic. 


glaib, -e, s.f. Dirty water, puddle. 2 Bog. 
glaibeaeh, a. Puddly, boggy. 

glaibeil, see glaibeach. 

giaic, -e, -ean, gen. sing. of glac. Sometimes 


nsedas a nom. (s.f.) 
giaiceasach, -eiche, a. Athletic. 
glaiceis, s.f. Grasping, wrestling, grappling. 
gluiceiseach, a. Grasping, wrestling, grappling. 
glàichd, -ean, s.m. see gloic. 
glaicte, see glacte. 
giaidean, -ein, s.m. Glutton. 
glaideanach, a. Gluttonous. 
giaideanachd, s.f. Gluttony. 
glaigeilis, s.f. Clattering. 
glaigis, s.f. see glagais. 


glaim, -e, -ean, s.f. Large mouthful. 2 Great 
noise. 3 Piteous complaint. 4 Howling, yell- 
ing, howl, yell. 5 Common report. Is olc a’ 


eh. à tha muigh air, there is a bad report a- 
broad concerning him. 

glaim, v.a. Seize upon voraciously. 2 Usurp. 

glaimh, see glaim. i 

glaimh,(CR) s.m. Glutton—Arran. 

eliimhean, ein, e m. Spendthrift. 2¢+Glutton. 

viaimhear, -eir, -an, s.m. Spendthrift. 2 Glutton. 

zlaimhich, see glaimhnich. 

£i&imhear, -ean, see glamhsair. 

giàimhearachd, s.f. see glamhsaireachd, 

glaimhnuich, v.n. Roar, cry out, howl. 

glaimseach, Ach, s. f. Gluttonous woman, 2 
Gulp. 3 Ingurgitation. 

glaimseir, ean, see glamhsair. 

elaimsich, -ean, see glamhsair. 

glaine. sf.ind. Cleanness, purity. 2 Brightness, 
clearness. G. na sithe, the purity of peace ; g. 
air mala na h-oidhche, brightness om the brow 
of the night. 


glaine, comp. of glan. Cleaner, cleanest. 


————-, 8. see gloine. 

zlaineach, a. Pellucid. 2 Clean. 3 see gloim- 
each. 

zlaineachd, s. f. Cleanness, purity, neatness, 
brightness. 


glainead, id, s. f. Cleanness, degree of clean- 
ness, purity, cleanliness. Air gh. an tobair 
bidh salachar ann, no matter how clean the well 
there will be some impurity in it. 

flainean,(WC) s.m. Roof of the mouth. 

tlainid,(DC) comp. of glan. 
the cleaner for that. 

rlainidh, see gloinidh. 

glainne, see glainead., 2 see gloine. 

glainnteach, see gloineach. 

plais, gen.sing. of glas. 

glais, pr.pt.a’ glasadh, po Lock, secure. 2 
Lock, embrace. 3 Fold. 4 Fetter. 

rlaisbheinn,ff s.f. Grey hill. 

zlaisdidh, e, a. see glasdaidh. 

zlaise, s.f.ind. Greyness, hoariness. 2 Poverty 
3 Strait. 4**Pale or wan colour, 5**Grey col- 
our. 6** Azure hue. 7**Greenness. 8**Shade, 
9**Eclipse. 10 **Verdure. Am min-fheur 'na 
oh,, the rush in its greenness. 

zlaise, comp. of glas. 

rlaiseach, Ach, s.m. Foam (cobhar.) 2 Lock. 
fast place. 

rlaiseachd, s.f.ind. Greyness, hoariness, pale- 
ness. 2**Greenness. 3**Verdure. 4**Eclipse, 

glaisead, -id, s.m. Hoariness, greyness, pale- 
ness, degree of hoariness. 

glaisean, ein, -an, s.m. Grey-headed man. 2 
Coal-fish in its second and third year. 3 Kind 
of finch. 4** Green linnet. 5** Sparrow. 61i 
Lark. 7(DC) Chaffi»ch— Uist. 8 (AF) Grey 


T k ' f 
E aep H N a Meet ki ` 
"^ — l "i — rl LI A jJ 
VTERNET ARCHIV 


498 


Is g. e sud, it is 





glamhaich 


fish. (DMC) Pale-faced child. - i 
glaisean-coille, pl. -an-coille, s. m. Wood-spar- ` 
row. 2 Jackdaw. ` 


EN Aë Ae 


niet Amr 


» d 





AN 376. Glaisean-daraich. | 
glaisean-daraich, -ein-, pl. -an-, s.m. Greenfinch 
P ike chious. McL & D gives Greg, ` 
nch. 28 
glaisean-seilich, -cin-, pl. -an-, s.m. Pied water. - 
wagtail, see breac-an-t-sil. 
glaisear,(DMC) s.m. Grass-land, green field. 
glaisear, fut.pass. of glais. 
glais-eun, -eoin, see glaisean. 
glais-iasg,(DMC) s.f. Grey fish. AT 
glaisleun, -leoin, s.m. Lesser spearwort. 2 Pep- — 
per-grass, Ai 
Tglaisneant,(AF) s. Cat. * 
glais-neulach, -aiche, o Pale-complexioned, 
wan. 
glais-neulachd, s.f. Paleness. | : 
glaisrig,* s.f. Female fairy, half-human, half- ` 
beast. 2 Gorgon. 3(DMC) Pale person. see 


elaistig. 
glais-shile, s. Water-brash. 
Locked. 


glaistic, see glaistig. 

glaiste, past pt. of glas. 

glaistig, -ean, s.f. Supposed she-devil or hag in 
the shape of a goat. 2 (AH) Beautiful female 
fairy, usually attired in a green robe, seldom - 
seen except at the bank of a stream, and en- 
gaged in washing, also known as maighdean ` 
uaine. 3 

glam, pr.pt. a’ glàmadh, v.a. Eat greedily, gob- ` 
ble, devour. 2 tfSeize voraciously, asa dog. / 


ES 
ud. ^e. ^ d 
Y = €— 


bk: SÉ dg 
dn, oe 
< - 


- d 
Lui eame rue 


e 


Ka 


em 


ae 


E ER 







3 Bawl, cry out. 4 Glut. 4 Handle awk- 
wardly. E De | 
glam, -aim, s.m. Cry, outery. 2 Noise. 3 Large ` 
mouthful. T7. 







glàmach, a. Edacious, ravenous, gluttonous. 2 
Censorious. X 
glamach,(DC) s.m. Greedy man, sorner, 
glamag,(DC) s.f. Greedy woman. 
glamadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Voracious bite, 
as of a dog seizing food or prey. 2 Large 
mouthful suddenly snatched. 3 Gobbling. 4 
Censuring. d 
glamaich,** v Gormandize. £5 
glàmair, ean, s.m. Glutton. 2 Noisy silly fel- — 
low. 3Smith's vice. 4 Shoemaker's vice, D 
*Chasm. 6 Lurcher. À 
glamaireach,tt -eiche, a. Carnivorous. E. 
glàmaireachd, s.f.ind. Voracity, gluttony. 2 —— 
Continual babbling. 3**Continued noisy talk. —— 
glamaras, see glamras. EA 
glàmasair, ean,tf s.m. Voracious eater,glutton. —— 
glambar, -air, -an, see clambar. E 
glàmh, s. & v. see glam. 
glàmhach, -aiche, see glamach. 
glamhadh, see glàmadh. 
glamhaich, see glamaich. 





IW EE gh AE 


I 


RU AM 


y glan, pr.pt. a’ 


x CH ES 


gl Amhair 


| gd pel oro 
glàmhair, see glàmair. 
giàmhaireachd, see glamaireachd. 
glamhan,-ain, s.m. Spendthrift. 
catches greedily at anything. 
glam!as, see glomhas. 
giambhasg, sf Greedy catch. i 
glambhsa, s.m.ind. Snapping. 2 Snatching greed- 
üy with the mouth, as a dog. 3 Snapping 
of the mouth. 4 Biting, ,asa mouthful of bread. 
5ttNoise, bawling. 
glamhsair, ean, $. m. 
person, 2 Muncher. 
plaining fellow. 4 Usurper. 5* One who 
seizes upon, or wishes to monopolize booty, 
g'amhsaireachd, s.f.ind. Voracity, gluttony. 2 
Munching, 3 Noi-iness. 4¢fBawling. 
gl:müsan, -ain, -an, s.m. Great noise. 2 Mur- 
muring, complaining. 
glamht,(AH)pr.pt. a glamhtadh, v.a. Bolt food 
with extreme voracity. 
glamhtaire,(AH) s.m. Ouewho bolts food ina 
rayenous manner. 
glamhus,-uis, s.m. Wide gap. 2 Open jaws. 3 
(DC) Strong pair of pliers, pincers. 
glamhusaeh, -aiche, a. Wide-gaping, having 
wide jaws. 
giamradh, -aidh, -aidhean, see glamair. 
glamras,** s.m. Chiding. 2(MS) Ciencher, vice. 
glan, -aine, a. Clean, pure. 2 Inncc2ut, uncor- 
rupted. 3 Sincere. 4 Righteous. 5 Clear, 
bright, radiant, resplendent. € Shrill. 7 
Willing. G. mar a’ ghrian, clear as the sum ; 
Ai glaine am measg bhan, purest among wo- 
men; a chlaidheama glan gorm, ^is bright 
blue sword ; cha chiir an t-each gian a chur 
chuige, the willing horse should not be driven. 
g.an, adv. Thoroughly, wholly, completely, 2 
Cleanly. 3 Purely, brightly. |G. mharbh, 
completely dead ; g. rui-gte, quite bare ; cuir g. 
a dholaidh, spoil completely. 
glanadh, Clean, purify, cleanse, 
wash, wipe. 2* Free fromscindal. 3 Purge. 
4 Blaze, brighten, beam. 5 Weed. 6 Winnow. 


Gi glanadach, a. see glanail. 


glanadail, a. Abstergent, cleaniug, purifying. 


—— gi&nadair, -ean, s. m., Cleanser, purifier, bur- 


nisher, washer. i ; 
glanadaireachd, s.f. Cleansing, scrubbing, puri- 
ication, winnowing. 2 Cleanliness. 


. glanadh, -aidh, s.m, Cleaniug, cleausing, act of 


- glanas, ais, s.m. Cleanness. 


cleaning, purifying. 2 Weeding. 3 Washing. 

A’ g—, pr.pt. of glan. Coltach ris a’ chat a’ 

glanadh ’aodainn, like the cat cleaning its face 

—i.e. scheming or planning. Thoir ruith 

ghlanaidh air, give it a good clean up. 
glanaich,(AC) prov. for glan, v. 


` gianaidh, gen. sing. of glanadh. 2 fut. aff. a. of 


glan. Fuil a glanaidh, the blood of her purifi- 
cation. 


— glanail, -e, a. Having a cleansing or purifying 


2 Abstergent. 3 Cleanly. 


tendency, 2 Purity 
uriby. 


—— glanbhan, -ain, s.m. Clean wheat. 


— glan-bhàrr, -airr, s.m. Clean crop. 2 Clean head 


of hair. 
 glang,-a,-an & -achan, s.m. see gliong. 
fglang, -aing, A, -an, s.m. Shoulder. 


glangach, -aiche, a. seegliongach. 2 Broad- 
shouldered. 

glan-labhrach, -aiche, œ. Clean-spoken, elo- 
quent. 


glan-labhradh, -aidh, s.m. Clearness of express- 


——-jon, 


~ 3Jglanlaeh, -aich, s.m. Fence, dyke. 


Tglanlaich, oo, Fence, enelose. 2 Trench. 
glan-ruis,} Eyebright, see lus-nan-leac. 
glan-rüi-gte, a. Quite naked. Rinneadh do 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


499 





Voracious, gluttonous 
3 Noisy, bawling, com- | glaodh, -aoidh & -an, s.m. Cry, shout. 2 Glue. 3 


?glaoidhseach 
bhogiiag, thy bow was made quite naked. 


| elan-sniuadhach,tt -aiche, a. Beautiful. 


2 One who g an-shoillsien, v.g. Outshine. 
i g.an-shuath, v.a. Absterge. 


vianta, past pt. of glan. Purified, cleansed, 
cleaned, brightened. 

giantair, s m. see glanadair. 

e'autaiveaend, $.f.0271. Cleausing, act of clean- 

. sing, puriiyiug. 2 Weeding. 

elante, see glanta. 

glan-thoileach, -iche,a. Quite willing. 2 Curious, 


Cement. 4 Bird-lime. 5 Batter. 6 Grief. 
7 (PJM) Tingling noise in the ear, supposed 
to be a forerunner of death news, if the noise 
is heard in the right ear the news to be ex- 
pected from tie south, and vice versa. 
Glaodhan bròin, the cries of grief ; g.-coiiien, 
cock-crow ; dean or thoir g., cry. 

giaodh,ff-aoitn, -an, see glaodhan. 

glaodh, pr.pt. a’ glaodhach & a’ glaodhaich, v.a. 
Cry, shout. 2 Proclaim, as marriage-banns, 
or peace after war, 3 Publish. Gh. e le 
glaodh mór, he cried with a loud voice. 

glaodh, pr.pt. a’ glaodhadh & a’ glaodhaich, v.a. 
Cry. 2 Glue, cement. 

glaodhach, -aiche, a. Of, or pertaining to crying. 
2 Of a glutinous nature. 

glaodhach, -aich, s.m. Crying, act of crying, 
bawling, calling. 2 Proclamation, as of banus. 
3 Publishing. A'g-, pr.pt. of glaodh. Anns 
a’ ghlaodhaich, shouting. 

glaodhachadh, -aidh, s.m. Glueing, act of glue- 
ing or cementing. 2 Publication, as of banns. 
Chaidu au g , treir banns were proclavined. A’ 
g—, pr.pt. of glaodhaich. 

glaodbachail,-e, a. see glaodhach, 

giaodhadair,fI -ean, s.m. Crier. 

glaodhadh, -aidh, s.m. Glueiug, cementing, ag- 
glutination. A’ g—, pr.p*. of glaodh. 

glaodhaien,s.m. d pr.pt. of glaodh. Same mean- 
ings as glaodhach. 

glaodhaich, gen.sing. of glaodhach. 

glaodnaieh, pr. pt. a’ glaodhachadh, v.g. Glue, 
cement. 2 Cry, shout. 

glaodhaichte, a. & past pt. of glaodhaich. Ce- 
mented, glued. 

glaoduair, s.n. Advertiser. 

glaodhan, -ain, s. m. The remaining part of a 
potato when the seed-slips haye been cut off. 
2 Pith of wood. 3 Pipes, tubes. 4i[Mixture 
of flour or meal and water, used as paste. 
5(DO) Means by which a benefit is brought. 
Suighidh an g., the pith of wood shall suck the 
juice. ; an g. le’n do ghabh i ris, the means 
by which she accepted him. 

giaodhan, n.pl. of glaodh. 

giaodhanach, -aiche, a. Pithy, as of a tree. 2 
Murmuriag. 3 Glutinous. 

glaodhanta, @ Viscous. 

glaodhar, -air, s.m. see gleadhar. 

glaodh-chlàr, s.m. Pasteboard. 

glaodn-éisg, s.m. Isinglass. 

glaodhran, -ain, -an, s.n. see gleadhran. 

—_————ta, a. see glaodhranach. 

aaa, past pt. of glaodh, Glued. 2 Cement- 
ed. 

elaogh, see glaodh. 

glaoghan, see glaodhan. 

glaoic, see gloic. 

ealaehd,( MS) s.f. Foolery. 

glaoidh, see glaodh. 

glaoidh, s.f. Heap, pile. 

giaoidneaman,(AF) s.m. Wolf. 

glaoidhseach, -aiche, œ. Crying, roaring,sound- 
ing high, making a needless noise. 

glaoidhseach, -eich, s. m. Noisy, senselessly 





Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


glaoidhseach 
clamorous person. 


glavim, s.f. Tingling sound in the ears. 2 


INoise. 3 Report. 4 Common rumour. 

rlaois, S.f. Glue, paste. 

glaoine, see gloine. 

giaoiteanaich, v.g. Paste, 

glaomar,f -air, -an, s.m, Foolish 
C) Imperfect speaker. 

glaoran, -ain, s.m. Wood-sorrei. 
wood-sorrel. 
1iNoise. 

glaoranach, a. Like wood-sorrel. 2 Abounding 
in weod-sorrel. 3(DC) Abounding'in yellow 
rattie. 

glaoranta, a. Noisy, prattling, 

rlaothar, a. Noisy, clamorous. 2 Prating. 

giaobhar, -air, s.m. Noise, clamour. z2 Prating. 

yiavthran, -ain, s.m. Battle 

glas, -aise, a. Grey, pale, wan, ashy, sallow. 2 
Poor. 3 (DC) Green, as grass, unripe corn, 
&c. Bu gh. a chiabh, grey were his locks ; 
tur gh., a grey tower ; a chnoca glasa, ye green 
hilis ; is g. mo luaidh, pale is (my love) the sub- 
ject of my praise ; cho g. ris a’ chal, as green 
as kacl—said of. anyone looking pale ; Gàidh- 
eal g., a true Gael; Gall g., a sallow *' Lowland- 
er” —but, dubh Ghall, a thorough ‘* Lowland- 
er." NGP says the term gías is never applied to 
an Englishman, but we have come across in- 
Staces of its being so applied, even by natives 
of Nicolson's own island, | 

gilas, -aise, -an, s. f. Lock to fasten doors. 2 
Fetter. 3 Green suríace. 4 Green. 5 (AC) 
Water. 6 Key of rudder on stern-post, see p. 
18. G. crochaidh, g. ckrochta or dorn ghb., 
@ padlock; chuir mi a’ ghlas-ghuib air, Z muz- 
Ziel hàm, put him to silence, applied the clos- 
ure to him ; g. a chroinn, the mast-lock of a 
SAup. 

glas, v.a. & n. Become grey, pale or green z 
Make grey, make pale. 3 Dawn. 4 see glais. 
Gh. a’ mhaduinn, the morning dawned. 

glasach, -aich, -aichean, s. m. Lea or fallow 
land. 2 Green field. 

gias-a’-chroinn, s.f. Mast-lock. 

glasadh, -aidh, s.m. Locking, making fast. 2 
Making pale.. 3 State of becoming grey or 
pale. G. na cubhaige, a@ slight fall of snow in 
early summer ` translated by NGP. as * the 
cuckoo’ s greening or preparation-time—the time 
following the 4th. week in March "' ; g. an la, 
the dawn; g. na Féill Mìcheil, 28th. Sept. 
the preparation for, or day preceding Michael- 
mas.  A'g—,pr.pt. of glas. | 

glasag,-aig, -an, s.f. Pied water-wagtail. 2 
Female of the salmon. 3 The green ulva (sea- 
weed)—uliva latissvma. 4 Applied also to 
other edible seaweeds, 5ttSmall lock. 6 (AF) 
Coal-fish. 7 Any kind of salad. 8 (DMy)Tne 
fisu rae before iu has come to maturity. 

giasagach, a. Abounding in edible seaweed. 2 
Abounding in salad. 

glasag-coille, see glasair-coille. 

glasag-muineil,-an-, s.f. Locket. 

giasaich, sf. Lea tield—Ross-shire. [Often used 
as rom. instead of glasach.] 

giasaidhn, fut.aff.u. of glas. Shall lock. 

glasall, -e, a. Greyish, pale, wan. 

glasair, eau, s.m. Prater. 2 Any kind of salad. 

glasair-eoille,$ s.m. Betony, see lus Beathaig. 

giasan, Ain, s.m Same meanings as glasag. 

giasanach, ach, s.m, Grassy plain. 2 Dawn of 
day. G. na cubhaige, the grey sky of the cuc- 
&oo's advent. ; 

glasanaich, (MS) s.f. Greyness. 

glasar, fut.pass. of glas. Shall be locked. 

gias-bhalach,(DU) s.m. A mere boy, 

glas-bhan, a. Pale, wan. 


2 Flower of 
3(DC) Yellow rattle (plant.) 4 


Digitized by 


NTERNET ARCHIV 


500 


person. 2(W 


glas-leun 


glas-bheann, -bheinne, -bheanntan, s. f. Grey 
mountain. 

glas-bhreac, s.m. 
Salmon-trout. 

glas-charbad, -aid, -an, s.f. Lock-jaw, 
air am bi g., œ man having lock-jaw. 

glas-charbaiach, a. Having lock-jaw. 2 Caus- 
ing lock-jaw. K 

glas-cheò, s.m. Grey mist. 

glas-chiabh, Ap, s.f. Grey lock, grey hair, 

glas-chiabhach, 
haired. 

glas-choire, see glas-choirean. 

glas-choirean, em, -an, s.m. Little green valley, 

glasdach, -aiche, a. see glasuaidh, 

glasdaehd, see glasdaidueachd. 

glasdaidh, o. Greyish, wan, ashy, pale. 2 Surly. 
9(MS) Bleak. 4(M3S) Grizzled. 

glasdaidheachd, s.f. Paleness. 2 Greyness. 

glas-darach, s.m. Peeled oak. 

gias-duirn,( DMC) s.f. Padlock. 

glas-éideadh, s.f. Grey shroud, 
clothes. 
spectre. 

glas-eun, s.m. T Rock-pipit, see gabhagan., 21 
Tree-sparrow, see gealbhonn-nan-craobh. 31 
Sedge-warbler, seuge-vird, sedge nightingale, 
sedge wren—s@licarta phragmitis. 4(AF) Fal- 
con, kite. 5(DC) Chaffineh. 

glas-fhaarge, s.f. The green sea. A’ ghlas-fhairge 
a’ sior-chopadh, the green sea perpetually foam- 
vg. 


Young salmon, samlet. 2 


Dui ie 


2 Suit of grey 
Taibhse nan g., the grey-shrouded 





877. Glas-fhaoileag. 
glas-fhaoileag, T sf. Herring-gull—larus argen- 
atus. 


glas-fheur, -fhedir, s.m. Seawheat grass—tritt- 
cum junceum 2 Green grass. 3 Grey grass.  — 


glas-fhothannan, -ain, s.m. Green thistle. 
glas-ghairmeach, Poolewe for glas-ghuib. 
glas-ghéadh, -gheoidh, pl. na glas-gheoidh, s.m. 
Wild goose, grey goose. 2 Grey lag goose. 
glas-ghiall, s.f. Lockjaw — Dain 1. Ghobha. 
gas-ghort, -oirt, -ean, s.m. Piece of lea ground, 
2 Green, green spot. 3 Fodder. 
glas-ghnuiseach, -eiche, a. Pale-faced. 


glas-ghuib, -e, -an-guib, s.f. Muzzle. 2 Gagto - 


prevent eating or speaking. gi 

glas-iasg, -éisg, diei White fish, as cod, ling, had- 
dock, &c,as distinct from iasg-dearg (red fish) 
belonging to the family salonde. 
Coal-fish. 


glas-labhraidh, s.f. Tongue-tie. G. air nighinn, 


gun fhios, teang’ an abhra dh'iomraicheas, — 
when à, maid is tongue-tied, her eye-lids tell @ | 


tae. 
glaslach,(MS) s.m. see glas-talamh. 
glas-lach,] "eat Widgeon—anas penelope. 
illust. 378. 


glas-làmh, -làimhe, -an-lamh, s. f. Handcuff, - 


manacle. 


glas-lann, s.m. Stonecrop, wall-pepper, see graf- 


ann-nan-clach. : 
glas-léan, s. Stonecrop, see grafann-nan-clacu. 
2 Green spot. 


glàs-leun,$ s.m. Lesser spearwort—ranunculus 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS T 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGNESE 





"che, a. Grey-locked, grey- | 


see | 


ff 
Z% 


Y Ds 
c. 


d ds 


^ 
ZEE 





2tt b | 





EE 
wë 


===> 


fe = 


las-leun 


ooo ode Ml a a Rec 





378. Glas-lach. 


flammula. 
glas-liath, æ. Greyish. 


_ glas-luachair,(AH) s. f. Rough bearded variety 


of rushes. 


lus, s.m. Woad, see guirmean. 


y poema, -a, -an, S. m. Lea field, green field, 
à plain. 


: green 
. gias-mhaghach, -aiche, a, Abounding in lea 


fields or green fields. 


| gias-mheur, -mheoir, s.f. A well-known tune in 


| 


ceol-mór,the finger-lock. [Preceded by the art. 
o gh—.] 2 Manacle. 3 Thumb-screw. 4(DC) 
Cramp in the fingers. 


H glas-mhogail,(WC) sr Entanglement made in 


a net by a conger. 


— glas-mhuingeach, -eiche, a.  Grey-maned, 
_ glas-mhuinneach, see glas-mhuingeach. 
| glas-mhuir, -mhara, s.f. The green sea. 


_ gias-neul, 
. complexi 


i Having grey clouds. 
. gias-neulac 


-neoil, s.m. Pale colour, pale or wan 
lon. 2 Grey cloud. 

glas-neulach, -aiche, a. Pale, wan, sallow. 2 
2 Paleness, 


has, o. m,  Bleakness. 


|  wanness. 
glas-neulachd, s.f. Same meanings as glas-neul- 
i glas-neunt,(AF) s.m. Cat. 


glasra, see glasrach. 
3 -aich, ZS, Tn, 
Green plot. 
glasrach, -aiche, o Abounding in lea, or un- 
ploughed land. 2 Green. 3 Having green 
groyes or meadows. 4 Abounding in pot-herbs. 
, -aidh, s.m. Pasture land, verdure. 2 
Green grove. 3 Pot-herb. G. na cubhaige, 
see under glasadh. 


Uncultivated land 2 


 glasraich, pr.pt. a’ glasrachadh, v.a. & n. Con- 


— glasruich, s.f. Greens or vegetables to eat. 


yert into meadows or pasture land. 2 Become 
grey or pale. 3 Make green. 4 Prepare green 
thread for use. 

2 


Green groves. 3 Pot-herbs. 


_ glas-sheabhag,*| s.f. Goshawk. 


— glas-shile,l s. f. Waterbrash. 


[Preceded by 
the art. oi gh —-] 


— glas-shruthach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to, 


. glas-stig, s.f. 


grey or azure streams. 
see glaistig 


- glas-stuadh, s.m. Grey cable. 'S tha Caol-chuirn 


nan g. ag aomadh 'sa brachadh, and Caol- 
chùirn of the grey gables is bending and wear- 
ing down (lit. fermentina)—Filidh, 60. 
as-talamh, -Imhainn, s.m. ( f. in gen. usually, 
but m. in Poolewe) pl. glas-talmhuinuean, Un- 
ploughed or pasture land, lea ground. 
glas-tarruing,* v.a. Remove sheaf-corn when cut. 
las-tarruing,* s.f. Act of removing sheaf-corn 


| . when cut. 


glaste, pr.pt. Locked. 2 Clasped. 
glas-tugha,$ s. Soft rush, see luachair bhog. 


- fglastum,$ s.m. Woad, see- guirmean. 


glas-uaine, a. Greyish-green, faintish green. 2 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


sei bite 


Azure, asthe sea. 3 Cerulean. 

glé, a. Very. 2 Sufficiently, enough. 3 Per- 
f»ctly. Glé gheal, sufficiently white, very white; 
glé mhath, very good. [Aspirates word follow- 
ing it. ] 

ee a. Real, pure, clean, good. 2 Open,plain. 

gleac, s. m. Fight, conflict, battle, 2 Wrest- 
ling, struggling. 3 Act of wrestling, strug- 
gling fighting, striving or endeavouring, spar- 
ring. 4 Agony. A’ g—,pr.pt. of gleac. A’ g. 
ris a’ bhàs, in the agonies of death ; le iom» dn 
gh., with many a struggle ; sluagh a bu gharg 
gh., people who fought fiercely ; tiugainn a ga., 
come to wrestle. 

gleac, pr. pt. a’ gleac, v.a. Fight, wrestle,strug- 
gle, strive. Gh. mi rim’ phiuthair, I wres- 
tled with my sister; chomhlaich sinn ‘sa 
ghleac, we met and fought. 


gleacach, a. Wrestling, struggling, 2 see 
cleachdach. 

gleacadair, -ean, s.m. Wrestler. 

gleacadh, -aidh, s. m, Wrestle, wrestling, 
struggling, fighting. 

gleacail, a. Gymnic. 

gleacair,** -ean, s.m. Shout, loud cry. 2 see 
gieacadair. 

gleacaireachd, s. f. Act or habit of wrestling 


or striving. 

gleacanach, 8. f. Wrestling, struggling. 2 Ri- 
valry. 

gleacas, -ais, 8.m. Wrestling. 

gleacanas, -ais, s.m. Keeping, custody. 

tgleachas, -ais, s.m. Gallery. 

gleachd, see gleac. 

gleadh, -a, -an, s.m. Onset, attack. 2 Deed, 
exploit. 3 Tricks, sham, humour. 4 (DMC) 
Quarrel. 5 see gléidheadh. 

gleadh, see gléidh, 

gleadhach, -aiche, a. Furious, wrathful, 

gleadhadh, -ailh, see gleidheadh. 

gleadhar, -air, -an, s.m., Noise. 2 Prating. 3 
Rattling. 4 Clang of arms. 5 Collision. 6** 
Rude blow, strike. 7*Noisy blow. 8 (DC) 
Clamorous talk—Argyll. [1 gives gleadhair.] 

gleadhna, s.m. ‘Tricks, humour. 

gleadhrach, -aich, s.m. Kind of knotted sea- 
weed used for cutting. 

-——,(DMC) s.f. Noisy, prattling woman. 

—— ———-—,-aiche, o. Making a shrill or ioud 
noise. 9 Rattling. 3 Giving hard blows. 4 
Obstreperous. 5, DC) Clamorous,loud-tongued. 

—————-—d,lt s.f.ind. Obstreperousness. 

gleadhradh, -aidh, s.m. Blow. 2 Noise, Thug 
e g. dha, he gave him a blow. 

gleaihraich, -ean, s.f. Loud noise, rattling. 
2 Clang of arms. 3 Collision. 4**Child’s rat- 
tle. 5* Rustling noise. G. nan corn, the 
rattling of the drinking cups ; ciod e a’ gh. a 
th’ ort ? why do you make such a noise ? 's ann 
ort a tha a’ gh. ; what à noise you make ! 

gleadhran, -ain, -an, s.m. Rattle, noise. 
Child's rattle. 

—,$-ain,-an, $. m. Yellow rattle, see 
modhalan. 2$ Wood-sorrel, see seamrag. 

—ach, -aiche, œ. Sounding, as a rattle. 

2 Noisy. 8 Making a rattling sound. 4 
Prattling. 

gleadhtach,** o see gléidhteach. 

+gleam, -a, -an, S.M. Loud noise. 2 Resound- 
ing echo. 

gleamach,(WC) a. Slow, tedious and uninter- 
esting. Duine g., a tedious uninteresting man. 

T anach, -aiche, @ Noisy. 2 Resounding, 
loud echoing. | 

gleamhsa,** s.m. Slow long draught of liquor. 

—ch,** -aiche, a. Slow, tedious, 2 Dis- 

agreeable. 





JER 











41 Trom 


LIFIGIT 


a Estro FE 
Fé ke " [iT 
Kell / 


UNIV 


Ep - A y 
a [3 rh 
k= d LJ Jl ri 


V F D - 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


gleamhsan 


gleamhsan,** -ain, s.m. Continued talk, tire- 
some talk. 2 Talkative person. 

fglean,** v. see lean. 

gleang, -a & -ing, -an, s. 

gicang, v. see gliong. 

rieanzarsach, see gliongartach. 

gleangarsaich, see gliongartaich. 

gleaan, gen. giiun & glinne, pl. glinn, gleanna, 
gteannan, gleanntaidh, glinnte & gleanntan, 
dat- pl. gleanntaibh, s.m. Valley, opening be- 
tween two heights. 2 Glen, dell, dale. Bho 
ghleann nan ruadh-bhoc, from the valley of roe- 
vucts ; air feadh a’ ghlinne, throughout the 
vallen. 

ach, -aiche, o Abounding in glens or 

dales. 2 Of, or belonging toa glen. 3**Steep, 

shelving. 

ain, gen.sing. & n. pl. of gleannan. 

an, -ain, -an, s.m. Little valley or glen. 


see gliong, s. 











2 Dale. 3** Defile. Ang. mòdhar, in q lit- 
tle peaceful valley. 
x anach, -aiche, a Abounding in little 





giens or valleys. 

taibh, det ol of gleann. 

tailn, n.p/. of gieann. 

tai tt o Full of valleys. 

or fond of roaming in valleys. 

-tan, n. pl. of gleann. 

tglear,** v.a, Follow. 

glearach, a. see gleadhrach. A’ bhean ghlear- 
ach, lonach, shanntach, the clamorous, greedy 
aid envious woman-- Dorm. bàn, p. 186. 

giearraen, œ. Flexiole, pliant. 

gleas, see gleus. 

gleasd, see gleusd. 

achd, see gleusdachd. 

gleaslann,** -ainn, s.n. Storehouse. 

Tzleastadh,** -aidh, s.m. Provision. 

gleastair,** s.m. Farrier. 

vleathair, see gleithir. 

gleicean, -ein, s. m. Shuttlecock. 
boy —Skye. 

— ————üàch,** a. Like a shuttlecock. 

gléidh, pr.pt. a’ gléidheadh, v.a. Keep,preserve. 
2 Retain, hoid. 3 Defend, protect. 4 Tend, 
as cattle. 5** Detain. O11 Get, provide. 7 
(CR) Get, find. Falbh 1s g. e, go and find it ; 
but, g. sinne ! keep us! gléidhidh mi do tnreud, 
I will tend thy flock. Applied also to meat, 
fish, &c. in a fresh state, as, an g. e P will it 
keep (without salt) ? 

eadair,ff ean, s.m. Curator. 

eadaireachd, s.f.nd. Curatorship. 

-ea ih, -idh, sm. Keeping, preserving, 2 

Act of keeping or preserving 3 Holding, re- 

taining. 4 Good turn. 65**Tending. 6**In 

dustry. 7**Frugality. 8* Preservation.  9* 

Detaining. A’ g—, pr.pt. of gléidh. 

—eür, fut.pdss. of gléidh. 

idh, fut. ajf. a. of gléidh. 

te, past pt. of gléidh. Kept, preserved, 
retained. 2 Protected. 

——w—teach, -eiche, a. Careful, close-handed, 
saving, frugal. 2* In safe custody or keeping, 
5**industrious. 4(MS) Conservative. 5 (DC) 
Securely protected, as a garden by a wall. 
Tha sin g., that is in safe keeping ; duine g., a 
careful or frugal man; gu g., frugally ; cha 
"n 'eil diochuimhn' ann na’s boidhche na dio- 
chuimhne g., the finest forgetfulness, forget- 
ting what was kept.—N.G.P. 

teachas, -ais, Sm. Anything saved or not 
spent. 2 Store. 

——— teachd, s.f.ind. Carefulness, frugality. 2 
Safe custody. 3 State of preservation or keep- 
ing. 4**Industry. 5**Disposibion to hoard up. 

—-tiche, comp. of gleidhteach. 











2 Haunting 








2 (DC) Sly 























WEEN -H L 
Digitized bv 
PPFLIZCU LU 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


502 


gleoran 


tiche, -an, s.m. Provider, careful person, ` 
keeper. | 
gleighteachd,(MS) s.f. Seantiness. 
tgleileachd,** s. f. Whiteness, 2 Pureness. 
Tzleirs,** s». f. Choice, selection. 2** Chastity. 
gleitean,** ein, s.m. Hard fight. d 
vleith, see gléidh. m 
fgleithe,** s f. Grazing, feeding. 
gieithea:lh, s.m. Gairloch &c. for gleachd. 
gleithire, -ean, 8. m. Gadfly. 2 Gnat. 
Grazer, animal that grazes. S. 
gleo, pl.-than, s.m.ind. Dazzling kind of hazi- 
ness about the eyes, as of a person losing 
sight, or threatened with cataract. t2 Fight, 
uproar, tumult, disturbance. t3 Sigh. t4ff 
Judgment, decision. +5 Heroic exertion. 6 
(DMC) Calm or still condition. Cò a chuir 1 
eadh orra g. P who would disturb them? a — 





g** 





mhuir 'na g., the sea a dead calm. 3 
tgleodh, v.a. Cleanse, scour, polish. er? 
gleodh, -a, s.m. Cleansing, scouring, polishing, ` 


2 Sigh. 3 Slumber. 4 Groan. * 
ach, a. Mournful. d 
——alh,* -aidh, s.m. Viosiness. 
aman, see gleoman. T 
amanach, see gledmanach. E 
———amanachd, see gleOmanachd. : 
gleog, -oig, -an & -achan, s.m. Blow,bang,slap. 2 
Drooping, silly look, 3ft Noise of anything — — 
falling. G. 'san leth-cheana, @ slap on the side 
of the head. ` 
-——ach, -aiche, o Silly, timid. 2 Lethargic, 
dull, lazy. Së 
-——aid,(DMC) s.f. Slow, idle woman. 2 (DO) ` 
Silly, stupid woman. E 
-——air, -ean, s.m. Stupid, dull fellow. 2 Talk- — . 
ative fellow. 3 Arrogant fellow. 4 Lazyfel- 
low. 5ttSloth. 6(DMC) 'Trifler. SEO 
-——aireachd, s. f. ind. Stupid behaviour. 2 | 
Idle talk. 3 Awkward gestures. 4ffSloth. 5- — 
**Arroganey. 6**falkativeness. = 
gleogaman,** -ain, s.m, Stupid drowsy fellow.  — 
gleogartaich, see gliogartaicn. d 
gieogh, see gleodn. , 
zleoghach,(MS3) a. Ropy. 
gleoghrach, see gleadhrach. E 
gleoid, -ean, s.m. & f. Sloven. 2 Slattern. 3 T 
* Bewildered female. M 
eachd,** s.f. Slovenliness. 3M 
eil,-e, @ Slovenly. 2 Like a slattern. ` 
31T Silly. 
———seach,* see gleoisg. 
———sear,*. see gleogair. 
gleòis, gen.sing. of gleus. 2** s.f. Babbling. 3 
(WC) Certain signs of drink in the eye. 4 | 
(WC) Bright fire. 




















gleoisg, -ean, s.f. Vain, silly, blustering woman. 
2 Slovenly woman. 3tfSlut. E 
eil, -e, d. Likea silly female. 2 Aptto 


talk idly. 
eledite,** a. Neat, trim, tight. 
3 Curious. 
gleoman, -ain, s.m. Silly stupid fellow. 2 Slug- . 
gish man, drowsy person. 3fiDull person.  . 
——— ———aách, -aiche, a. Drowsy, sluggish. 2 © 
stupid, silly. Gu g., sluggishly. 1 
—— ———achd, s.f.ind. Drowsiness, sluggishness. 
2 Stupidity, silliness, 3**Siuttishness. 4ff ` 
Dullness. 5 (DC) Becoming faint, as with - 
fright. Bha e 'sa gh. gu tuiteam, he was ` 
like to fall. 1 
gleorachan,(MS) s,m. Gewgaw. 
gleorag, -aig, s.f. The lark. 
gleorais,(DMC) s.f. Slow, dull female. 
gledramas, -ais, see glòramas. E 
gleoran,( DMO) s.m. Motionless person. 2 Snail- — 
like speed. TE 


2 Handsome. E 


e ef 
Lal 


= 





Original from 5 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGNE 


|. 
| 


gi 


—— aid, -ean, 
Dees lf, -ean, 


rieorann 





smock, see plür-na-cubhaig — ?$ Nasturtium, 


5US 


gliog 





eórann,$ ainn, s. m. Cuckoo fiower, ladies’ | glibeil,* æ. Sleety and showery with hail now 


and then. 


3§ Wood angelica, see lus-nam-buadh. 4 This | glibheid,* s.f. Weather in which a curious mix- 


name is applied to various kinds of cresses. 
gleòs, -òis, s.m. Lamentation. — 
gledsg, -eòisg, -a & -an, see gleoisg. 
—— ——aàch, -aiche, @. see gleoisgeil. 
see gleoisg. 
see gleogair. NicGleosgair 
mhór, 2 famous rock in the sea off Skye. 
— —aireachd, see gleogaireachd. 
othaisg, -ean, see gledisg. 


"fgleothan,** -ain, s.m. Ciue. 


Seuil & -a,s.m, & f,Order,mauner,condition, 


(rum 2 Mean, means., 3 Activity. 4 Action. 5 
Provision,ration, 6 Furniture. 7 Readiness or 
nous of any kind, 8 Lock of a gun. 9 
Sey or gamut in music. 10*Screw of a spin- 
niue-wheel, 11 Occasion (want.) 12'^Work. 
13.CR) Wound —Suth'd.  14** Strength. 15 
Exercise, as for one learning a language. 
Dè ang a th’ ort ? how are you ? tha iad air 
gh., they are in trim ; cuir air gh., prepare, 
make ready ; thug avis dhiom g., age has de- 
priv^d me of my readiness for action ; chaidh 
e air gh., he prepared himself ; fiodhull air gh., 
a mitt in tune; gug. bàis, to the work of 
death ; is trom dithis air an aon mhèis, gun 
ac’ ach an t-aon gh., two are heavy on one dish 
when there is but ome ration; is math an g. 
toil, will isa good putter-in-trim ; g. Gàidhlig, 
a Gaelic exercise. 


_ gleus, pr.pt. a’ gleusadh, v.a. Adjust, mend. 2 


Put in tune, 3 Trim, prepare. 3(DMC)Sharp- 
en. G. an fhiodhull, tune the violin ; gleus- 
aibh bhur cridheachan gu ceòl, aditun2 your 
hearts to music ; ghleus iad na h-eich, they 
harnessed the horses. 

gleusadair, -ean, s.n, Tuner. 2 Trimmer, 

gleusadh, -aidh, s.m. Tuning, act of tuning,ad- 
justing. 2 Mending repairing, ordering, trim- 
ming. 3 (DMC) Sharpening. 4 Preparing. 
A’ g—, pr.pt. of gleus. 

gleusaich,** v.a. Prepare, trim. 

gleusda, a & past pt. of gleus. Prepared, ready, 
tuned. 2 Clever, expert. 3 Neat, trim, tidy. 
4 Wellexercised. 5 Diligent, industrious. 6 
Endeavouring, keen, eager, active. 7 (MS) 
Adventurous. 8"*Bent, às a bow. 9**Cocked, 
asa gun. l0**Braced. 1lłf Swift. 12 (CR) 
Kind—Arran. 13 (DMC) Cunning, shrewd 
14 In humour, in good condition, Giullang, 
a diligent boy ; coin gb., keen dogs; ais g.a 
pour e, he does well, he is clever ; am 

heil thu g. ? are you tolerably well ? 

chd, s.f.ind. Preparation, readiness, 2 
Order, arrangement, 3 Neatness, tidiness 4 
Expertness, cleverness. 5 Alacrity 6 Dili- 
gence, attention. 7 Keenness, eagerness, ac- 
tivity. 8 Alertness.9 Penetration. 10**Good 
humour. 11(DMC) Shyness. 12 Shrewdness 

gleus-fhear,ff s.m. Ambidexter, 

gleus-làimh,1f -an-, sf Mechanics. 

gleusmhor,** -oire, œ. Mannerly, orderly. 

gleusta, see gleusda. 

chd, see gleusdachd. 

gliadar,** .air, s.m. Loquacity, pertness, 

gliadrach,** -aich, s.f Drab, slattern. 

—— — ——,** a. Glittering. 2 Sprigbtly. 








3 
Wanton, 


liasda, see gleusda. 
gliath,** s.m. War, battle. 


— gliathrach,** -aich,.s.m. Drab, 2 Common pro- 


‘stitute, 


glib, -e, s.f. Sleet. 2 Lock of hair, ringlet. 3 
Slut. 4 Raw weather. 
land allotted by the kirk to its ministers. 


Dig tized I y 


5**Glebe, portion of | 


ture of rain, sleet and hail prevails, 
each,* -iche, @. Rainy, sleety, thawing. 

iglib.shleamhainn,** @. Slippery with sleet, 
glic, -e[& glioca] o Wise, prudent, sagacious. 

2**Steady. 3**Cunning.  4**Cautious. Bi 

g., be wise; gu g., wisely ; g. gun mhoille, 

cautious without dilatoriness, 
glic-bhriathrach,tt -aiche, a. ApophegmaticaL 
glice, comp. of glic. More or most wise or pru- 

dent. 

— ad, -eid, sm. Degree of wisdom. A’ dol 
an g., getting wiser and wiser ; air a gh. ’s ge 
^m bheil e, howzver wise he be, 

glid, (WC) s.f. Sleet, showers of soft wetting 
snow. 

Tglid, see glidich. 

glideachadh, -aidh, s.m. Moving, stirring. 2 
Act of moving. 3 Power of moving or stirring. 
4**Budging. 5 **Motion. Cha b' urrainn dha 
o, he could not move, A’ g—,pr.pt. of glidich. 

glideachair,** s.m. Budger. 

glideachd,** s.f. Motion. 2 Commotion. 3** 
Power of motion or stirring. 

glidich, pr.pt. a glideachadh, v. n. Move, stir, 
budge. 2ffImpress upon. Nach g. thu ? will. 
you not budge ? 

glidnich, see glidich. 

glifeid, s.f. Sleet—Suth’d. for clifeid. 

glifid,** sf. Noise. 2 Voice. 

Tglin, s. see glùn. 

tglinn,** s Sky. 2 Light. 3 Fortress, 

glinn, n. pl. of gleann. Rugadh thu "ena g., 
thou wast born inthe glens. 

glinn, -e, d. see m 

glinne, gen.sing. of gleann. 


Tglinne,** s.f. Habit, coat. 2 Bail, as in law. 


glinneach,** a. Clear, manifest. 2 Pliable, fiex- 


ible. 3 Full of valleys. 

adh,** .aidh, s. m. Making evident, 
clearing up. 

glinnich, v.a gn. Make evident, clear up. 
Observe closely. Gh. an là, the day cleared up. 

te, past pt. of glinnich. Made evident, 
cleared up. 

glinnidh,** a, Clear, manifest. 

glinnseach, eiche, @ see gleannach. 

elinnte, n pl of gleann. A’ ruith gu g., rune 
ning towards the valleys. 

gliob, A. s m. see glib. 

gliobach,** @ Hairy 

gliobar, -air, see gliobas.. 

gliobas, -ais, s m. Sleet. 

ta, aiste, a Draggled, drenched~ 

glioca, see glice. 

gliocaire, s.m. Wise man Togaidh an gòraiche 
caisteal, is ni an g. cómhnuidh ann, the fool 
builds æ castle, the wise man dwells in it—the 
meaning is that it is cheaper to buy a house 
than to build one, which is certainly not al- 
ways the case. 

gliocas, -ais, s m. Wisdom, prudence. 2**Cun- 
ning 3**Wit  4**Steadiness. 5**Sagacity. 
Is esan ceann a ghliocais, he has wisdom. 

sliocasair, ean, sm, Wise man. 2 Philosopher. 

gliofaid,(CR) st, Chatterbox— Arran. 

gliofau, (CR) s m. Chatterbox—Arran. 

gliog, -a, -an, s.m. Sound of water falling by 
drops. 2*Motion. 38ffClink, tinkling, see 
gliong. 4 (DU) Clicking sound, applied toa 
shorter metallic sound than gliong. 5 (DC) 
Tick. as of a clock, crack, as of something 
breaking. Cha toir e g. as, he cannot move :t; 
cha'n'eil g. agam, I haven't a copper —com- 
mon in W. of Koss, 











nal Tom 


` za eT Ae 
ni e | ms 


UN 


V 
LU 


o 


MOIS 


Xm =, " Tm -— 
EIL S hA Į ARADA f Zh 
VER ATH PIE Gank i 


as =i 


d 
Li 
! "4 


gliog 


gliog, v.n. Click, 2 Tinkle. 

-——ach, -aiche, o Clumsy. 2 Feehla, stagger- 
ing. 3 Lazy, iuactive. 4 (MS)Iaartieulate. 
5 Clinking, tinkling, see gliongach. 6t Un- 
stable. 

gliogadaich,tt s.f. Clinking. 

gilogag, s.f. G. nan dramag or dlamag, clumsy 
bud woman—A TIAN. 

gliogaiche, comp, of gliogach. More or most 
ciumsy, feeble or lazy. 

gliogaid, -e, -ean, s.f. Person clumsy about the 
Knees, 2 Sluggish woman. 3 (DC) Anything 
ina broken-down condition. 

each, -eiche, o. see gliogach. 
gliogair, gen.siny. of giiogar, see gliongair. 
„v.n. Tinkle, ring. 

giiogan, see gliongan. 

gt'ogar, -air, -an, see gliongar. 2 Slowness. 

ach, a. Making a tinkling noise, ringing. 

saich, see gliongartaich. 

suaich, see gliongartaich. 

gliogartaich, see gliongartaich. 

gliogradh, -aidh, see gliongadh. 

gliogram, -aim, s.m. Staggering. 2 Contempt- 
uous name for a staggerer. 

— -chas, s.m. Long-limbed person. 

— -chois,(MM) (leggeram cosh—Burns) 
Name of the tune ‘‘ Quaker’s wife.” 

gliom, s.m. Mild tussle—Suth’d, 

gliomach,"* -aich, s.m. Sloven. 2 Long-limbed 
person. 3 see giomach. 

-— — ——, -aiche, a. Slovenly, sluttish,drabbish. 

*— — ——88, -ais, s.m. Slovenliness, sluttishness, 

-— — — -Spainndeach, s.m. see giomach-uisge. 

gliong, -a, -an, s,m. Ringing noise, clash of 
metals, jingle, clink, clang, clangour. 

; pr.pt. a’ gliongadh, v.n. Tinkle, ring as 

metal, clang. 

ach, -aiche, a. Tinkling, jingling, clink- 

ing, ringing, clanging. 

adaich,(DU) s.f. Clinking, clanging, 

adh, -aiih, s. m. Tinkling, act of tink- 
ling, clinking or rattling. A’ g—, pr. pt. of 
gliong. 

gliongag, -aig, -an, s.f. Slight degree of drunk- 
enness. 

gliongair,** v.n. Tinkle, ring. 
— ———, -ean, s.m. Empty prattler, 
prating fellow. 2ttTinkling noise. - 
gliongan, -ain, s.m. Tinkle, tinkling or jingling 
noise, 2 (MS) Click. 3 Anything that pro- 
duces a tinkling sound. 4 Cymbal. 

-—_——aich, 8.f, see gliongan. 

gliongar, -air, -an, s.m. Tinkling ringing noise. 
2**-lowness. 

aen, tt ug. 

ringing. 

aich,** s. f. Continued jingling noise, 

tinkle. 

aich,** on Clang, make a jingling 

sound, tinkle, Gh. an claidheamh, the sword 

clanged, 

sach,** o see gliongartach. 

saich, see gliongartaich. 

snach,** -aich, s.m. Tiokling noise. 

gliongartaich, s. m. Tinkling noise. 92ttslight 
inebriety. 

gliongnaich,(MS) v.n. Ring. 

tgliosair,** s.m. Prattling fellow, tattler. 

eachd,** s.find. Prating. 

gliosdar, see cliostar. 

gliosg, s.m. Glance. 2 Twinkling, 
g., en a twinkling. 


























trifling, 


Making a tinkling noise, 











Ana an 





artaich, see gliongartaich. 2**Glancing 
or glittering light. 3** Tremulous motion, 
dangiing. 


gliostair, -ean, see cliostar. 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


504 E 
TUUM EA : M 


i AF Seth. RRE th ai Sow os 
"TER YET aie GNI TROT et WEA ka 4. 
e Sa? i "du. PN A wh r f r \ ex DAT 
kaft j 4 

CNN dër, Le i 





gliogair nr. 


Tzliphit, s. Torment. 
giiuc, sm. Blubbering, crying, 
Bumper. 3 Gulp. 
ach, -aiche, o 


29-2 


Blubbering. 2 Givento — 
blubbering. 3 (DMC)Having drooping wings. 
aich, see gliuc. dee 
gliugail,** sf. Ciucking, as of a hen. 
tgliumb, Gaelic spelling of glue. 
gliusta. see gliustaeh. ~ 
ch, a. Slow. 
ehd,** s.f. Slowness, tediousness. 
tglo, s.m. Veil, covering, hood. A 
globach,** a. Having a head covered with down, . 
as a ben - p 
globag, -aiz, s.f, Stupid quean. Ah 
gloc, pr. pt. a’ glocail, Swallow greedily. 2 E 
Cackle, as à broody hen. 3 Gulp. = 
gloc, gloic, s.m. Clucking ofahen, 2**Cackle. 
3 Noise, loud note. 4**Loud, confident talk. bb 
5**Garrulity. 6**Large wide throat or mouth. Sc 
7**Bung of a cask. 8 Gaelic spelling of clock 2h 
(time-piece.) 9ttLoud cry. 10 (DU) Guffaw. - 


sobbing. 

















[** gives s.f.] $ 
glocach, -aiche, a. Given to cackling. 2**Cluck- Si 
ing. 3**Garrulous. = 
glocadaich, (a' g—) s.m. & pr. pt. Guffawing. Lá 
glocadh, s.m. Gulp. ! Zei 


glocail, s.f. Clucking, as of a broody hen, 2** - 
Garrulity. 3**Loud prating. 4ttBawling. A? CN 
S—, pr. pt. gloc. ; Ba 
,"* a. Clucking. 2 Garrulous. A | 
glocair, -ean, see glogair. | 
eachd, see glogaireachd. m 
glocan,* -ain, sm. Bung. 2 Bird cherry, see — 
craobh-fhiodhag.  3**Sling. 4**Fork,  5** - 
Wide throat.  6**dim. of gloc. iilOpening 
or angle where branches meet, | % 
glocar, a. Garrulous. 2 Apt to cluck. 3 Apt ` 
to talk loudly and confidently. d 
gloc-gaire,(DMK) Caithness for lachan-gaire. 4 
glochar, air, s.m. Wheezing. 2 Difficult res- - 
piration, rattling in the throat. 3**Asthma. — 
4**Snoring. : 
naich,** see glochar. 
glochdan, -ain, -an, s.m. Wide throat. 
gloc-nid, s.m. Morning dram taken in bed. KE 
glodh,** sam, Slime. Laogh anns na glodhan, . 
said of a ealf before being licked by its mo- 
therafter birth, CG 
--——ach,** -aieh, s. m. Slimy matter coming ` 
from a cow before calving. a 
glodhraich,(MS) v.n. see glomhraich. 
glodhar,(MS) s.m. see glomhar. 
glog, oig & -a,-an, s.m. Softlump. 2*Sudden 
hazy calm or sleep. 3 Dozing. j 
glogach, -aiche, a, Soft, blubbery, heavy. 2 Of ` 
a dull stupid look. 3 Heavy, unwieldy, lumpy. ` 
4 Pale, cadaverous. 5**Skinny, flabby. o 
glogach,(WC) s.m. Choppy sea. l s 
glogag, -aig, -an, s.f. Dull woman. 2 Bubble, 
small bladder of water, 1$ 
ach, -aiche, œ. Abounding in bubbles, — 
2 Bearing bubbles. 3ttPertaining to a dull 
or stupid woman 3 
gloga:d," s.f. Lubberly female. 
glogaidh-hómh, s m. Term expressive of great 
coutempt, unmanly, sottish, useless fellow. 2 


Imbecile. | | 
glogaian,* s.f- see glogluinn. 2 Sudden hazy 
kind of calm with occasional soft puffs of 
wind. 3 Stupor, dozing slumber. E 
glogair, -ean, s.m. Heavy, dull, stupid fellow. 
2 Lubberly coward 3** Chattering fellow. 
4rfBawling fellow. 5tfSottish man. f 
Cha d' thubhairt rr mo thogair ” riamh ach 
an fhìor gh., nene ever said ** what do Icare?” 
but a real boor | 





















Di 
H 





Original from | H 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOISI 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGR 


plogaireachd 


‘glogaireachd, s. f. ind. Dulness, stupidity. 2 
Offensive idle talk. 3** Lubberliness, 4** 
Cowardliness. 5**Gasconadiag. 6**Chatter- 
ing. 7 Cackling noise. SttSottishness. 

'glogais, s.f. Senseless talk—Dain I. Ghobha, 

Slogan, ain, An. s£. m. Soft lumpish man. 2 
Little soft lump. 

:glogluinn, s.f. The rolling of the sea ina calm. 
2** Agitation of a vessel caused by such roll- 
ing. 3ttNoise of water. 

‘glograich, s.f. The collision of soft substances. 
2 The noise produced thereby. 

glog-shüil, -üla, -shüilean, s.f. Hollow, inani- 
mate eye. 2 Soft eye. 

sh, -eiche, a. Hollow-eyed, 2ft 
Full-eyed. 

ele, tt at Full or tufted cheek, 

gloic, -ean, s.f. Idiot. 2 Foolish or senseless 
woman. 3*"Slattern, 4**Stupid quean. Tha 
thu ’nad sheann gh. le aois, age has made an 
oid fool of you. 

-——each, -eiche, a. see iceil. 

gloiceach,tt a. Having full cheeks. 
hanging cheeks, as hens. 

gloicealachd, s.f. Idiotism, stupidity. 2 Slut- 
tishness. 3**Queanishness. | 

gloiceil, -e, o, Fooltsh, idiotic, stupid. 2** 
Sluttish. 3**Queanish. 4ff Having full or 
tufted cheeks. 

gloc-gaire, s.f. Horse-laugh, see lachan-gaire. 

gloich, see gloie. 

gioichd, see gloic. 

gioienid,** at see gloc-nid. 

gloidhc, see gloic. 

£loidhehd, see gloic. 

—— —————each, see gloiceil. 

—ealachd, see gloicealachd. 

| —eil, see gloiceil, 

£loidhseam,(CR) s.m. Fnght. 2 Folly —W. of 
Ross-shire. 3 (DU) Rage, frenzy, also pro- 
nounced cleidhseam. 

gloin, see gloine. 

gloin,** oa Glaze. 2 Vitrify. 

glóin, a. Squint-eyed. 

gloin'-amharc, s.f. Spy-glass, telescope, 

gloine, s.f. see glaine. 

gloine, ( for glaine) comp. of glan. 
gZ., the purest gold. 

gloine,,-an & -achan, s. f. Glass. 
glass. 3*Bumper. 4 Window-glass. 
The measure of a drinking-glass. Gloin’ 
uinneig, & pone , cinnidh uisge "na gh. 
cruaidh, water shall turn into hard glass ; g, 
nan druidh, the druids’ glass or druids’ egg— 
called in the south of Scotland, adderstanes ; 
g. uisge-beath, a glwss of whisky. 

[Gloine-nan-druidh was in high esteem a- 
mong the Druids. It was one ot their disting- 
uishing badges, and was accounted to possess 
the most extraordinary virtues  'There is a 
passage in Pliny's Natural History, book xix, 
minutely describing the nature and proper- 
ties of this amulet. The following is à trans- 
lation of it, ‘*There ts à sort of egg 1n great 
repute among the Gauls, of which the Greek 
writers have made no mention. A vast num- 
ber of serpents are twisted together in sum- 
mer, and coiled up in an artificial knot by 
their saliva and slime ; and this is called the 

. Serpent's egg. The Druids say that it is toss- 

ed in the air with hissings, and must be 

caught in a cloak before it touches the earth. 

The person who thus intercepts it, flies on 

horseback ; for the serpents pursue him until 

prevented by intervening water. This egg, 

. though bound in gold, will swim against the 

Stream, And as the magi are cunning to con- 


2 Having 








An t-or ais 


2 Drinking 
5( DMC) 


505 


gldirichte 


ceal their frauds, they give out that this egg 
must be obtained ata certain age of the moon. 
I haye seen that egg as large and round as a 
common-sized apple, in a chequered cartilagi- 
nous eover, and worn by the Druids. It is 
wonderfully extolled for gaining law-suits, 
and access to kings. It is a badge which is 
worn with such ostentation, that I knew a 
Roman knight, a Vocontian, who was slain 
by the stupid emperor Claudius, merely be- 
cause he wore i£ in his breast when a law- 
suit was pending." Huddleston’s edition of 
Toland gives some very ingenious conjectures 
on the subject of this enigmatical Druids’ 
egg. The amulets of glass and stone, which 
are still preserved and used with implicit 
faith in many parts of Scottish Gaeldom, and 
are conveyed, for the cure of diseases to a 
great distance, seem to have their origin in 
this bauble of ancient priestcraft.—**] 
gloineach, æ. Glassy, vitreous. 

————adh,** -aidh, 8. m. Glazing. 2 Vitri- 
fymg. 3 Vitrification. 4 Panne, as of a 
window. 

gloinead, -eid, o m. Degree of cleanness or 
cleanlimess. A’ dol an g., growing 
cleaner ; is g. e an sgrothadh sin, it is the 
cleaner for that scrubbing. 

gloineadair,* -ean, s.m. Glazier. 2 Glass-blower. 

--—eachd,** s.f. Glaziery, business of a 
glazier. 2 Glass-blowing. 

gloine-deilbh, s.f. Camera. 

-fhad-sheallaidh,ff s.f. Telescope 

-loisgeaech, tf s.f. Burning glass. 

—— -losgaidh, see gloine-loisgeach. 

——— -lughdachaidh,ft s,f. Microscope. [So 
given by H. S. Dict., but the author must 
have been looking through the wrong end of 
the microscope when he translated this 
word !] 

——— -mhara,1Í s,f. Sea-glass. 

——— -mheudachaidh,iis.f. Magnifying glass, 
microscope. 

——— -mheudaiche,(MS) er Magnifier. 

-0il,( WC) s,f. Drinking-glass or horn. 

-rionnaig,f} s.f. Astronomical glass. 

—— —— -shide, s.f. Barometer. 

—-— -theas, s.f. Thermometer. 

glomieh, pr.pt. a’ gloineachadh, og, Glaze. 2 
Vitrify. 3 Pane, as a window. 

———-ear, fut, pass. of gloinich, 

— ——4Adh, fut.aff.a. of gloinich. 

— ———te, past pt. of gloinich. Vitrified, 2 
Glazed. 3 Paned. 

glòir, sf. Glory. 2 State of bliss. 3**Praise. 
4**Honour 5f{fTongue, speech. 6O6lIBoasting. 
7(DC) Torrent of coarse language—Skye. 8 
gen. sing. of glor. Treun thar g., powerful 
beyond prarse. 

—— -bhinn, -e, œ. Sweetly sounding. 

— -dhiomhain, s.f Vain-glory. 

gloireachadh, see glórachadh. 

gloiream, -eim, s.m. Taunting language. 2ff 
Pomp, pageantry. 

— ————ach,tt a. Taunting. 2 Fond of pomp or 
pageantry, pompous. 

———as, -ais, s.m. Stultiloquence. 

gloireis, -e, s.f. Boasting, prating, vain talk. 

each, -eiche, a. Boasting, babbling, pra- 
ting, verbose. 
eachd,** s.f. Boast ulness, verbosity. 
glóir-fhionn, -a, æ. Spotted in the face or fore- 
head. Scots, Ringle-eyed, asa horse. 2* Of 
an ugly drab colour. 

gloir-ghleusta, see gloir-fhionn. 

glòirich, see glóraich. 

te, see gloraichte. 

















gloirionn 
gloirionn, see glóir-fhionn. 
gloirmeas, see gloramas. 


tgloirlionta,** a, Crammed, stuffed, choke-full. 
2 Thick-set. 

glòir-mhiann, -a, s.m. Ambition, desire for glory. 
2 Pride. 

—— — —-———&ach, -aiche, a. Ambitious, desirous 
of glory. 2 Proud. 3 Vain-glorious. Fear 

., an ambitious man. 

gloir-mhóir, see glormhor, 

gloir-réim, s.m. Pomp, triumph, pageantry. 

— —————each, -eiche, a. Pompous, 

gloite,** s.f. Gluttony. 

ar,**-eir, -an, s.m. Glutton. 

arach, a Greedy, gluttonous, voracious. 
Gu g., greedily. 

t-——arachd, s.f. Gluttony, voraciousness, 

glòm, (CR) s.m. Abyss, gulf, chasm— W. of Ross- 
shire. HenceGlómach Falls, Kintail. 

glomach, a. Nasal. 2 Pronouncing the letter 
l like gh, thick of speech, as though the ton- 
gue were too big for the mouth. 

glomadh, -aidh, s. m. The evening twilight, 
Scots, gleaming. 

glòmag, s.f. Handful of oatmeal eaten dry— 
Caithness, Suth'd. d Lewis. (also gromag.) 2 
(DC) Pool in a stream or river—Árgyll. 

glomaiche,s.f.ind. Defect in speech, that makes 
one pronounce / like gh, 

glomainn, see glómadh. 

glomanaich, see glómadh. 

glomar,** air, s.m. Bridle. 

glomhar, -air, mhraichean, s.m. Piece of lea- 
ther or wood, or sometimes a pine cone, with 
a sharp peg placed in it point upwards, 
which used to be placed on the snouts of 
lambs to keep them from sucking the mother. 
This was used when it was the custom to milk 
sheep as well as goats. Thainig an g. as, he 
is ungagged. 

glomharaich, see glomhraich. 

glomhas, -ais, -an, s. m.  Rock-cleft, fissure, 
chink, chasm. 2 (DC) Wide mouth—Argyli, 
& Uist. 

glomhraich, pr.pt. a’ glomhrachadh. v.a. 

glomnaich,* see glómadh. 

glomuin, -e, see glómadh. 

glon,(DMK) a. Cross-eyed. 2 Having much of the 
white of the eyes visible—Caithness. 

glonach, a Avaricious, 

glonaid,** s.f. Multitude, crowd. 

glong, -a, -an, s.m. Slimy, clammy substance, 
2ttspittle. 3 Snot. 

ach, -aiche, a. Slimy, clammy. 

aiche, s.f.ind. Clamminess, glutinous pro- 
perty, tendency to become clammy. 

glongaire,tf ap, s.m. Dull, weak fellow. 

glonn, -a,-an, s.m. Deed of valour, exploit. 2 
Fact, deed. 3 Loathing, qualm. 4 Boasting, 
5**Oalf. Oscar nam mor g., mighty Oscar. 

glonnach, -aiche, a. Having an inexpressive, 
stupid or swollen face, see glonnmhor. 

glonnar, see glonnmhor. 

glonngag,(DMy) s.f. Sling for throwing stones, 
made of a piece of leather with string at each 
end. 

glonnmhor, -oire, œ. Heroic, valiant, performing 
heroic deeds. 2 Loathing, qualmish. 3 
Boasting. 

glonnrach,** a. Glittering, resplendent. 

glonnradh,** -aidh, s.m. Fulgency, splendour. 

glòr, s.m. see glòir. 2ft Speech, language, 
utterance.  3**Noise.  4**Idle talk. C’ait’ 
am faignear g. dhnomh P where can I find langu- 
age ? Connal bu mhìn g., C. the mild in speech. 








Gag. 








tglor, a. Clean, neat, trim. 2 Clear. 

tglorach, a. Noisy, clamorous.. 2 Talkative, | 
[ j 

ITERNET ARCHIVE 


506 


gluasad 


garrulous. 
SCENE -aidh, s.m. Glorifying, act of ghori- 
-fying. 
gloraich, pr. pt. a’ glórachadh, v. a. &Glority, 
praise, bless. 
te, past pt. of gloraich. Glorified. 





glórais, see gloireis. 





each, a. see gloireiseach. 

gloramach,tt a. Full ot pomp.. 

-—d, see gloramas. 

gloramas, -aiS, 8.m. Boasting talk, idle talk, 2 
ttPomp, pageantry. 3**Vain boaster. i**I[dle. 
talker. 

gloran,(MS) s.m. Hopper. 

glòrmhor, -oire, a Glorious, illustrious. 2 Ex- 
cellent. A chumhachd g., his glorious power.. 

glotair, s.m, Glutton. 

——-—eachd, s.f. Gluttony.. 

tglotan -ain, s.m. Bosom, breast. 

gloth, & see glo. 

+-——, a. Wise, prudent, discreet. 

t-——, s.f. Veil. 

glothag, -aig, see glothagach, s. 

glothagach, -aich, s.m. Frog’s spawn. 

——,** æa. Abounding in, or like frog's 

Spawn. : 

glothair, see glomhar,. 

glothraich, pr. pt. a’ glothrachadh, v. a. 
glomhraieh. 








sea 


tgluair,a. Clear, bright, gleaming. 2 Clean. 3 


Splendid. 
t eachd, s.f. Clearness, brightness. 
gluais, pr.pt. a’ gluasachd & a’ gluasad, v.ad.n. 
Move, go, walk. 2 Advance, proceed, march, 
3 Affect, agitate, put in motion, 4 Affect, 
touch pathetically. 5 Afflict, provoke. & 
Bestir, make a motion, get up. 
G. as a seo,. move out of this ; g. gu blar, march 
io the battle-field ; gh.. o ’n ear a mhaduinu 
ghlan, the radiant morn advanced from the 





east ` bha’n righ air a ghluaiseadh, the king 


was agitated; gh. iad chun a’ bhaile, they 
proceeded towards the town ; an ni nach cluinn 
cluas, cha ghluais e cridhe, what does not 
reach the ear cannot affect the heart ; gh, e au 
t-uisge, he agitated the water; ’sa mhaduinn 
'nuair a ghluaiseadh Di-mairt, in the morning. 
when Tuesday was ushered in; o'u cheud la 
a gh. i air tus air thalamh, since the first day 
she ever appeared en Life's scene; na glinn 's 
an do gh. mo shinnsir, the glens in which my 
ancestors ftourished. 
gluais, s.f. Device, invention. 
pretation. 
gluaisdeach, œ. Moving, stirring, agitating, 2 
Causing motion. 3 Affecting, pathetic. 
gluaise, s.f. Neatness, trimuess. 2 Cleanness. 
-—adair,Tf s.m. Mover. 
—————àüh, see gluasad. 
ar, fut.pass. of gluais. 
ar, -eir, s.m. Mover. 2 Agitator. 
gluais-fhear, see gluaisear. | 
gluaisidh, fut. af. a. of gluais. 
gluaisneach,(MS) a Active. 2 Busy. 


2 Gloss, inter- 





pime 


acd dal M | 
Y cb TET: 


A 


Les 


DE ES d. 


xut s 


~È 3 


ch 


fr vie 
AS, Ri 


P. 


- 





gluaiste, past pt. of gluais. Moved, stirred, af- * 


. fected, agitated. i 
gluarach,** g. Pure. 2 Glorious. 3 Vociferous. 


gluasachd, -an, s.f. see gluasad. 2 pr. pt. ol - 


gluais. 


gluasad, -aid, -an, s. m. Moving, movement, 


motion. 2 Act of motion. 3* Agitation. 4 
Conduct, behaviour. 5 Gesture. 6 Gait, 
carriage. 7**Provoking. 8 Pathos. Gun 


gh., without motion; gun gh. à nunn no à 
nall, without moving hither or thither ; 'nad 
gn., im your behaviour ; tha g. muà-uaisle 
aice, she has a lady's gait; a’ g. a bhileanm, 





gluasad 

T.. À— À— ry 

moving keine A’ g—, pr. pt. of gluais. 

gluasadach, -aiche, 
pable of motion, 
fecting, moving, 


à nn) disquieting, agitatiye, 
gluasadair,** s,m, 


Agitator, 2 Motor. 


gluasadh, -aidh, 8. m. Moving, motion. 2 Agi- 


tation. 3 Gait. 


gluasag, -aig, 8. E Water-wagtail (bird.) 2 


Restless girl. 

gluasair,** s.m. Interpreter. 

gluas-rud,** sm Projectile. 

gluc, -uic, -an, s.f. 
(DMC) Clucking of a broody hen, 

glucaid,** sr Bumper. 

glug, -uig, -an, s.m. Noise of a fluid confined in 
a vessel when agitated, 
Darrow aperture 2 Gulp, noise of liquid in 
the act of being swallowed or gulped.  $* 
Rumbling stutter ur stammer. 
ing of a hen. Cearc air gh., a clucking hen ; 
cha robh coille riamh gun chrìonaich, no linn 
gun ubh-gluig, never was wood without dry 
brushwood, nor brood without addled egg. 


Gulp. 3 Gurgle, 4* Stammer, Gh. eair a 
h-uile deur dheth, he gulped down every drop 
of it. 

glugach, -aiche, a, Making a noise as of fluid 
when moved in a close vessel not quite full, 
2Stammering. 3 peaking thickly and im- 


perfectly. 4 Clucking. o"*Lisping. 6 Gur- 
gling. 7(MS) Dull. 8(MS) Pot-bellied. 
, “aiche, s.f. Stammering female, 2* 





Rumbling noise. 3* Stammer. 

‘glugaiche, s.f. Same meanings as glugaireachd. 

—, comp. of glugach. More or most 
imperfect in speech. 

glugail,** s.f. Gurgiing. 2 Swallowing with a 
gurgling noise, 

glugair,-e,-ean, 3. M. Stammerer, one who 
speaks imperfectly. 2 One who talks non- 
sense, prater. 3 Soft, cowardly tellow. 4* 
Rumbler. 

glugair,** v.q. Gargle. 

eachd, s. f. und. Stammering, lisping. 
speaking inarticulately, 9 Foolisn, incoher- 
ent tàlk. 3 Cowardice. 

glugairueaeh,(MS) a. Pot-bellied. 

glugalaich, see glugaich. 

glugaiman, (DMC) s.m. Unstable condition, Air 
gu., man unstable condition. 

——aich,(DMC) pr.pt.a’ glugamanachadh, 

Gë. Rock, shake. 

. glugan, -ain, -an, s.m. dim. Faint noise of a 

fluid confined in a vessel, 9** Gurgling noise 

of water against the side of a vessel, 3 Rum- 

bling in the intestines. 4 Rolling motion, as 

of a ship at sea. 5 The uvuia, "e Gurgling 

noise, 














ach, -aiche, q. Rolling, as a ship, un- 

steady, tottering. 2**Gurgling, 

adh,(DU) s.m. Process of making but. 
ter from a small quantity of cream by, putting 
it in a bottle and shaking 1b till the butter 
forms. 

——aich, pr. pt. a’ gluganaich & ag glugan- 

achadh, v.a. Make butter by shaking cream in 
a bottle, 

 gluganaich, s.f. (MS) Gurgle. A’ g—, pr.pt. of 
gluganaich, 

glugaran,** s,m. Gargle, 

glugraich, s.f. Rumbling, 

— 0f fluid, 

glüig, -e, -ean, see gloic. 

gluig, a. Addled, as an egg. 2** Unsound, rotten, 

glùine, gen. sing. of glùn. 

glùin, az, of glùn. 








2 Superabundance 





507 


gluineach, -eiche, o. Having large knees. 3 
as certain kinds of 
4 (DMy) 


$. H Morbus genuum [prece- 














a. Moving, locomotive, ca- 
2 Moving, unsteady. 3 Af- 


The socket of the eye. 2 


or escaping from a 


4 (DU) Cluck- 


glug,"" v.a, Swallow witha gulping noise. 2. 








glüineanach 





Abounding in joints, 
9 In-kneed, knock-kneed. 
Weak-kneed. 
glüineach,| .eich, 

ded by the art, o gh—.] 


female. 3 Large-kneed female. 


ness of the joints or knees. ? N 


bility ot the body 
— —-— -an-uisge,$ s.f. 
Eech amphibiu 


aviculare, 


W 
A à Kaz 


2 Oy 





378. Glüineach bheag. 


~~ -dhearg,$ s.f. Amphibious persicaria 





see glùineach-an-uisge. McL giveg 
** knot-grass.” 

379. Gliineach dhubh. ; 

———--dhubh,$ s. f. Climbing persicaria, 


black biudweel climbing buckwheat —poly- 

gonum convolvulus. 

— -mhór,$ s.f. Spotted persicaria—poly- 

gonum persicaria. 

~ -theth g s. f, Water-pepper, water 
knot-grass, lake-weed, see lus-an-fhogair, 

gluineag, -eig, -an, s.f. Blow with the knee in 
fighting or wrestling, 

glùinean, ein, .an, s.m. 
leg, coarse garter. 

-—ach, -aiche, o Gartered, wearing gar- 


2K 2 








Garter, hose-tie on the 





gluineach,ty -ich, B.S. Milkwort. 2 In-kneed 
"cn, “Ich, s.m. Any illness causing weak. 
ats c ame given to 
the potato at its first introduction, from ita 
Supposed tendency to weaken and cause de- 
Amphibious persica- 
Ma 


heag,§ s./. Knot-grass—polygonum 







































oa 














I M 
slüineanach 508 gnàthaich K 
ters. pt. of giut. 
glüineas, -eis, s.m. Gout in the knee. c —, Barra for glut-lionadh. 
glüineineach, -eiche, see glüineanach,: glutaich, v.n. Gormandize, glut, devour. 
id et LA s.f. Shoulder. iglutail, a. Intemperate. - 
glüiutean, n.pl. of glùn. glutair,-ean, ëm. Glutton, 2 One greedy of 
glüintibh, dat.pl. of glün. Air do gh., on thy| gain. 
knees. : eachd, s.f.ind. Gluttony, avarice, greed.. 
gluis, s.f. Slush. 2 Liquid food, —Arran. glutan,(DU) s... Drep narrow valley, gully. 
+cluis-gheugach, -aiche,a. Full of green poughs. | glut-lion,(DC)pr.pt.a’ glut-lionadh & a’ glutadh,, 
glum,* sf. see glam. 2(MMcD) Deep pool. v.a. Pack inside of a wall with gravel—Uist. 
glumach,(DU) e. Dark, dull, cloudy. 1 7 hi : adh,(DC) s.m. Packing of gravel, put 
glumadh,tt -aidh, s.m. Big mouthful of liquid.| 1n the middle of house-walls to fill up the 
2 Plunge. G. na fuaradh, a lurch to the wea-| space between them.—Uist.. These walls: 
ther side—when a boat is too heavily ballasted are dry-built and hollow, and from 6 ft. to 10. 
on the weather side in a rough sea. | ft. in thickness. A’ g—, pr.pt. of glut-lìon. 
glumag,(WO) Poolewe for giumadh 1. D gnà, see gnàth. 
glumag, -aig, «an, sf. Puddle. 2 Deep pool, |gnàbh-lus, -uis, 8.m. Cudweed, see lus-à'-chait,. 
deep pit full of water, usually applied to a gna-bhogha,ff{ -achan, s.m. Arcade. 
pool in running water. 3:Deep hole. gnàda, -àide, see grànda. 
en ach, -aiche, a. Of, or relating to, pools | gnadan,(CR) s.m. Murmuring, complaining— 
of water. 2 Abounding in such pools. 38 Arran. 
Full of deep holes. gnàdran,-ain, see gradran. 
glumagan, -am, -an, s.m.dim. of glumag. Little gnàdranach, see gràdranach. e 
pool. 2 Deep pool. 3 Deep hole. —_—_————adh, see gradranachadhi Sr 
glumaid,(DMy) s. f. Deep pool in a river or gnàdranaich, see gradranaich. = 
burn—Lewis. tgnae,tf st Woman. A: 
glumraidh, s.f. Hungriness, voraciousness. gnag, pr.pt.a’ gnagail, v.n. Make a small crack: 
—,a. Devouring, engnlphing. 2 Ap- ling noise. r 
plied to the sea when it is bulging heavily in | gnagail,t s.m. Crackling. A’ g—, pr.pt.ofgnag. 
rolling waves. | gnàidead, -id, see graindead. 
glùn, -ùin & -üine, pl. glùinean & glùintean, s.|tgnais, s.f. Pars nefanda mulieris. vi 
m. [s.f. in Badenoch.] Knee. 2 Joint. 3|gnàithseach,T -aich, s. m. Arable land under 
Generation, race, 4**Step, degree, in a pedi-| crop- 2(DC) Cultivator of the soil, farmer. 
gree. 5 Descendant. 6 Joint in reeds. 7| Ceuma'ghnàithsich, the ploughman’s step— —. 
(AH)Beam-knee in boat, see under bata, p76.| heavyzand solid. . E 
Bean-ghlüin, a midwife ; an t-aon nach teag- gnaithsear,* s.m. Husbandman. 2 Countryman.  . 
aisgear ris a’ ghlùn, chan fhoghlumar ris | gnamhan, -ain, -an, s.m. Periwinkle, sea-snail. —— 
an uilinn, the child that is not taught at the enamhanach, &. Abounding in periwinkles. A 
knee, cannot be taught at the elbow ; sios air do| fgnamhuil,-e, a Peculiar, proper. de 
ghlüinibh ! on the knee ! ; aon gh., first cousin; gna-mhuinntir, $.pl. see gnàth-mhuinntir. X: 
dà gh., second cousin ; lùbadh: gach g., let tgnaoi, a. Pleasant, courteous. 2 Gentle. 3 
every knee bow. Respectable. 4 Ingenious.. | EE 
glünach, see gluineach. tgnaoi, s.f. Countenance. 2 Grin. (see gnùis} 
an,tt -ain, s.m. Knee-cap. tgnaoi-fhiosachd, s.f. Physiognomy. E 
ünan,** ain, s.m. Little knee. 2 Garter. tgnaoi-fhiosaich, -ean, s.7n. Physiognomist. * 
glün-bhleathach, -aiche, see glün-bhleitheach.|gnàs, Ais, s.f. see gnàths. 7H 
glün-bhleitheaeh, -aiche, o, In-kneed. enath,-a, -than & -annan, s.m. Manner, fash- E 
glin-bhrat, s.m. Bass. ion, custom, usage. {2 Stature. +3 Lowing f 
yelundas, a. Knock-kneed, bandy-legged. of cows. 14 Bleating of sheep. +5 Soothing 
glün-dos, a. glün-dosach. voice. 6**Experience. Mar bu gh. leis, a$ | 
— ————ach, a. Bandy-legged. his custom was; talla do'n g. na cuirm, halls — 
glung,(CR) s.m. Hollow sound as from an| where feasting (hospitality) was the fashion; — 
empty vessel—W. of Ross-shire. 9(MM) The} eòlach air gach g., acquainted with every eg: | 
noise a bottle makes when being emptied. tom; a gh., do gh., continually, usually ; & —— 
glungan,** -ain, s.m. Clink. réir an g., according to their manner. d 
glün-ghinealaich, -tean-,:$.m. Pedigree. gnàth, -a, œ. Usual, common. G. obair, constant , 
giün-lüb,** V.n.. Kneel. 2 Curtsy as a female, work ; g. chleachdainn, habitual practice ; a" 7 
ach,** a. Kneeling. 2 Genuflecting. 3 gh. Fhéinn, the standing army of the Féinne. | 
Curtsying. gnath, (i.e. do ghnath, a ghnàth) adv. Always. | 
adh, s. m. Genuflexion, kneeling. 2 ach, -aiche, a. Customary, ordinary, com- — 
Curtsy. mon. 2 Continual, constant, habitual 3** 
glupad,(AC) s.m.Dropsy in the throat, affecting Active. 4 Industrious. EA 
Practising, act or - 


cattle and 
and kidneys. see clupaid. 

+glus, -uis, s.m. Light, brightness. 

giusar,** a. Bright, glossy. 

glut, -a, s.m. Voracity, gluttony. 2*Gulp, 
3 (DU) Greed. 

glut, 
mandize. 


glut 


gulp. 
gluta, (DMy) s. Dee 
lutach, -aiche, a. 
U) Greedy. 


p round. pool—Lewis. 
Gluttonous, edacious. 


glutadh, -aidh, s.m. Glutting, act of glutting. 
8 Gulping food voraci- 
ously. 4t+Drinking with a noise. A'g—, pr. 


2 Eating to excess, 


Mien OY 

== pn av Ne: 
"i =. L1 d emm Fj 1 d i I 
i ^L D SA EN l VM 

— 1 — LI 1 "A 


sheep, due to decay in the liver 


pr.pt. a’ glutadh, v.c. Glut, devour, gor- 
2++ Drink with noise or greedily, 


2 (D 


——achadh, -aidh, s. m. 
habit of doing a thing. 2 Practice, cust 
manner. 3 Behaviour. 4**Way, course. Y 
(MS) Management. A réir gnàthachadh an 
t-saoghail, according to the ways of the world; 
do dhroch gh., your bad behaviour. A’ g-—s 
pr. pt. of gnàthaich. - 

enathachas, -ais, s.m. Invariableness. 

gnàthaehd, s.f.ind. Customariness. e 

gnàthaich, pr. pt. a’ gnàthachadh, v. A. & Me 
Accustom, use, inure, exercise, practise. 2 
Behave. GQ. thu fhéin gu ceart, behave your- 
self properly ; a’ gnàthachadh tombaca, SCH 
tobacco ; is dona a gh. ei, he behaved very e 
ly to her.. 


D 


Ze 


Aet 






5 


a t dio urs aT, 


= 


. gaeatbhail, 
. gneidheach, -eiche, 


INTERNET 


-gnathaichear 





sgnathaichear, fut.pass. of gnàthaich, 


—eur, -eir, s.m. Practitioner. 

—te, a. & pr. pt. of gnathaich. Used, 
exercised, practised. 2 Common, usual, ac- 
customed. f 

‘gnathail, a. Usual, customary. 2 Peculiar, 
proper. 

gnath-ainm, s. Usual or common name. 

gnathalachd,(DMC) s.f. Naturalness., 

gnàthanna n. pl. of gnàth. 

gnathas,-ais, see gnàths. 

gnàth-bheurla, s.f. Vernacular tongue. 





 gnàth-chainnt, s.f. Phraseology. 2** Vernacular. 








each, -eiche, a. Idiomatical. 

gnath-chuimhne, s. f. Tradition. 2 Constant 
remembrance. 

gnath-edlach, a. Experienced. ` 

gnàth-eólas, -ais, 8. f. Experience, knowledge 
got by experience. . 

guath-fhacal, -ail & -clan, s.m. Proverb, phrase, 
py-word. Bithidh e,’na gh., he shall be a by- 
word, 

g) ath-fhaclach, a. Proverbial. b 

gnath-fhiabhras, -ais, -an, s.m. Unremitting fe- 
ver, constant fever. 


;gnàth-fhuaim, s.f. Continued noise, constant 


clack, din. 
-——neach, @. 





Making a continued 
noise, 

gnàth-ghlas, @ Evergreen. 

gnath-leughach, -aiche. a. Bookish, 

gnàth-mhaireannach, -aiche, a. Perpetual,ever- 
lasting. 

gnàth-mhuinntir, s.pl. Natives, 

guath-oidhirpeach, -eiche, a. Indefatigable, 

gnaths, -ais, s.m. Custom, practice, habit, bent. 
2(DMC) Nature. Cha’n’eil sin "na gh., that 
is notin his nature. 

gnàth-shàrachail, -e, a Importune. 

gnàthta,* a. Arable. Talamh g., arable land. 

gnàth-ürnuigh, s.f. Frequent prayer. 

gnè, s.f.ind. Kind, sort, species, nature,quality. 
2 Natural temper or disposition. 3 Counte- 
nance. 4 Form. .5 Appearance, outward 
sensible sign, complexion,  6* Slight degree 
-of the nature of anything. 7 Tinge. 8 Tinct- 
ure. 9**Manner. Is don’ a’ gbnè a th’ air, 
what a bad expression of countenance he has! ; 
ainnir a bu mhine gnè, æ virgin of the mildest 
expression [** translates this ‘* of the softest 

' temper "]; g. chreadha, a slight degree of clay, 
ciayish (as soil); g. deirge, a tincture or tinge 
of red; gach creutair a réir a ghné, every 
beast after its kind. 

gneag,ff-a, -an, s.m. Knock, 

see gnéidheil. 

see gnéidheil. 

gneidhealachd, s.f.ind. Kindness, tenderness, 
ood nature, generosity. 2 Mannerliness. 3 
Shapeliness. 4 Inateness. 

gnéidheil, -eile, o Genial, generous, tender, 
kind. 2 Shapely, well-proportioned, urbane. 
3 Mannerly. 4 (DU) Endowed with natural 
affection. Gu g., good-naturedly. 

gnéith, see gnè. 

gnéitheach,(MS) a. Inate, see gnéidheil. 

gnéitheachas, ais, s.m. Inateness, see gnéidh- 
ealachd. 

gnèi erha, S.f. Inateness, see gnéidheal- 
achd. 

gnèitheil, see gnèidheil. 

gnéithich,(MS) v.a. Assimilate, 

gneé-mhill,** v.g. Disfigure, deform. 

gnéth, see gnó, 

guéthealachd, see gnéidhealachd, 

gneutail, s.m. see gneutair. 

gneutair(DMu) s.m. Native race—Suth’d. Am 


Digitized by 
ARCHIV 


509 





gnòdh 


bheil e dhe gneutair an àite P does he belong to 
the native race of the place ? 


fgnia, s. Voice. 2 Knowledge. 3 Tree. 4 
Judge. 5 Knowing person. 6 Servant. 
gniamh, see gniomi. 


tgnie, s.f. Knowledge. 

gniobunn,(MMcD) s.m. Rock-fish, 

gnìomh, pl. -a, -mhtharra, -an, -annan & -mhar- 
an, sm. Deed, action. 2 Office. 3 The 7th. 
sheaf as payment to the hinds that work the 
farm of tenants or landlords. 4 The building 
of a peat-stack or of hewn stones, [In Gair- 
loch, applied to a temporary peat-staek, where 
the peats are built up to dry befere being 
built into the permanent stack. The word is 
also applied to corn similarly dealt with. ‘The 
meaning appears to be a '* show " rather than 
reality.—DU.] 5 Exploit. 6ffBusiness, avo- 
cation, work. 7T[IWord. 8**rarely Fear. 9 
**Parcel of land.  f10 The 12th. part of a 
ploughland. G. mna-gluine, the ofice of a 
midwife; chronaich mi an g., I blamed the 
deed; droch gbh., a bad deed ; g. duine, the 
work or office of any man ; cuir an g., perform, 
operate; g. a làimhe, his handiwork ; mac- 
gniomharan Fhinn, the exploits of Fionn’s 
boyhood. 

gniomh,* oa, Build or pile, as a peat-stack, 

gniomhach, -aiche, a. Active, busy. 2 Diligent, 
industrious, 3 Actual. 4 Laborious. 5 Op- 
erative. 6tt Thrifty. 7 * Making great or 
good deeds. An seillean g., the busy bee, 

————-—adh, -aidh, s. m. Performing, per- 
formance,,execution, agency. ?(DMOC) Outside 
building of a peat-stack. A’ g—, pr. pt. of 
gniomhaich. 

—— —— —---ail,ifi-e, a. Busy, active. 

gnìomhachas, -ais, s,m. Activity. 2 Agency. 
3 Industry, doings, business, work, perform- 
ance. 4* Office of an overseer. 

gnìomhachd, s.f. Efficiency. 2 Activity. 3 In- 
dustriousness. 

gnìomhaich, pr.pt. a’ gnìomhachadh, v. v. Act, 
perform, effect, operate, work. Ormsa gh. e 

beud, to me he has wrought harm. 

- ——e,-an, $. m. Agent, actor, perform- 

er of an action, doer. 

gniomhail, -e, a Actual, active. 

gniomhair, -ean, s.m. Actor, agent. 

gniomhar, -air, -an, s.m. Verb in grammar. 

--————-ach, a. Active, actual. E 

-.— ———aich,tt v.a. Officiate. | 

-— ———üàiche, s.m. Operator. 

-.————— an, n.pl. of gnìomh. 

gniomharra, n.pl. of gnìomh. 

—— —— — —— , a. see gnìomhach. 

gniomharrach, -aiche, see gnìomhach, 

eniomharran, n.pl. of gnìomh. 

gniomh-chomasach, -aiche, a. Able to work. 2 
Powerful, mighty. 3 Executive. 

Tgnis, v.g. Effect, bring to pass. 

Tgnithe, 5,57. Transactions, business. 

Tgnó, s.m. Jeering, mocking, 2 Sea. 

tgno, see gnothach, 

gno, see gnódh. 

gnob, -oib, -an, 
Hillock, knoll. 

gnobach, -aiche, æ. Bunchy. 2 Tumorous, 
covered with little swellings. 3ffKnolly. 

gnoban, -ain, -an, s.m., dim. of gnob. Little 
hill, knoll or heap. 2 Swelling. 

ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in little hills, 
knolls or heaps. 

gnodh, a. Gruff, surly, gloomy, down-looked. 
2 Notable, remarkable, famous. 3**Jeering. 
see gnu. Iomadh bodachan g., many a gruff 
little old man ; bu gh, an geamhradb, gloomy 





s. m, Bunch, 2 Tumour. 3 





r i] Tom 


UNIV 


| rm c m 55-1 Li d KZ Cu) i 
LE a im | rai As ee d LE Wu 


i d gä WT 
V elei ka " of le MI ES 


gm 


d 
Li 
E73 


gnodh 5 


was the winter 

gnodh, s.m. Frowning, stern. fierce look. 

gnodhan, -ain, s$. m, Angry frown 2 Growl, 
moan. 3 Noise. 4 (DMC) Humming of à 
song. 

gnog, v.a. Knock. 2 Knock with tne hand or 


knuckies. 3 *Knock down. 4 *Kill 

gnog,-oig,-an, s.m. Frown, sullen look, 2 
Knock, 3 Knock with the knuckles 4 Sud. 
den shove, 6 Jolt. 


gnogach, .aiche, a. Pettisn, sulky, frowning. 
2 Fickle, ready to take offence. 3ttShy. 4** 
Jolting, 5**Knocking Gu g., sulkily. 

E -aidh, s.m Knocking A’ g—, pr. pt. 

gnog. 

gn , alg, -an, Sz. dum of gnog. Little pet- 
tish female, 2 Little sulky female. 8 Slight 
knock on the head with the knuckles. 

gnogaiseach, -eiche, o. Peevish, pettish, 

—————-—, §. find, Peevishness, pettishness, 
sulkiness. 

gnoig, Oen eng of gnog. 

gnoig, -e, -ean, sf. Surly frown, gloomy sulky 
look. 2 Surly, old-fashioned face on a young 
person. 3 Sulks, 4tt Head. 

-——each -eiche, o Frowning, sulky, gloomy. 

-——eag, -eig,-an, S. f. Little sulky frowning 
woman. 

-——ean,(CR) s.m. Ball of.worsted and tar, put 
on the points of the horns of vicious cattle— 

e. 

-——eas, -eis, s.m. Sulkiness, pettishness, peey- 
ishness, sulks. 

-——easach, -aiche, a, Sulky, frowning, peevish, 
as a young person. 2 Grim. 

gnoigeis, see gnoigeas. d 

gnvimh, s.f. Visage 2 Grin. 3 Ludicrous name 
for a person with a grinning countenance 4 
(CR) Sulky look— Perthshire. Chuir eg air, 
he made faces. 

gnoin,* pr.pt. a’ gnoineadh, v. a. Shake and 
scold a person at the samejtime, 

gnois, gen.sing. of gnos 

gnómh,* v.a, Grunt like a pig. 

st s.m. Grunt of a pig. 

gnomhaeh, see gnothach. 

guomhan, see gnamhan. 

gnómhan, -ain, -an, s.m, Groaning, groan, 

——-— ach, -aiche, a Groaning, 

gnos, ois, -aD, sm Snout or mouth of a beast, 
especially a pig. ? Derisive term for tbe hu- 
man mouth, 8**Bill G. tunnaig, a duck's 
bill [this ex is given by "*, but is bad Gael- 
ic) ; g. muic, the snout of a pig. 

gnosach, -aiche, a Havinga snout. 2 Having 
a large mouth. 3ttSullen, grumpy surly. 

—— —— , -aich, s.m. Forward,interfering person. 

gnosad, see gnosd. 

gnosad,(MS) s.m Hum 

gnósadaich, s.f. Querulous low noise or moan 
made by a cow or ox, approaching to lowing. 
2 Roaring, as a bull. 3 Snoring noise, 

gnosail, s.f. Grunting of à sow 

gnosair,** s.m. Man withalarge mouth, 2 
Blubber-lipped man. 

— — —eachd, s.f.ind. Muttering. 2 Blubber- 
liness. 3 Mouthing, 

gnosd, s.f. Lowing, bellow 2 Snoring noise 
3 Deep groan, grunt. 4 Low made by a cow 
to her calf. 5 The subdued noise & cow atters 
as her ordinary expression of ceeling.  6** 
Hollow roar of a bull. 






















A 


~ 
" 
un 


gnusadn 


cation. 2 Affair, matter, circumstance. $ 
Errand. 4Callofnature.  Nie'n g., it will 
do, a gabhail gnothaich ri, meddling with, 
being o busybody ; a’ dol air g., going on an 
errand , na biodh gnothach agad ris, have no- 
thing to do with him ;thag. agam riut, Z 
have some business to transa:t with you, I have 
Something to say to you ; dean do gh., do your 
business ; gille-ghnothaich, an errand-boy ; 
adh’ aon gh., on purpose ; g. na cubhaige, & 
fools errand ; lag. na cubhaige, all fvols’ 
day (April 1st.) 

gnothaich, gen. sing. of gnothach. 

————-— ean, n.pl. of gnothach, 

gnothuch, see gnothaeh. 

gnothuich, see gnothaich. 

gnu. @ Famous, remarkable, notable. 2 - 
Worldly, parsimonious. 3 Grippy. 4tfsurly, 
gruff. 5 Envious. Cho g.ri broc, as surly 
as a badger, (see gnódh.) 

tgnuach, a. Leaky. 

gnudhachd,(MS) st Gruffness, 

gnügach, -aiche, a Surly, sulky, scowling. 2 
tt Worldly, parsimonious. 

gnugag, -aig,-an, s.f. Dejected, poor female, 2 x 
Sulky female. 

gnügair, -ean, s.m. Surly fellow, 

gnuig,* s.f. Surly lowering expression of coun- 
tenance, scowl. 

gnüigean, ein, s.m. Sorry wretch. 2 Pitiful 
miser, 3iIMiserable hut. 

gnuigeineach, -eiche, a. Wry-mouthed, sorry, ks 
mean. 2 Morose. de 


gnuis, -e, -ean, s.f. Face, countenance. 2 Sur- 
face. 3 Love, favour. 4 Aspect. 5**Ap- Ru 
pearance. Sheall e'nam gh., he looked in my — 
face i | 


Tennis, s.f. Hazard, jeopardy. 2 Notch. 
gnuüis-aognachaidh, s.m.  Ghastliness. 
gnuis-bhrat, -ait, -an, s.m. Veil for the face. 
gnüis-bhreith, s.f. Judging by the look. 
——-. —— ——eamh, -eimh, -nan, s.m. Physiog- 
nomist, H 
gnuis-chiontach, s.f. Guilty countenance. "f 
ynuiseach, -eiche, | €. Aspected. 
gnuis-fhionn, -a o, White-faced. 
gnüis-fhiosachd, er, Physiognomy. 
a pluysvognomist. 
gnüis-fhiosaiche, s.m. Physiognomist. A 
gnuis:mhalda, s. 7. Modest countenance, face T 
expressive of gentleness of disposition. "e 
, a. Of a modest appearance. Mo 2 
chaileag g,, my modest faced girl. 
gnüis-inheall, v.g. Counterfeit, put on a false e 
appearance, dissemble. 
——-—ach, -aiche, a. Counterfeiting, apt 
to deceive by a fair appearance. SÉ 
———— -— adh, -aidh, s. m. Counterfeiting, 
dissimulation. 2**Disguise, mask. Rinn iad E. 
g they dissembled. à 
——:— —— tà, a Counterfeit, fictitious. 
—— — -—tair, -ean, s.m. Deceiver, dissem- 
bler. counterfeiter [ness. 
guüis-naire, s.f.ind. Bashfulness, shamefaced- 


Fear g., 











gnuis-naireach, -eiche, à. Bashful. Gug., a. 
bashfuily S 
gnüis-nàireachd, s.f. Bashfulness, shamefaced- : 
ness, demureness. fv 


gnüis-shubhach, -aiche, æ. Merry-faced, hav- 

ing & merry countenance. 5 
rguumh, s.m. Notch, dent. 2 Heap, pile. 
tguumh, v.d. Heap up, pile, amass. 


gnosd,** v.n. Low, bellow. 2 Groan. 3 Snore. | gaumnail, s.f. Grunting, groaning. 
4* Grunt. 5**Make a hollow roar, as à bull. | g»ámhan, Gairloch tor gnómhan. 
gnosdaich, : gnusad ` 
gnosdail, see gnosadaich. gnusadaich, 
gnothach, -aich, -aichean, s.m. Business, avo-| gnusa‘th, 


see gnósadaich. 


e 
keng 
7 
m 


RR 
L 


| ] i [ 
NET ARCHIV 


[TI 
ri 





k^ 


gnusadh 


+gnusadh, -aidh, sm, Notch, dent. 

gnusd, see gnosd. 

adh, see gnosd. 

aen ER see gnósadaich. 

gnusgalach, see grünsgalach. 

gnüsgail, see grunsgal. 

gnüsgal, see grùnsgal, 

—aich, see grunsgal. 

gnùth, -üith, -ùithe, & guütha, s.f. see gnodh. 

gnutha,(MS3) a. Niggardly. 

——-—il, see gnuümhail. 

go, see gu. 

go, 8.m.ind. Lie, deceit, hypocrisy. 2 Fault, 
blemish, defect. 3 Guile, 4 Grudge.  6** 
Airy gait. 6 Wisdom. 7**Fraud, Dune gun 
ghò, a guilebess man; dà reithe gun ghò, 
two rams without blemish. 

gò, s.m. tSea, 2 Spear. 3 Fool. 

gó, v. 








a L 
gob,** s. Babble. 2 Pee of an anchor, see p.77. 


gob, guib, s.m, Bill or beak of .3 bird. 2 Mouth. | 
3 see gab. 4 Garrulity, 5 (DMy) Point. G.|8 


an rudha, the point of the headland ; g. na 
snàthaid, the point of the needle ; g. a’ phrine 
the pin's point ; g. na cuiteige, the mouth of 
the whiting ; duilleag "na ghob, @ leaf in its 
bill ; g. circe, œ~ hen’s bill ; glas-ghuib, the 
closure. : 
gobach, -aiche, a. Beaked, snouty, having a 
long bill, 2 see gabach. 3 (DU) Tell-tale. 
G. civeanach, Long-billed and crested. 
, -aiche, s.f. Prating female, chatterer, 
gabbler, scold. ’Nuair a phos mi a’ gh..àrd- 
anach nach obadh cnamhan rium, when I 





married the irritable chatterer, who would 


mot cease from gnawing al me. 

gobach, T -aich, s. m. Hawfinch--coccothraus- 
tes vulgaris. 

gobachaih, (M3) s.m. Growth, 





$80. Gobach. 


gobada-liridh, (CR) s.m. Sandpiper—W. of Ross. 
_ gobag, -aig, -an, s.f. Dog-fish—squalus acanth- 


tas. 2(AF) sSea-dog. 3 (AF) Little gab (fish,) 


4**Sand-eel. 5 Kiss. 6 Little bill, 7 Garru- 
lous female. 8 Period of the year, lasting ae: 
cording to some, three days, according to 
others a week, coming in, apparently, between 
the Feadag and the Gearran and so ending on 
14th. March. Feadagan is Gobagane tuill- 
eadh gu Féill Padruig, whistling and biting 
winds on to St, Patrick's day. Carmichael 
in Carmina Gadelica, explains A’ Ghobag as 
the day before an Fhéill Brighde (p. 276.) 
— gobag, s.f. Staple (DMK)—W. coast of Ross. 2 
*tKind of bird. 3 (DU) Little hook, such as 
is used for keeping a cupboard-door closed. 


Digitizs 
L mE" fe, 8 == LR opem e re 
4 | [5 "à 1 a 
ITERNET ARCHIVE 


f ] 
i 


511 





Lochalsh, Suth’d, Torridon & Lewis for |g 





gobhar-bhacach 





2 . _ 881. Gobag (1) 

gobagach, -aiche, a, Abounding in dog-fish. 2 
Like a dog-fish. 3 see gabach, 

gobaich,ff v.a. Peck 

gobaiche, comp, ot gobach. 

gobair, -ean, sea gabair, 

——-eachd, see gabairesachd. 

gobais, s.f. see gabaireacad. 

goban, (AF) s.m. Young sea-gull or fowl. 

goban, -ain & guiboin, p}. -an, s.m.dim. of gob. 
Little bill or beak. 2 Garrulous mouth. 8 
Mutle. 4 External hinderance to speech. 

gobanach, -aiche, o Prattliug. 2 Having a 

little dill. 

obanacnh, -aich, s.m. Prattler. 

goba-sail, (A8) s. m. Seal, fat sea-Iump. 

gob-babharrtha,' | see cam-ghlas. 

gob-cabharrta (AF) s, m. Redshank. 

ob-cathainn s.m. Spoonbill. 

gob-céarr, (AF) s.m. Avocet (bird.) 

gob-éasgaidh, see gab-éasgaidh. 

gobh, see gabh. 

gobha, see gobhainn. 

gobha-bhreac, (AF) s.f. Buck, or buckie-snail 
(striated,) [Some writers give “gobha breac,” 


8.72. | 

gobhachan-allt, s. m. see gobha-uisge. 2 (AF) 
ce grebe. : 
obhachan-dubh, e 

Cer } see gobha-uisge. 

gobhachan-uisge,] see biorra-cruidein. 

gobhadh, see gobhainn., 

gobha-dubh-a’-mhonaidh, s.m, Mountain-ouzel, 
blackbird. 

gobha-dubh-an-uisge, -an-dubha-, s. m. Water- 
ouzel, see govha-uisge. 2 Balm-cricket. 

gobhagan, see gabhagan. 

gobhaich, v.g. Peck. 

gobbaina, pl. goibhuean,s.m. Smith, blacksmith. 

gobhaiun-chruidhean, s.m. Farrier. 

gobhainneachd, see goibhneachd. 

gobhainnean, s.m. Cockchafer, 

gon gen.sing. of gobhal. 2 Lewis for gabh- 
ail. 

gobhairnear,(MS) s.m. Prefect. 

gobhal, -ail & goibhle, pl. -bhlean, s.m. Fork, 
2 Prop, post, pillar. 3 House-support. 4 
Forked supporter. 5 Fork of a cycle. 6 Any 
furcated instrument. 7 Bifurcation, 8 The 
perineum, 9 Descendant, branch. 10 Yok- 
ing. 11 Day’s labour. 12* Pair of compass- 
es. 13* Crutch. 14**Forked part of anything. 
15 Prong. G.na briogais, the crutch of the 
trousers ; g. a’ chroinn, the space between the 
plough-handles. 

gobhallan, s.m. Fool. 

gobhal-luachair,$ s.m. Bulrush, lake scirpus,see 
luachair-ghóbhlach. 

gobhal-reaug, see gobuüàl-roinn., 

gobhal-roinn, -ail-roiane, $.m. Compasses, calli- 
pets. 

govhann, -ainn, pl. goibnean, see gobhainn. 

gobhar, gen. -air & goibhre, pl. -air, s.f. Goat. 
2 Sort of branching river.— Perth. 3 (AF) 
Shad (fish. | 4 (AF) Mackerel. 5 The sign 
Capricornus (V5) of the zodiac. 6 (DO) Sheaf 
of corn — Skye. (also gabhar.) 

gobharach, o Of, or belonging to, a goat. 2 
Skipping. 

gobhar-alluidh, s.m. Chamois. 

gobhar-athair, s.m. Snipe—scolopaz gallinago. 

gobhar-bhacach,(AF) «7, Name given in soms 


gobhar-bhacach 512 gobhrag 

arts (e. g. Skye) to the last handful of corn | gobhladh, -aidh, see gobhal. 

vo be cut. gobhlag, -aig, -an, $.f., dim. of gobhal. Dung 
gobhar-bhreac, s.f. Buck-snail. fork. 2 Graip. 3 Any two-pronged instru- 
gobhar-cheann,(AF) s.m. Leader of goats. ment. 4 Any forked piece of timber. 5 in 
gobhar-chro, see gobhar-lann. ridicule, Bow-legged female. 6(AF) Karwig: 
gobhar-fhiadh, Antelope. 2(AF)Wild| 7 Stick with forked end for turning hay. æg 
gobhar-fhiadhaich, dé or rock goat. 3 of old| Fork-shaped twig on which to wind a fishing- 
gobhar-fhiadhain, Horse. » line. AN 
gobhar-lann, s.m. Goat-pen. gobhlag-fheoir,ff s./. MHay-fork. 


gobhar-mhór, s.f. Crawfish, crayfish. 2 Lobster. | gobhlaichead, s m. Degree of furcation or 
gobhar-oidhche,fI s.f. Snipe, see gobhar-athair. forkedness. A’ dol an g., growing more and 
> 2 Night-jar. more furcated. 


gobharr, ze, Periwig. | gobhlaichid, comp. of gobhlach. Is e e am 
gebharrta, (AF) s. shank. buille sin, that blow h&s made it more Sorked. 
gobha-uisge,T -n-uisge, s. m. Dipper, water-,gobhlaisdeach, adv, Astride. 


ouzel—cinctus aquaticus. 2 Kingfisher. gobhlaisdeaeh, s.m. Clipt of a boat, see H1,p.73.. 
gobhlaisgeach, -aich, s.m. Long-legged person. 
gobhlan, -ain, -an, s.m., dim. of gobhal. Prong. 

2 Small fork. 3 Weeding book, 4 Little 
branch. 5 Swallow. 6 Karwig. 7(DC) Es- 
tuary of a river or burn, where the stream 
divides on the shallows near the sea. 

gobhlanach, -aiche, a. Pronged, forked. 2 
Two-headed. 3 Divided. 4 Branching. 

gobhlanachd, s.f, ind. Bifurcation. 

gobhlan-bharta, (AF) s.m. Redshank. 

astris ae 8&.m. Great martin, black 
martin. 





TY. gobhlan-gainmhich, -ain-ghainmhieh, s.m.Sand- 
. $82. Gobha-uiage. | martin (species of swallow)—hirundo riparia. 
gobhlach, -aiche, a. Forked, pronged. 2 Long. STi. 
legged. 3 Bow-legged. 4 Straddle, astride. 
Sporain gh. de dh’ or a’ Phrionnsa, forked: 
purses of the Prince's gold—a Lochaber saying 
alluding to the purses m use in 1745 ; elamh- 
an g., @ kite; a’ marcachd casa-g., riding 


e. 

gobhliachan,€ -ain, s. m. Turnstone, Hebridal 
sandpiper—strepsilas interpres. 2 Dipper, 
uge, see gobha-uisge. 3 (AF Cricket 
insect.) 





885. Gobhlan-gainmhich. 

d, ! Wr agam gobhlan-gaoithe,f[ -ain-gh., -an-g., 8$. m. d f. 

"d NA Fg Pg Swallow—hirundo rustica. 2 Fork-tailed pet- 

y rel—thalassidrema Leachii—Barra. 3 see 

obhlan- j he. 

M aea s.m. **Redshank. 2(AF) Fork- 
tailed petrel. 1 f 

gobhlan-monaidh,§ s.m. Alpine swift—cypseius 
alpinus. 

gobhlan-mór,cQ s.m. Swift—cypselus apus. 





383. Gobhlachan (1.) 
gobhlaehan, -ain, -an, s.m. Person sitting a- 
stride, 2 Crane-fly, daddy long-legs, 3 Ear- 
wig. 4 Shad (fish.) 5 Young trout. 6 Stick- 
leback. 7 Large minnow. 8 Mackerel. 9 ,,, 286. Gobhian mór. : 
furrow-board to lefthand board of plough. 12 gobhlan-nan-creag, f s. m. Alpine swift, see- 





- 


(DU) Centipede. gobhlan-monaidh. 





38h. Gobhlachan (4.) 
gobhlachan-gaoithe, -ain, -ain-gaoithe see 887. Gobhlan-taighe. : 
gobhlan-gaoithe. gobhlan-taighe,] s.m. Martin—hirundo urbica. 


gobhlach-innse,(AH) s.f. Cow after giving birth | gobhlan-uisge,(AF) s.m. Little grebe, dabchick, 
to her third calf, and before giving birth to|gobhraeh,tt see gabhrach. 
her fourth. eobhrag, see gabhrag. 


- [Lr 
LII = 
I1 


I1 

r1 

Ï 

i 
"E s -= 
T zł 
CH 

i 


| | [ 
4 | 
crm Bo Fa A At Em 
JTERNET ARCHI\ 
L = i — J i 3 m l T — 


FETA 


SE = 


gobhragan 


gubhragan, seegabhragan. ` ` 
govhrag bheag, sj. Jack snipe, see gabhrag 


gogailleachd 


of Martin, who saw a gocaman at the house of 
MacNeillof Barra. He was stationed at the 
top of the house, where he watched night and 
day, and strangers were never allowed to 
draw near the house until they gave satis- 
factory answers to his questions concerning 
the purport of their visit. 

gocam-go,* s.m. Spy, scout, 
on any place. see gócaman. 

gocan, -ain, -an, s.m. Little attendant. 2t¢ 
Pert, conceited little person. 3 Titlark. 4 


see gabhagan. G. na cubhaige. the cuckoo’s 
attendant. 


bheag. 
‘gobhraidh,(MMcD) s.pl. Compasses, callipers— 
Lewis. 
gobhran, see gabhran. 














2 Fellow perched 





fa ` 
888. Gobhiag bheag. 
gobhta, see gabhte. 
gob-labharta,(AF) s. m. Redshank, 
gob-labhradh, s.m. Redstart (bird.) 





goblachan, see ;obhlachan. `. 
gobhlachan-uisge, see spag-ri-tón, 


391. Gocan. 
gocan, s.m. Whin-chat—sazicola rubetra. 


gocan-conuisg,(AF) s.m. Whin-chat. 

gocan-cubhaige,(DMC) s.m. Titlark, little bird 
always following the cuckoo. 

goc-fola,(WC) s,m. Blood spurting out. 

gochdan, see gocan. 

zoehdmunnp, -uinn, see gocaman., 

goch-ghéadh, see gob-gheadh. 

god,* v.a. see gog. 

god, -oid, s.m. Show, ornament. 2 Coquetry. 

godach, -aiche, a. see gabhdach. 

gòdach, -aiche, a. Showy, dressy. 
tish. 3 Giddy. 

godadh, -aidh, s.m. see gogadh. 

podag, -aig, -an, s.f. Coquette, prov. 

godagach, -aiche, a. Coquettish, 

godail,(MS) s.f. Talkativeness. 

godhan, -ain, s.m, Cask, barrel. 

gog, s.m.ind. Little syllable. 2 Nod. 3 Toss- 
ing of the head. 4 Cackling or clucking of a 
hen. 5 Cooing of a pigeon. 

gog,* pr.pt. a’ gogail & a’ gogadh, v.a. Cackle, 
asahen. 2 Toss. 

gogach, -aiche, a. Nodding, wagging, as the 
head. 2 Fickle, wavering. 3 Reeling. 4(DC) 
Stammering, stuttering—Perth. 

gogadh, -aidh, s.m. Nodding. 2 Tossing of the 
head. A’ g—, pr. pt. of gog. Cha’n e gog- 
adh nan ceann a ni an t-iomram, it is not the 
nodding of the heads that rows the boat. 

gogag, -aig, -an, see gogaid. 

gogaich, v.g. see coc. 

gogaid, -e, -ean, s.f. Light-headed woman, 
coquette, giddy female, stupid trull. 

gogaideach, -eiche, a. Light, airy, gay, vain, 
coquettish, giddy, foolish,light-headed. Gene- 


2;Coquet: 





889. Gob-leathann. 
gob-leathann, guib-,4] s.m. Spoon-bill—plataica 
leacorodia. 









$90. Gob-leathann (2. ) 


gob-leathann,*[ -uib-, (2) s.m. Shoveller—anser 
clypeata. 

goc, -a, -an & -achan, s.m. Pipe or faucet put 
into a cask to give passage to the liquor. 2 
^*Stop-cock, tap. 3(DC) Finials on the ridge 
of a house. 4 (DC) Buds of trees, flowers, 
&c., before burstiug. 

goc, v. See gogaich. 

gocach, -aiche, see gogach. 

gocag,(DC) s.f. Pert, forward girl. 

gocaman, -ain, s.m. Usher, attendant. 2 
Warder, domestic sentinel, 3* One on the 
look-out in a mask, spy, scout. 4 Fool, 5 An 


officer employed in the Hebrides in the days; gogailleachd, see gogaideachd. 


KS 
&ITITPAITT ARS Ze? 
3 m m iJ = L ri || e kd — 

— a — i 1 "ua i K ELI 





gogaill, -ean, 


rally applied to à female. 

gogaideachd, s f.ind. Light airy behaviour,flirt- 
ing, coquetry, capriciousness, womanish van- 
ity or folly, giddiness. 

gogaidn,(CR) s. Egg (a nursery word)—Arran. 

gogail, s. f. see gogadh & gogaid. 2 Clucking 
or cackling of a hen. 3 Cooing of a pigeon. 
4tfNoise of liquor issuing from a cask or bot- 
tle. A’ g—, pr. pt. of gog. 

gogaild, -ean, see gogail. 

eogailich, s.pl. Blinders, in horse's harness. 

see gogaid. 


gogailleach, -eiche, see gogaideach. , 


gogair 

gogair, (MMcD) s.m. Stupid fellow, fool. 

— — ehehd, s.f. ind. Aet of making a fool of 
anyone, Là nag., All fools’ day— Lewis. 

gogain, gen.sing. d n.pt. of gogan. ! 

gogallaeh,"* -aich, s.f. Cackling of poultry. 

&-gan, -ain, -an, s.m. Small wooden dish made 
of staves and with one handle. ? Kit. 3 Pail. 
4 rarely Prating, cackling Laogh-gogain, a 
hand-rearea calf , 2 lout of a lad. 

goganach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to, wood- 
en dishes. 2 see gog-cheannach. 

gogar, -air, s.m Light. 

gog-cheannach, -aiche, o  Light-headed. 2 
DOS MAE: 3 Tossing the head in walking, as 

eer. 

gog-gheadh, -eòidh, s.m. Gosling, young goose 

gog-shüil, -üla, -ean, s.f. Goggle-eye. 

gog-shüileach, -eiche, a. Goggle-eyed, having 
wandering eyes. 

gog-shüilich, s.pl. Blinders. . 

goguideach, -eiche, see gogdideach, 

goguideachd, see gogaideachd. 

go!bean, dim. of gob. see goban & gobag. 

enb i Old Gaelic name of the letter G, see 
gath. 

goibheinn,** s.f. Little hill 

goibhlich,* v.a. Prop, buttress. 

goibhneachd, s. f. ind. Smith-work, trade of a 
blacksmith, 

goibhnean, n.pl. of gobhainn, 

goibhre, see gobhar. 

goibhrios, s.m. False colour. 

goibin, -ean, s.m. Sand-eel. 
see gobag. 

goic, -e, s,f. Tossing up of the head in disdain 
2 Scoff, taunt. 3* Wry-neck. G. moit, tossing 
up of the head with pride. 

goicealachd,s.f.vnd.Scorntul tossing of the head. 

goicean,(DC) s.m. Short, stout man— Uist. 

goiceil, -a, @. Scoffing, taunting, disdainful. 2 
Scornfully tossing the head. 

goiá, s.pl. Part of a plough, see goid. 

goid, -e, s.f. Theft, stealing, pilfering. 2 Creep- 
ing, slipping away cautiously, A’ g—, pr.pt. 
of goid. Am bheil thu rig. ? dost thou steal ? 

goid, pr.pt. a’ goid, v.a. Steal, pilfer, 2 Creep, 
steal, slip, sneak Goididh an doinionn e, the 
storm shall steat him; en e orm, he crept 
Softly uponme ; gh. e à' chlach orm, be stole 
the stone from me ; g.a staigh, slip in ; galr 
falbh, abduct. 

goid, (for gaid) m.pl. of gad. 

goideach,** a. Inclined to pilfer, 

goideadh,** -idh, s.m. Act of stealing, theft. 2 
stealth. (Generally goid ) 

goideadh, 3rd. sing. & pl. ump. of goid. G, iad, 
let them steal. 

goidean, -ein, -an, sm Little withe. 

ach, a Abounding in iittle withes. 

goidnich,**'s.f. Theft, stolen goods. 

goigean, ein, an, s.m. Bit of fat meat. 2 Clus- 
ter. 3 Coxcomb, 4f Kink or tangle in thread. 

goigeanach, -aiche, a. Abounding in bits of fat. 
2 Clustering, dangling 3 Coxcombical. 

goigeanachd, s.f.ind. The pehaviour of a Cox- 
comb. 

goigleis, s.f. Tickling. 

goil. eet Boiling, act or state of boiling. 2 
Smoke, vapour, fume. 3 Battle. 4 Rage, fury. 
5 Powder. 6 Valour. 7 Power. 8 Eferves- 
cing. 9ffGrief. 10 (DC) Swirling of stream 
in a tideway. A’ g—, pr. part, of goil Gach 
anam air g. gu h-ar, every soul boiling for 
bloodshed ; air g., boiling, on the boil; than 
coir’ aire, the kettle is boiling: an g. an t- 
sruith, in the swirling of the stream. 

goil, pr.pt. a goil, va. dn. Boil, as a liquid. 





2 see goban., 3 





| 
[TI 
SR r1 
[TI 
| 
i 
A — 
I 
VI) 


514 


goimh ` 


. 2 Boil with rage. 3 Cook by boiling. 4 Effer- 
vesce. 


| tgoil, s. Prowess, chivalry. 


goile, an & -achan, s. f. [s. m.—WC] The 
stomach. 2 Appeite. 3 Throat. 4 Swarm, 
as of vermin. 5 Fowl’s crop. 6 Gizzard. 711i 
Gluttony. 8 seegoil Air son do gh., for thy 
Stomach. 

goileach, -eiche,:a. Boiling.- 2 Hot, as boiling 
water, Uisge g., boiling water. 

goileach, Ach, s.m. Glutton. 

gòileach, (DO) e m. Forward, impudent boy, 
“ sneak ”—A rgyll. 


goileachan-éisg, s.m. Stomach of a fish stuffed 


with livers of fish minced with oatmeal and 
spices— Caithness, Suth’d & Lewis. 

goileachd, sif.ind. Gluttony. 2 Flattery, the 
conduct of a parasite. 

goileadair, -ean, s.m. Boiler. 2 Kettle. 

goileadh, -idh, s.m. Boiling, regurgitation. 

goileag,f -eig, s.f. Haycock, cole— Badenoch 

goileag, eg, s. f. Flirt. 2 Staggering gait, 
drunkenness—Suth’d. 8 The globules of fat 
circling on the surface of a pot of broth— 
Lochcarron. see coinnleag. Tha g. air, he ig 
drunk ; nach e a ghabh a’ gh. a’ tighinn ! 
what a roundabout way he came ! r 

goileam, -eim, s. m. Prating, chattering, vain 
tattle. 2 Flattery. 3 Verbiage. 4 Fast and 
senseless talk. 5(AC) Fire, fire-kindling. 6* 
Incessant high-toned chattering. : 

goileamach, -aiche, a. Prating, tattling. .2 
Adulatory. Gu g., pratingly. 

goileamachd,1t s.f.ind. Petulancy. 

goileamag, -aige, -an; s.f. Female prater, loqua. 
cious girl. 

goileamaiche, s.m. Prater, tattler. 

goileaman, -ain, see goileamaiche. 

golleamhuin, s.f. Grief, sorrow. 

goilean, -ein, s. m. Gourmand, greedy-gut. 2 
Parasite. 

goilean, s.pl, State of boiling. 
ing, very hot, as liquid. 

goileanach, a. Parasitical. 
Flattering. 

goilear, s.m. see goileadair. . 

goilibheir, Gaelic spelling of cleaver (knite.) 

goill, e s.f. Hanging lip. 2 Shapeless mouth. 
3 Face distorted by grief or sullenness. 4 
Angry or sullen look. 5 Distortion of mouth. 
6 Blubber cheek. 7 rarely War. 8 Any cause 
of grief. Is ann aira bha a’ ghoill! what e 
distorted mouth he had. 

fgoill,-e, s.m. Shield. 2 War, Geht, 3 Any 
cause of grief. " 

goilleach, -eiche, o Sulky, sour-looking. 2 
Blubber-lipped or cheeked. 3 Having a swol- 
len or distorted face. 

goilleag, -eig, -an, s.f. Blow on the cheek, slap 
on the face. | 

goillear, -eir, -an, sm Blubber-lipped person. 2 
Man with a distorted mouth or face. 

goilleas, -1s, see goill. i 

goilleasach, -aiche see goilleach. 

goillseach, -eiche, see goilleach. ES 

gollir, -ean, s.m. Petrel. 2 Lewis bird of 
the size of the swallow, said never to come 
ashore, except in the month of January. 


Air na g., boil- 
2 Gluttonous. 3 


goimh, -e,s.f Anguish 2 Agonizing pain. pang,” 


throb. 3 Excessive yexation 4 Grudge, ha. 


tred, spite, malice. 5 Hurt, damage.  6** 
Storm. 7 Frown. S8(AF) Leech. (AF) 
Worm. Ceann g. air maduiun Earraich ’s 


AMairg achailleadh a chaomh charaid a spring 
morning with a stinging head, who would lose 
his loved friend—N.G.P. says the meaning 4p- 
pears to be, that asa bitter spring morning 





eg wm, gt, 


goimh 

is often followed by a fine day, sc is the dis- 
pleasure of a friend not to be taken as a, 
gzound for serious quarrel , do chridhe gun | 
g, thy heart without anguish (or without ma- 
tice.) 

goimn-chridheach a Keen, ardent 
guais-bneartach, keenly and daringly. 

goimheach, a. see goimheil. 

gounhealachd, s.f.und. Soreness 

geimheil, e, a. Painful, pinching, causing pain 
or anguish, inflicting pangs. 2 Throbbing 3 
Bearing hatred, or grudge, spiteful, malicious, 
4ttSurly Gr Venomous’ 6 Vexatious 

goin, -e, $.) Wound, hurt 2 Lancinating pain 
3 Sting. 4 Lance. b Deiusion 6 Para. 
graph. 7{fFascination  8ffBlasting Cha b’ 
fheairrd mo gh. e. my wounds were not the Det 
ter for it, 

goin, v.a. Wound, hurt 
smarting. 3 Fascinate 

goineach, -eiche, a. see guineach 2 Painful, 
throbbing. 3 Prickly, stinging 4 Agonizing, 

- vexatious. 6 Angry (in surgery ) 6 Keen ea- 
ger Gug., painfully. 

goineach, @ see goinneach. 

goinead, id, sm. Painfulness, throbbing 2 
Vexatiousness. 

goineag, -eig, s.f Pang. twitching of pain. 

goinean, san. Couch-grass, quickens—Perthsh 
2(DC) Withered grass gathered after a harrow 
or grubber—Argyll, 3 (DMy) Growth inside 
acow’s mouth, which hinders her chewing. 
lt is often cut with scissors. 

goiueanta, -inte, y. Keen, wounding, piercing. 

goinear, s.m. see goin-fheur. 


Gu g 


2 Cause a sudden 


= goineideach," -eich, s.m. Person bewitched, or 


goin-là:nhach, -aiche, 


|^. ply it to à person is neither good nor polite?" 


influenced by the evil eye. 

goin-theur, fheoir,$ s.m. Crested dog's tail, 
couch-grass—cynosurus cristatus, 2 see goin- 
ean 2 

a Wounding with the 
hand. 

goinneach,(CR) a. Unkempt, shaggy, untidy, 
uncared tor— W of Ross-shire. 

golnneag,(CR) s.f. Dowdy, slattern, untidy 
womau—W of Ross-shire. 

goinnean s.m. Blair Athole for gonan. 

goinntean, s.m. Confinement— Daun L. Ghobha. 

goinntir, see gainntir. 

goin-olann,* er Bad kind of wool next to the 
skin of the sheep. 

goin-shuil, -shüla, -shüilean, s.f. Blasting eye. 
2 Fascinating eye. Goin-shuil na righ-nath- 
rach, the fascinating eye of the cockatrice. 

goin-shuileach, a. Having a blasting eye. 2 
Having a fascinating eye. 

gointe, past pt. of gon. Bewitched, infatuated, 
fascinated, ‘‘fay’’ 2 Wounded. 3* Hurt 
with an evil eye.. 4* Galled to the core. 

goir, pr.pt. a’ goirsinn, v.a. Cry, call. 2 Crow, 
as a cock, cry. as the cuckoo, [* says * to ap- 


3 Name, style, bestow a name. 4 Talk loudly 
and pertly. DEL Shriek, cry with a shrill 
piercing voice. Gb, an coileach, the cock crew: 
fàth mu'n g a’ chorr, the reason why the heron 
cries. (also gair.) 

goir see gair, 

Tgoir,** œ Near. 

goire, see gaire. 

goireag. Suth d for goileag. 

goireal,fI eil, s m. Crow of a cock, 


—  £olrealas, ais, s.m see goraiche 


em 


goiream, 1st. per. sing. fut af of goie for goir. 
idh mi, Z will cry. 2 1st. sing, ump. Let me 
shout, 

goireas, -is, S.M. Apparatus, tools. 


Digitized | 
NTERNET ARCHIVE 


515 





goirt-bhriseadh 
necessary—islay 3 Furniture. 4 Modera- 
tion, nioderate quantity 5 Cheer. 61 Con- 
venience. 7 Advantage. benefit Tha g. 


agam. / have a moderate quantity er æ sufi- 
crency 

goireasach aiche æ. Convenient, handy, use- 
ful. near àt hand z2 Moderate, temperate,.3 
Needtui  4**1n moderate quantity S 

goireasachd st ind, Advantageousness. 

goireasaich v9 Accommodate 

golreil -6, @ see gaireil 

goirgeach,** @ Foolish. z Doting, 

goirgeachd,** s.f Foohshness. 2 Dotage 

goirid, a Short, not long, 2 Scarce, scanty. 3 
Briet. Thus compared .—Ist comp. giorra, 
2nd. giorraid. rd giorrad An ceann g., in 
a Short time , o cheann g., & short trme since: 
fear 2., a man of low stature ; cha bu bheag 
orra bhith g dbomb idir they did not at ail 
object to being near me 

gorridh, fut.aj.a. ot goir 

goiriosach, -aiche, see goireasach, 

goiriseadh, adh, s.m. Target. 

g£oirriwnn see gairisinn 

goirısneach, eiche, a see gairisneach, 

goirleis,tt s.f. Foolishness, childishness, 

goirmean-searradh,§ s. m Pansy, heartsease— 
viola tricolor, 





892, Goirmean-searradh. 


goirmein, see guirmein 
goirn,(AF) see goirnead 
goirnead, -id, s.m, Gurnet. 
góirseideach, see gorsaideach. 
goirrid, see goirid. 
goirridh, (AC) a. Fox-coloured. 
my fox-coloured hewfer 
goirrig,** s Fool. dolt. 
goirseadh, -eidh, s.m. Target, 


l|goirsinn, e s.f Crying, crowing 2 Act of cry- 


ing or ealling, as of & cock or euckoo 3 Nam- 
ing. 4 Boast, loud, pert talking A g—, 
pr.pt. of goir, 

goirt, e a. Sore. painful. ? Mournful. 3 Sour. 
4 Acid, bitter 5 Salt, salted 6 Hard, sad. 
7 Poor-spirited 8 Narrow 9 Mean. 10* 
Severe lL High,“ applied to game, &c. Le 
amhghar e with sore distress; acain ghb., 
bitter sobbing ; leana g., sour beer; is g. a’ 
chüis, i£ wa hard case ; cas gh.. a sore foot ; 
deuchainn gh., a severe trial , bainne g. sour 
milk ‘Argyitskh for blathach), bwtter-milk ; 
sgadan g. (for sgadan Saillt,) salt herring. 
oirt, -e,s.f see gort 2 gen.sing. of gort. 


Weit e i : 
2*Family|goiwt-bhüriseadh idh, s m. Calamity 2 Misery 


M' aghan g,, 


"goirt-dhearce 
goirt-dhearc, s.f. Bearberry. 


516 
Red bearberry— | tgoladh,** -aidh, em. 


‘gorach 
Gluttony. 


arctosaphylos uva ursi; black bearberry—a.| golag, -aige, -an, s.f. Nip, pinch with the nails 


alpina. 

goirte, s.f. Saltness, 2 Sourness, 

goirteach, -eiche, a. see gortach. 

goirteachadh, -aidh, s.m. Hurt. 2 Act of hurt- 
ing. 3 Making, or state of becoming sour, 
acid or bitter. 4(DMC) Leavening. A’ g—, 
pr. pt. of goirtich. 

goirteachd, s.f. Acidity, acerbity. 

goirtead, s.m. Sourness, saltness, bitterness, 
acidity. 2 (DU) Soreness 3 (DC) Chagrin 
G. do chorraig’ nad chuimhne, (be soreness of 
your finger still in your memory. 

goirteag, eig, s. f.  Crab-apple, see craobb. 
ubhalfhiadhain. 2 Stingy female. 3**Acid! 

goirtean, -ein,-ean, s. m. Little corn-field. 2 
Small patch of arable land 3**Little field, 
enclosure, ' park." 4** Little farm. 5 (MS) 
Croft. 

goirteanach, -aiche, a.  Abounding in little 
fields, crofts or patches of arable land. 

goirteas, eis, s.m. Pain,painfulness 2i Disease 
[Preceded by the article an.] 3*Acidity.  4* 
Soreness. 5*Sourness. 6*Saltness 

goirteas-nàrach (an), s.m. see an tinneas-nàrach. 

goirtein, -ean, see goirtean. 

goirtich, pr.pt. a’ goirteachadh, v.a. & n. Hurt, 
pain, cause pain. 2 Make sour, 3 Become 
sour or acid, acidulate. 4 Leaven. Goirtich- 
ear e, he will be hurt. 

goirtichte, a. & past pt. of goirtich. Hurt, pain- 
ed. 2 Soured, made or become sour. 3** 
Leavened. Aran g., leavened bread. 

goisdidh, see goistidh. 

goisean, s.m. Tuft. 2**Bush. 

goisear,(AC) -an, spl. Waits, young men who 
go about singing carols at Christmas, New 
Year and other great festivals. Scots, guiser. 

goiseid, s.f. A horse’s or cow's hair. Lubag ghb., 
a horse-hair snare for catching birds ; cas-gh., 
«€ fishing-sned ; buarach .gh., cow-fetter made 
of horse-hair—WC. 

goisir, -e, -ean, see goisinn. 

goisinn, goisne, pl. -ean &-nichean, s.f. Snare, 
SE gin, trap. 2 Fox-trap. 3 (MS)Mouse- 
rap. 

each,** a. Full of gins or traps. 2 Like 
a gin or trap. 3 Ensnaring. 

goisne, see goisinn. 2 (MS) Trammel. 

goisneach, o. see goisinneach. 

gòisneach, (DMC) s.m. Single loop in the snare 

goisneadh,(DC) s.f. Particle, minute part. Cha 
*n ele agam, J have not a particle—ap- 
plied only to straw, and not to meal, &c in 
Uist--DMC. 

goisnean, -ein, -an, s.m. dim. of goisinn. Little 
snare. 2(DMO) A single straw. 

ach,tt æ. Abounding in little snares. 

goisnibh, s.pl. Nets, snares. 

goisnich, v.g. Decoy, enmesh. 2(MS) Tangle. 

goisridh, see gasraidh. 

tgoiste, -an & -tichean, see goisinn. 2 Halter. 

goisteachd, see goistidheachd. 

goistean, -in, -an, see gaoisnean. 

goistidh, -ean, s. m. Gossip. 2 Godfather. 3 
Father of a child to whom one is godfather. 

— — ——each, a. Gossiping. 

goistidheachd, s.f.ind. Office or duty of a god- 
father. 2 Gossipping. Ri g., assuming the 
ofice of a godfather ; cleamhnas am fagus is 
E RU afinity at hand and sponsorship 
afar off. 

tgoithne, s.f. Lance, spear. 2 Quick gait. 

gol, s.m. see guil & gal. 

gola, s.m. see goile. 

gola-bhigein, (AF) s. 





Common bunting, 


D 


VL LAM c i SS 
i 1A ri 1 IW 
ITERNET ARCHIV 


.gonaim, (for gonaidh mi) v. I will wound, 


orteeth. 2 Budget. 3 (WC)Anylittle fish. 
4(DMy) The spaces between the peats when 
laid upon the fire. 

gaah, -aidhean, s.f. Clumsy clasp-knife. Scots, 
gully 

golan,(AH) s.m Forward, insolent fellow. 

golanach, o Two-headed. 

golanach, see gobhlanach. 

Tgolgbair,** sf Lamentation, loud wail. 

tgolghaireach, -eiche, o. Lamenting, wailing, 
mournful. 2 Causing lamentation. 

golibheir, see goilibheir. 

tgoll.| a, Blind. 

gollach. a. Gluttonous. 

golum, s.m, Trifling flattery— Arran. 

gom,(DMC)-.s.m. Throat trouble, caused by eate 


~ 


ing oats or unripe corn, 

gòmadaich, (DMO) (ein, pt. Gaping, opening 
the mouth wide, as one about to vomit. 

gomag, -aig,-an, $.f. Nip, pinch with the nails. 
2 (MMcL) Blade of grass. 

———ach, -aiche, d, Pinching, nipping with 
the nails. 

———aich, v. Bepinch. 2 Nip. 3 Sting, stab, 
gore. 

gomhainn, W. of Lewis for gamhainn. 

gon, pr.pt, a’ gonadh, v.a. Wound, wound sore- 
ly, stab, lance, 2 Bewitch, destroy by en- 
chantment, hurt by the evil eye. 3 Starve to 
death by cold. 4 Blast. 5 Pique or gall to the 
core. 6**Charm, fascinate. 77+Annoy. An 
nia gh. thu, the thing that galled you. 

gon, prov. for gus, 
return hither. 

tgon, prep. With, with them. 

gon,** -oin & -a, s.m. Wound, sting, stab,lance. 
2 Stinging, stabbing, lancing. 3 Stinging 
pain, throb. 4 Charm. 5 Fascination. 
gona, nine wounds. 

gonaeh, -aiche, a. Sharp, keen. 2 Wounding, 
stinging, stabbing. 3tf Bewitching. 

gonachas, -ais, for donachas, see donas. 

gonadair,** s.m. Wounder, piercer. 2 Annoy- 
er, afflicter. 3 (DC) Man with an evil eye, 
one who can bewitch—Argylish, 

gonad-fhear, see gonadair. 

gonadh, -aidh, 
ing, stinging, stabbing. 2 Bewitching. 3 Fas- 
cinating. 4 Starving. 5 Lancinating. 6 
Lancing. 7 Wound. 
A’ g—, pr pt. of gon. Gonadh ort ! (an im- 
precation), may you perish. 


vonadhaire, gr. Wounding, stinging, stabbing. e 


gonag, -aig, -an,s.f. Bite or pinch with the teeth 
or nails, 2 Stab. 38frWitch. 
woman. 5ttSpell, enchantment. 5 
Small bit. Bha gonagan is friodhain air a 
chu, the dog was showing his teeth and his hair 
was bristling.—S.-nan-caol p. 75. ; chan fhaigh 
thu g. dheth, yeu won't get a bit of it. 

gonaich,** v.g. Annoy. 

gonaidh, (AF) s.f. Leech. 


gonair,** see gonadair. 

gonais. st Sting, prick, wound. è 

gonan, (CR) s.m. Grass roots. (see goinean.) 

gon-iasg,(AF) s.m. Cramp-fish, torpedo. 

gonn, 

gonta, see gointe. 

gontach, -aich, s.m. Old coarse eoverlet. 

gor, pr.pt. a’ goradh, v.a. Peep. 

tgor, s.m. & f. Profit. 2 Laughter. 
ure. 4 Pus. 5 Light. 6 Heat. 

gòrach, -aiche, «. Silly, foolish. 2 


Gon an till mi nall, til 2 


Naoi — 


s.m. Wounding, act of wound- ` 


8 Lancinating pain, - 


4tTMiserabie $ 
5 (DMO) 









3 Please — 


Insane, 


see gon, prep. d 


mad. 3 Inconsiderate, thoughtless, unwis®. 


Original from 


URBANA-CHAMPA 
Em V LJ I i [7 k Sa | IP NIE? if 





Lm 


= e 


teg ne 


"E 


E Ee Se 


a 


eS 


pum rs 


ech 


gorach 517 gorin-phreas 


a ——— Hà MÀ — — — — —————o————nQüÁMÁá€Ó MEI 

Nuair a bha mi òg is gòrach, when I was|gormag,T -aig, s.f. The hc ird— 

young and foolish ha innis do rùn do charaid | buteo. j^ HE Rn E 

g., teil not thy mind to a foolish friend. 
gorachan,* -ain, s.m. Young male, silly fellow. 
gorachd, s.f. Foolishness, idiocy. 
goradair,(MMcD) s.m. Spy. 

eachd, 8.f. Spying, peeping. 

goradh, -aidh, s.m. Peeping, spying, 2 (DU) 

Hurried look. 3 (DMC) Listing, bending, as 
if about to fall. A’ g—, pr pt. of gor. Bha e 
ae orra,*he was watching them on the sly —W. 
of Ross., thug mi g. air, 4 made a short call 
on him. (9 Whipping 
Tgoradh, -aidh,§s.m. Blush, heat. 2 Warming. 
gorag, -aig, -an, sf. Foolish woman. 2 Sheaf 
of corn standing upright and isolated on a 
field in harvest. 3*Young she-crow. 4(DMy) 
Scare-crow, made of sticks dressed up as a 
woman, to frighten birds from the corn. Tap- 
an gòraig air cuigeil criontaig, a foolish ,wo- 
man's flax on the wise woman's distaff. 

$#g5raiceadh, sdh, s.m. Croaking, croaking voice 
or shout 

goraiceil, æ. Croaking, screeching. _ | 

gòraiche, sf. Folly, silliness. 2 Insanity. Mo 
gh. is coireach rium, my own folly ts the cause; 

chan 'eil ann ach g . itis but folly. 

goraiche, comp of gorach. 

——, See góraichead. 

góraichead, -id, s.f. Folly, degree of folly or 
maduess. A‘ dol an g., growing more and. 
more foolish 

goraicleis, s.f Croaking. 2 Shouting, shout. 

goraidear, see goradair. 

goralas, -ais, see goraiche. : 

goramhach, a. Greedy. hungry, Gu g.,greedily. 

goramhachd, s.f Greediness, hunger, gluttony. 
goramhan,** -ain, s m. Hungry fellow, glutton, 
goran, -ain, see guirean, 

gorg, a. see garg. 

"Ctgorgach, a. Foolish. 2 Peevish. 

tgorgachas, -ais, s.m. Foolishness. 2 Peevish- 
ness, 3 Dotage. 

gorgaich, v.a. Hurt, injure, annoy. 

gorghlan,v.a. see gart-ghlan. 

gorghlanadair, s.m. see gart-ghlanadair. 

gorlais,tt s.f. Folly. 

-gorm, guirme, a. Blue, azure, blue of what- 
ever shade. 2 Green, as grass, verdant. 3** 
Hot. 4 rarely Great, illustrious. 5 Azure, in 
heraldry, represented by a shading formed of 
horizontal lines. 7 Green, in the sense of un- 
sophisticated 8* ( DU) Mean, spiritless. 
Nach e tha g. ! how green he is ! feur g., green 
grass : each g., œ dark grey horse ; aodach g., 
dlue cloth ; na speuran gorma, the blue hea- 
wens; cho g. ris a’ chal, as green as kale ; 
fear g. a negro; bean gh., à negress. 

gorm, guirm, s.m; Blue or azure colour. 2 
Green. 3 Grassy or green plain. An g.is an 
dubh, the blue and the black ; Irt nan caor- 
ach gorma, St. Kilda of the black-faced sheep. 





‘Enw "ege 














gormag-liath, s.f. Coltsfoot (plant.) prov. 

gorman. -ain, s.m Blue-bottle, bluet, cornflow- 
er—centaurea cyanus, 2 Woad, see guirmean, 
3**Green Knoll. 





$9, Gorman. 
gorm-aotrom,** sm. Light blue. 
gormanach, -aiche. & Full of green fields. 2 
Having green knolls. | 
gormanaich,(AH) s.f Grey of the dawn. Anns 
a gh at the first streak of day. 
gorm-bhallach,** æ Blue-spotted. 2 Blue-boss- 
ed, Cuchuilinn nan gorm-bhallach sgiath, C. 
of the blue bossed shields. 
gorm-bhileach, -eiche, à. Blue-edged. 
gorm-cheathach,** -1ch, s.m. Blue mist. An 
g. a snàmh, the blue mist floating. 
gorm-chruaidh,** sf. Blue steel. 2 Blue ar: 
mour. 3 Blue sword. Feachd nan g., the 
blue-armed host. 
gorm-aotrom, s.m. Light blue colour. 
gorm-ghlas, -ghlaise, @. Of an azure or blue co- 
lour, cerulean. 2 Of a sea-green colour. 3 
Slate-drab. 
gorm-mhae,** -mhie, s.m. Brave servant, sturdy 
domestic. 
gorm-phreas, -phris, -an, sm, Green bush. G. 


gorm, pr. pt. a’ gormadh, v. a. Make blue or 
azure. 2 Make green. 3 Become blue or 
green. 4 Grow green, as grass. 5 (DU) 
Starve with cold, benumb. Gh. am feur, the 
grass grew green. 

gormachd, s.f. Blueness. 

gormadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of making blue or 
green. 2 State of becoming blue or green. 
3 Growinggreen. 4t{{Daybreak. 5 Blue col- 
our or shade. A’ g—, pr. pt. of gorm. Tha 
e air g., he is benumbed with cold ; fo gh. 
aan sgiath, beneath the blue colour of the shields; 
g. an là, twilight, daybreak. 

gorg!aji- CR) s. f. Croaking of frogs— A rran. 

















d 
gorm-phreas 518 grabhal-cloiche 

na bruaich, the green bush of the bank. airy gait he has! (or what “go” he has i£) 
Zorm-rathad, s.m. Green path. 2 Passage| tiugainn a ghabhail goth, come, let us walk 

through the sea, track of a ship on the water. about. 
go.u-rod, prov. for gorm-rathad. goth, s.m. Bagpipe reed. . 
gorm-shléibhteach, -eiche, o Green hilled. gothach,** o Airy, having a smart or airy 
gorm-shùil, -shüla, -shuilcan, s.f. Blue eye. gait. 
gorm-shuileach, -eiche, a. Blue-eyed. gothach, for gothaivhe— Sàr-Obair. 
g£oru-shüileach, -eich, s.m. Blue-eyed person | ;gothadh, -aidh, sq. Smart gait. 2 Bending 

An g. treun, the blue-eyed warrior. or rushing forward. T3 Appendix. 4 (DMC) 
gorm-thalamh, s.m. (f. in gen.) Blue land, Pounding bark. 
gorm-thalla, -thalluichean. sam. Blue hall. 2 gothaiche,ff -an, s.m. Drone-reed. [This e 

Poetical name for the sky. 3 see gorm-thal.| whas the dictionaries give, but g. is evidently 

ami. meant for *' gaothaicie,’’ mouthpiece. ] 
gorn, guirn, s.m. Ember. 2 Fire.brand. 3 gothail, a. Airy, giddy. 

The force of poison. 4**Murdering dart. gothan, -ain, s.m. Anker, keg. 2 Airy youth. 
gorrach, see gorach. . ach,** -aich, s.m. Sinart, lively lad,young 
gorraidear, see goradair. man with an airy gait. 
gorsaid, -ean, s.f. Gorget, military defence, 2 -——— ach, -aiche, a, Airy in gait, lively, smart. 

Cuirass, 2ttEnvious, malicious. 

each, -eiche, a. Of, or belonging to, gothanach, -aiche, æ. Opprobrious, scurrilous. 
cuirasses or gorgets. 2 Like a cuirass or gor-| ZrftfEmnvious, malicious. 

get. 3 Wearing a cuirass. gothlam, -aim, s.m. Noise, prating, tattling, 
tgort, -oirt, s. f. Ivy. 2 Old Gaelic name d see goitean, 3 

the letter G. - ‘ach, -aiche, a. Prating, noisy. : 

















gort, o see goirt. 

gort, -a, -oirt, s.f. Famine, scarcity. 2** Hun- 
ger. 3fj{Sore. Bha gort 'san tir, there was 
famine in the land. 

tgort, -oirt, s.m. Standing corn. 2 Garden, 
field, enclosure. 3 Crop of corn or grass, 

gorta, s.f. see gort. 

gortach, -aiche, o. Hungry, starving. 2 Spar- 
ing, miserly, parsimonious, penurious, scant. 
3**Causing famine. 4** Greedy Bliadhna 
gh., a year of famine. 

e- » -aich, s.m. Hungry person. Cha’n zeit 
nàir’ air a’ ghortach, the hungry has no 
shame, 

gortachadh, -aidh, see goirteachadh. 2 Fam- 
ishing, starvation. 3 Oppression. 

gortachas,** ais, s m. Ihliberality. 

gortachd, s.f.ind. Penury, starvation, scarcity. 

gortadh, -aidh, s.m. Famine. Air son a’ ghor- 
taidh, by reason of the famine. 

gortag, -aig, -an, St. Hungry or starving wo- 
man. 2 stingy. penurioug or parsimonious 
woman. 3**Crab-tree. 

gortaich, pr.pt. a’ gortaehadh, v.a. see goirtich. 
2**Famish, starve. 3**Oppress, wrong. 

te, d. see goirtichte. 2 Famished,stary- 
ed. 3 Oppressed. 4 Soured. 

gortaighean,** s. m. The universal language 
before the confusion of tongues of Babel. 

gortaladh,** -aidh, sm. Patening, mending. 

gortan, -ain, -an, s.m. Hungry, starving fellow. 
2 Stingy, penurious fellow. 

gortas,** ais, s.m. Famine, hunger,starvation. 

Bhàsaich e le g., he died of hunger, 


goug. see guga. 

ferad, s.m. Tooth. 2 Dent, notch. 

grab, -a, -achan, s.m. see grabadh, i 

grab, pr.pt. a’ grabadh, v.a. Interrupt, impede, 
hinder, stop, oppose, prevent from doin g or 
going. 2**Entangle. +3 Notch, indent. Gh. 
e maomadh na feachd, he stopped the on-rush 4 
of the army. i 

Tgrabach, -aiche, a. see gróbach & grabalach. Ze 

grabadh, -aidh, -ean,s.m. Hinderance, stopping, e 
impediment. 2 Act of hindering, preventing, 
interrupting, stopping, opposing. 3 Notch- 
ing,indenting. 4 Entanglement. 5 Bar. 6 Pro- 
test. A'g—, pr.pt. of grab. 

grabailjf-e, o Preventive. 

-- (MS) s,f. Impediment, 

grabair,* -ean, s. m. Obstructer, hinderer, op- 
poser. 2 Entangler. 3 Jester, droll. 4 
Prattler. 

grabaireachd,** s.f. Entanglement. 2 Opposi- 
tion. 3 Idle talk, gibble gabble. 

grabalach, a. Barful, debarring. 

grabalaich,(MS) v. a Blench. 2 Impede, 3 3 
Perplex. à 

graban,$-ain, s.m. Wormwood, see burmaid. 

grabh, -a, -an, s.f. Abhorrence, dread, dislike, 
horror. .2 Cause of abhorrence or dislike 3 A 
*Horrid thing. Righ nan G., the King of In 
Terrors. à : 

gràbh, pr.pt. a’ grabhadh, see grabhail. 3 

adair, s.m. Engraver. 2 Graver (tool.) E: 

adaireachd, s.f. Engraving, business of 
an engraver. A 

grabhadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s. m d pr. pt. see 




















gori-ghlan, see gart-ghlan. grabnail,-e, a. Horrible, causing horror, aver- ay 
-—adh, see gart-ghlanadh. sion or strong dislike. d A 
tgort-reabadh,** -aidh, s.m. Misery. gràbhail, po Engrave. 2 Embroider. 3 Carve, ny 
gort-threabhadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of ploughing. te, see gràbhalta. . + 
12 Misery. gràbhair, s.m. Graver. e à (ce 
£ortuchadh, see gortachadh & goirteachadh. |grabhal, -ail, s. m. Engraving, carving. 2 TE 
gortaich, see gortaich. Sculpture. : i" 
igosda, Gaelic spelling of ghost. — ———Aaehd, s.f. Carving, engraving. * 
Zosganach, a. 'l'ufty. grabhalachd, s.f. Horribleness, matter of aver- xv 


sion, or strong dislike. `` 
grabhalachd-cloiche, s.f. Lithography. : 
gràbnaladh, -aidh, sm. Writing. 2 Engraving. 
3 Sculpture. A’ g—, pr.vot. of gràbhail. Obair 
grabhalaidh, carved work. ` 
— ———-.— -walairt, s.m. Bill of Exchange. 


igos-sheabhag, -aig, -an, see glas-sheabhag. 

tgost-adis, s. Old age. 

Tgost-aosmhor, a. Aged. 

got-gheadh, see géadh-gnot. 

goth, va. Toss the head contemptuously or 
giddily. 

tgoth, a. Straight, even. — — —--— -soluis, s.m. Photograph. 

Tgoth, -a, -an, sm. & f. see gath. 2 Vowel. ——— — ..— -slainte, s.m. Bill of health, 

goth, s.m. Airy gait. 2 (DMC) Taunt, vibe. 3 ——, -reic, s.m. Bill of sale. 
"Go." Nach ann aige tha 'n g. ! what an gràbhal-cloiche, s.m. Lithograph, 





ri — A "op I 
LT. Ss 
f. j L I LI — 
[ j Fi F Ur : 
I |] ; | d = 
rms P ym "NE 
j AN i 
Kä L f 


— mgem A = = "l T fm 
ko e elef? A e AIL. 
ITERNET ARCHIVE 





"e mem 
D 


grabhalaiche 


grabhalaiche, s.m. Engraver. 
grabhalair, s.m. Engraver. 


- gràbhalta, past pt. of gràbhail. Engraved, car- 


ved, sculptured. 
Each, -aiche, a. Of, or pertaining to wri- 

ting, &. 
Grabhalixiche, -an, s.m. Engrayer, sculptor.. 
-mm -cloiche, s.m. Lithographer. 
—— -soluis, s.m, Photographer. 
grabhaltair, see grabhaltaiche. 

rabhan, -ain, s.m. Grubbing-axe, 
grabhan-ban,§ -ain-bain,s, m. White horehound 

.omarrubium vulgare. . 








M 
whe 


JT ` 





896. Grabhan-dubh. 
grabhan-dubh,§ s.m. Stinking horehound—bol- 


$95. Gràbhan-bàn. 


niger. 
grabhan-nan-clach,§ s.m. Stonecrop, wall-pep- 
per—sedim acre. e 
grabhat, Gaelic spelling of.cravat. 
tgrabhlochd, s.f. Blot, fault, error. 
ach,a. Faulty, full of errors,blotted. 
tgrabhshorb, see grabhlochd. 
grac,(DC) s.m. Cry of a duck— Argyll. 
gràc,tt pr. pt. a’ gracadh, oo Frighten or si- 
lence a child by frowns, 
gracan, -ain, s. m. Querulous sounds uttered 
by a hen. Far am bi cearcan bidh g., where 
there are hens there will be cackling. 
ach,tt a. Querulous. 











- 4gràd, A, s.m. Degree. 


grad, graide, a. Sudden, quick. 2 Hasty, 
irascible, short-tempered. 3 Agile, nimble, 
‘ clever.” 4**Unexpected. 5**speedy, soon. 


— 


-a 


Gu g., speedy, soon, early ; isg. do chaochladh, 
thy death is early ; g. "oa ghnothachaibh, quick 
an his business ; cho grad 's a db’ éirich e, he 
rose so suddenly ; ghrad chlisg e, he quite of a 
sudden started. 

grada, see grànda. 

gradag, -aig, -an, s. f. Quickness, nimbleness. 
2*Hurry, haste, jiffy. 3łtQuick woman. 4ff 
Gun. Chatigean gradaig, he will not come 
in a hurry ; bi an seo an gradaig, be here n- 
Stantly ; an gradaig, quickly, in æ short time. 

gradaig, (i.e. an gradaig) adv. Anon. 

gradain, pr.pt. a’ gradanadh, oo Parch grain 
preparatory to grinding it. 

te, past pt. of gradain. Parched as corn. 

gradan, -ain, s. m. Expeditious mode of drying 

-~ grain for the quern by burning the straw. 2 
"The meal obtained from such grain. 3 Snuff 
hastily prepared 





tobacco in a mortav. 4łł Kind of snuff called! gradhag, -aig, -an, 
“ Gradan was corn or meal| 


** Lundifvot,’’ 


519 


gràdhag 


prepared after the ancient custom of the 
Gael. A woman sitting down, took a hand- 
ful of corn and holding it in her left hand by 
the stalks, she set fire to the ears, which 
were at once in a flame. In her right hand 
she held a stick, with which she dexterously 
beat the grain out the very instant the husks 
were quite burnt. By this simple process, 
corn may becut down, winnowed, ground, 
dried and baked within half-an-hour. In 
separating the meal from the husks, instead 
of sieves, they made use of a sheepskin 
stretched on a hoop, minutely perforated by 
a small hot iron. The bread which is thus 
made is considered very salubrious, and is 
extremely pleasant to the palate of the Gael’’ 
—* In Uist, where the three processes, eal- 
achadh, eararadh and gradan, may still be 
seen practised, the meaus employed are prac- 
tically the same as described above. The 
grain end of the sheaf is put into the flame 
of the fire ; when the chaff and ends of the 
straw are well alight, the sheaf. is held over 
a clean-swept part of the hearth, or over some 
vessel, when the grain drops off.—DC. 

gradan, -ain,-ap, s. m. Severity, rigour. 2 
Danger, hazard. 

achd, s.f.ind. Quickness, alacrity, des- 

patch. 2 see gradan. 

gradanadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of hastily parching 
corn. 2 Hasty parching and grinding of tob- 
acco leaves, A’ g—, pr. pt. of gradain. 

gradan-uisge,(DMu) s.m. Blink of sunshine be- 
fore a summer shower.—Suth’d. 

grad-bheairteach, -aiche, a. Soon prepared or 
aecouvred, active, ** clever.” 

grad-bhris,f{ v.a. Burst, break suddenly. 

— ——— —eadh,1t -idh, -idhean, s.m. Abruption., 

grad-bhuille,if ap, s.f. Jerk, 

grad-charach, -aiche, a, Nimble, quick. 2 Fid- 
getting. 3ftshy. Gu g., nimbly. 

—- d,* s.f. Agility. 

grad-cheumach,ft-eiche, a. Light-legged. 

erad-charaich,{t v.a. Jerk. 

grad-chleas, s-m, Clever trick or movement, 
hocus-pocus trick. 

——————ach, a Nimble, Gu 
nimbly. 

grad-chlisg, 9.9. & n, Startle, convulse. 

—each, q«. Conyulsed, convulsive. 

Startling. 





active. e 


2 


grad-choilleag,]f -eig, an, s.f. Bounce. 


grad-dhealachadh,Ti -aidh, s.m. Abruption. 

grad-fhaclach,t{ -aiche, a. Flippant 

grad-fhuasgail,fI v.a. burst. 

Tgradh, s.m. Degree, gradation. 

tgradh, a. Noble. 2 Valiant. 3 Dear. 

gràdh, -àidh, s. m. Love, fondness. 2 Lover, 
beloved object. 3 Charity. benevolence. 4 
Virtue of universal love. D’ an d’ thug m’ 
anam g., whommy soul loved ; tha g. aige dhi, 
he loves her ; tha g. agam ort ; I love you; a 
ghràidh ! my love! my dear! Used in the 
vocative case as a term of endearment. 

gràdhach, -aiche, a. Loving, beloved, dear, 
lovely. 2*Amiable. An éilid gh., the loving 
hind ; acneas g., her amiable form. 

-——————, -aich, s. m. Beloved object. prov. 
[Generally used in the vocative singular only 
—a ghràdhaich ! my dear !] 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Love, act of loving. 2 
Admiring, admiration, A’ g—, pr. pl. of 
gràdhaich. 

d,* s,f. Extreme love, endearment. 


| see graidheag. 2 (DMC) 
Term of endearment applied to a woman, and 





y pounding dry leaves of gradhadair, -ean, s.m. Lover. 


gràdhag 5 


containing the idea of sympathy with, or 
gratitude to, the person aildressed. 
gràdhaich, pr.pt. a’ gràdhachadh, v. a. Love, 
esteem, admire. 
—e,-an, see gradhadair. 
—e, a. comp. of gràdhach, 
ear, fut. pass. of gradhaich. 
&hall be loved. 
gradhaichte, past pt. of gradhaich. Loved, be- 
loved. 2 Admired. 
gràdhail, a. Lovely. 
giathaileachd, s.f. Loveliness. 2 Amiableness. 
eradhair,** s.m. Adorer. 
già hun, -ain, an, s. m. dim. of gràdh. Lit. 
tle darling. see graidhean. 
gradhan,(CK) s.m. Darling—Suth’d. 
vradharachd, see gradhmhorachd, 
eradhdan, -ain, see gradtran. 
vradh-dhaoine, s.m. Philanthrophy. 
già th-gheasag, tI s.f. Love-charm. 
eriih-laiste, s.m. Fervent love. 
gcadhmhoire, comp. of gràdhmhor. 
gràdlnmhor, -oire, d. Loving, lovely, greatly be- 
loved. 2 Affectiouate. Gu g., lovingly. 
gradnuihorachd, sJ. Loveliness, lovingness. 
fuuduess, affectiouateness. 
gràdhran, see gràdranaich. 
gràdh-shealladh, s.m. Sheep’s eye. 
gràdhtainn,s.m. for ag ràdhtainn, pr.pt.of abair. 
gràdhuchadh, see gràdhachadh., 
gràdhuich, see gràdhaich. 
grad-leum, $.m. Quick spring, jump, bound. 
grad-leum, v.n. Spring, jump quickly. Gh. 
e, he sprung quickly. 
gràdran, -ain, s.m. see gràdranaich. 
ach, a. Noisy, clamorous. 2 Cackling. 
—aich, s. J. Peculiar complaining noise 
made by hens. 2 Murmuring. 3 Con- 
tinued complaining. 4 Prolonged cackle. 65 
Chattering. A’ g—, pr. pt. of gradranaich. 
gradranaich, pr.pt. a’ gradranaich, v. o, Cac- 
kle, chatter, make a complaining noise, like 
hens. 
eradranaich, a. Noisy, clamorous. 2 Cackling. 
grad-theich, v.a. Fly quickly, retreat precipi- 
tately. 
grad-thog, v.a. Raise quickly. 
grad-thuit,Ti v.n. Plunge. 
gerad-thulgadh, -aidh, s.m. Jerk. 
lgraf, see grabh. 
Tgraía, -n, s.m. Graft, sción, 
Tgrafadh, see grabhadh. 
igraían, -ain, see grabhan. 
igraf-chuir, v.g. Ingraft. 
tgraf-chur, -uir, s.m. d: pr.pt. Ingrafting. 
teraf-churta, past pt. Ingrafted. 
grag, -aig, -an, s.m. Croaking of crows, cawing. 
2 shout. 
gràg, pr.pt. a’ grag & a’ gràgail, v.n. Cry out 
bawl, croak, caw. 
gnàgail, s.f. Cackling, croaking. A’ g—, pr.pt. 
of grag. 
gragalr, -ean, s.m. Glutton. 
gragallaich, s.f. Clucking of a ben. 2 Croak- 
ing or cawing of a crow. 
gragan, -ain, son. Manor, 2 Village. 3 Dis- 
trict. 4 Bosom. 
gragan, see gradran. 
ach, see gràdranach. 
aich, see gradranaich. 
teragh, -aigh, -ean, see greigh. 
Turai, a. Old. 
igraibh, s. Almanac. 
tgraibhre, s.f. Loud laugh. 2 Word, utterance. 
3 Dignified expression. 
gràic, s.f. Rough scolding voice. 
air, he spoke harshiy to him. 








G. e, he 














Thug eg 


2 


+ - 


le 


gràineag 


gràiceach, a. Harsh. 

graid, see greigh. 

graide, s.f. see graidead. 2(MS) Parlousness. 
2 Vividness. G. nàduir, shortness of temper. 

graide, comp. of grad. 

Pr Misprint in Gaelic dicts. for graidh- 
each. 

graideachd, see graidead. 

graidead, -id, s.m. Quickness, degree of quic* 
ness, haste, hastiness. 2 Acuteness, 

graideal, see groideal. 

graidh, -e, -ean, see greigh. 

graidh, see gradhaich. 

graidheach, see greigheach. 

gràidheag, -ig, -an, 8. P. Sweetheart, belovec 
female. 2 Lovely young female. see also 
gràdhag. 

graidhean, 
mirer. 2 
man. 


-ein, -an, s.m. Lover, sweetheart, ad- 
Term of endearment addressed to a 


ach, a. Gallant, wanton, amorous. 
—achd, s.f. Gallantry, intrigue, amour, 
gcaidhear, -ir, -Irean, $.7Ó. Lover, sweetheart, 
admirer. 2 Beloved person. 
graidhire, see greigheach. 
graifear, see gràbhair. 
tgraifne, see graifneachadh. 
graifneach, -eiehe, a. Alarming, 
arm. Dor 
graifneachadh, -aidh, s.m. Riding, horseman- 
ship. 2 Alarm. 
graige,** sf. Superstition. 





sounding an al- 


———ach, a. Superstitious. 
—_——achd, s$. f. Superstition, superstitious 
usages. 


graigean, ein, s.m. Gluttonous swag-bollied 


young person. 


——-——ach, a. Gluttonous. | 

— —.——achd, s.f. Gluttony. 2 Infirmity of a 
swag-belly. 

-—-—as, -ais, s.m. Gluttony. 


graigh, see greigh. i 

———each, -eiche, see greigheach, 

graighear, -ir, see greighear. ; 

grailbeag,] s. m. Wood-cock, soe coilleach- 
coille. 

grailleag,( AF) s.f Dunlin (bird.:. 

grailleay,(CR) s.f. Morsel, little bit, as of meat 
cheese, &c.— W. of Ross-shire. 

graillean,** -ein, $.9^. Scimitar. 

grailneag,(AF) s.f. Winged animal. 2 Bat. 

graim, see greim. 2 (CR) Expression of & 
crying child—Arran. 

grain, -e, sf. Disgust, abhorrence, uem 
abomination. 2 Deformity. 3 (DMC) Hatred. 
G.de bhiadh, a loathing for food ; thusa le 'n 
g. iodhalan, you who abhor idols ; is fheàrr 
na fochaid g., abhorrence ts better than 
mockery. 

gràin-abhall, see gràn-ubhall. 

gràin-aigean, see gran-aigeim. , 1 

gràin-chàileach, -eiche, 4d. Antipathetic. 

nn nn (MS) s.f. Antipauhy. 

grainde, comp. of granda. More or most ugly. 

vraindead, -id, s.f. Degree of ugliness, 

gràine, s.f.ind. Ugliness. 

graine, see grainne. i 

gràineach, -eiche, d. see gràinneanach. 

graineachadh,.-aidh, s.m. Abhorring, loathing, 
disdaining. 2 Act of causing to abhor, loathe, 
or disdain. 3 **Granulation. 4(DMC) Alien- 
ating. A’ g—, pr. pt. of giainich. ` 

grainead,** -eid, s.m. Ugliness. 2 Disgust. 

gràineag, -eig, -an, $. f. dim. Hedgehog. 2 
Bittern, see corra-ghràin. 3**Wild duck. 4 
ttLittle grain. Cnuasachd!na gràineig (the 


hedgehog's hoard) expressive of the folly of : 





PE 


Ou _ graineag 521 gran-arcain | 
worldiy-minded people who part with all at} grieve, overseeing. 
the graye, as the hedgehog is compelled to|grainnseireachd, see grainnsearachd. 
drop its burden of crab-apples at the nar- |eraip, see grap. i 
row entrance to its hole. MK grais, -€, $.f, Prosperity, success, 2 Blessing, ` 

gràAineagach, -aiche, a. Of, or pertaining to, |gràiseag, s,f. Crackling, 
hedgehogs. 2 Like a hedgehog. 3 Bristly. | graisear,(MS) s.m. Overseer, seefgrainnsear. 
L 4110f, or pertaining to, little grains. graisg, -e, s.f. Rabble, low people, worthless 
gràinealachd, an, s.f. Abominableness, detest- people, ofiscouring,canaille,riff-raff,mob, Far 
g ableness, loathsomeness.  hatefulness. 2| ambi g bidh gleadhar, where the rabble is, ' 
Abomination. there will be noise ; na earb thu féin ri g., do 
| gràineasadh, -aidh, s.m. Glanders in horses. not rely on the mob. l 
" gràineil, -e, a. Abominable, hateful, loath- | graisg-chomhradh, s.m. Cant. 
i some, odious, disagreeable, detestable,abject. | gràisgealachd, s.j. ind. Vulgarity. 2 Black« 
- 9 Nasty. Nach gràineile an duine? i$ not| guardism. 3*Turbulence. 
i man more abominable ? gràisgeil, -e, a. Vulgar, mean, low, gross, 
K graineileachd, see grainealachd. blackguardish, 
P graing, -e, s.f. Disdain. 2 Frown. 3 see grain. | graisg-fhlath,tt -aith, -aithean,s.m. Demagogue. 
graingeach, -eiche, œ. Causing disdain, 2| graisg-fhlaitheachd,s.f. Democracy. 
ae Frowning. graitinn, [Improper form of ‘‘ ag ràdh,” pr.pt. o£ 
graingead, see gràinde. abair. 
gràiugich, see grainich, 2 Frown. gramachadh, -aidh, s.m. Fastening, tightening, 
grainich, pr. pt. a’ gràineachadh, v.g. Impress 2 Holding fast, clenching, grasping. G. barr 
with dislike, aversion or disgust. 2 Loathe,| ordaig, holding on by a thumb-top—with diffi- 
f abhor, detest, hate, disdain, 3(DMO)Alien-| culty. A’ g—, pr.pt. of gramaich. 
v ate. grama-chas, -chois, sam, Sure-foot, 2 Sure 
| e gràinichte, a. & past pt. of grainich. Disgusted,| footing, 
L impressed with disgust or aversion, loathed, | grama-chasach, -aiche, o. Sure-footed. 
detested. gramadach, -aich, s.m. Grammar. 2**Philolo- 
f gràinne, -an & -achan, s.f. Grain, single grain. gist. 
i 2 Grain or pellet of shot. 3 Sight on a gun- | —-—-—, -aiche, æ. Philological. 
H, barrel. 4 Small quantity of any granulated | ;ramadh, see greimeadh. 
"n substance.  5** Small number, as of people. | gramag,** -aig, -an, s.f. Hook. 2 Buffoon. 3 
d G. de shiol, @ grain of seed. Jester. 
_. gràinneach, -eiche, a. Full of grain. 2 Granu-|gramaich, pr.pt. a’ gramachadh, oo. Hold fast, 




















4. 


e EE 


D 


o lated, granulous. take hold, cling to. 2 Tighten. 3 Clench, 
h grainneachadh, -aidh, s.m. Granulating, granu-| grasp. 4 Fasten, adhere. Ris an do gh. an :! 
n lation. sealgair, which the hunter grasped. 


| grainnean, -in, -an, s.m., dim. of gràinne. Lit- 
tle grain. 2 Single grain. 3 Small quantity 
' of any granulated or pulverized substance. 
4 Smali quantity of anything.—Avgylil. 4 
(DU) Small collection of men or animals. G. 
fùdair, œ little powder; g. eòrna, a small 


gramaiche, -an, s.m. One that keeps a good 
hold. 2 Flesh-hook. 3 Hook of any kind. 4 
Smith's vice. 5 Pincers. 6 Grapple. "tt 
Chape of a buckle. 8 Cleat, see bata, Nos, 
6 to 10, p. 76. 9(AH) Table-fork. G. feòla, 
a flesh-hook. 


quantity of barley. gramaichte, past pt. of gramaich.  Fastened, 
grainneanach, -aiche, a. Grained. 2 Gritty.| clenched, laid hold of, grasped. 
3**Pulverized. gramail, -e, o Strong, firm. 2 Muscular. 3 


Vigorous, resolute. 4 Trusty. 5 Tightened, 
fastened, clenched. 6 Holding fast. 7(MS) 
Agglutinative. Thugaibh ionnsaidh gh.,make 
@ vigorous onset. 

gramaisg, s.f. Mob, rabble. 

gramalachd, s.f.ind. Firmness of body or mind. 
2 Vigorousness, strength, muscular vigour. 

gramalas, -ais,s.m.Muscular power or strength. 
2 Vigour or firmness of body or mind. 3 Pow- 
er of grasp. Cha’n fhacas do leithid air gh., 
thine equal for firmness was never seen. 

eramannan, pl. of greim. 

gramar, -air, sm. Grammar. 

gramasg, -aisg, s.f. Morsel, handful. 2 Small 
bit of food. 

gramasgar, -air, -airean, sm, Flock, company. 
2 Fry. 

gramhaisg, -e, -ean, s.f. Rude association. 

gramur, -uir, s.m. Refuse of grain. 

gran, -ain, s.m. Kiln-dried grain, 2 Corn. 3 
Hail. 4 Shotof lead. G. cruadhaichte, dried 
corn ; g. gradain, parched corn. | 

gràn-abhal, see gràn-ubhal. i 

grànach, -aiche, æ. Grained. 1 

grànachd, see grandachd. | 

grànaich, v.d. Corn, granulate. 

gràn-aigein, s.m. Common pilewort, lesser cele 
andine—ranunculus ficaria. see illust. 397, 

grànalach, -aich, s.f. Grain, 

gran-aobrainne, s. The glanders. i 

gràn-arcain,? see gràn-aigein. 2L 


grainneanaich,* see gràinnich. 

|». M gràinnein, gen. sing. of gràinnean, 

= gràinne-mul/aich, s.f. Top grain on a stalk. 

= gràinnich, pr.pt. a’ grainneachadh, v.g. Gran- 

ulate. 2 Pulverize. 

gràinnichte, a. & past pt. of gràinnich. Granu- 
lated. 

|... gràinn-itheach,** o Eating granulated or pul- 

verized food, granivorous. 

|  grainnse, see grainnseach. 

|. grainnseach, -sich, -sichean, s.f. Grange or 

t corn farm. 2 Granary. 

-———_—_—_——, (AH) a. Relating to the product- 
lon of grain. 'Se àite g' math a th' ann, it is 

y a good grain-producing place. 

J £graiunseag, -eig, -an, s.m. Cracklings, refuse of 
rendered tallow. 2** Cracknel, hard brittle 
cake. 3 Red bear-berry—arbutus uva ursi.— 
Badge of Clan Colquhoun. 4(DMC) Pimple. 
5(DMy) Refuse of fish-livers after the oil has 
been taken from them. ! 

grainnseagach, -aiche, @ Of, or belonging to, 

: cracklings, cracknels or bear-berries. 2 (D 

lw MC) Full of pimples. 

X grainnseag-dhubh,? -ig-dhuibhe, -an-dubha, s.m 
dr Black bear-berry—arbutus alpina. 
&grainnsear, -ir, pl. -an, & -eirean, s.m. Farmer. 

— . 2 Farm-servant. 3 Agriculturist. 4 Corn- 

— . dealer, 5**Grieve, overseer. 

. &rainnsearachd, s.f.ind. Occupation of an agri- 
culturist, agriculture, 2 Employment of a 


y Original from 


M : „i! Pee oa EE (DW E pU P ds A 
f Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS Al 


BÜ INTERNET ARCHIVE — URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


Wing 
I P 


gràn-chist 





397. Gran-aigein. 

gran-chist, -e, pl. -ean & -eachan, 3.f. Garner 
2 Granary. 3 Corn-chest. 

grànda, grainde, a, Ugly, 
Shameful, causing shame.. 
Nasty. 5 Grim. G.ri’m faicinn, ugly to be 
seen ; is g. leinn e, we think it unseemly. 

gràndachd, :s.f.ind. Ugliness. 2 Unseemliness. 

nlach,** -aich, s.m. Corn, grain. 

gràn-lachàn,S s.m. Duck-weed, see mac-gun- 
athair. 

gran-lagain, s.m. The grain that falls through 
the straw when it is placed in the kiln, 

grannna, see grànda. 

-— — —chd, see gràndachd. 

grannaidh,** s.m. Long hair. 
3 Grimness. 4 Nastiness. 

grannda, -ine, @ see grànda. 

granndachd, see gràndachd. 

grant,** a. Grey, green. 

gràn-ubhal, 
ate—punica granatum. . Mar gh., like @ pome- 
granate. [Written “ pomgranat ” in recent 
editions of the Bible.] 

graodha, an galar graodha, s.m. Strangles— 
Skye. 

graoine,** s.f. Joy. 

Tgraoine, a. Joyful, cheerful, bright. 

fgraoineachas, -ais, s.m. J oyfulness, cheerful- 
ness. see greadhanachas. 

graoineag, -eig, $.f. Irritation, provocation. 

graoineis* s.f. Joy. 

raoineagaich, v.d. Provoke, irritate, incense. 
graoinich, v.d. Provoke, irritate, incense. 

graoltas, -ais, s.m. Obscenity. 

graosda, see graosdach. 

graosdach, a. Filthy, obscene. 

graosdachd, s.f. Filthiness, obscenity, ribaldry 

gràp,** v.g. Climb. 

grap, s.m. see gràpa. 

gràpa, -n & chan, s.m. Graip, iron dung-fork. 

gràpadh, -aidh, s.m. see grapa. 

gràs, -ais, -an, s.m. Grace, favour. 2 Divine 
favour. 3 Aid, help. 4 Grace in the soul. 5 
Fortune, luck, 6 *Free love. G. Dhé, God's 
grace. 

gràsaich,** v.a. Give thanks. 

gràsail, -e, a. see gràsmhor. 

gràsalachd, see gràsmhorachd. 

grasda, -àisde, a. Compassionate. 2 Gracious. 
3 see granda. 4(DMy) Rugged-faced. 

grasdachd, s.f.ind. Compassionateness. 2 see 
grandachd. | 

gràsmhoire, comp. of gràsmhor. 


gràsmhor, -oire, a Gracious, merciful. 2 Fa- 


yourable. 3 Having the graces of the Holy 
D 3itized | d 
NTERNET ARCHIVE 


522 


ill-fayoured. 2| 
3 Unseemly. 4} 


-ubhala & -ubhlan, s.m, Pomegran- | 


greadh 


. Spirit. 4 Graceful. 

, God! 

gràsmhorachd, s.f. Graciousness, benign:ty. 2 
Gloriousness. 3 Gracefulness, grace. 4 Mere 
cifulness. 

gràst, see grasda. 

grasta, -àiste, see grasda. 


A Dhégh.! gracious 










‘|prastachd, see gràsdachd, ~ "^ 


grab, Gaelic spelling of grate, 

grath, -a, s.m. Fear,terror. prov. 
horrence, feeling of repulsion. 
cur g. orm, you disgust me. 

grath, a. Fearful, ugly. 

grathail,-e, æ. Terrific, dreadful. 2(DU) Dis- 
gusting, revelting, repulsive. 

grathann, see grathunn. 

gratharra, o Squeamish. 

grath-muing, see gath-muinge. 

grathunn, -uinn, -uinnean, s.m. Space of time, 

. while. 2 Considerable time. 3 Turn. 
Eadar seo agus ceann grathuinne, ín a while 
after this ; gabh g. dheth. take a while of it; 
gabh do gh. dheth, take your turn of it; g. 
math, @ good while, [Armst.* gives grathuinne, 
as nom. and marks it f.; 1j has nom. grath- 
unn, gen. -uinn, s.m., T has nom. grathuinn, 
and gives no gen. or gender.) ` 

graturnach, @ see gràdranach. 

gràturnaich, s. see gr&dranaich. 

graufal, a. Revolting. (now graineil.) 

tgré, s.m. Nature, essence. (gné.). 

tgré, a. Gaelic spelling of grey. 

greab, prov. for grab. 

greabadh, prov. for grabadh. 

emnes -ain, s.m. Dropwort—spirea flipene 

ula. 

‘greabhailt, s.f. Helmet, prov. 

tgreach,** s.m. Nut. 

tgreachd, s.f. Outery. 

tgread, pr.pt. a’ greadadh, v. a Wound, tor- 

|. ment. 2 Whip severely. 
Burn, scorch. 

gread, s.m. see greadadh. 

greada, see greadadh. 

vreadadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m.. Tormenting, 
beating, whipping, drubbing. 2 Hardship, 
misfortune. 3 Impatience. 4 Anxiety, D 
Burning, scorching. 6 Piercing pain.  7** 
Stroke, blow. 8 Wound. 2 Aridity. 10 Sor- 
row. Aobhar mo ghreadaidh, tAe cause of my 
wound. 

greadag,** -aig, s.f. Gridiron. 2 Girdle. 

greadair,"* s.m. Warming pan. 

greadan, -ain, s.m. see gradan. 2 Considerable 
time spent with all one's might at anything. 
3**Quarrel. 4 Thumping, blow.  5**Creak- 
ing. 6(AF) Mule. 7 (DMO) Cause to regret. 
8 Painful result. 8 Bitter sorrow or pain. 
lOttBurning. G. feasgair is cead dol dach- 
aidh, evening spurt and leave to go home ; is 
goirt an g. a fhuair an dùthaich, the country 
has received a severe blow ; thoir g. air, bela- 
bour it awhile, give it (try it) awhile ; g. gaoith, 
a very strong gale of wind. 

greadanach,-aiche, 
Obstreperous. 3 Quarrelsome. 4 Hot, scald- 
ing, burning. 5 Fighting, dealing blows, 
thumping. 6**Clamorous. 

greadanachd, see gradanadh. 

greadanta, -ainte, a. Hot, scalding. 2 Hard, 
difficult. 8 Vehement. 4}tBeating. Gug., 
vehemently. 

greadh, s.f. *Joy, happiness. 2 see greigh. 3 
** Baking, batch of bread. 

greadh, pr.pt. a’ greadh, v.a. Prepare food, boil, 
knead.. 2 Winnow. 8 Thrash, thump, A’ 


2 (DU) Ab- 
Tha thi2’ 


i 


3 Blight, blast. 4 


gw gës, A) ^ 
Ais etch Ag ad mrtg P 





a. Babbling, chattering, 2 


g. na cuilm, preparing the feast. pm — 


| greadhanachd, 


'g£readhadh 


greadhadh, -aldh, s.m. greadhadh, -aidh, s.m. Dressing or preparing |fgreann, v.a. Engrave. or preparing 
of food, or 2 of grain. 3 Winnowing. 

greadhadair, -ean, s.m. Dresser of victuals. 2 
Winnower. 





eachd,(DC) s.f. Act of winnowing 
corn— 4A rgyll. 9** Dressing of food or grain 

greadhair, s.m. Stallion, entire horse—Islay. 2 
, Groom—Lochaber. 3 Brutish fellow— Perth. 
see greidhear. 

greadhainn, see greadhan. 

greadhaireachd,** s.f. Covering a mare. 

greadhan, -ain, -an, s.m. Band, troop, group. 2 
Jovial band, 3 Great noise, G. mu 'n bhórd, 

a company around the table. 

&f. Drolling, going about in 
co:upanies or groups. 21ÍPageancvry. 

greadbanadh,(DMC) s. m. Slow progress with 
any kind of work. ’S ann ort tha 'n g. ris ; 
what a long time you are taking at it ! 

greadharra, a. Pretty. 

greadhnach, -aiche, v. Joyful, cheerful, bright, 
merry, exulting, social 2 Magnificent. 3 
Pompous. An cuirtibh g., un joyful courts. 

greadhnach, -aich, s.m Merrymaking. 2 EEN 
ing, making showy. 

greadhnachd, sf. Going about in companies or 
groups, 21[Pageantry. 

greadhnachas, -ais, s.m. Joy, festivity, social- 
ity, conviviality. 2 Pomp, august appearance, 
solemnity, parade. 3 Brightness, magnifi- 
cence, Le mor gh., with much pomp.| 

£readhnas, -als, see greadhnachas. 

grea thte, past pt. Boiled. 

greadhuinn, -e, -ean, see greadhan, 

greagag, -aig, -an, see grìogag. 

greagh, see greigh. 

greagtlain,* s.m, Old starved horse. 2 Donkey. 
3 Old sword. 

grealiach, -aiche, st Entrails, iutestiues, gar- 
bage. 2 Purtenance. 3 Pluck, 4 Cart-sad- 
dle. 5 Chain. 6 Clay. Nighidh tu a gh., 
thoushalt wash its entrails ; maille ri 'ghreali- 
aich, with its purtencnce. [WC gives s.m. ; 
H.S.D. and McL & D both spell greallach, 8., 
with one l, but McL & D gives two ('s in 
greallach, a. As pronounced in Suth'd, greall- 
ach should have one l] 

Breda. -aiche, a. Dirty, nasty, filthy. 

greallag, -aig, -an, s.m. Swingle-tree next the 
horses, splinter-bar. 2 Swinging rope. 4** 
Swing. 5 Yoke. 6 see grealach. 7 (MS) 
Sling. Ann an g., ina swing; greallagan a’ 
chruinn, the plough'8 swingle-trees, 

greallagach, -aiche, @. Of, or belonging to, 
sWibgle-trees, or 2 swinging ropes. 

greallagan, s.pl. Treadles to draw heddles of 
weaver’s loom up and down. 

greallaich,** s.f. Ciay, mud, dirt, mire. 

grealnach,(AF) see erealsach. 

grealsach,(AF) -aich, s.m. Grilse (fish,) 2 Sal. 
mon. 3 see greusaiche, 

gream, -à, An. see greim. 

greama, s.m. see greamach. 

greamach (AF) s.m. Streaked cow. 

greamach, g. Grinding, biting, 2(DC) Forbid- 
ding, tousie, as hair. 

greamaich, oo. see gramaich. 

greamaichte, see gramaichte. 

TZreaman, s.pl. Shreds. 

greamannan, (for greimeannan) pl. of greim, 

tgrean, s.m. Gravel, 

tgrean, v.a. Carye, engraye, emboss. 

tgreanachadh, -aidh, s.m. Exhorting, exhorta- 
ion 

greanachair, s.m. Exhorter. 

greanadh, see greannach adh. 

tgreanaich, v.a., Exhort, 





TI) 


EE EE . gtedhfS$ o o a 


Sea v.a. Engrave. 

greann, grinn, s.m. |f. in Badenoch, North 
Argyll and Poolewe, m. in Coigach, ] Grim 
suriy scowl, angry look, appearance of rage. 
2 Hr 3 Hue, colour. 4 Collision, act of 
striking. 5 Courage, boldness, 6 Bristling 
of the bair, as on an enraged dog. 7*Ripple 
on the surface of water. +8 Uncombed hair. 
9**Beard. 710 Fair hair. 11** Gloom. f 12 
Noise, clangour, blast. 13 Siren (creature.) 
+14 Friendship, love. 15 Joke. 16 Cloth, 17 
Rough-piled clothing. 18* Head having the 
hair standing on end. Tha g. air an fhairge, 
the sea has æ rippled, scowling aspect; bho gach 
g- 'bhiodh teann do m’ thòir, from every siren 

ard pressing me ; dh’ fhàs air cith is greann, 

he became angry and scowling; mar gh, a 
bheireadh da ord, like the clangour of two 
hammers ; is iomadh corp à chaochail a gh., 
many a body changed its hue ` por a's beadar- 
aiche g., a race of the loveliest hue; mar gh. 
reo: taidh, like a wintry blast. 

greannachd, (MS) er, Hairiness. 

greannach, -aiche, o Hairy, rough, bristly. 2 
Rough, uncombed, having dry, “bristling hair. 
3 Crabbed, morose, irascible, 4 Gloomy, 
frowning. 5 Lowering, as weather. 6 Mean, 
of little worth. Lie are by the wind, as the 
surface of a lake. 8 (AH) Breezy and very 
cold. Claigeann g., a hard, dry-hairedscalp ; 
duine g., & person ; feasgar gZ., & lower- 
ing threatening evening ; aois gh., gloomy old 
age. 

greannachadh, -aidh, s.m. State of becoming 
hairy or bristly. 2 Standing of hair on end. 
3 Irritating, act of irritating. 4 Frowning, 
5 Gloominess, appearance of a rising storm. 
6**Growing rough or shaggy. A’ g—, pr. pt. 
of greannaich. 

greannadh, -aidh, s.m. Graving. 

greannag, -aig, -an, S.f. dim. of greann. 
straggling hairs. 

greannagach, -aiche, o Having few or strag- 
gling hairs. 

tgreanna-chluich,ff -ean, s.m. Comedy, 

greannaich, pr.pt. a’ greannachadh, v. a. Be 
come hairy or bristly, bristle, 2 Frown, lower, 
scowl. 3 Irritate, provoke. 4 Shrivel, parch. 
5 Defy. 6 Grow gloomy. Gh. gach ‘tulach, 
every hillock kas grown gloomy ; gh. e rium, 
he became angry with me. 

greannaichte,(CR) a. Bristling—Arran. Thae 
g. fuar, it is bitterly or piercing!y cold. 

greannan,ff -ain, s. m, Shrivelled, ill-favoureg 
creature. 2 (DU)Crabbed fellow. 

greannar, see greannmhor. 

-—————achd, see greannmhorachd, 

greanndag, ( AC) s.f. Piece ofcloth, rag, tatter. 

greann-ghaoth, -aoithe, an. s.f. Cold, parching 
wind. 2 Boisterous ‘wind, rough breeze 

greannmhor, -oire, d. Neat, comely, lovely, 
pretty. 2 Brisk. lively, pleasantly droll, fa- 
cetious, witty. 3 Sweet, agreeable. 4 Dis- 
creet. [MeL & D says ' applied to females 
only."] 

——achd,s.f. Neatness, comeliness. 2 
Pleasantness, affability. 3 Discretion. 4 
Loveliness, 

greannta, œ. Neat, handy. 2 Handsome, come- 
ly, becoming. 3 Carved, engraved. Gu g., 
handsomely. 

———-chd, 
Handsomeness, comeliness. 
4 Disagreeableness. 

greanntasan, -ain, s.m. Graving, carving. 

greannuich, v.a. see greannaich. 

greanta, a. Exact, 


Few 


$.f. Neatness, handiness. 2 
3 Carved work, 


2L2 


greantachd 


greantachd, Ss. J.e Cleanness, cleanliness. 
greap, see gràp. 
gréas, see gréis. 4t 
Manner. 
greas, pr.pt. a’ greasad, a’ greasachd & a’ greas- 
adh, v.a. dn Hasten. 2 Drive, urge, as a 
horse. 3 Despatch. 4 Promote. 5 Prepare, 
dress, accoutre. 6 (DU)Setting a dog ata 
thing, forcing or hurrying a dog, G. iuth- 
aidh sios, speed an arrow downwards ; ghreas 
i oirre, she hasted ; greas ort ! hurry up! 
greas,** a. see greasach. | 
greasach, d. Common, usual. 
-—adh, -aidh, s.m. Hastening. 2 Inciting. 
greasachd, see greasad & greusachd, 
greasad, -aid, s.m. Hastening, act of hastening. 
2 Driving, act of driving. 3 Preparing, dress- 
ing, accoutring. 4 Despateh, hurry. 5 (DU) 
Setting on a dog. A’ g., pr.pt. of greas. A’ 
g. a’ choin, setting the dog on, 
greasadach,tt e. Impulsive. 
reasadair,** s.m. Carrier. | 
greasadh, -aidh, see greasad. H 
gréasaich, v.g. Hasten. 2 Incite. 3 
greasaiche, -an, s.m. see greusaiche. j 
—eachd, see greusaicheachd. a - 
igreasailt, -ean, sf Inn. 
Tgreasair, -ean, s.m. Innkeeper, host. 
greasan, -ain, s.m. Web. 
greasdachd, see greasad. 
greastachd, (for greasachd) see greasad. 
great, s.m. Seap-sud—Badenoch. Scots, graith, 
—warm water so wrought up with soap as to 
be fit for washing clothes. 
jgreath, s.m. Noise, cry, shout. 
greath, v.a. see gréidh. 
greathachd, s.f. Surliness, moroseness, ehur- 
lishness. 
greathlach, -aicb, see greallach. 
tgrech,tf -ich, .s.m. Garden. 2 Nut. 3 Salt. 
igrech, -eich, s. m. Dog, hound. Gach eg. 
gregh, -eigh, bha’n ar mur, every dog with- 
in our house. 
Tgreid, s.f. Stroke, see gread. 
tgreideadh,-idh, s.m. Second stroke of infection. 
greideal,f -eil & alach, s. f. Gridiron. 2 Gir- 
die. Dubh na greidealach, the smut of the 
gridiron. 
greideilein, see greidlean. 
gréidh, s. see gréidheadh. 
greidh, see greigh. 
—-—-. s.m. Treatment. 2 Beating, thrashing. 
gréidh, pr.pt. a’ gréidheadh, v. a Prepare or 
dress victuals. 2 Winnow. 3 Whip, flog, 
thrash. 4 Toast, as bread, 5 Knead. 6}f{ 
Dress leather. 7(MS) Dry. 8 Treat or use 
well.— West Gaeldom. 9(DMC) Season, eure, 
eadaireachd,tt s.f. Winnowing. 
eadh, -idh, -idhean, s.m. Dressing, act of 
dressing victuals, 2 Dressing of leather. 3 
Winnowing. 4 Whipping, flogging, thrashing, 
punishing.—Noríh. 5 Toasting, of bread. 6 
Treatment. 7 Treating kindly or liberally. 
8 Act of curing, toasting, &c. 9 State of being 
cured, toasted, &e. 10 Seasoning, preserving. 
A’ g—, pr.pt. of gréidh. Droch gh., bad treat- 
ment ; fhuair e a dheagh gh. he got a good 
thrashing ; a’ g. an arain, toasting the bread ; 
a’ g. an éisg, curing the fish ; a’ g. 'san t-sabh- 
all, winnowing in the barn. 
gréidbear, s.m. Grieve, man in charge of farm- 
work under a manager or farmer. 
greidheirne,(AF) see greidh. 
gréidhte, past pt. of gréidh. Prepared, dressed, 
as of victuals or leather. 2 Whipped, flog- 
ged—North. 3 Baked. 4 Kneaded. şt 
Treated kindly—West. 6 (DMC) Dried, sea- 


12 Guest. +3 Protection. 











[ 


i j 
dl L 
A ITE PRIEIET m | IE 
i — i — d <; WW 
1 X d FEM EN l Vi: 
KHN Ka LE NX v" LL 


024 


greim-neoim 


soned,in agood state of preservation, as of 
peats, corn, &c. Aran g., baked bread. 

greidlean, -ein, -lan, s.m. Bread-stick, instru- 
ment for turning bannocks on the girdle in 
baking. 2 Peel. 3 Scimitar. 2 Name of 
Pleiades. 5(DMy) Pot-stick for porridge. 

greigh,,-e, -ean, s.f. Herd, flock, as of deer; seud 
of horses. G. each air t’ fhuarain ghorma, d 
troop of horses on thy green fountains. 

, & f. Gadfly.—Kintyre. [Spelt gréigh by * 
but the vowel is short in. Kintyre.—greiguire 
is the correct spelling.] . 

greigh,* s.f. Uncommon heat of the sun after 
bursting out from behind a eloud. 

each, -eiche, a Abounding n studs of 

horses, armental.. 

each, Ach, s.m. Stallion, see digeach. 

ear, -ir, -an, $m. Groom, one who tends 
horses. 2 Horseman. 3(CR) Stallion— Arran. 

greigheire, see greighire. 

greighire,* s. Gadfly. 

gréighte, see gréidhte. 

greillean, -ein, s. m. 2 Old rusty 
sword. 

greim, gen.-reime & -ama, pl. -eanna & gram- 
annan, s.m. Hold, holding, custody, grasp, 
gripe. 2 Bite, morsel, piece of brea. 3 
Stitch in sewing. 4 Stitch, throb, pang. 5 
Bite with the teeth or nails. 6**Diiliculi ex- 
pression, hard word. G. bìdh, a morsel of 
Jod ; g. 'san aodach, a stitch in the cloth ; tha 
'n deagh gh. aige, he has a good hold ; cna'n 
"eil g. agad air, you have no hold on him ; am 
fear nach cuir à shnaim, eaillidh e a cheud 
gh., he who knots not his thread, will lose his 
Jirst stitch ` chaidh a chuir "na gh., he was re: 
instated ; thae an g., he is in custody ; cham 
"eil g. ri ghabhail air uisge no teine, fire 
and water cannot be grasped—i.2. are good ser- 
vanis and bad masters ; ann an g. fixed, held 
Jast; gabh e, take hold; g, fola, pleurisy ; 
gach fear ’na gh. ! all hands to quarters ! 

-acair, -acraichean, s.m. Grapnel. 

-àu-diabhuil,$ s. Devils bit scabious, 
see ura-ballach. 

——— -bàis,[ sm. Death-throe. 
ease. 














Dagger. 








2 Mortal dis- 


-cluaise,li s.m. Ear-acbe. 

eacnadh, -aidh, see gramachadh. 

——eachail,(MS) a.  Ansated. 

—— -—eaüas,* -ais, s.m. Hold, tenement. 

eadh, -idh, s.m. Grasping, biting. 

————ealas, -ais, see gramalas. 

eauna, n.pl. of greim. Grasps, holds. 2 
Morsels,:bits, pieces. 3 Gripes, sudden pains 
in any part of the body. 

———eannach,,a. Pleuritic. 

ell, -e, a. see gramail. 

—— ——eilteach, a. see gramail. 

——— -fais, sm. ‘‘ Growing pains." 

——— -fola, s.m. Pleurisy. 

-fuachd, s.m. Chilbiain, see meilicheart. 

——— ich, -ean, s.m. see gramaiche. 

ich, 0.0. see gramaich. 

———iche, s.m. Anchor. 2 Cleat of a boat, 
(Nos. 6 to 10. p. 76,) 

ichte,see gramaichte. 1 

ir, -ean, s.7z*. Grappling-iron. 2 Pincers, 

tgreimisg,** s.f. Old garments. 2 ‘Trash, trum- 
pery, lumber. 

-—— —— ——ear, s.m. Higgler. 

- ——————earachd, s.f. Higgling. 

greiu-lóinidh, ssm. Rheumatic twinge. 

gvreim-inionaich, s.m. Colic. 

ereim-mor,(DMy) s.m. Pleurisy. 

greim-neirt,s.m. Strengthening muscle—Arra@it. 

sreim-neoin, ff s.m. Luacheon. 5 





























E 
e) 








eg 4 , E P 
De 


the body. 


greim-sic 525 grian-lasta 
greim-sic,ff s.m. Pain in the anterior part of | f | 


gréinbheach, see grian-chrios. 
gréine, gen.sing. of grian. 
tgreineachadh, -aidh, s.m. Effort, 
gréin-ghil, gen.sing. of grian-gheal. 
gréis, v.G. see créis. j 
tgreis, -ean, s.m. Champion. 2 Protection. 
3 Pillage. 
greis, -e, -ean, s.f. Prowess, strength. 2 Battle, 
contest, onset, attack, engagement. 3 Virtue, 
efficacy. 4 Slaughter. 5 While, space of 
time. 6 Hero. 7tfFit of coughing. G. air 
fiona’s g. air branndaidh, a while at wine 
"and a while at brandy ; car gh., fora while ; 
fé na g., the interval between actions ; thoir 
g. air H obair, work a while; g. mhath, a 
good while ; o cheann gh., @ while ago. 
gréis, -e, s.f. Needle-work, embroidery. 2 
Furniture. 3**Tambouring. 4** Fine cloth- 
es. G.-obair, embroidery ; obair-gréise, em- 
broidered work. 
igréis, v.g, Embroider. 2**Adorn. $**Dress. 
gréis-bhean, s.f. Milliner. 
fgreischill,** er Sanctuary. 
gréise, gen.sing. of greus. 
greiseach,** a Soliciting, enticing.’ 
greiseachd,** s. f, Solicitation, enticement. 
gréiseadair,* s.m. Embroiderer. 
eachd, s.f. Embroidery. 
gréiseadh,** -eidh, $. m. Embroidery. 2 Act 
of embroidering. | 
greiseag,(DC) s. f. Wanton woman, ''rantin' 
widow ''— Uist. 
greiseag, s.f. Little while. 
gréisg, see créis. 
gréisr, (CR) s.f. Loathing, nausea.—W. of Ross. 
ean,(CR) s.m. Repulsive tood — W.of Ross. 
—— ——eanach,(CR) a, Fastidious, squeamish, 
easily nauseated.— W. of Ross. 
gréiste, past pt. Embroidered. 
gréiste, past pt. Greased. 
Tgreistear,** Ar, -an, s.m. Carter, 
tgreit, s.m. Champion, warrior. 
réite, see gréidhte. 
ENT s.f. Jewel, ornament. 9 Dress. 3 
ift. 
greòd, (CR) s. m. 
Skye & Argyll. 
common. 
gredig,* s.m. Botcher. 
ean,* ein, s.m. Dabbler. 
ich,* v.a, Bungle, botch. 2 Dabble. 
greollach, see greallach, 
greollan, -ain, s.m. Cricket (insect. ) 
greos, -eois, s.m. Expansion of the thighs. 
——-—ach, -aiche, a. Devaricated, expanded 
in the thighs. 
—gach, -aiche, a. Grinning, apt to grin. 2 
(MS)Rough. Gaire g., a forced laugh. Leac 
gh., @ rough slab ; làmhan g., hands rough 
through hard work, 
greus, v.g. see gréis. 
greus, -a & -éis, s.m. see gréis. 
greusachd, s.f.ind. Shoemaking trade. 2 Shoe- 
making work. | 
greusadaireachd,** 6.7. see gréiseadaireachd. 
greusadh, -aidh, see gréiseadh. 
greusaiche, -an, s.m. Shoemaker. 2 Cobbler- 
. fish, also known as, frog-fish, lump-fish, chub, 
bull-head, miller's thumb, sea-devil, and an- 
gler. (illust. 398.) 
greusaidheachd, s.f. see greusachd. 
- greus-obair, for gréis-obair. 
griachan,(MMcL) s.m. Warfare. 
griàm, s.m. Kind of lichen growing on stones 
and trees —Suth’d, 











Group, company, crowd— 
Gaelic form of crowd—not 




















grianachd, s.f. 





griaman, -ain, s.m. Kind of lichen. 
tgrian, grein, s.m. Ground or bottom of the sea 
2 Bottom of a lake or river, 3 Land. 


grian, v.a. Bask in the sun, expose to the sun, 


grian, gréine, :s.f. The sun. 2 Light of the sun. 
A gh. na h-óg-mhaidne ! thou sun of early 
morn ! ; éirigh na gréine, sunrise ; luighe na 
gréine, sunset ; aomadh na gréine, the oblique 
descending of the sun ; O ! nach d’ eug thu mu 

'm facas grian ! O that thou didst not die ere 
thou sawest the sun’s light ; gath-gréine, @ 
sunbeam. 

grianach, -aiche, æ. Sunny. 2 Coloured by 
the sun. 3 Bright, shining. 4 Warm. 5(MS) 
Airy. 6 Aboundingin sunny spots. Dealbh- 
an g., sun-images ; mu q’ bhlàthaibh g., about 
thy sunny blossoms. 

— — —adh,-aidh, s.m. Solar warmth. 2 
Basking or drying in the sun. 3f1Isolation. 
A' g—, pr. pt. of grianaich. 

see grianachadh. 

grianadh, -aidh, s.m. see grianachadh. Pàirt 

"San raon a’ g., some basking in the sun. 
grianaich, pr.pt. a’ grianachadh, v.a. Bask or 
dry in the sun, 2**Expose to the sun or air. 
3ttIsolate, 
te, past pt. Dried in the sun. ` 
grianair,* oa see grianaich. 

tgrianair, -ean, s.m. Sun-dial. 

grianan, -ain, -an, s.m. Sunny spot. 2 Sum- 
mer-house. 3 Peak of a mountain. 4 Palace, 
any royal seat. 5 Green. 6 Place where 
peats are dried. 7**Court. 8 Hall, tent. 9 
Round turret. 10 Sunny eminence. 11 Ex- 
posure. 12fTArched walk on a hill command- 
ing an extensive prospect. 13 Any place 
suited for exposing to the heat of the sun. An 
g. coir, the beauteous hall ; g. ard ’sam biodh 
na féidh, @ sunny eminence where the deer 
would be. 

griananach, -aiche, a. see grianach. 

griananta, -ainte, a. see grianach. 

grianar, a. see grianach. 

tgrianare, -aire, -aircean, s.f, Sundial, 

grian-bheum,** s.m. Sun-stroke. 

grian-chearcall,** -aill, s. Solar halo, 
grian-chlach,** -chloiche, -an, s.f. Sun-dial, 
grian-chrios, -an, s.m. Zodiac. 
—ach, à. Zodiacal. Comharran (no 
ceuman) na g., the signs of the zodiac. 
grian-chuairteag,** -eig, -an, s.f. Solar halo. 
grian-dhealrach, -aiche, a. Sun-bright. 
grian-dheatach, -aich, s. f. Exhalation. 
Vapour. 
grian-ghamh-stad, -staid, s.m. Winter solstice. 
grian-ghath,** s.m. Sunbeam.  'Gan tiormach- 
adh 'sna grian-gathaibh, drying them in the 
sunbeams. 
———— ach, -aiche, q. Emitting sunbeams, 
sunbright. 2 Radiant, effulgent, 
grian-gheal, -ile a. Sun-bright. 

grian-lasta, a. see grian-gheal, 


9x 


erian-loisgte 


-grian-loisgte, a. Sun-burnt. 

grian-luibh,** s. Heliotrope, (flower.) 

grianmhor, -oire, @ see grianach. i 

grian-mhuine,} s, Common bramble, see dris. 

grian-neoinean,- ein, -an, s.m. Turn-sol or sun- 
flower. 

grianrachadh, -aidh, see grianachadh. 

grianrachd,** s.f. Warmth of the sun. 2 Sun- 
rising. 

grianradh,* -aidh, s.m. & pr.pt. see grianadh, 

grianraich, see grianaich. 

grian-riochd,** -an, s.m. Image of the sun. 

grian-ros,$ -ois, -an, s.m. Rock-rose—helianthe- 
mum vulgare. Badge of the Fergussons. 2 
Heliotrope. 

egrian-sgàil,** s.f. Parasol, any shade for the 
face against the sun's heat. 

—ean, s.m. Little parasol or umbrella. 
grian-sgar, -air, see grian-sgaradh. 
grian-sgaradh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Fissure or 

chink in anything caused by the sun's heat. 


2 Breaking into chinks with the sun's heat. 
Tgrian-shamh-stad,-staid, s.m. Summer solstice. 
grian-stad, s.m. Solstice. G. geamhraidh, win- 

ter solstice ; g. samhraidh, summer solstice. 
grian-thir,** s. f. Sunny-land. Griau-thir is 

uaine cota, a sunny, green-maniled land. 
grianuisg,(AC) s. Fay. 2(DC) “Silly.” —Argyll. 
grias,* v. @ see grìos. 
-—ach, see grìosach. 
-—adh, -aidh, see grìosadh. 
-—aiche, -an, see greusaiche, 
griathran, see greollan. 
¢grib, a. Swift, quick. 
grib,** e s.f. Hinderance, impediment. 2 


Dirt, filth. 3 Feathers on the legs or feet of | 


birds. 4 Manger. 5(AF) Griffin. 
gribeach,** a. Having feathers on the legs, as 
some kinds of fowls. 
gribeach,** eich, s.m. Hunting nag. 
ribeadh, -eidh, s.m. Manger. 
Tgribh, s.m. Griffin. 2 Warrior. 3 Finger. 
gribheag, -ig, -am, see griobhag, 
— ————àch, -aiche, see griobhagach. 
gribhean,** ein, s.m. Griffin. 
gribh-iongach, -aich, s.m. Griffin. 
grid, -e, 8. f. Substance, quality. 
quality. 
Very keen penurious woman. 5ffColour. 
gridealachd, s.f. ind. Goodness of quality. 
grideil, -e &-eala, a. 
ine. 2 Substantial. 
trious. 4tt Penurious. 


loch. 
grifeag, -ig, -ean, see griobhag. 
-———-&ach, see griobhagach. 
grigeag, -eig, -an, see griogag. 
ach, see griogagach. 
Grigirean, -ein, s.m. Pleiades. 





crann-arain.” ] 


grigleach, a. Clustered, in festoons or clusters. 
-an, S$. m. Cluster of stars, 


grigleachan, -ain, 
small constellation. 2 see Grioglachan. 
Griglean, -ain, s.m. see Grigirean. 


grigleann,$ s.m. Quaking grass—Breadalbane. 


see conan. 


grileag,{-e, -ean, sf. Grain of salt. 21i Any 
3 (DC) Small potatoes— Uist. 


small matter. 
see crileag. 





salt. 





grains. 
grillus,(AF) (for griullus) s.m. see greollan. 
Zenn s.f. see griam. 2 see griom. 


NTERNET ARCHIVE 


526 









r 2 Good 
3 Disposition, temper, faculty. 4 


Of a good quality, genu- 
3 Very keen or indus- 

Ged tha e beag, tha 
e g., though he is small, he is “gritty "—Gair- 


[not The con- 


stellation ** Charles’ wain," which is ‘‘an 


ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in grains of 


achadh, -aidh, s.m. Breaking into small 





grivbacu 


grim-challair,** s.m. see griom-challair. "3 

tgrim-charbad, -aid, s.m. War-chariot. It 

grim-chliath, -chléithe, s.f. Hurdies used in sie- T 
es às coverts. 2 Penthouse. | 

grimeach, -eiehe, @ Grim, surly. 2 Rugged. 
3 Barren. 4t Thin-baired. 

grimeasach, -aiche, a. see grimeach.. 

grimeil, -e & -eala, @ Valiant. 2 Martiali, 
warlike. 3**Skilful. ` 

fgrimisgear, -eir, s.m. Pedlar. 

tgrin, sf. Piece, bit, morsel. | 

grin, -e, s.m. Gaelic spelling of green, plot of 
ground. 

grinean, s.m., dim. of grin. 

grinn, -e, a. Handsome, elegant, beautiful. 2 
Neat, clean, 3 Wellor neatly made, formed, 
or arranged. 4 Excellent, 5* Very kind. 6 
Very polite. 7**Artificial. 8**Workmanlike. 
9**Of an imposing appearance. 10**Pieasant. 
t1l**Serious, attentive, diligent, deliberate, 
profound. 12}+Fine in texture, as linen, &c. 
Duine g., & very kind person ; anart g., very 
fine linen ; na/s grinne, finer, politer ; do thaigh 
g., thy beauteous house. 

grinn, s. f. Piece, morsel, 2 Decency. f 3 dt 
Beard. f4 Garrison. EN 

grinn (gu), adv. Neatly, elegantly. 2 Serious- p 
ly. 3 Profoundly. 

grinne,* s.f. Girning expression of countenance. 

grinne, comp. of grinn. More or most fine. 2 TE 
Beautiful. 3 Neat. 

grinneach, -ich, -an, s.m. Pop, young spark. 2 dA 
TrStripling. | 

—adh, -aidh, s.m. Making neat, orna- Pu 

menting or finishing with elegance. 2 Dress- 

ing, decorating. 3**Decoration. 4**Striving, xd 

effort. 5fiPressing, squeezing. A’ g—, pr.pl. p 

of grinnich. | 

—as, -ais, s.m. Jemminess. | 

grinnead,;-id, s.m. Degree of neatness,,&c., see 
grinneas. 

igrinneadh, -idh, s.m. Dying, perishing. ` 

griuneal, -eil, s.m. Bottom of the sea, a river, 
ora well. 2 Gravel. 3**Channel. 4**Abyss. 
5**Pool. G. gaineimh, a bottom of sand ; lion 
air uchd a’ griuneil, a net on the bosom of the =$ 
pool ; cha ruiginn g. mo ghràidh, I would not 
torment my love. 

ach, -aiche, @ Deep, gulfy. 2 Gravel- 
ly, sabulous. 3 Calculous. 

-—__—_—-achd, s.f. Grittiness. 

tgrinneanachadh, see grinneachadh. 

grinneas, -is, s.m. Neatness, elegauce. 2 Gen- 
tility. 3* Kindness.  4*'Finery. 56**Deli- TEE 
cateness. Am bòidhchead 's an g., in beauty ` 
and elegance ; a thaobh grinneis, by reason . 
of delicateness ; cha bhi luathas is g., there 
cannot be expedition and neatness. 

ach, -aiche, 4. Neat, clean, elegant, 











M -m Ae e 
b » e > 
e ‘ Chen n Y cu Ki 
Ee e en 





fine. TANA 
grinneinich, see grinnich. 
-—te, see grinnichte. ` 
grinn-edlas, -ais, 8. mM. Erudition, 
knowledge. P 
grinnich, pr.pt. a’ grinneachadh, v.a. Polish, 
make neat, improve, finish, beautify, adorn. 
9**Dress. 3 rarely Gather. 4 Pierce. 
—te, past pt. of grinnich. Polished, finish- 
ed, ornamented. f 
grinn-obair,(Ms) s.f. Mechanics. 2 Mechanism. 
erinn-làmnachas, (MS) s.m. Mechanicalness. B 
griob, pr.pt. a’ griobadh, v.g. Nibble, as a fish — 
a hook. | 
griob, (DC) s.m. Coast precipice, part of 
grioba, 1 sea-coast where it is rocky and 
difficult to land — Uist. k 
griobach,| -aich, S.M. The itch. 





profound 








p 


griobadh 
&riobadh, -aidh, s.m. Nibbling, bite, act of nib- | 


bling. A’ g—, pr.pt. of griob. 
p: s.m., Pimple. 2(AF) Osprey. 3 (AF). 
Griffin. 


griobh, s.m. Gaelic spelling of grieve. 
griobhach, see griuthach. 


griobhachan, s., pl. of griobh. Overseers— Rob 


Donn. 

griobhachd, s.f. Office of a grieve. 

griobhag, -aig,-an, sf. Hurry, confusion. 
Timidity, [* gives Genteel hurry.] 

ach, -aiche, o Hurried, confused. 
Flurried. 3 Timorous. 4*Ina hurry-burry 
about trifles or nothing at all. 

griobharsgaich,* s.f. Rash of pimples through 
the skin. 2 Fucus conferve, see lianach. 

griobhlach, see griuthach. 

griobhrach, prov. for griuthach. 

xrioblas,** -ais, s.m. Closeness 

griocas,** Ais, s.m. Rumbling noise. 

grioch, -ich, -an, $.m.Consumptive or lean young 
deer. 

griochair, -e, -ean, s.m. Sickly,consumptive per: 
son. 2 Mean, miserly person. 

griochan,|| -ain, s.f. Consumption. [Preceded 
by the art. o gh—.] 

griodar, -air, s.m. Great noise. 

griofach,(MS) Kintyre for griuthach. 

griogach,** a. Pebbly 

griogag, aig, -an, sf [McL & D gives s.m.) 
Bead. 2 Pebble. 3 Crystal. Lewis, Loch- 
aber, e, 4* Small cheese— Islay. 

ach, -aiche, a. Of, or pertaining to, 
beads or pebbles.: 

tgriogchan, s.m. Constellation, 

—ach, a. Twinkling like stars, 
dazzling. 

Grioglachan, -ain, s.m. Pleiades [not the con- 
stellation called ‘* Charlies’ wain,” as given 
by some—that is ‘‘ an cranii-arain,’’ 

grioglachanach, -aiche, a. Gtittering like stars. 

griog-shüil, -shula, -shuilean, s.j. Little* round 
lively eye. h : 

——each, -eiche, a. Having small round 
lively eyes. 

T2Zriom, s.m. War, battle. 

grioma,(AF) s,f. Streaked cow. 

griomach, -aiche, a. see grimeach. 

griomacach, -aiche, o. Thin-haired, 


2 


9 


ad 











blazing, 





.griomagach, -aich, s.m. Shrivelled grass. 
.griomail, -e, a. 


see grimeacb. 

grioman,} -ain, s.m. Lungwort lichen, see crot- 
al-coille. 2 Malt bud or growth, 

griom-challair,** s, m. Herald, one who pro- 
claims war or peace. 

Tgriom-charbad, see grim-charbad. 

tgriomh,** s.m. Nail. 2 Talon. 3 Claw. 

griomh, see gniomh.. 

griomhach,** o Having claws or talons. 

griomhag,** -aig, s.f. Hurry, flurry. 
ity. Foighidneach 
timidity. 

griomh-shronach,** o, Hawk-nosed. 

tgriongal, -ail, s.m. Care, sorrow. 2 Assidu- 
ity. 3 Industry. 


gun gh., patient without 





siduous. 3 Industrious. 

—achd, s.f. Continued care orsorrow 2 
Assiduity. 

grionnal, see grinneal. 

grios, pr.pt. a' 
licit. 2 Abet, encourage, aid. 3**Adjure. 
rarely Provoke, whet. 5t Rake up a fire, 
Blaspheme. G. air, beseech him. 

grios, -a, s.f. Heat. 
swearing by God, Christ or any of the host of 
heaven. 





024 


2 Timid- ' 


| grith,** s.f. Knowledge. 
l= 


—ach,** o Anxious, sorrowful. 2 As:! 


2(AC) Profane swearing, | 


griüragan 


griosach, -aich, -aichean s.f. Burning embers, 
2 Hot battle. 3 Volley. 4** Fireside, 
Squall. Aghann grìosaich, a Jrying-pan ; 
'nuair a thigeadh i "ua grìosaich, when it (the 
wind) would come in squalls ; air a’ ghrios- 
aich, on thy embers; eadar a’ gh. 's an stairs. 
neach, between the fireside and the threshold. 

griosach,** a. Imploring, supplicating, (alse 
griosail.) 2(TS) Imprecating. 

(TS) -aichean, s.m. Adjuration. 
griosachadh, -aidh, s.m. Frying. 2 Stirring up, 
as of a fire. 3 Provocation. 4 Exilement. 
griosad, -aid, e m. Conjuration. 2 (MS) Re- 

quest, invocation, orisons. 
achd, s.f. Blasphemy. Ri g., blasphem- 








ing. 





air,* s.m. Blasphemer. 
griosadh, -aidh, s. m. Entreating, act of en- 
treating, beseeching, 


adjuration, solicitation. A’ g., pr.pt. cf grios, 


griosaich, v.g. Entreat. 2 Stir up the fire. 3 
Provoke. 4**Fry. 5**Grow hot. 6(TS) Im- 
precate. 

—te, past pt. of grìosaich. Fried. 2 





Kindled 

griosail, e œ. Supplicatory. 

griosair, s.m. Implorer. 2**Frying-pan. 

grios-naimhdeas, eis, s.m. Inveterate enmity. 

Tgrios-nàmhach, a. Inveterately hostile. 

griosta, past pt. of grìos. Stirred up, provoked. 
2 Beseeched, implored. 

tgrioth, s. Sun. 

grioth,* s.f. Gravel.pit. 2 Pebble. 

alach,* -aich, s.m. Gravel—Islay. ; 

gris, -e, s.f. Horror, shuddering. 2 Pimples 
produced on the skin by heat. 3 Redness. 4 
Fire. 5 The horrors, 6**Tremor. 7**T error. 
8** Cuticular inflammation. 9 Shiver. 10 
Prickly heat. 11* Perspiration or sweat pro- 
duced by the idea of horror. 12 Horrified ex- 
pression or appearance. G. fhuachd, a cold 
shiver ; thug e g. orm, he made me shudder. 

gris,** e a. Grey. 

gris-dhearg, -dheirge, o Red mixed with 
white. 2 Roan-coloured. % Ruddy. 4**Li- 
ard, colour formed by mixing red and grey. 
Gruaidh g., o ruddy cheek. 

grise, see créis. 

griseach,* o Shivering, fond of the fireside— 
North. 2 Patoy, oily. 

| —— ————(, s.f. Oiliness. 

grisean, s. m. One of a rabble 
worthless feilow !—Gairtoch. 

gns-fhionn, o Kind of brindled colour, mix- 
ture of black and white. 2 Grizzled. 3 Roan. 
4 Spotted. Breac agus g., spotted and griz- 





A gh! you 





zled. 
grisg,** v.g. Roast. 2 Fry. 3 Broil. 
ean, -ein, s.m. Roasted meat. 2 Boiled 
| meat. 


| grisich,(MS) v.a. Begrease, besmear. 

grisionn, d. see gris-fhionn. 

grisnich,(MS) v.a. Besmear. 

2 Learning. 3 Outcry, 
each, a. Knowing, learned, wise, discreet, 
-——eil,s.f. Grunting of young pigs. 





| griübhrach,(TS) Inverness for griuthach. 


yriugadan, -ain, see grigirean. 


i griuilleag,(DU) -eig, -an, s.f. Small potato, 2 


in, pl Dross of potatoes. 


grìosadh, v.g. Entreat, pray,so- | griullach, Harris for griuthach. 
EN 


|griullus, see greollan. 


6* | griun, s,m. Hedgehog, porcupine. 


griùrach, -aich, Skye, Uist, W. Isles, d. for 
| griuthach. 

|griüragan, -ain, s.m. Infinitely small parti- 
cle, mote. 2 Pustule on the skin. 


praying, supplicating, 


B 


griüraeanach 


griüraganach, -aiche, a. Full of small particles 
or pustules. 

griuthach,| -aich, s.f. Measles. [Preceded by 
the article a’ gh—,] Tha e 'sa gh., he has the 
measles. 

griuth-lamhach, a. Quick, expert, ready-hand- 
ed. Gu g., expertly. 

griuthrach, -aich, see griuthach. 

gròb, pr.pt. a’ gròbadh, v.a.Join by indentation. 
2 Serrate, groove. 3 Join or sew together 
awkwardly. 4 Dig with the hands, grub. 5 
(MS) Purse. 6ttrCobble. 

——, s. m. Channel or sewer of a cow-house. 
—Arran. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Serrated. 2 Indented. 3 
Wrinkled. 4 Joined by serration. 5** Dig- 
ging, grubbing. 

grobach, -aich, 8.m. Sea-ware, see propach. 

grobadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of joining by serration. 
2 Serrating. 3 Grooving. 4 Rebate in car- 
pentry. 
of gròb. 

—ag, -aig, -an, s.f. Poor shrivelled toothless 
woman. 2* Little tooth. 

grobais,§ s. The plants mallows—malve. 

groban, -ain, -an, s.m. see gnoban. 

groban, -ain, -an, s. m. Mugwort—artimisia 
vulgaris. 

grobhd,(CR) s. Chunk, thick piece. 
a chunk of bread —W. of Ross. 

gròc, pr. pt. a’ grocadh & a’ gròcail, v.a. & n. 
Croak. 2 Roar with a hoarse low voice. 3 
Frown on, frighten, threaten in order to 
frighten children. 4 (AH) Scold noisily and 
passionately. | 

grocadh, -aidh, s.m. Roaring, act of roaring. 2 

 Croaking. 3 Frowning. 4(AH) Scolding with 
noise and passion. A’ g—. pr.pt. of grog. 
gròcail, -e, s.f. & pr.pt. see grócadh. 

grod, -a & -oide, œ. Rotten, putrid. 2 Proud. 
3 Smart. 4(DC) Unreasonable, cross-temper- 
ed. Mar fhiodh g., like rotten wood ; ugh g., 
a rotten egg ; duine g., an ill-tempered man. 

grod, pr.pt. a’ grodadn, v.a. £ n. Become pu- 
trid, rot. 2 Cause to rot. 

Tgrod, -oid, s.m. Foam. 

grodachd,ff s.f.ind. Putridness. 

grodadh, -aidh, s.m. Rotting, state or act of 
rotting or becoming putrid. 

grodag, -aig, -an, s.f. Depraved woman. 

grodaidh, o. see grod. A 

grodair,* s.m. Putrid fish. 2 Stinking fellow. 

grodan,** -ain, s.m. Boat. __ 

grodh,** s.m. Lever. 2 Gaelic spelling of crow. 

grodh-iaruinn,** s.m. Iron crow. 

grodlach, -aich, s. f. Rotten tree. 2 Mass of 
rottenness. 

gródlan,(M3) s.m. Hum. 

eródlanadh, -aidh, s.m. Grunting, as a pig. 

grodlanaich, v.n. Grunt, as a pig. 

grog,** -oig, s.m. see gnog. 

Tgrog, -ojg, -an, s.m. see gruag. 

erogach,* -aiche, a see gnogach. 

erogag, s.f. dim, of grog. 

grogair, see ads | 

groganach, -aiche, «. Wrinkled, stunted, as 
heather. 

groibleach,** æ. Long-nailed. 2 Having talons. 

eroideal, -oidie & -oidleach, see greideal. 

groidheal,** -il, s.m. Coral. 

groidlean, s.m. Spirtle, pot-stick—Arran. 

groig, -e, s.f. Awkwardness. 2 Perverseness, 
3**Scrawl. 4(DU) Mess. Tha e 'na ghroig, 
it is a perfect mess. 

groig,** s. see gnoig. 

groiv,* v.a. Bungle, botch. 

groigean, -ein, -an, s.m. Awkward, unhandy 


G. arain, 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


5**Digging, grubbing. A’ g—, pr.pít | 





Wit SAR a cf AER 
CERN 


gruagach 


person. 2 Botcher, bungler, dabbler.. 
-—achd, s.j.ind. Awkwardness, unhand» 
ness, helplessness. | 
groigeil,. -e, a. 
groigeileachd, see groigeanachd. 
vroigeileas, see groigeanachd, 


groigeineachadh, -aidh, s.m:-& pr. pt. Gnarling. 


groigich,* v.a. Botch, bungle, dabble. 

vroilean,** -ein, s.m. Bilbo. 

gr illeach,** -eich, s.f. Coarse cloth. 

groilleach,(DMu) a. Muddy. "Tha 'n rathad glé 
gh,, the road is very muddy— Black Isle, 

groim, see greim. 

groimh, sf. Grin. 2 Visage. 3 Nickname for 
a person with a grinning countenance, 

grois, see gnois. 

groiseag, Blair Athole for groiseid. 

groiseanach,** o, see gnoiseanaeh (appx.) 

groiseid, -e, -ean, s.f. Gooseberry. 

— ————each, -eiche, a. Of, or relating to, goose~ 
berries, abounding in gooseberries. 


groisgeach,** eich, s.m. Droll, hare-devil. 


erollan, see greollan. 
grom,(CR) s. m. Minute shellfish that cover 
tidal rocks and stones—W. of Ross-shire.. 


'grómag,(CR) s.f. Small rock-fish that feeds on 


the grom—W. of Ross-shire. 2 Mixture of oat- 
meal and churned cream, 
W. of Ross-shire. 

gromag,** -aig, at, Prating girl. 

promos ee e, m. Small red variety of 
coral. 

gromhan, -ain, see gnomhan. 

fgron, -oin, sm. Stain, blot, blemish. 

gronnsal,** -ail, s.m. Grunt. 

grontaeh,** -aiche, œ. Corpulent, gross. 

eronustal,** -ail, s.m. see pronnasg. 1 

gropach,(MMeD) st Seaweed, light brown in 
colour, and used with **slaodach"' as food 
for cattle. 
shore as ‘‘ cìreanach.” 

gropadh,** -aidh, s.m. Gully, sewer.. 

eropais, see grobais. 

gros, -Ols, see gnos. 

grosach, see gnosach. 

erosadh, -aidh, s.m. Gross (twelve dozen.) 

grosaid, see groiseid. 

each, see groiseideach. 

grosair, see gnosair. 

grosaireachd, see gnosaireachd. 

erosanach, see gnosach. 

grósd, see gnosd, 





gróta, chan, s.m. Groat, silver coin value 4d. 


sterling. Is don’ am pàigheadh an g., & 
groat i$ but poor pay. 

grothach, -aich, see gnothach. 

erothal, -ail, s.m. Sand, gravel. 

erothalach, see grothlach. 

grothan,** -ain, s.m. Purring. 2 Moan, groan. 
3 Complaining. ; 

grothlach, -aich, s.m. Gravel-pit. ` 

— ——— — , -aiche, à. Gravelly. 

grotonaeh,** .aiche, @ Corpulent. 2 Heayy- 
breeched. prov. | 

eru,(AF) s.m. Greyhound. 

grü, See gnu. | 

eruadhach, -aich, -aichean, s.f. 

gruag, -aig, -an, s.f. Wig. 2 | 
especially of a female. 2 Anything resem: 
bling hair. 4 Lock of hair. 5**Woman. 6 
Wife. G.-bhréige, a wig. 


see gruaidh. 


gruagach, -aich, -aichean, s.f. Young woman, — 


maiden, virgin. 2 in derision, Man with long 
hair. 3 Bridesmaid. 4 ** Bridegroom's 
maid. 5** rarely, Chief of a place. 6 Sup- 


posed household goddess. "Ft s.m. Brownie. — 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOI 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGE 


Awkward, helpless, unhandy.. - 


3 Mixture of oate ` 
meal and whisky, with or without sugar.— ` 


It is not found so high up on the. - 


Hair of the head, ` ` 











gruagach 


8 Horizontal bar bearing supports of flyers 
of spinning-wheel. Ghràdhaich e a’ gh., he 
loved the virgin; na gruagaichean laghach, 
the pretty maidens ; cha ghruagaichean gu 
léir air am bi am falt féin, ald are not virgins 
who wear their own hair—of old, young wo- 
men in Gaeldom were wont to go bare-headed 
until after marriage or after child-bearing. 

——- ~, -aiche, a. Hairy, having much hair. 
2 Having ringlets. 2 Womanly. 

gruagag, -aig, -an, s.f., dim. of gruag. Little 
wir. 2 Small lock of hair. 

gruagair, -ean, s.m. Hair-dresser. 2*Wig-maker. 

gruag-Muire,$ s. Goldilocks, see follasgain. 


 gruaidh, -e, s. J. Cheek. 2 Countenance. 3 
Brow. 4 Edge of a furrow. 5 Profile. 6 


 grüan, see grùthan. 


froe, 


grug, -uig, s.f. 


Temple ofthe head. 7 Liver. Coslas a’ bhàis 
"ma gh. the likeness of death in his face; 
rughadh g., a blush. 

gruaidhean, n. pl. of gruaidh. 

* see grùthan. 

gruaidh-lagan,** -ain, s.m. Dimple on the cheek. 

gruaigean,$ -ain, s.n. Badderlocks, hen-ware— 
kind of sea-ware— Skye, *birses, see mircean. 

—— —— — -éisg,( DMyjs.m. Round tasselled ball 
between a tish’s stomach and entrails. 

— ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in seaweed. 

gruaim, -e, $. f. Gloom, surly look, 2 Sullen- 
ness, 3 Sadness, melancholy. 4 [ll-humour. 
5 Darkness. Fo dhoruinn ’s fo gh., in sor- 
row and gloom. 

gruaim-bheinn, -bheanntan, s.f. Dark hill. 2 
Gloomy mountain. O ghuallaibh nan g., 
from the shoulders of the gloomy mountains. 





gruaimean, -in, -an, s.m. Gloomy, sullen, mo- 


rose fellow. 2 Man with a frowning visage. 
3**Frown. 4**Glcom. 

gruaimean,** o Surly. 2 Frowning. 

gruama, @. see gruamach. 

gruamach, -aiche, ‘a. Sullen, gloomy, morose, 
surly. 2 Dark, sad, sorrowtul. 3 Gloomy, 
obscure, cloudy. Bu gh. an tuar, gloomy was 
their aspect. 

——, -aich, s.m. Forbidding face. 

wc, s.f.ind. Sullenness, gioominess, 
surliness, melancholy. 2 Sternness, grimuess, 
austerity. 3 Habit of frowning, continual 
frowning. 4 Cloudiness. 5* Unhappy temper. 

gruamadh, pr.pt, Darkening, as the evening. 

gruamag, -aig, -an, sf: Grim, frowning, morose 
woman. 

gruamaiche, comp. of gruamach. 

——, s.f. Gloominess, gloom. 2 Stern- 
ness. 3 Surliness. 4 Grumbling. 

gruaman, -ain, s.m. Gloomy sadness, dudgeon, 
melancholy, dejection. 2Slight frown.  3** 
Man who frowns. Na biodh oirbh g., let 
there be no frown upon you. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Vexed, dejected, sad, 

displeased. 











2* Deep moan 

gruanach, see gruthanach. 

grübban, see grùthan, 

s. Wrinkle. 

grùdair, -ean, s.m. Brewer,'mashman. 
tiller. 3 ftTavern-keeper, victualler. 
drinker, 

eachd, 
brewery. 
tillery, 

grug, -uige, 4. see gnug. 

| üi see gnüg. 

grügach, -aiche, d. see gnügach. 

P ach, S.f. see gnügag. 


2 Dis- 
4 Mean 





s. f. Employment of brewing, 
2 Employment of distilling, dis- 


' grugadan, (WC) s. m. The seven stars (Seven 


Sisters.) 
grügag, see gnügag. 


529 


grunndaich 


grugair, -ean, see gnugair. 

grùid, -e, sf. Lees, dregs, grounds, sediment, 
2** Malt. 

——each, a. Full of grains. 2 Malte 3 Full 
of dregs. 

gruidhear, -an, s.m. Overseer. 

grùig, -e, -ean, prov. for grug. 2 Churlishness, 
inhospitality. 3 Shrinking of the shoulders, 
as from cold, drooping attitude. 4(DU)Churl- 
ish look. Thag. aira’ bhoin, the cow has a pug- 
nacious look, 

gruivean -ein, see gnuigean. 

eruigeineach, -eiche, a. see gnüigeineach. 

gruigh, see gruth.  2* Dish of curds dressed 
with butter, &c. 

gruileag, see griuilleag. 

gruilleamach, -aiche, a. Prancing, leaping sud- 
denly. 

tgruin, -e,-ean, s.f. see gràineag, 

gruin,(AF) see griun. 

gruip, s. f. see gròb. 2 Gaelic spelling of grip. 

gruitheach, -eiche, see gruthach. 

gruitheam, -im, s.m. Curd-butter (that is, half 
butter and half curd finely mixed.) 2f+Crow- 
die. 3 *Curd-pie. 

gruithim, see gruitheam. 

gruitin,( AF) s. Salt, old or sour butter, 

grullagan,* ain, s.m. Circle, ring of people, 
2 see grioglachan. 

grullan, -ain, see greollan. 

grumach, @ see gruamach. 

grumadh, -aidh, s.m. Gaelic noun formed from 
Eng. groom. 

grumastal,(CR) Torridon for pronnasg. 

grümha,(DU) a. Sour-looking. 2 Churlisn. 

vramhan,(DU) s.m. Grunt, moan. 

Tgrunn, s.m. Crowd, group. 2see grunnd. G. 
dhaoine, a crowd of people ; lìontan ghrunna, 
ground nets, 

gruunachadh, -aidh, see grunndachadh. 

grunnadh, see grunnidadh, 

grunnaich, see grunndaich. 

——————-—e, see grunndaiche. 

——te, see grunndaichte. 

grunnail, œ. see grunndail. 

grunnal,** s.m. Bottom. 

grunnan, -ain, -an, s.m. Cluster, handful, 
group. 2 Little heap. 3 Hillock. 4 Parcel. 
5 Group of animals, 

grunnanach,tt a. Abounding in clusters, 

grunnanaich, pr. pt. a’ grunnanachadh, v. e 
Group, collect in groups. 

grunnas, see grunnasg. 

grunnasg, -aisg; -an, s.f. Groundsel, see buagha- 
jan. 2[rDregs, sediment, 

-———— ach, -aiche, a. Of, or abounding in, 
groundsel. 21i Full of dregs or sediment, 
drafty. 

grunnastal, prov for pronnasg. [In Gairloch 
this is the only form used—DU. ] 

grunnastan, Reay Co. for pronnasg. 

grunnd, -uinnd & a, an, sm. Ground, bottom, 
2 Base. 3tt Sense. 4 Thrift, carefulness, 
economy. 5 Decision of character. 6**The 
nether world. 7* Attention. G. an domhain, 
the bottom of the deep ; g. à chléibh, the bottom 
of his breast ; a chumhachdan dubha a 
ghruinnd, ye gloomy divinities of the nether 
world ; dean le g. e, do it carefully ; duine 
gun gh., a man without decision of character ; 
lamh a’ ghruinnd, @ thrifty person. 

grunndachadh, -aidh, s.m. Grounding. 3 Sound- 
ing, fathoming. Cord grunnachaidh, o sound- 
ing line. 

grunndadh,-aidh, s.m. Heaping up, gathering to 
gether, accumulation. 

grunndaich, pr.pt. a’ grunndachadh, v.a. Sound 





Original from 


Digitized by 


I INTERNET ARCHIVE 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


grunndaich 


the depth, fathom. 2(DC) Wade—Uist. Feuch 
an g. e, try ij the lead touches the bottom (of the 
water.) 

e x9 an, 
fishing-line. 

—te, past pt. of grunndaich. Sounded, 
measured, (of depth.) 

grunndail,-e, œ. Having a good foundation. 2 
Frugal, solid, economical. 


s.m. Sinker, weight for a 








and punctual. 4**Careful. 5**Sensible. Gu 
g., frugally. 
a — -fuar,(CR) a. Somewhat cold—W. of 
OSs. 

grunndalaehd, s.f.ind. Solidity, firmness. 2 
Carefulness, frugality. 3 Economies. A 
Sense. 5 Decisive character. 6 Attention 


to business. 7 Good management. 

gruundalas, ais, s.m. see gruandalachd, 

grunndas,** ais, s.m. Good management. 
Carefulness, frugality. 3 Dregs, lees. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in dregs, 
feculent. 

grunnd-lagh, s.m. Fundamental law. 

grunnd-luchd, s.m. Ballast. 

grunnd-luchdaiehn, v.a. Ballast, 

xrunonstal, Heimsdale for pronnasg. 

grunnstalach, a, Brimstony. 

gruusgal, -ail, s.m. Grunting, snarling, growl- 
lng, 
ing. 

gruth, -uith, s.m. Curds. Cho geal’s an g., as 
white as curds. 

ach, -aiche, o Curdled, abounding in 
curds. 2 Curdling, curd-produecing. 

grùthan, -ain, -an, s.m. The liver. 

ach,ti-aiche, Livered, belonging to the 
liver, heptic. 

gruth-im, s.m. see gruitheam. 

gu, prep. To, towards, Cuiridh mi litir chugad, 
4 will send a letter to you ; chuige is uaithe, 
to and fro ; gu fichead, to twenty. [Governs 
dative case.] Gu is generally omitted in Ar- 
gylishire when speaking of the cardinal 
points, as tha mi 'falbh an iar, [ am going (io 
the) west ; tha mi 'sealltainn deas, I am took- 
«ng toward the south ; but in Skye and the 
North the gu is generally inserted, as, tha 
mi dol gu deas, I am going to the south. In 
Gairloch, Lochalsh & Lochbroom they say “ a’ 
dol gu deas " and ‘“‘ gu tuath,” but ** à? dol an 
ear agusan iar (gu pronounced dho.) Gu in 
these cases is not good idiom ; gu implies 
reaching your destination, but you can never 
reach the N., S., E. or W. It may be men- 
tioned here, under gu, that a strange effect of 
the migrations from the south side of the 
Moray Firth is heard in a common English 
expression among the people of E. Ross gen- 
eraliy where they use such comieal phrases 
as, I am going west to the kitchen, I am going 
east to the room,—but the place indieated as 
east is often almost due north. [In certain 
districts of Perthshire all piaces are either 
east or west.] This disappearance of to in 
English when speaking of the cardinal points 
is worth noting. At first sight it appears as 
though the Gaelic idiom of the south had 
been translated into the English of the 
north, but the English idiom has really no 
connection with Gaelic. 

Gu is used locally in Suth’d in place of the 
usual æ before infinitives, as, gu àrach an an- 
ma, to nourish their souls. : 

G. seilg nan sliabh, to the mountain-chase ; 
g. crìch mo shaoghail, to my lifes end ; air 
dol gu neo-ni, gone to nothing ; gu là bràth, for | 


2 








ach, -aiche, a. Snarling, growling, grunt- 








Digitized | 


ULIT y 
AITE m 3 CT A Fa ds i / 
JTERNET ARCHIV 


530 


8 Very attentive | 


guaillfhionn 


ever ; blialhna gu leth, a year and a half. 
| Gu here does not mean to, but is a remnant 
of con, with, and is only found in a few sen- 
tences, as, ‘‘ bliadhna gu leth,” “ gu Mac’ Ie 
Alasdair 's Lochial."'] 

When gu comes before an adjectlve, the adj. 
is translated into English as an adverb, as, 
math, good, gu math, well ; buileach, effect- 
ual, gu buileach, effectually Armstrong says 
'** Gu has often a similar effect ona substan. 
tive, as, beachd, observation, gu beachd, clear- 
ly; dearbh, proof, gu dearbh, truly, indeed,” 


but both words are adjectives—'' gu beachd nm 


isan Irishism in the Psalms, “ beachd ” being 
an adjective in Irish. Chi thu chugad e, ’s 
chan fheàirrd thu agad e, you'll see it coming 
to you, and you'll be none the better when you 
have got it. 
gu, adv. Till, until. 
gu, con). That, to theend that. Used to signify 
a wish or idea, and implies that a sentence 
which is not expressed precedes the clause 
it introduces, (‘hae fior) gu’n tugadh crodh 
Chailein dhomh bainn’ air an raon, (tt is true) 
that Colin’s cattle would give me milk on the 
plain ; (is e mo mhiann-sa ) gu’n robh móran 
maith agad,(it is my wish) that you may have 
good--a way of returning thanks; (is e mo 
mhiann-sa) eum bu slàn a chi mi thu, (it is 
my wish) that I may see you well ! gu ma fada 
beò an righ! long live the king! slàn gu'n 
robh an Gaidheal gasda, may the gallant Celt 
be hale. Gu is used in poetry if the nomina- 
tive precedes the verb, and also to give great- 
er emphasis, as, fiamh aiteis àird, gu'n robh 
'na ghnùis, an appearance of exceeding joy was 
in his fuce ; nam bu duine eile gu’n deanadh, 
bu mhise gu’n dioladh, had another man done 
it, it’s I would avenge it. In'negative express- 


ions nach takes the place of gu, O ! (is truagh) 


nach robh mi oam chalman, OI (it is sad) 


that I were not a dove.—MacKay's Easy Ge — k | 


Syntax. 

tgu, s.m. Lie. 

guag, -aig, -an, s.m. Giddy, whimsical fellow, 
unsettled, capricious person. 2 Splay foot. 3 
(DC) Lameness. see cuag. Tha g. ann, he is 
lame. 

——-ach, -aiche, æ. Capricious, giddy, whimsi- 
cal. 2 see cuagach. 

guagair, see cuagaire. X 

guaid, pr.pt. a’ guaideil, v. see guait. 

guaideil, pr. pt. see guaiteil. 

guaigean, -ein, -an, s.m. Thick little round cake, 

3(DC) Short, stout man or boy—A rgyll. 

ach, -aiche, a. Thick, little and round. 

guail, gen.sing. of gual. 

guailisg,(AC) a. False, distorted, displaced, 
out-of-order morally, mentally or physically. 

guaille, gen.sing. of gualainn. j ^l 

guailleach, -ich, -ean, s. f. Cord tying the 
shoulders of the dead. 2* Shoulder-strap or 
chain of a horse, 3 pl. in the sense of Should- 
ers—-Arran. 


—an, -ain, -an, s.m. Woman's tunic. 2 
Companion. 3**Shoulder-piece. 4**Mantle. 
5(CR) Draught-chain of a cart. : 

guaillean, -an, s.m. Coal of fire, cinder. 2 pl. 
of gualann. : 
ach, -aiche, o. Full of cinders. 2 Like 
a cinder. É 
guaillear, -eir, -an, (gual) s.m. Collier. 
, -eir, (gualann) s.m. Comrade, chum. 
achd, s. f. Employment of a collier, 
colliery. 1 
guaillfhionn, -a,'@. White-shouldered. k 
en S.M., Name given to a cow with 


A 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 


RBANA-CHAMPAIK 


3M 





guailllfhionn 531 guarag-bhleothainn 


Cao Tat DUI Md hse an ESE TE 
white shoulders. gualadair, s.m. see gualair. 

guaillibh, dat.pl. of gualann. Clann nan Gàidh- ' gualadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of blackening with 
eal ann an [not ri, which is the Eng. iliom| coal. 2 State of burning into coals, 3 Tor- 
translated] guaillibh a chéile, children of| turing, torture, greatest pain, tormenting. 4 





the Gael shoulder to shoulder. (DU) Act of coaling. <A’ g—, pr.pt. of gual. 
guaillich, v.a. Go hand in hand and shoulder to} Mo chridhe 'ga gh. 's ’ga losgadh, my heart 
" shoulder. 2 Accompany. 3**Elbow. being tortured and burnt. 
guailliche,** s.m. Colleague. gualag, -aig, -an, s.f. dim. of gualann, Little 
guaillinneach, see guailleach. shoulder. 
guaillionn, see guaillfhionn. gualaich, v.g. Tuck, 2 Blacken as with coal, 
guailineach, -eiche, a. Shouldered. 3 Burn to cinders, calcine, carbonize, char. 
guaillnean, n.pl. of gualann. -— — —-Ve, past pt. Burnt to à ciuder, carbon- 

—, s.m, Cinder. ized. 

guailneanan, s.pl. Traces of a carriage, &e. gualair, see g"aillear. 


guaim,* s. f. Econoiny, attention to minute | gualann, -ainn & -ua/lne, pl. -uailnean & -uaill- 
articles of gain, prudence, good management, | ean, dat. pl, guaillibh, s.f. Shoulder. 2 El- 
‘thrift. Cha’n "eil móran g. innte, sheis not ol bow or corner of a mountain. 3 Bend of a 











good manager. ship’s bow. 4 Crank of a cycle. 5 Corner, 
eas, -is, s.m. Quietness. 2 Comfort. 3**| angle. 6 Ara, 7* Stamina, Soitheach ait æ 
Neatness. gualainn, a vessel on her shoulder; g. deas an 
easach, -aiche, æ. Quiet. 2 Comfortable. taighe, the right corner of the house; crios 
snug. 3 Neat. Gug., neatly. guailne, a shoulder-belt ; is lag g. gun bhratn- 
guain,* s.f. see guaineas. air an am do na fir teachd an làthair, weak ts 
guaineag, -cig, -an, $.f. Minx. shoulder without brother,when men are meeting 
guaineas, -is, s.m. Liveliness, briskness, giddi-| one another. 
ness. 2 Affectedness, 3 Buxomness.  4|gualbhran,** -ain, s.m. Firebrand, 
Colt/s tooth. gual-fhionn, d. see guail'fhionn. 
E ach, -aiche, a Brisk, lively, giddy, | gual-fhiodha, s.m. Charcoal. 
sportive. 2 Affected. guallach, see guailleach. 
guaineileas, -eis, s.m, Sporting, frisking, rest- | guallaich, s.pl. Shoulders—Arran, 
lessness, frolicking. euallann, see gualann. 
guaineis,(MS) s.f. Levity. see guaineas. guamach, -aiche, a. Thick, plentiful. 2 Smirk- 
guairdean,t s.m. Vertigo. ~ ing. 3 Careful, exact. 4 Nodding, waving. 
¢guaire, s.f. Hair of the head. 2 Point of any- | 5*Neat, snug. 6**Well-formed. 7**Pleasant. 
thing. 3 Bristle. 4 Roughness, &CR) Managing, thrifty —Arran. 91 Plenti- 
tguaire, a. Noble. ful Beulg., a smirking mouth ; fàsach g., @ 


guairne,* s.f. Unshapely, unmannerly woman. | pleasant moor. 
ach, -eiche, d. Spherical. d, s.f.ind. Trimness. 2 Economy. 
guairne-mu-ghuairn, 8. Quill-pith, see guirne- | guamag, -aig, -an, $.f. Neat, tidy woman. 2** 











mu-ghiüirn. Smirking girl. 
guairsgeach, -eiche, a. Hairy. 2 Curled, in —ach, a, Neat, trim, tidy. 2 Smirking, 
rings or ringlets. 3 Bristly. ı asa female. 
guairtean, see cuairtean. guamaiche, comp. of guamach. 
 Teuais, s. Danger, hazard. 2 Enterprise, ven- -—ad, -eid, s. m. Neatness, degree of 





ture. 3 Fatigue. neatness. A’ dol an g., getting neater and 
guais-bheart, -eirt,s.m. Enterprise, adventure, | neater. 

dangerous enterprise, hazardous attempt. 2|guamaiseach, a. see guaimeasach. 

Feat. guaman, -ain, s.m. Cheek. 
guais-bheartach, -aiche, a. Enterprising, ad- guamnach, -aich, s.m. Lamentation, 
venturous, daring, fool-hardy, hazardous. Gu | guan, -ain, s.m. Fool. 


goimh-chrilheach, g., keenly and daringly. guanach, -aiche, a. Light, giddy, fickle,affect- 





guaiseach, -eiche, a. Dangerous. edly apish, light-headed. 2 Active. 3 Un- 
—d, s.f. see guais. steady, nodding, wavering. Maoisleach a’ 
guaismhoire, comp. of guaismhor. chinn ghuanaich, the light-headed roe ; air a’ 
guaismhor, -oire, a. Dangerous, hazardous, cri-| chreig ghuanaich, on the nodding rock. 
tical. 2 Enterprising, daring, fool-hardy. guanachas,(MS) ais, s.m. Airiness. 


guait,f pr. pt. a’ guaiteil, v.g. Leave off, let a- guanachd, s.f.ind. Giddiness, 
lone, quit, desist. Used principally, if not|guanadh, -aidh, s.m. Lightness, unsteadiness, 





solely in Gabh no g. e, take or leave it. giddiness. 
— eal, -eil, s.m. Desistance. guanag, -aig, -an, s.f. Light coquettish girl. 2 
eil, (a) pr.pt. of guait. Letting alone. 2| (MS) Prude. [ ** gives ‘‘guamag’’ fer a 
Refusing Arran. smirking girl. ] 


gual, -ail, s.m. Coal. 2 Coal-fire. 3 (AC)Grief,|guanais, s.f. Lightness, unsteadiness, giddi- 
consuming by grief as by fire. Deagh theine| ness. Air son bhi guanais feadh nan caol, 
guail, a good coal-fire ; toll-guail, a coal-pit ;| for gadding about or for pleasure-sa4ling among 
.fairge, sea-coal; g.-ceardach, smtthy-coal. the kyles ; air beagan staid no g., with but lit- 
àmh dheas a dheanadh an gniomh''s nach) tle affectedness or CO o 
bu tais a shéideadh an g., a right hand for| - each, a. Light, active. 2 Light-headed. 
action and, able persistently to blow the fire. 3 Unsteady, nodding, wavering. G. og, light- 
gual,* v.a. Gall, pain intensely. headed and young. 
gual, pr.pt. a’ gualadh, v.a. & n. Blacken with | - eachd, s,f. Lightness, activity. 2 Light- 
coal. 2 Burn to coal. 3 Become coal. headedness. 3 Unsteadiness. 
guala, see gualann. dr MW guanalas,* -ais, s.m. Giddiness, unsteadiness. 
ch, -aiche, @. Abounding in coal, coaly.| 2 Light-headedness. 3 Wavering. 4 Strolling. 

















2 Like coal. [* gives nom. as -als.] 
chan, -ain, s.m. Stout young fellow. guarag,(AF) s.f. Name of a cow. 
chadh,(MS) s.m, Calcination. ——-— -bhleothainn, s.f. Milch-cow. 
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF ILLINO 
INTERNET ARCHIVE URBANA-CHAMPAIC 


guas 

fguas, -ais, s.m. Danger, jeopardy. 

t——ach, a. Hazardous. 

t——achd, s.f. Danger, jeopardy. 2 Perilous 
situation. 3 Perilous adventure. 

guasachdach, -aiche, a. Dangerous, dreadful, 
painful. 2 Perilous, hazardous, forlorn. 3 
Enterprising. It is used in the last sense in 
old medical MSS. 

gubarnach,(AF) s.m. Devil-fish, angler. 
Cuttle-tish —A rgyll. 

-— -meurach,(AF) s.m. Octopus. 2(DC) 
Cuttle-fish — A ryyll. 

gu beachd, adv. Truly. 

gu beagnaich,(DC) adv Almost, nearly —U ist, 

tsubha, s. Lamentation. 2 Battle, conflict, 

tgubhach, -aiche, a. Mournful, sorrowful, 

gubhannach, -aiche, o Slanderous. 

tgubhb, -a, -an, s. m. Study. 2 Schoolhouse. 
3 Armoury. 

t ach, -aiche, a. Studious, assiduous. 

gu brath, adv. For ever, ever (future time only.) 

gu buileach, adv. Altogether, quite. 

guc, -an, s. m. Bell, bubble, drop. 2 Germ. 
3 Sprout, bud. 4 Corolla of any flower. 5 
Bumper. 6 Acrospire. 7 Bell-flower.  8** 
Flower of any leguminous vegetable, 9(DU) 
Egg-shell| 10 Cyst. 11(DU) Bead on whisky. 
Barr-gue, the fiower of any leguminous vegeta- 
ble, as peas ; g. uighe, an empty egg-shell. 

gucag, -aig, -an, dim. of guc. 

ach, -aiche, o Bearing bells, bubbles or 
drops. 2 Clustering, sprouting. 3 Full of 
buds. 4 Curling, as a wave. 5 Blooming, 
flowery, in flower, as a leguminous vegetable. 
Mar thonn g., as a curling billow. 

gucagaich,(M5) v.a. Plower. 

gucan, s.m. FE lowret, 

achd. s.f.ind. Floweriness. 

gu cruinn, adv. About. 

gùda, -n & -chan, s.m. Gudgeon (fish.) 

gudabochd, s. Woodcock. 

guda-leum,tt sr Bound, wild leap—Argyll. 

gu dé? Form of ciode? [The old neuter in- 
terrogative pronoun still surviving. ] 

gu dearbh, adv. Iudeed. [Pronounced gu 
dearra-hoo in Ross-shire and some other parts 
of the North—probably a corruption cf ‘ gu 
dearbh fhéin.''] 

gu dilinn, adv. For ever. 
only.) 

Tgufarghoill, s,f. False testimony. 

gug, see gog. : 

guga, -n & -chan, s.m. Solan goose, see sulaire. 
2 Young of the solan goose— Lewis. 3 Fat, 
clumsy fellow. 4(DMy) Gannet, young of the 
solan goose. 

gugachan, pl. of guga. 

gugail, see gogail. [tf gives '* cackling of so- 
lan geese,''] 

gugaill,(CR) s.f. Crouching or sitting dowu on 
tne heels— W. of Ross-shire. Scots, corrie-hun- 
kers. 

gugaille, -an, s.m. Silly, slovenly person. 

gusairneach,tt -aich, s.m. Fledgling bird. 

gùgan, s.m. Daisy—Arran. 

gugan, -ain, -an, s.m. Bud. 2 Flower. 

-———ach, a. Budding, flowering. 2 Abounding 
in buds, flowers or daisies. 

gugarnaich, prov. for gu-ail. 

gugurlach, -2ich, s.m. Lumpish corpulent man, 
dc 2(AF)Useless bird. 

gugurla-fuich,tf s.m. Certain vile trick. 

gu h-àraidh, adv. Above all. 

gu h-àrd, adv. Above, aloud. 

gu h-iosal, adv. Below. 

gu h-osgarra, adv. Aloud. 

guibean, -in, -an, s.m., dim. of gob. 

















[Used in negative 


Digitized by 


INTER NET ARCHIVE 


55g 





2(DC) | 


gtimean 


guidh, pr.pt a’ guidhe, v.a. & n. 
beseech, wish earnestly, 2 Impreeate. G, 
mallachd air, imprecate a, curse on him, 

guidhe, -achan, s.m. [ f. in Badenoch, Gairloch, 
Lochbroom, de, Common in the latter in pl, 
meaniug Swearing.] Wish, act of wishing. 
2 Geseeching, praying, prayer. 3 Curse, im- 
precation.  4**Intercession. 
of guidh. Droeh gh., an imprecation ; ai g. 
slàn leis, wisking him well at parting 





Pray, entreat, 


guidheach, a. Prone to beseech, 2 Imploring. 1 


Sealladh g., an imploring look. 
—air, s.m. Supplicant,petitioner, swear- 





er, 





: —an, -ain, s.m. Earnest prayer,petition, 

imprecation. : 

—an, s.pl. Imprecations, oaths, curses,’ 

guidheadh, -idh, x Ban chie. 2 Impreca- 
ting. 3 Obsecration. 

ni Ist. sing. imp. of guidh, Let me be 
seech. 

guidhear,** s.j. Asker. 

guidhidinn,* s.f. see guidhe. Tha mi a' cur 
mar gh. ort, I entreat you most earnestly. 

guidhim, (for guidhidh mi) I shall beseech. 

guidseal, s. Gaelic speling of cudgel. 





guil, pr. pt. a’ gul, v.n. Weep, cry, lament. 2. 


Wail, mourn. Ait’ anns an guileadh e, @ 
place where he might weep. 

guilbearnach, -aich, see guilbneach. 

guilbion, see guilbneach. 

guubinneach, (AF) e, m. Whimbrel, see eun 
Bealltainn. 

guilbneach, -ich, s.m. Curlew—numenius ar- 
quata. Coire 's am bidh guilbnich, a corrie or 
gorge where curlews are found. : 





guileach, 


see gulach. 
guileag, -ig, -an, s.f. 
warbling, chirping. 8 Shout of joy, exulta- 


Swan's note. 2 Singing, 
tion. 4(AF) see guilleag. [Shaw has 1 
chattering of birds. ] See Lee mi 
posed to resemble the swan's note. 6 (DC) 
Wailing. 

— ———a8, aig, -an, $.f., dim. of guileag, 1&2, 
2 v. see Moladh Mórag. 

guil-ghearan,ff-ain, s.m. Bitter lamentation. 

tguilimne, s.f. Calumny, reproach. 

guilimneach, æ. Calumnious, reproachful. Gu 
g., calumniously. 

guilımnich, v.n. Calumniate, reproach. 

guiileag,(AF) s.f. Leech. 

— — — -chapuill (AF) s.f. Horse-leech. 

— — —- -nan-each, s.f. Horse-leech. 

guilneach, -ich, see guilbneach. 

guim,(CH) s.m. Artifice, trick, plot—Skye. 2 
(AC) Conspiraty, revolt, rebellion. Tha iad a’ 
deanamh g. an aghaidh a’ mhaoir, they are 
hatching a conspiracy against the ground-officer.s 

Tguimean, -ein, sem. Holy relic. 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOISE 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGBNE 


A’ g—, pr. pt. 





| e = wt IE 
at o mere o * 
E - 
ves e a NM E, E Gg 


wg? 


e e € SI £ - 


ort 


HS 


- 
> m3 


Y 





* 


MEE ilL ll d 


ruin 

guin, -ean, s.m. Pain, momentary pain, sting, 
sharp pain, pang. 2 Arrow, dart. 3 Sharp 

oint. 4 Wound. 5 Fiercen ss. 6**Lrou- 
le, 7**Barb. 8 (DO) s.f. Shoemaker’s awl. 

G. gheur, a sharp awl; g. na ré, the falling 
Sickness; g. sa:ghde, barb of an arrow. 

guin, œ. Stinging. i) 

guin, pr.pt. a’ guineadh, po, see gon. Sùil 
mheallach a ghuin mi, anenticing eye that 
wounded me. 

Tguin, -e, sf. Woman. 

guin-chridheach, a. Ardent, keen. 
bheartach, keen and daring. 

guin-cheap, -chip, -cheapaichean, s.m. Pillory. 

guineach, -eiche, a. Sharp-pointed. 2 Keen, 
eager. 3 Bitterly malicious. 4 Wounding. 
5 Lancinaring, causing sudden pain,  6** 
Like a dart. 7* Venomous. 8*Fierce, acute, 

, eich, s.f. Arrow, dart. 2**Weapon. 

as, -a1S, S.M. Sharpness. 

guineadachd, s.f.ind. Fierceness, 

guineas,jf-ais, s.m. Violence of a malady, 
acuteness, 

guiniche, comp. of guineach. 

guinideach, -eiche, a. Ready to gore or thrust, 
asa bull. 

guinideachd,tt s.f.imd. see guineadachd, 

guinneir,** s.f. Epilepsy. 

tguinnire, see guinneir. 

guin-scead,** s.m. Scar. 

——an, -ain, s.m. Little scar. 

guinte, see gointe. j 

guinteach, -eiche, a. Having gowns. 2 Dressed 
in gowns. 

guintean, n.pl. of gin. 

guir, a. Broody, (as a bird.) 

guir, gen. sing. of gur. 

guir, pr.pt. a’ gur, v.n. Lie or sit upon eggs, as 
a bird, hatch, brood. 2 Fester. 3* Watch 
strictly. 4 Clock, call or cluck, as a hen. 

Ee v.a. Exulcerate, break out into pim- 
ples. 





G., guais- 














—eadh, -idh, s.m. Exulceration, break- 
ing out in pimples. 


guirean, -ein, -an, s.m. Pimple, spot, blain, 


pustule. 2 Scab. 3 in derision, Sickly look- 
ing person, 4 (AF) Eggs of the moth. 5* 
Bladder. Atadh no g., a swelling er scab. 


guireineach, -eiche, a. Full of spots, blains, 
pimples or pustules. 2 Scabbed, pustulous. 

guirm, see gorm. 

guirme, comp. of gorm, 
green, 

guirme, s.f.ind. Blueness. 2 Greenness. t3 Inn. 
G. cneidh, the blueness of a wound. 

achd, s.f. see guirmead. 

ad, -id, s.m.ind. Degree of blueness or 
greenness. A’dol an g., getting greener or 
bluer. 

guirmean, -ein, s.m. Indigo, dark-blue dye. 2 
Washing-blue. 3 Dyer’s woad—isatis tinctoria. 

—ach, -aiche, @, Abounding in indigo 
or woad. 
————aich,* v.a. Tinge with blue, as linen. 

guirminn, see guirmean. 

| ich, see guirmeanaich, 

guirnead, -eid, s.m. Gurnard. 

guirneal,(AH) s.m. Guest who outstays his wel- 

. come, and sits stolidly ip. à position where he 
is in everyone's Way. 

guirnean,(AF) s.m. Brent goose, 

-—ach,(AC) a. Giobular. 


More or most blue or 

















(guis, s.f. Leak. 


———, V.n. Gaelic spelling of gush. 

guisdean,(AF) s.m. Gaelic spelliug of gudgeon. 

guiseach, a. Leaky, full of chinks, not air-tight 
or water-tight, 


Digitized by | 


IKITERRIET AR HIV 
| bi | P k | i L iA LT - M 


533 


gun 

guisead, -eid, -an, see guiseid, 

gulseag, see cuiseag. 

-rainich, s.f. Bracken— Arran. 

guisean, $.m. Bracken—Arran. 

gulsear, -eir, sm. Stocking. 

guiseid, s.f. Gusset, as of a shirt. 
stocking. 

each,ft a. Having gussets. 

guit, -e, -eachan, s.f. Corn-fan, winnowing-fan, 
made of sheep-skin stretched on a hoop, some- 
what resembling the head ofa drum. 2(AH) 
Ash-sbovel without a kandle, made of sheep- 
skin stretched over a wooden hoop. 3 (CR) 
Small corn-basket—W. Ross-shire, 

guit-dhruma, e Tambourine. 

guiteach, -eiche, a. Abounding in, or relating 
to, corn-fans. 

guiteachan, n.pl. of guit. 

guiteadh, -idh, s.m. Winnowing, act of winnow- 
ing. 

guiteag, -eig, -an, s.7. Little corn-fan, 

guiteanach, æ. Bashful, timid. 

guitear, -ir, -an, s.m. Gutter, conduit, sewer, 
kennel. 2 Sink, drain. : 

ach, -aiche, œ. Abounding in gutters or 
sewers. 

guiteas, -eis, s.m. Denial, refusal. 

guiteirich, v.a. Drain, as a field. 2 Make sew- 
ers or drains. 

—e, s.m. Drainer, ditch-maker. 

— ———-—te, past.pt. Drained, having sewers. 

guitich,ttpr.pt. a guiteachadh, v.a. Winnow, 
. fan, 

teuitineach, -eiche, a. Bashful. 

guitseal,** s. see guidseal. 

gul, -uil, s.m. Weeping, crying, act of weeping. 

A’ g—, pr.pt. of guil. Am gu g., a tune to 


ween. 

gu labhradh,** adv. Aloud. 

gulach, -aiche, a. Lameniing, tearful. 
gulanach, -aiche, œ. Weeping, crying. 2 Noisy. 
Tguiba, sm. Mouth. 








2 Clock of a 








gulbanach, s.m. prov. for guilbneach. 


gul-chaoin, s.m. Lamentation. 

gul-dheur, -dheoir, 3.m. Tear. 

gu léir, adv. Altogether, completely. Chuir 
seo iongnadh guledir air a’ chuideachd gu 
léir, this made the entire company greatly as 
tonished. . 

gu ledir, adv. Enough. 

Tgulfa, a. Narrow. 

gulfhart, see ulfhart. 

—aich, see ulfhartaich. 

gul-ghàir, s.f. Loud lamentation. 

-—each, a Weeping aloud. 

gul-ghearan, -ain, ëm. Bitter lamentation: 

gulm, -uilm, s.m. see glum. 

vulmach, -aiche, a see glumach. 

gulmag,(AE)s.f. Sea-lark. 

gu'm, conj. That, in-order-that. [Used instead 
ofgu'n, before b, f, m or ol Gu'm faigh e e, 
that he will get it. 

gu ’m(gu+.2m) To their, to the. Gu’m bat, 
Lean a ghiacadh, to take their towns; gu 'm 
fearana a sgriosadh, te lay waste the lanil.. 

gu minig, adv. Often, frequently. 

gun, prep. Without. G. amharus, without 
doubt ; g. fhios, without knowledge, 2 unwit- 
tingly, unconsciously, 3 privately, clandestine- 
ly; ; g. eòlas, ignorant; g. fhios ciod a ni 
mi, not knowing what 1 shall do; is truagh 
g. thu agam ! alas that Iam without thee ! g. 








fhios domh, without my knowledge ; gun fhios: 


nach fhaic e thu, in case he may see you. [As- 
pirates consonant following, except d, n, t,.as, 
gun cheann, without head. 

gun, conj. That, in-order-that, 2 Till, until, 


Original fram 


r. SN 
y LIF 


UNIVERS 


T ak =| 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


LINOIS 


$E 


di 
Li 
i 


vun 


[When gu’n is followed by the past tense of 
verbs. do is sometimes erroneously elided.] 
Gwn robh math agad ! thank you ! 

gu 'n, (gu an) To their, to the. 

gun, -üin, pl. -achan, güntaichean & güintean, 
s.m. Gown. G.-oidhche, a night-gown. 

gun, -uin, s.m. Breach. 

günach, -aiche, @ see gùinteach. 

an,tt s.m. Little gown. 

gunaideach, -aiche, @. see guinideach. 2 
Wicked, vicious. 3 Apt to thrust, as a bull. 

nl, s.f.ind. Viciousness. 

günan, -ain, -an, s.m. Little gown. 

gunbhuine, s.f. Dart, javelin. 

gun chaird, adv. Speedily. 2 Ineessantly. 

gun cheist, adv, Without doubt. 

eunlaun, see gunnlann. 

gunn, -uinn, s.m. Prisoner, hostage. 

gunna, pl. chan & -ichean, Ss. m. £ f. Gun, 
musket. 2 Cannon. Glacag, trigger of à gun. 

-barraich, see gunna-sgailo. 

—— — -bhiodaig, -aig, sm. Gun on which to fix 
a bayonet. 2 Bayonet. 

-caol, s.m. Fowling-piece. 

gunnach, -aiche, a. Of, op belonging to, guns 
2 Armed with a gun. G., dagach, armed with 
gun and pistol. 

-—an, -ain, s. m., dim. of gunna, Little 

gun. 


e tum 

















an-sputachain,§ s.m. Cow-parsnip, see 
odharan. 

-—— ———— -mora,tt s.pl. Artillery. 

gunnadair,-ean, see gunnair. 

gunna-diollaid, s.m. Holster-pistol. 

-dübailt, s.m. Double-varrelled gun. 

-froise, s.m. shot-gun as distinct from a 








rifle. 

— — .gaoithe, s.m. Air-gun. 

glaice, s.m. Fowling-piece, shot-gun. 

gunnair, -eav, $s. m. Gunner. 2 Musketeer, 
rifleman. 3 Marksman. 

eachd, s.f.ind. Gunnery. 2 Cannona- 

ding, firing of guns. 3 Shooting. 4 Shooting- 
match. 

ich, v.a. Cannonade. 

gunna-marcaich, s.m. Carbine. 

gunna-mór, s.n. Cannon. 

gunna-peilear, s.m. Rife. 

gunnars, (CR) s.m. Whius, gorse—Farr d W. of 
Ross, & Suth'd. 

gunnas,(CR) s.m. Whins, gorse—Black Isle. 

gunna-sgailc, s.n. Pop-gun, a.r-gun. 

gunna-Spàinndeach, s.m. Long musket. 

gunna-spüb, s.m. Syringe, squirt—Arran. 

— — ——-—ain, s.m. Syringe—Argyll, 

gunna-steallair, s.m. Syringe—Arran. 

gunn’ athair, s.m. Air-gun. 

gunn-bhuine, see gun-bhuine. 

gunn'-eunaich, s.m. Fowling-piece. 

gunulann, -ainn,s.;n. Prison. 2 Pound for cattle. 

guunraich,** sm. Artilleryman. 

eege DË y.a. Cannonade. 

gunnraidh,** s.f. Artillery. 

jgunragach,** a. Straying. 2 Apt to wander 
or go astray. 

tgnnragadh,** -aidh, s.m. Straying, wandering. 

gun-spütachan, see gunna-sput. | 

guu stad,(CR) adv. immediately —Arran. 

fgunta, sun. Man of experience. 2 skilful man. 
3 Prying man. 

Jgunta, «a. Wounded. 2 Pained. 3 Prepared, 
4 Shiiful. 

——1),** -aich, s.f. Costiveness. 

gun taing, In defiance of. Gun taing dhuit, 
in Spite of you. 

tour, a. Sharp. 2 Gallant. 








D 


ho) ol | oe * ms = LJ 
A rr d e Là HI | H Ld 
= 1 — (e Kä N 


534 
Air chor 's gu'n dean se e, that he may do it. | gur, -uir, 


gus 

s.m. Brood of birds, hatch, incuba- 
tion. 2 Festering, matter of a fester. 3 
+Blotch, wheal. t4 Man, 5 Cover. 6 Pimple. 
A’ g—, pr.pt. of guir. Mar chearc a ni g., 
asa hen that hatcheth ; de 'n ghur rìoghail, of 
the royal race. 

gur, v.n. See guir. 

four, (aig--bhur) At your. 'Gur bualadh, strik- 
ing you (lit, at your striking.) 

gur, conj. That. Thubhairt e gur math e, he 
said that it was good. 

gur, Or not. [Used with is only.] 

gur, Ach gur, until. 

eu’r, (gu+ar) Toour. Gu'r dùthaich a mhill- 
eadh, to destroy our country. 

gu, (gu+bhur) To your. Gu'r sgriosadh, to des- 
troy you. 

guraban, -ain, see gurraban. 

vurach,(M3) @ Broody. 

guradan,* see gurraban. 

Tzuradü, -aidh, s.m. ;Hatching. A’ g—, pr. pt. 
of guir. d 

guragag, T s.f. Ring-dove, wood pigeon, see cale 
man fiadhaich. 

guraiceach, -ich, 

+gur-chliathach, -aich, s.m. 

gurd, s.m. Gourd. 

gur-le-güg,** s.m. Hatch-with-song. This name ` 
has been given to the kind of cooing uttered — ` 
during hatching-time by the small sea-fowls ` 
called Mother Cary's chickens, see luchaidh- ` 
fairge. 2(AF) Stormy petrel. 

tgurua, -aidh, s.m. Den, cave, place of conceal- 
ment. fe a 

gurpan,f -ain, sm. Crupper. 

gurraban, -ain, s.m. Crouching, posture of 
crouching, vm hunkering.” 2(AH) Tall, slen- | 
column of rock often found on foreshores and 
elsewhere, monolith. G. beag caillich, a 
crouching little woman. 

gurracag, -aig, -an, S.f. Shock of corn peculiar- 
ly constructed. In Skye, when weather is un. 
certain, the sheaves of corn are temporarily 
built up into a circular stack-like heap, over- | 
lapping each other like slates on a house, to ` 
cast off the rain, about three score Sheaves 
being placed in each heap—DC. 2tfGurgle. 3 
TrEroth bells. 4 Blot—Argyll. i 

ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in shocks of 
of corn. | 

gurrach, -aich, see gurraiceach. 2+¢ One ma ` 
crouching posture, 3 ‘‘ Hunkering.” 

eurradan, see gurraban. 

gurraiceach,(MS) a. Hairbrained, queer. 

Ze ich, s.m. Bloekhead. 2 Big, awk- | 

3(AF) Unfiedged bird. 4 Dot- 





see gurraiceach. = 
Palisade. > 





ward fellow. 


terel. | 
gurraiceideach, s.m. Dotterel. | 
gurraiceil, -e, a. Foolish, stupid. 4 


gurraidh, see gurraban. Scots, coorie. A 

gurran, -ain, s.m. Grunting. 2 Lowing. 3 Beb . 
lowing. d 

gurt, -a, & guirt, s.m. Fierceness, sternness of 
look. 2 Pain, trouble, twinge of pain. 

,** a. Fierce. 2 Terrible. 

—ach, -aiche, a Fierce, cross, angry, in 
temper. 

gu ruig, prep. Until, as far as. si 

gus, adv. Until, so. G. an till iad, until they re- — — 
turn ; v. am faic mi tha, til. [ see you; g. am 

bi mi, tiil L be ; g. an àm seo an ath bhliadh- | 

na, till ihis time next year ; seachduin g. an 3 

4 





bad 


dé, yesterday se’ennight ; ach gus, until. x 
gus, prep. 'To, unto, as far as. 2 So that, in- - 
ordċr-tùat. G. nach cluinnt’ e, so that he could 
not be heard ; g. a seo, as far as this ; g. 
nach tizeadh e staigh, so that he could noe 





al from 


UNIVERSITY OF IELINOISTN 
URBANA-CHAMPAIG Ma 


Oria 


- —— 


gus 
mum Ce Tm uns ge in Hao ipt TU 
come in ; g. am b’ fhearr dhomh, so that «t 
ecas beiter for me. Gus=or mot, not used 
with is, as, ge b’ e théid gus nacn téid, who- 
ever goes or does not yo. | Governs nom. case ina 
definite noun, but dat, in an indefiuite noun.) 
G. a’ chlach, to the stone, 
igus, -uis, s.m. Weigüt. 2 Force, 3 Death. 
4 Anger. 5 Deed. 6 Inclination, desire. 7 
Sharpness, smartness. 
jgus, a. Sharp, keen, smart. 
gusar,** a. see gusmhor. 2 
gives gusair.] 
gusdal,** -ail, s.m. Burden. 
gu seo, adv. Hitherto. 
gusg, see gusgan. 
gusgal, see gusgul. 
gusgan, -ain, -an, s.m. Bumper, hearty draught, 
swig. Fhuair thu fhéia an ceud gh, dneth, 
you got the first bumper of it yourself. 
usgar,**-air, s.m. Roariug. 2 Loud wailing. 
Cuiridh g. neach "na bhreislich, loud lamenta- 
tion confounds one. 
gusgarlach, see gusgurlach. 
gusgul, -uil, s.m. Refuse, husks, filth. 2 Idle 
words, 3*Blubberiug. 4**Roaring, bawling. 
5 Clatter—Sar Obair. 
gusgulach, -aiche, a. Filthy. 2 Trifling. 3 
Roaring. 4 Lamenting loudly. 5 Abounding 
in husks. 
—d, s.f. 
lamentation. 
gusgurlach, -aich, s.m. Keen sharp fellow. 
gu siorruith, adv, For ever. 
gu siorruidh ! int. Well ! well ! 
gusmhor, -oire, a. Valid, strong, powerful, ca- 
pable. 2**Keen. 
gustag,** s.f. Clumsy girl. 
gustal, -ail, s.m. Burden, pledge. 2 Protection. 
= 9 Ability, affluence. 
gu suthain, adv. For evermore, eternally. 
 gub,** s.m. Gaelic spelling of gout. 
gutach, a. see cutach. 2 Arthritic. 
gutalaiche s.m. Cuckold maker. 
gutalach, -aiche, œ. Cuckold. 
—-—-, -aich, s.m. Adulterer. 
——-———d,** s.f. Cuckoldom. 
gutalag,** -aig, s.f. Adulteress. 
gu taobh, adv. Apart. 2 Aside. 
stand aside. 
guth, -a, pl. -an, -anna & -annan, 
2 Word, syllable.. 3 Taunt, defamation. 
Calumny. 5 Mention, report, warning. 6 
Vote. 7 Vowel. 8 Sound. 9 Ill-name. 10 
Bard. 111 Erudition. Chuala eg., he heard 
a voice ; dean g. rium, speak a word to me ; | 
cha chuala mi g. air riamh, J never heard the 
slightest mention of it ; dh’ aithnich mi a gh., 
I recognized his voice ; na toir g. air a leithid 
Sin, never mention such a thing; g. caointeach, | 
a plaintive voice ; thàinig g. d' a ionnsuidh, a 
voice from the dead warned him; guthan a’ |} 
bhàis, the sounds of death; am meadhon a gh., 
in the middle of his speech ; gun guth mór, gun | 
droch fhacal, without uproar, without strong 
uge ; dean g. aige ’san dol seachad, call 
on him when going by; is fhearr g. na meidh, 
a word is better than a balance—probably 
-meaning that the voice of a powerful friend is 
of more value than strict impartiality. 














2 Strong. 
Sharp, smart. [1i 


Continued roaring. 2 Loud 





Rach gu taobh, 


s.m. Voice. 
4 


d 
d 
V g 





uthach, -aiche, a. Endowed with a voice. 2 
Noisy, vocal. 3**Having a voice or vote. 4}7 
Wordy. 

27 s.f. see cubhag. 


_ == adh, -aidh, s.m. Calling. A’ g— pr.pt. 
o guthaich. 
guthaich, pr.pt. a’ guthachadh, v.a. dn., Call 


upon, call from a distance. 2(Ms) Vocalize. 


Di gitized by 


IKITITBDRITT ADLI] 
INTERNET ARCHIV 


000 


jachdar 


guthaid, see guth-aite, 

guth-àite, -achan, s.m. Oraculum. 2 Confess. 
ionary. 3 Oratory—Dain I. Ghobha. 

guthalachd, 8.f. Vocality. 

guthan, n.pl. of guth. 

vuth-ghleus,** s. Accent. 

guth-leazradh,ff -aidh, s.m. Cadence. 

vuth-le-gug, Lui» for conachbaz. 

guthmhor, -oire, œ. Loud-voiced. 

—— ———Aaáchd, s.f.ind. Loudness of utterance.. 

gu timenioliach, adv. About. 

gu tur, adv. Quite, entirely, altogether. 


-—- 





ES ia 


h, Uath, the hawthorn-tree. The eighth letter 
of tne Gaelic alphabet now in use. It is used 
in Scottish Gaelic not properly as a letter, for 
no word commences with it, but simply as a 
sign of aspiration, in the same way as the dot 
is used over consonants in Irish Gaelic. 
When it is prefixed to a word beginning with 
a vowel, it has the same degree of aspiration 
as h in hall, hurt—na h-o:gaean, the maids ; 
na h-oidhche, of the night. Itis also required 
between the negative ni and the following 
word, if it begin with a vowel—ni h-e, not 
he; ni h-eadh, no; ni h-iad, not they ; ni h- 
fheudar, must not. 

Before an initial vowel, R is sometimes in 
serted, and sometimes uot, after certainwords. 
In Skye, the teudeucy is to insert that letter 
as shown by Mary MacPherson in her book 
of poems—after prepositions, le h-aiteas, pp. 
35, 110 ; re h-uine, p. 44 ; after gur, mur d ge, 
gur a h-e, and gur h-e, that it is, both p. 289 > 
gur h-ise bhios sona, that it is she that will 
be happy, 91 ; s gur h-onair dha ar dùthaich 
thu, 88 ; gur h-uallach mo nighean duban, 207; 
mur a h-e, 2/6 ; ge h-iomadh, though so many, 
notwithstanding how many, 37, 49. 





X i 


i, Iogh, yew, the ninth letter of the Gaelic al- 
phabet now in use. I has two sounds—(1) 
both long and short, long like ee in deem, as, 
sin, stretch ; cir, comb ; short like ee in feet, 
(only as feet is pronounced by a Scotsman ) as, 
bith, existence; sir, seek. (2) short and ob- 
scure, like ï in miss, as, is, æm, art, are, in 
which particular case it does not give the sh 
sound to $. 

Gun i, gun 6, gun aobhar, said when anything 
is apparently done without rhyme or reason. 

i, pers. pron., f. ind. She, her, it. Bhuail si 
i, she struck her. [emphatic, ise & i-féin, her- 
self. ] 


i, s.f.ind, Island. 
nop s. find. 


see igh. 

ti, s.f. Art, science. 

fi, a. Low, shallow. 

Tia, s. Country. 

iach, éich, -an, s.a. Scream, yell. 2 Exclama- 
tion. 13 Salmon, 4(AF) Cat. [** gives s.f. 
for No. 1.] 

iach,** v.a. Cry, scream, shout, yell, bawl. 

iachadh, -aidh, s.m. Crying, screaming, yelling,. 
2 Cry,scream, yell. Agi—, pr.pt. of iach. 

iachal, -ail, s.m. Cry, scream, yell, noise, 

iachdar, see iochdar. 


iachdarach 


see iochdarach. 
see eud. 


jachdarach, 
lad, é1d, 


iad, per. pron. They, them. [emphalic, iad-san, | tial, 


& iad-féin, themselves.) Lad sud, those yonder; 
iad seo, these here ; iad sin, those there. 

jadach, -aich, s.m. Jealousy. [Generally used 
in the North with this meaning, but in Glen- 
lyon and the south generally eudach is used.] 

, -aiche, @ Jealous. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Jealous watching. 2 
Jealousy. 

iadaich,** v.a. Watch jealously. 

iudai,** ail, s.m. Disease. ^2 

iaih,tf iaidh, s.m. Enclosing. 2 Hovering. 

iadu,s pr.pt. ag iadhadh, v.a. Encompass, cir- 
cie, shut round, enclose. 2 Bind. 3 Over- 
take. 4 Hover.  5**Wind,roll 6 Join, 7@ 

Take a circuitous route. An saoghal mu'n 
i.a ghrian, the world which the sun compass- 
es; an'iadh na tuiltean mi, the jluods sur- 
rounded me. 

jadbach,** a. Ambient. 2 Circumstant, 3** 
Meandering, as a stream, 

iadhadh, -aidh, s.m. Surrounding, act of sur- 
rounding, enclosing. 2 Binding. 3 Overtak- 
ing. 4 Meandering, asa stream. 5**Wind- 
ing, rolling. 6 Fluttering or hovering round, 
7** Stretching, as of a bow. 8**Circuit. 9** 
Circumference. 10**Circuitous route. 

. Adjunction. Ag i—,pr.pt. of iadh. 
mun tràigh, winding along the shore ; a gorm- 
shùil ag í., her blue eye rolling ; bas ag 1. mu 
'shleagh, death hovering about his spear ; i. do 
luing, the circuit of thy ship. 

iadhaidh, fut.af.a. of iadh. 

iadhaim, (for iadhaidh mi), I shall surround. 
I. ur braighde, I will surround your captives. 

iadhain, see eidheann. 

jadhan, -ain, s.m. Parenthesis. 

iadhar, fut. pass. of iadh. Shall be surrounded. 

iadnastar, see aghastar. 

iadhladn, see iadh dh. 

iadh-lann, -lainn, -an, see iodhlann. 

jadh-lus,$ s.m. Small bindweed—convolvolus 
arvensis. 

iadh-shlat,$ -ait, -an, s.f. Honeysuckle, wood- 
bine, see uilleann. 2 Ivy. Mar i. ri stoc 
aosda, like ivy to an aged trunk. 

— -thahuhainn, s.f. Ground-ivy,—nep- 
eta glechoma. 














L00. iadh-shlat-thalmhainn. 
-iadhta, past pt. of iadh.  Encompassed, 
rounded, closed, hemmed in, &c. 
iad-san, emphat. pron. They themselves. 
iag (AF) s. Salmon. 


sur- 


Digitized by 
a he Led 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


536 
i tiagh, s.m. Island. 















ialuinn Y 


iaghastar, see aghastar. 

see iol, 

ial, -a, s. 7, Moment, time, season. 2 (M5 sIn- 
termission. 3 Gleam of sunshine. 4** Light. 
5**Age, generation. 6** Sunny interval be- 
tween showers. [f says a poetic word —seein- 
imgly a metaphoric use of iall.] Gach i., every 
moment ; foghar an aigh—ial is fras, finest au- 
tumn —sun and shower. 


b | 
3 
* ^ ) 
F 
fe 
am 
a 
S 

t Y | 
2 
ay 


ZE 








ialach, -aiche, @ Shining, bright, clear, lumi- d 
nous, 2**Sunny, having serene intervals, | 
gleamy, as the sun in the interval of showers. 

ialadh, see èaladh. id 

(DC) s.m. Fair spell between showers— . 
Argyll, see ial 6. g 
ialaidh, see ealaidh. — 
tiall ! int. God forgive you ! Tu 


tiall,tft -a, -an, s. m. Flock of birds. 2 Herd, 
drove. 

iall, éille & -éill, an, s.f. Leather thong, lace, 
leash. 2 String. 3 Ribbon. 4 Part of crann- 
nan-gad, see p. 263.  5* Leather strop. I. 
bròige, a shoe-lace or latch ; an i. ris an d earb 
thu, the string to which you trusted ; le h-éill 
ghuirm, with a blue lace; i, de ghorm, a rib- 
bon of blue; iallan fada de leathar chaich,  - 
long thongs of other people's leather—express- —— 
ion applied to a person generous with an- - 
other's goods ;i.-shuisde, o flail-thong. 32H 

iallach, -aiche, a. Abounding in thongs, thongy. _ 
2 Jaunty, lithe. 

- — —,** -aich, s.m. Thong. 2 Assortment of 
thongs. An t-i. cruaidh, the hard thong. 

iallachrann, s.pl. Shoes. ` ` 

iallag, -aig, -an, s.f.dim. of iall. Little thong. - 
2 Shoe-lace, latehet. 3 Thread. 4**Shoema- | 
ker's thread. VC 

--——ach, -aiche, a. Aboundingin little thongs. 

iallaich, v.a. Bind with thongs. 

iallan, -ain, s.m. Thong. 2 Shoemaker's thread. 
3 n.pl. of iall. ET 

, S.f. Honeysuckle.—Sgeulaiche-nan-caol. 

iall-chasaidh, s.f. Martingale. 

iall-cuipe,(CR) s.f. Lash. 

iall-sréine,(CR) s.f. Bridle-rein. 5 

iall-sròine, (CR) s. f. Mausrole, band over a — 
horse’s nose. 





ialltaich, s.f. Howling of dogs—Suth’d. m 
iall-theapnaidh, s.f. Brace, p. 76. bo 
ialt, see ialtag. "d 
Ka 
I 


^ i wf 

Y e saj a 

A wël: ek 
eg NUS 


Ute 








401. ia aJ. ^ 
ial'ag, -aig, -an, s.f. Bat, rearmouse—vesperti- — 


mus murinus. 2(MS) Titmouse. 
ach, -aiche, v. Abounding in bats, 
2 Of, or pertaining to, bats. 


ialtag-anmoch, 
p Bat. 


-leathair, 
-leuthraigh, d 

ialtag-oidhche,(DMu) s.f. Suth’d for ialtag. 

| ialuinn, -e, sf. see iadh-shlat. 











Original from 





E E Ee e? 
a Se? E 
mes $ wm ® X "gn 
- : = = - 
-zi 


a 

















| janihann 537 iarnaich 
: jamhann,(M5) s m. Pearl. sachadh làn iargain, learning full of useless 
| jamhunn,(Ms) s.m. Margarite., knowledge, 
- jan, còin, s.m. see eun. 12 Vessel. 3 Blade each, -eiche, o, Uneasy, iu great pain, 
| of a weapun. 4 Weasel. afflictive. 2 Moaning, lamenting. 3 Having 
= danach, see eunach. dregs or sediment.  4**Distressful. 5** Lan. 
| janaich, see eunaich: guishing, troubled. Leabaidh a thinneis 
—A jan-buchainn, see eun-buchainn. 


iargainich, the bed of his languishing sickness. 

— ———-eachd,** s.f. Painfulness, 2 Distress. 
3 State of being troubled or distressed. 

iargal, -ail & -aile, s.f. The west. 2 Evening. 
3 Twilight, 

largall, -aill, -an, s.f. Skirmish, battle, strife, 
contest, fray. 2 Tumult, uproar, bustle. 3 
Storm. 4**Concourse. 5 Distress, calamity. 

iargallaeh, -aiche, a. Warlike, contentious. 2 
Quarrelsome, noisy, fieree, 

iargalta, -ailte, a. Churlish, inhospitable, 2 
Angry. 3 Surly, not affable. 4 Turbulent. 5 
Obstinate. 6 Distressing. 7 Backward. $8 
(DU) Forbidding, as a haunted place, eerie. 

largaltach, see iargalta. 

iargaltachd, see iargaltas. 

iargaltaiche, -an, s.m. Churl. 

iargaltas, ais, s.m. Churlishness, moroseness, 
surliness. 2 Turbulence. 3 Backwardness. 
4(MS) Rudeness. 5**Obstinateness, 

largan, see iargain. 

ach, see iargaineach. 

achd, see iargaineachd, 

jlarganaich,(MS) v.n. Groan. 

iar-ghaoth, -ghaoithe, s.f. West wind. 

iar-ghile, an, s.m. Under servant. 2 Minor. 

iarghuil, -ean, s.f. Sound, noise, report. 


jan-dubh-an-sgadain, see coltraich, 

jan-glas-an-sgadain, see bur-bhuachaill  . 

dan-ghobhrag,(AH) s.f. Snipe, see gobhar-ath- 
air. 

. ianlaith, see eunlaith, 

| jannraidh, see eannraidh. 

n janrag, s.f. Snipe, see gobhar-athair. 

| lapal, -ail, s.m. Dispute. 

| Jar, s.f.ind. The West. 12 The end. 3 Every- 

i thing last. T4 Bird. Ani., westward; an i. 

= ‘san iar-dheas, west-by-south ; an àirde an iar, 

- . the west; osag o’n i., a blast from the west. 

| dar, see iarag. 

* jar, adv. West, westerly. . 

^. fiar, prep. After, second in order, lar sin, Of. 

ter that. 2ftBackwards. 

| Bar, a. Dark, black, dusky. 

| fara,(AF) s.m. Cat. 

- iarach, s.m. see iùbhrach. 

- darag,** -aig,-an, 8. f, Weasel. 

_ creature of brownish hue. 

—  4**see eireag. 

| jaran, see iarunn. 

X Jaran-gràbhalaidh,s.m. see iarunn-gràbhalaidh. 

Ü EL sf. After age, succeeding age, after 

imes. 


TIC 


LZ PUE 
SS. 


2 Any little 
3 Anguish, grief. 








. Jar-astar,]l-air, s.m. Longitude. 


——— — = Xe 
Sa 


. mains of a disease. 3 Issue of an affair, con- 
sequence. 

jarbheil, see iar-bhed. 

_ jar-bheó,** a. Surviving, still alive. 


-X363 


. iar-bhleoghann, -ainn, s. m. Second or after- 


n milking. 
_ jar-bhreith, -e, $.f. After-birth. 
. iar-bhuille, an. s.m. Second stroke. 2 Stroke 


-iarbhail, e s,f. Anger, fury, ferocity. 2 Re- 


iarguil, see iargall. 

———leach, see iargallach. 

iarguin, -ean, see iargain. 
each, see iargaineach. 
eachd, see iargaineachd, | 

iargunach, see iargaineach. 

iarla, -an, s.m. Earl, (iar-fhlath.) 

-——chd, s.f.ind. Earldom. 

iarlas, see éarlas & airleas. 

iarmad, -aid, -an, s.m. Offspring, race,, poster- 


from behind, ity, branch. 2 Remnant, remainder. I. mo 
X Tiar-ehara,1t s.collect. Posterity. shluaigh, the remnant of my people; a chog- 
| jar-cheann, -chinn, s.m. Hindhead, noddle. adh ris an iarmad mheanbh, to fight with the 
_ lar-eheann-suidhe, s.m. Vice-president. pigmy race. 
= lar-chléireach, -ich, s. m. Under-secretary, un- | ——-—aech, &. Having remnants. 2 In rem- 


der-clerk. 

. dar-ehléirsinneachd, s.f. 

. under-clerkship. 

| lar-ehuan, -ain, pl. -chuantan, s.m. The West- 

|. ern sea. 

. lar-chuimhne, s.f./nd. Indistinct recollection, 

. lar-chullach,(AF) s.m. Wild boar. 2 Monster. 

. lar-dheas, -dheis, s.m. The South-west. [ Pre- 

_ ceded by the art. an.] Chum an i, to the 

|». south-west. 

-iar-dhonn, a. Brownish black, dusky, blackish, 

dark brown. ' 

Jar-dhraoi,** s.m. Remnant. 2 Posterity. 

 lar-fheur,"* -fheoir, s.m. After-grass, 

 Jar-fhlaitheach, a. Aristocratic, oligarchal. 

ij u d,** s. f, Vice-royalty. 2 Earl. 
dom. 3 Aristocracy. 

jar-fhlaithiche, s.m. Aristocrat. 

Aar-fhlath, -aith, sm. Viceroy. 2 Feudal lord 

= dependent on a greater. 3 Earl. 

 iargail,-ean, see iargall. 

jargaill, see iargall. 

iargain, v.a. Deplore, miss, bewail the loss of 
a friend. 2 Feel pain. 

, “ean, s.f. Sorrow, grief, smart of sor- 

_ row. 2 Pain. 3 Bewailing, lamenting. 4 


. Danger, peril 5 Dying groan. 6 Burden, 
load. 7 Dregs, sediment. 8* Evil effects of 


Under-secretaryship, 











H 
Ki 


"anything. Innis t’ i., tell thy trouble ; ionn- 


iarmheirghe, s.f. Matins. 


nants. 3 Like a remnant. 4 Having posterity. 
iarmaid, gen.sing. ofiarmad. 
iarmailt, -ean, ert Sky, firmament.  'San i. 
urair, in the pure firmament ; na h-iarmailt 
ean, the skies. 
each, -eiche, @ Of, or belonging to, the 
firmament, aérial. 
jarmair,** s,f. Remnant, remainder, 
tiarmantach, -aiche, a. Favourable,prosperous. 
2 Furious. 


iarmart, -airt, s.m. Result, consequence of an 


affair, 2 Riches. 3 Offspring. see iarmad. 


2 Morning. 3 Ris- 
ing early. 


iarna, -ichean, s.f. Hank of yarn (200 yards.) 2 


Skein of thread. 3 Confusion. An àireamh 
—9 threads, in counting off the crois-ig; na. 
iarnach, -aiche, œ. Abounding in hanks of yarn. 
2 see iarunnach. 

iarnachadh, -aidh, s.m. Smoothing, ironing. 
2 Act of smoothing with an iron. Ag i—, pr. 
pt. of iarnaich. | 

larnachan, -ain, pl. -chanan & -ain, s.m. Little 
dressing iron. 2 Any iron tool. 

iarnadh, -aidh, see iarna. 

larnag, -aig, -an, s.f., dim. of iarna. 

-———ach, a. Abounding iu little hanks. 

iarnaich, pr. pt, ag iarnachadh, v, a. Smooth 
with an iron. 2 Make hanks, 


D 
2M 
4 Origis al from 
gd RECO CIT FE II ALC AT 
bh Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS Al 
e x m m j gm Fs pb bes Bh 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


B INTERNET ARCHIVE 


DN 


iarnaiehean 


iarnaichean, n.pl. of iarna. 

larnaichte, past pt. of iarnaich. Ironed,smooth- 
ed with an iron, as linen. Anarv i., ironed 
linen. 

iarnaidh, -e, a. Of, or like iron. 2 Iron-colour- 
ed. 3 Hard, like iron. 4 Miserly. 5 Chaly- 
beate, having an iron taste. Uisge i., chaly- 
beate water. : 

—  — —eachd, s.f. Hardness. 2 Squalid;colour. 
3 Miserly disposition. 

iarnaig, see iarnaich. 

eadh, see iarnachadh. 

iarnair,** s.m. Ironmonger. 

iarnaireachd, s.f. Ironmongery. 

iarnallach, -aich, s.f. After-birth, secundine. 

iarnan, -ain, see iarna. 

iarn-aols, see iarunn-aois. 

larndobh,(AF) s. Fawn. 

iar-ogha,-aichean, s. m. gf f. Great-grandehild. 
Fionn-ogha or ionn-ogha, a grandson's grand- 
son ; b’ i féin is mo mhathair na h-iar-ogha- 
chan, sheand my mother were second cousins. 

larr, pr.pt. ag iarraidh, v,@. Ask, request. 2 
Seek, seareh, look for. 3 Pain or purge, as 
medicine, 4 Probe. 5**Invite. 6**Demand. 
E. e gu fieadh, invite him to a» feast ; chan 
fhaic ’scha’n iarr iad, they shall not see nor 
enquire, I«rv,in the sense of bidding or de- 
siring, takes the prep. air, compounded or 
understood, as, iarr air, desire him ; i. orra, 
desire them. 

i&rradach,tft a. Of a candidate, seeker, &c. 2 
Ínvitatory, 

iarradaiche, s.m. Probe, feeler. 2 Petitioner. 

larradair, ean, s.m. Seeker, one who seeks. 2 
Beggar, petitioner. 3**Candidate. 

iarraidh, -ean, s.m. Request, petition. 2 De- 
sire, longing. 2 Act of asking, seeking, search- 
ing or enquiring. 4 Invitation. Ag i—, pr.pt. 
of iarr. Freagraidh cruachan an i, hitlocks 
shall respond to their inquiries ; tha ’fhuil air 
a h-i., his blood is sought ; ag i. gu bealach, 
moving towards the pass. 

, a. Desirable, tolerable. An i. ghleusda, 
pretty well ; tha mi an i., I am pretty well. 

————— , fut.af.a. of iarr. 

each, -aiehe, a. see iarradach. 

eachd,ff s.f. Inquisitiveness. 

arraim, Ist. sing. fut. ag. ot iarr (for iarraidh 
mi) I shall ask. 

larram, 1st. sing.imp. of iarr. 

arratas, als, see iarrtas. 

iarr-fhionn,(MS) a, Rubican. 

iarrnaig,ff see iarnaich. 

iarrtach, -aiche, a. Soliciting, importunate, 
continually requesting. 2 Desirous, willing. 

warrtachail, see iarradach. 

iarrtachd, see iarrtas. 

larrtaiche, -an, s.m Seeker. 2 Petitioner, im- 
portunate person. 3 Probe. 4**Descenants, 
posterity. 5 Domestics 6{{Feelers of shell- 
fish. q Dan, 

jarrvanach, -aiche, a. Optative. 

farrtas, -ais, -an, s.m. Petition, request, asking. 
2 Desire, command, instance. I. faoin, a 
vain request ; cha toil i achmhasan, request 
deserves no blame. 

iarrtasach, -aiche, a. Frequently soliciting, re- 
questing. 

jarrtus, -uis,-an, see iarrtas. 

jarsalach, a. Covetous. 

, -aich, s.m. Covetous person. 














west. 
- -—ach, a. West. 2 North-west. 
iarsmach,** œ. Generous, 





jarsmadh,** -aidh, s.m. Remnant, remainder. 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


538 




















jarsceart,** -ceirt, s.m. The West. 2 The North- 


1 e Lt ep Kg 
CO NU, ai ze 
Sr LC SEX 

e ru ng dt 

















iasg a 
2 Relic. 3 Burden, encumbrance. 4 New 
Year's gift. ; RK 
iarspealadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. After-grass,, — 
after-inath, second crop of grass, rowen. E 
iartaiche, see iarrtaiche. AK 
Tiar-taighe, s.collect. Descendants, posterity. E 
lartas, see iarrtas. AX 
lar-thir,** s.f. West country. s$ 
iar-thrath, -aith, s.m. see (an) earar. "e 
iar-thuath, s.f. The North-west. [Preceded by.  . 
the art. an. ] £ 
iar-thoiseach, -ich, s. m, Captain of the van- ` 
. guard. A 
iartuinneas, -eis, see iarrtas. TÉ 
iarunn, -uinn,-an, s. m. Iron. 2 Irontoolof 
any kind. 3 (CR) Blade of a scythe. I. gràbh-- — 
aidh, a graving tool ; i. as an talamh, iron out — 
of the earth ; gad iaruinn, an iron bar; i. fàil, — 
& scythe ;-i. casaidh, @ crispizig-iron. E 
——-—ach, -aich, s.m. Iron, irons. I. seisear- | 
aich, plough-irons. di 
- ach, a. see iarnaidh. E 
iarunnaidh, see iarnaidh. o» 
iarunn--amaill, s.m. Iron for swingle-trees, gene — 
erally used in the pl. —iaruinn-amuill. SC 
iarunn-anairt, s.m. Smoothing-iron. d 
- -aois, S.f. The iron age. WS 


——-— -borrais, s.m. Soldering-iron. a 

——-— -earra, s.m. Catch of the lock ofa gun, | 
2(AH) Iron used for cutting grooves round 
inside of casks, &c. to receive bottoms or heads. * 
Bhiodh rùdan air an tarruinn leis an lübt'an — - 
t-iarunn-earra; @ finger-point would be on the ` 
trigger, by which the catch would be acted on.. 
—Beinn Doran, Donn, Ban. 

——-— ghreallaig, s.m, Iron for trestle-tree of ` 
a plough. 

-grabhalaidh, sm. Burine. 

na stiùireach, s.m. Pintle of a rudder, 

see Rudder, No. 2, p. 78. 

-tathaidh, s.m. Soldering-iron. E 

— —-— -tochailt (MS) s.m. Hoe-iron, d 

iasachd, s.f.. see iasad. Gabhaidh ei., he will 
borrow. m 

iasachdach, : @ Ready to give on loan. 2: 
Prone to ask on loan. 

iasachdaiche,** s.m. Creditor. 

iasad, -aid, s.m. Loan. 2 The thing borrowed. 
3 Profit, advantage, 4 Credit. Millidh aire 
i., necessity spoils credit ; ghabhadh e cridhe ` 
"an iasaid, he would take a heart on loan, 
or heart of grace—an exaggerated way of say- — 
ing that one would borrow anything; bu ` 
choir an t-iasad a chur dhachaidh a’ gàire — 
eachdaich, the loan should be sent laughing | 
home—to lend freely is to send the borrower . 
home smiling, to send the loan back laughing  — 
is to repay liberally ; is tric a fhuair gunna 
urchair-iasaid, œ gun has often got a loan-shot- — 
-—a warning against careless use of fire-arms; ` 
na toir iasad air an iasad, do not lend the  . 
loan. [tt gives s.f.] ‘ | E. 

iasadach, -aiche,a. Lending,granting ofa loan,  - 
12 Squeamish. / 

iasadaiche, -an, s.m. Creditor. 2 One who lends. - 
3 borrower. 

iasadail, -e, a@. see iasadach. : 

iasad-bhriathar,tf{ -air, -thran, s.m. Quotation, 

tiasalach,** o, Easy. 2 Feasible, practicable, 

iasalachd, s.f. Frailty. 2 Facility. 

jasan, -ain, s.m. Petulance. 2Sauciness. 3 
Petulant person. : 

-——ach, a. Petulant. 2 Saucy. 

-——achd, s.f. Petulance. 2 Sauciness. 

iasg, -éisg, an, s.m. Fish. Iasg dubh, salmon 
on its return from the sea ; i. air chladh, fish 
ai spawning ; na h-iasgan, the sign Pisces (X) 



























a 
4 


Original fram - 
UNIVERSITY: OF ILLINOISS 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGRS 


E un gach 3 
im the zxiiac ; ma tha i. à dhìth orm, cha'n 1. 


539 


il 
3 Tribe of people. 





ple. 


Jeam sgat, if L want fis, skate is no jish to me| tibh, v.n. Drink. 


—the skate is most unjustly underrated by 
the natives of the West coast of Scotland. 

iasgach, e. Fishing, angling. 2 Art of fish- 
ing or angling. 3 Take of fish. 4**Fishery. 
Ag i—, pr.pt. of iasgaich. Is daor a cheann- 
aich mi an t-iasgach, dearly have I bought the 
Jishing. 

, a. Abounding in fish. 

— ————adh, -aidh, s.m. Fishing, angling. Ag 
L, pr.pt. of iasgaich. 

——-d, s.f. & pr.pt. of iasgaich. 

iasg-a’-chlaidheimh, s.m. Sword-fish. 

lasgaich, pr.pt. ag iasgachd & ag iasgachadh, 
v.a. Fish, angle. 

jasgaiche,{t an, sm. Fisher. 

iasgaidh, see easgaidh, 

iasgail, æ. Fishy. 

iasgair, -ean, sm, Fisher, fisherman. 2 Angler. 

iasgair-cairneach, sm. Kingfisher, see biorra- 
cruilein. 2**Osprey. 

fasg-air-chladh,(A F) s.m. Spawning fish, 

lasgair-diomhain,T s.m. Kingfisher, see biorra- 
cruidein. 2 Common gull, see faoileann. 3** 
Unsuccessful fisher, 

iasgarach,tf-eiche, «. Fishing. 

d, s.f.ind. Trade of fishing. 2 Act of, 
or amusement of fishing. 3 Fishery. 4 Art 
of angling. 

iasgairean, n.pl. of iasgair. 

iasgair-slaite,* s.m. Angler. 

| jasgaire.] 

iasgan, -ain, s.m. Little fish. 2 see feusgan. 

iasg-an-donais,(AF) s.m. Devil-fish. 

iasg-dearg, s.m. Fish of the salmon kind, as 
distinct from white fish. 

lasg-deilgneach,(AF) s.m, Stickleback. 

iasg-driomanach,(AF) s.m. Surmullet, red mul- 
let, marked salmon. 

iasg-driomman, see iasg-driomanach. 

iasg-druimein,(AF) s.m. Salmon. 

iasg-dubh, s.m. Salmon on its return from the 
sea. 

iasg-eigir,(AF) s.m. Small or dwarf fish. 

iasg-geal,(AH) s.m. Any sea-fish not of the sal- 

' mon kind. 

iasg-itheach, a. Piscivorous. 

iasg-itheanaich,tf s.m. Ichthyophagy. 

iasg loch, an, s.m. Fish-pond, loch abounding 
in fish. Lasg-loch, with hyphen and consequent 
accent on loch means a fresh-water or loch-fish. 

. jasg-lochan, -ain, s.m. Fish-pond, 

iasg-mara,(AF) s.m. Porpoise. 

iasgmhor, -oire, œ. Fishy, abounding in fish, pis- 
catorial. 

iasg-Pheadail, see iasg-Pheadair-rùnaich. 

iasg-Pheadair-rùnaich,(AC)s.m. (Loving)Peter's 
fish. The fish caught in the W. Isles on Christ- 

. mas Day, and given to the poor. 

lasg-seigir, see iasg-eigir. 

iasg-shlat, -shlait- s.f. Fishing-rod. I. 'sa Cheit- 
ein, œ jishing-rod in spring. 

` ele -ich, s.m. Shell-fish, see maor- 
ach. 

iath, v.g. see iadh, 

1——, s.m. Land. 

iathadh, see iadhadh. 

iathladair,(MS) s.m. see èaladair. 

ialaideach,(MS) o see èalaideach. 

iathlaidh, a. see èalaidh. 

———., v.d. see èalaidh, 

. jath-lann, see iodhlann, 

~ftathlu,(AF) s.m. Cat. 

iath-shlat, see iadh-shlat. 

lathta, see iadhta. 
fibh,-e, s. f. Drink, see dibh. 2 Country peo- 








[* spells iasgair 


Digitized by 


INTERNET AR(CHI 
EM EB LP ann A V 


ibhig,$ s. Shield-fern—polystichvin aculeatum, 
lobatum & angulare, 

ibhne, et, Drinking. 

ibhteach, a. Dry, droughty. 
That imbibes water. 

He, -e, -ean, s.f. Cure, remedy, balm. Ice air 
son a leoin, a balm for his wound ; gabhaibh 
ic, take (ye) balm. 

ic, -e, -ean, s.f. Affix. 2 Supply. 3 Appendix. 
4(AC)Frame put under a bee-hive. Ic na cuin- ` 
neig, edge outside the bottom of a pitcher or . 
barrel. 

ic, v.a. Heal,cure. 2 Affix. 3 Supply, eke. 

'je, (for mhic) e. g. Mac ’Ic Alasdair for Mac: 
Mbic Alasdair. j 

iceach,** o Balmy. 2 
medial. 4 Medicinal. 

iceadh, -idh, s. m. Healing, act of healing. 
2 Remedy. 3 Supply, eke. Ag i—, pr. pt. of 


2 Soaking. 3 


Salutiferous. 3 Re- 


ic. 

iceil, y. Healing. 

ich, see ith. 

ichd, see ic. 

ic-iarn-nac, adv. At any rate. 

ic-lus, wis, -an, s.m. Medicinal herb. 2 Heal- 
ing by herbs. 

ach, d. Abounding in medicinal herbs. 

ic-shiol,** s. Affix. 

tid, a Honest, good, just. 

tid, s.m. Ring. 2 Use. 

idearmanachd, s.f. Hydromancy. 

tidh,** s.f. Wreath. 2 Fine chain. 
Use. 

tidhal, -ail, see iodhal. 

Tidid, a. Cold, chill. 

tidid ! int. Exclamation denoting cold. 

idir, adv. At all. 2**Yet. Cha’n "eil idir, not 
at all ; cba tig e idir, he will not come at all ; 
cha'n e idir, that is not it at all ; no idir air a 
bhruicheadh, nor even boiled ; cha’n 'eil e gu 
math idir, he is not at all well ; cha deanainn 
idir e, Z would not do it on any account. 

idireug,** s. Change of the moon. 

Tidlneadh, s. Weapons, arms. 

idnearach,** a. Prosperous. 2 Happy, merry. 
Gu h-i, prosperously. E 

d, sr Prosperity. 





3 Ridge. 4 


2 Happiness, 





mirth. 

tidu,| s. Pain, pang. 

tifinn, s.f. Gooseberry. ” 

ifreannta, @ see ifrinneach. 

ifrinn, -ean, s.f. Hell (1+fuar) The Hell of 
the old Celts was a Gold dark region, abound- 
ing in venomous reptiles and wild beasts. 
The Gael still retain the name, although it 
is no longer the custom to consider that cold 
forms any part of infernal punishment. 

each, -eiche, a. Hellish,fiendlike,infernal. 

stygian, extremely wicked. 

each, -eich, s.m. Hellish fellow, wicked 
wretch, fiend, demon. 

ifrionda, a. ifrinneach. 

ifrionn, see ifrinn. 

ach, see ifrinneach. 

igh, s.f. Burn, small stream with green banks 
—Suth’d. 

igh, -e, sf. Tallow. 2**Fat of any slaughtered 
quadruped. +3**Ring, Ghabhe an igh, he 
took the tallow( fat.) [** gives s.m.] 

ighe, -an, s.f. Island. 

ighe,(MS) s.f. Grease. 

tigheach, a. Abounding in fat, fat, tallowy. 

ighean, ighne, -an, s.f. see inghean. 

igheil, a. Tallowy. : $ 

fil, ile, s.m. Plenty. 2 cree: TOSET. 4 











3 


-A i 





E 

A 

| $ 

il 540 imlreh $ 

Multitude. 4 Composite particle. 6 see iol.| Boundary, circuit. 8**Pace, progress. 9** ES 
6 Used as a prefix. Course. 10** Moving. 11 Advanuciug. 12 Tra-  - 


il-, For words beginning with il, see under iol. 

ilbhinn, -ean, s.f. Craggy mountain. 

ileach, -iche, o. Variegated, diversified. 2 Neat. 

,** -ich, s.m. Ordure, dung. 

jleas,** -eis, s.m. Diversity, difference. 

ilimeag, Laygan & all W. Ross for imleag. 

ilimich, Laggan d all W. Ross for imlich. 

iliscean, s.pl. Taunts, nicknames, reflections on 
one's couduct—Sar-Obair. 

Till,** s.m. Ill, ruin. 

'ille,** ( for a ghille) voc. sing. of gille 

illse, comp. of iosal, see isle. 

illsich, see islich. 

- ear, see islichear. 

ilmeag, -eig, -an, see imleag. 

ilse, comp. of losal. see isle. 

im-, prefix, Much, many. 2 About. see iom- & 
iomadh. [It is the prefixive form of prep.mu.] 

im, -e, s.m. Butter. Sruthan ime, brooks of 
butter; fear an ime mhòir ’s e a’s binne gloir, 
(lit. the man of much butter, his voice is the 








sweetest) the rich man's voice prevails ; cha bhi | 


an t-ìm sin air an roian sia, that butter will 
no be so divided ; im ri im, cha bhiadh 's cha'n 
annlann e, butter to butler is neither food nor 
kitchen. 
mobbristeadh,(MS)is.m. Flutter. 
imbhuideal,(CR) s.m. [pronounced, imideal, m 


long.] Wooden keg or pail for carrying home | 


milk and cream on the back from the sheil- 
ings. Sometimes carried on horseback, slung 
one on each side.—W. of Ross. The piece of 
skin tied over its mouth is called iolaiman,and 
the piece of of string that ties the iolaman is 
snathainn imbhuideil. 2 (DC) In Uist, ap- 
piied not to the pail or keg, but to the dress- 
ed skin used as alid for the keg, and fast- 
ened, on the mouth of it by the snàthaiun im- 
bhuideil, à strong supp!e thong, which se- 
cures the skin lid, by tightening it between 
the two hoops on the edze of the pail or keg. 
When so fastened, the keg could be carried 
on one's back without spilling any milk, &c., 
it contained. The usual manner of carrying 
the kegs so secured, was in a ‘“‘ plaid”? or 
sack made of muran or sea-bent sewn togeth- 
er. They are still made and used in some 
parts of Uist. 3(AF) Softy of a fellow. 
im-chéimnich, v.a. & n. Walk round. 

imchéin, see im-chian. 

imcheist, -ean, s.f. Anxiety, perplexity, doubt, 
distraction. 2** Dilemma, jeopardy.  Ani., 
perplexed. 

—each, -eiche, og. Doubtful, anxious, dis- 
tracted, perplexed. 2 Causing perplexity or 
doubt. 

im-chian, -chéine, a. Far, remote, foreign. 

,-chéin, s.m. Distance. O i, froma 
distance. 

im-chubhaidh, see iomchuidh. 

———eachd, see iomchuidheachd 

¢im-dheagal,** -aii, s.m. Protection. 

iimdheanta,1f s.m. Fashion, figure. 

im-dhearbh, see iom-dhearbh. 

imdheargaich,(MS) v.a. Dishonour. 

in-dhidean,** ein, s.m. Protection. 2 Protect- 
Or. 

im-dhorus, see iom-dhorus. | 

imeacach, -aiche, @ see ìmeach. -~ 

imeach,-eiche, a. Abounding in butter, but- 
tery. 2 Like butter. 3 Producing butter. 
I. càiseach, abounding in butter and cheese. 

imeachd, s. f. ind, Journey. 2 Act of going, 
walking or departing. 3 Departure. 4 Com- 
pany. 6 The very spot. 6 Distinction, "It 











Digit 
NTERNE 


zed by 


iC HIY 


I 
T 





imeachdan,** -ain,s.m. Child on leading strings. 
imeachtraidh,(AF) s. Plough-bullocks. 

imeall, 
im-easargain,** s.f. Striking on all sides. 
im-easarganach,** a. Stc?king on all sides.. 
im-éiginn, s.m, Substitute for butter, made with 


imir, -e, -ean, 





imirich, v.a. & n. see imrich. 


T 


^ ` 
Weier, 
Ce E 


velling. Ag i—, pr.pt. of imich. Mu'n i. seo, 
hereavouts ; dé 'n i mu ’n d' fhàg thu e ? 
whereabouts did you leave it ? ; bu gurad a h- 
i., quick was her pace ; t' i. an saoghal chéin, 
thy travelling in @ distant world; ag i. an 
ravia, traversing the heath ; cha'n 'eil aon 'gan 
i., no one walks on (traverses) them ; bi ag i., 
begone, be off. 


t FESSES ER Nr Y 


see iomall. 


We Jm 


milk and eggs and a little salt stirred togeth- 
er over the fire for a few minutes ; custard, 
omelette. 

imfhios, see impis. 


imich, pr.pt. ag imeachd, v. n. Go, depart. 2 


Walk. 3 Stir, budge. 4 Advance. 5 Come. 
I. gu d’ shruthaio dhìomhair, bezone to thy 
lonely streams ; dh’ imich an laoch, the hero ` ` 
has departed. “> 

imideal, s.m. see imbhuideal. 

imileadadh, -aidh, s.m. Unction. 

inir, pa, dm Need, bshove, must, require, 2 
(AC) Deliver. Imiridhmi falbh, Z must go; 
i. do Dhia, deliver to God ; an i. mi 'dheanamh ? 
must I do it 2 ; cha do thaisg riamh nach d' i., 
no man ever laid up a thing who did not find 
use for it ; imiridh mi e, I shall need it ; dh’ i. 
mitoiseachadh, 4 was obliged to begin ; an i. 
mi falbh ? imiridh, must I go ? yes. S, 

re s. m. Balkor ridge of land. 2 | 

Field. | 


imire, s.f. see imirceadh. SES | 
imirceadh, s.m. Journey, departure, flitting. | 
imir-chuimir,* adv. 


Wholly and solely, most 
completely or thoroughly. Tha iad mar sin 
gu imir-chuimir, they are so wholly and solely. 


imireach, -eiche, a. Abounding in ridges. i 


-— — —-adüh, see imreachadh. 

i 2**Ridge, make 
a ridge, as in ploughed land. 
-te, past pt. see imrichte. 2 Ridged or 


furrowed, as ploughed land. 





imiridh, fut. af. a of imir. 


imirt, see iomairt. 

imis, see impis. : 

imisear, Suth'd. for aimsir. = 

imisg, -e,-ean, s.f. Sarcasm. 2 Scandal, bad | 
report, disgrace. 3 (CR) Proximity, near | 
ness.—W. of Ross. Cha robh ean i. do'n | 
àite, he was not near the place; cha tig ean — ' 
i. dha, he does not approach him, is not to be. 
compared to him; is beag ani. nach tilg leth- ` 
bheisd, little is the scandal (or fault) that @ l 
half idiot will not cast up. > 

each, -eiche, a. Sarcastic. 2 Scandalous, - 

disgraceful, given to scandal. É 











imleach,* see imlich. oH 

adh, -aidh, s. m. Licking. 2 Lapping - 
with the tongue. 

imleag, -eig, -an, s.f. The navel. 2 Nave ofa 
wheel. 3 Name of the cup-shaped frond from — 
which the long thongs of the sea-weed Aem. —— 
anthalia lorea spring. Eadar m' i agus m' 
àirnean, between my navel and my kidneys. wéi 

— ——ach, @. Umbilical, like a navel. 2 Of,or S 
pertaining to, the navel. a 

an, see imleag. : 1 bé 

imlich, pr. pt. agimlich, v.a. Lick with the 

tongue, 2 Lap. 3f¢fSweep off with the finger. bei 


Imlichidh iad an duslach, they shall lick. the 
dust. 


Original from | 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOISS 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 






_im-réimnich, v.n, 


imfich 511 in-ghreimeacn 
D OST beet 
imlich, -e, s.f. licking, act of licking. Agi—,|inbhe, -ean, s.f. Quality, dignity, rank, 2 


pr.pt. of imlich. 

ear, fut pass. of imlich. 

te, past pt. of imlich. Licked. 

imlid, see imideal. 

timmsruth, s.m. Diarrheea. NA 
imvidh, -e, s.f. Care, diligence. 2 solicitude. 3 











**Sadness. 4 (DMy) Anxiety. Gun i. gun 
eagal, without care or fear. Af 

E each, -eiche, a. Careful, anxious,diligent. 
2 Uneasy. 9 Sad. 4 Vigilant. 





K -eachd, s.f. Care, uneasiness. 

jmpeachadh, -aidh, s.m. Persuading, 
ing, converting, constraining. 

impich, see iompaich. 

ear, see iompaichear. 

te, see iompaichte. 

impidh, -e, -ean, s.f. Prayer, petition, suppEca- 
tion, entreaty. 2 Exhortation. 3 Urging, 
persuasion, constrainment. 4 Means, me- 
dium, instrumentality. 5 Conversion. 6 
sr foi, rod. Cuiri. air, urge him ; le h-imp- 
idhibh, with entreaties. 

each, -eiche, a. Persuading, persuasive, 

supplicatory, constraining, urging, exhorting, 

beseeching, 2 Converting. 3 Intercessory, 

mediatory. 

each, eich, œ. Petitioner. 2 Deprecator. 

.3 Exhorter, one who persuades. 4 Intercess- 

or, 5 Converter. 


beseech- 

















3 Intercession. 

dmpis (an), adv. Almost, on the eve of, like. An 
i. dol fodha, almost sinking ; an i. teicheadh, 
on the eve of scampering ; an i. a chiall a chall, 
almost losing his reason ; àn i. a bhi sgàinte, 
like to burst. 

impis, s. lmminence. 

imreachadh,* -aidh, s.m. Walking is ranks or 
procession, 2 Procession. 3 Bearing, carry- 
ing. I. an tòrraidh, the funeral procession— 
Islay. 

imreasan, -ain, -an, s.m. Dispute, controversy. 
troversy. 

Go about. 

imrich, -e, -ean, s.f. Removal, changing of resi- 
dence. 
**E migration. Agi—, pr. pt. ofimrich, Air 

i., emigrated ; chuir e airi. iad, he removed 

them ; théid ei. thar a’ chuain, he shall emi- 


grate beyond the sea; ni an imrich thric an àir- | t 


neis lom, constant flitting makes the furniture 
scarce ; is buidhe le amadain i., fools are fond 
of removing. 

imrich, pr. pt. ag imrich, [ag imreachadh & ag 


imriehd,] v.a. Carry, bear. 2*March, walk 


in ranks or processions. 3 Procession. 4 Re- 

move furniture, ‘‘ flit.” 5 Change, alter. 

te, past pt. of imrich, Carried, changed, 
altered. 2 Wielded. 

imseach, siche, œ. Revengeful, 2 Furious, en- 
raged. Gu h-i., furiously. 

an,**-ain,-an, s.m. Rage, fury. 

d,** s.f. Revenge, revengefulness, 

timseachtrach, -aich, s.m. Project. 

timshniomh, -a, ssm. Heaviness, sadness, care. 
2 Diligence. 

ach, -aiche, o Anxious, solicitous, 








_ uneasy. 
imtheachd,-an, see imeachd. 
im-thus,** s. Progress, 2 Adventure. 





 in-, prefix, of the same force as Latin in- 


Tin, ine, s.f. see ionga. 
fin, oa, Fit, proper. (for ion.) 
Tin, st Country. 2 Island. : 
fin, prep. see ann, 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


eachd, s.f. Persuasion, 2 Petitioning. 


ach, -aiche, a. Disputing, given to con- 


2 Effects or furniture so remoyed. 3 





Eve. 3 Condition, maturity, state of advance. 
ment or progression. 4 Size. ’Dé an i. am 
bheil thu ? how far have you advanced ? tha 
mi an i. mhath, 4 have made considerable pro- 
gress ; tha mi deas gu h-inbhe deich, I am 
prepared within ten ; bha mi ani. 's an dorus 
a dhùnadh, I was on the eve of shutting the 
door, I was hesitating whether to shut the door; 
am bheil iad an inbh' a bhi deas ? are they 
near the close ? ; thàiaig i gu h-i., she grew 
up to size or stature; seasaidh aon suas "Dä 
h-inbhe, one shall stand up in her stead; an 
i. mhoir, in great dignity. 


| inbheach, -eiche, a. Eminent, in high rank. 2 


Noble, exaited. 3 Mature, ripe. 4 Sizeable. 
5 Advanced in station or condition. 6 Chief. 
Duine i., a man of mature age, [** gives a mam 
of rank, a man high in office]; àite i., an ex- 
alted place;a W inbhiche, who was most es- 
alted. 

-— — ——-as,-ais, s.m. Fondness for being high 
in rank. 2 Fondness for high office. 

-—d, s.f.ind, Quality, dignity, rank. 2 
Height of rank or office. 3 Nobleness.) 4 
Maturity, perfection, years of discretion, 5 
Aggrandizement. 

inbhear, -ir, see ionbhar. 

inbheirt,** s.f. A perfect birth. 





| inbhich, oe, **Exult, aggrandize, 2 see ineach, 





-te, past pt. Aggrandized. 
inbhidh,* o, see inbheach. 


inbhidheachd, see inbheachd. [wrong on p. 5&3. 


inbhir, -ean, s.m. Correct form of ionbhar spelt 

ine,** $. Gaelic spelling of wk. 

inchinn, -ean, s.m, see eancnainn, 

tin-chomharraichte, a. Notable. 

tindearbh, og, Prove. 

Tfindlobor, a. Weak. 

tindlobre, s. Weakness. 

ine, see ionga. 

ine, see iodha. 

ineach,** s m. Chopping-block. Is math an t4. 
a’ chlach gas an ruigear i, the stone isa good 
block tili it is reached. 

ineach, a. Tfsee iongach, 2 see iodhach. 

ineach,** Ach, $.f. see inneach. 2 Generosity. 
3 Hospitality, 4 Good management in house- 
keeping. 

ail,** a. Generous. 2 Hospitable, Gu 

cairdeili., friendly and hospitable, 


ras,** ais, s.m. Fair. 2 Public meeting. 

ineadal, see imideal. 

inealta, -ailte, see innealta. 

——-— jr, see ionaltair. 

incaltradh, see iovaltradh. 

inean, n.pl. of ionga. 

tin-fhaiesinn, -e, @ Remarkable, worthy of no- 
tice, notable. 

infhir, @ Nubile, 

Ting,** s.f. Force, compulsion. 
Neck ofland. 4 Danger, 

ingealtas,** -ais, s.m. Vasture ground, ground 
fit for feeding cattle. 

inghar, -eir,-an, s.m. Plumb, mason’s line, 2 
*Level. 3**Perpendicular, 4 Anchor.  6** 
Chain or cord to measure with. 

ach,** æ. Level. 2 Perpendicular. 

ingheach,** -ich, see inneach. 

ingheann, An, pl inghnean, s f. see ighean, 
A’ chlann nighean, Lewis for young women 
as a species. 

finghilt, see ingilt. 

in-ghreim,** s. m. Clutching grasp. 2 Ravens 

ing, 8 Persecution, 4 Extreme avarice. 

—each, œ. Clutching, 2 Ravenous. 3 

Clawing. 4 Perseouting, 6 Avaricious., 9% 








2 Stir. 3 








Origit 


re I 


al from 
| m 


AA end 
kal LW of 
p KA 


UNI 


V | 
Dip ARTA gn LRA A De 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


P in-ghreimeoach 

Plundering. 

—each,** s.m. Persecutor. 

ingilt,** s.f. Feeding, grazing. 2 Pasture. 
inilt. 

ingir,** sf. Sorrow, affliction. 2 see ingear. 

inglan,** a. Dirty, filthy, nasty. 

ingneach, see iong.:en. 

tingor, s.m. Torment. 

iniatar,** -air, s.m. Bowel, entrail. 

inich, -e, a. Neat, tidy. 2 Lively. 3 Firm. 4 





see 


Handy. 5 Strong. 6 Sufficient. 7 Eager. 8 
Effectual. Gu h-i., sufficiently. 


inieh,(CR) s. f. Floor of a cattle-stall, eleva- 
ted above the carcair or grip—W. of Ross-sh. 

inicuead,-id, s.m. Neatness, degree of neatness. 
2 Liveliness. 

in-ichte,1i a. Edible, eatable. 

Inid,-e, s.f. Shroye-tide. Di-màirt na h-Inide, 
Shrove Tuesday. 

Inid bheadaidh, said when the full-moon of 
Shrove-tide comes a few days after An Fhéill 
Brìghde (Feb. 1), then comes ‘‘ Earrách fad’ 
an déidh Càisge.” An I. bheadaidh thar 
gach féill, "a olc an aimsir duine ghionaich 
thig "oa déidh, early Shrove-tide of all feasts, 
evil days come on a greedy man after it—there 
would be a long tail of spring and lean days 
after Easter. 

inilt, s.f. Bondmaid. 2**Pasture. 3**Eodder. 
4(AF) Cattle. Tha 'n crodh air an i, the cat- 
tle are on the pasture. 

——, v.a. Feed cattle, 

inirte,** st, 
ness. 

inis, innse, see innis. T2 Distress, sorrow. 

inisg, -e, -ean, $.f. Reproach, bad name, upcast, 
fling, personality, 2* Libel, calumny, defa- 
mation. A’ tilgeadh inisgean, defaming, re- 
proaching ; an i. 'ga cur 's a bun aig a’ bhaile, 
the reproach getiing spread and its root at 
home. 

inisgeach, -eiche, a. Reproachful, defamatory, 
disgraceful. 

ini-iol,** s.m. Servant. 

tin-ite, see inithe. 

Tin-ithe, a. Edible, eatable. 

inleighis, -e, a. see ion-leighis. 

inmhe, -an, see inbhe. 

ach, see inbheach. 

inmheachd,** s.f. Concoction. 

in-mheadhonach, -aiche, œ. Mean, moderate. 
2 Inward, inmost. 

ininheallia, o Deceivable. 

inmheasda, a. Commendable. 

finn, see ann. 

inn-, prejiz, of same force as Latin in-. 

Tinn,** I. Now used only in composition with 
a verb, as, dheanainn, J would do; bhual- 
ainn, Z would strike. 2 Us, we. 

Tinn, -ean, s.f. Wave. 

inndrig, pr.pt. ag inndriginn, v.a. Enter. 

inne, s.f Byre-channel or gutter, see p. 79. 

inne, see ionga. 

inne, dat.pl. innibh, see innidh. 

iuneach, -ich, sm. Woof of cloth. 2 see ineach. 
3**Curse. 'San diuth no ’san i., in the warp 
or woof ;'nam dhlüth ’s ’nam i. air, I, the 
heart and soul of the affair. 

,* -iche, a. Black, dirty. 2 Having nails. 

Thig bradan tarra-gheal, inneach, mealgaeh 

the white-bellied black salmon full of roe shall 

come—Filidh, p. 22. 

|dAunnesohadh, -aidh, s.m. Agitating. 
inneachas, -ais s.m. Scramble. 12 Choice. 

inneachd, st Blow. 

Want, deficiency. 


inneadh,-idh. s.m. 
(corrupt word.) 


2 Pasture, graze. 








inneailt, (MS) v.d. Keep. 
inneai, -il, pl. -an & Innil, s. m. Instrument of 


Digitized by 


54 


Laziness, inactivity. 2 Feeble-|: 


2 innis 

any kind. 2 State, condition. 
riage, deportment. 4 Order or disposition of 
anytning. 5 Dress, attire, caparison. 6 Ser- 
vice, attendance. 7 Restraint. 8 Machine, 
apparatus. 9 Implement, tool  12** Array. 
Na m bitheadh an t-i. agam, had I th» means: 
i. bu sheinnteach fuaim, a loud sounding iù- 
strument. 


ach, ff -aiche, æ. Mechanical. 2 Organ- 


ical. 
— ——-aádh, -aidh, s. m. Ordering, 

adjusting, furnishing. 

aich,** v.g. Wield an instrument. 

-buill,* s.m. Windlass. 
-ciüil,* s.m. Musical instrument. 
-cogaidh, s.m. Weapon, arms. 
-coise, s. m. Footst:p of a spinning- 


-draghaidh,** s.m. Capstan. 
-fasgaidh,** s.m. Press. 
— —— -glacaidh,** s.m. Trap. 
— —— — -iomchair,** sm. Vehicle. 
—— ——— -mairbh** s.m. Instrument of death. 
— ——— -smalaidh, s.m. Extinguisher, 
-stoith,* em. see inneal-toit. 
ta, -ilte, a. Well ordered or adorned. 2 
Conformed to art. 3 Ingenious. 4(MS) Ar- 
tificial. 5**Neat, 6** Well made. 7**Spricht- 
ly. s**Handsome. 9**HElegant. 10**Active. 
11**Artistic. Deudan an ordugh i., teeth in 
elegant array, 
— ——achd, s find. Neatness. 2 Conformity 
to art, 3 Ingenuity, fitness, aptness. 4 
Handsomeness. 5 Sprightliness. 6 Elegance, 
7**Activity. 8 (MS) Artificialness. see fl» 
ealtachd. 
—— —— -tarruing,* s.m. Capstan. 
-togail, s.m. Crane, 
-toit,* s.m. Steam-engine. 
innealtradh, see ionaltradh, 
finneamh,** -eimh, s.m. Increase, augmenta- 
tion. 
innean, -ein, -an, s.m. Anyil. 2 Rock, hill. 3 
**Navel. 4**rarely Middle of a pool. 5 An- 
kle. 6(CR) Protuberanee at root-joint of lit- 
tle toe—Farr. Mari, nan ord, like the sound- 
ing of an anvil ; adhare inuein, the horn of an 
anvil ; chaidh e dhe 'inuean, he dislocated his 
ankle (lit. went of his ankle.) 
— ———ach,tf a. Abounding in anvils. 2 Like 
an anvil. 
adh, -aidh, s.m. Deficiency of yarn in 
weaving. 
innear, see inneir. 
innearach, gen.sing. of inneir. 
— ———- 7,0, Full of dung, mucky. 
inneil, see ionnail, 
innein, -ean, see innean. 
inneir, innearach, -eirean, s. f. Dung, manure. 
Cairt innearach, a dung-cart, or a cart-j «il of 
dung ; dùn innearach, @ dunghill. 
—ich, v.a. Dung. 21iMuck. 
innich,* v.n. Scramble, struggle. . 
innidh, dot oi innibh, s.f Bowel, entrail, in- 
testines. 2** Compassion. 3 Byre-channel. 
Ot innibh, from thy bowels. 3 
——,* a. Expert, clever, smart. Gille i, @ 
clever, active young man. 
— ——eachd,* s.f.ind. Expertness. 
innil, -e, d. Active, prone to, ready. 
innil, n.pl. of inneal. Gins, snares, &c, x 
-——, pr.pt. ag innileadh. v a. Prepare, equip. 
tiunill,**s,f. Fort. 2 Gin, snare, 
innilt,** -e, -ean, s.f. Han thinaid, maid-servant. 
innis, iunse, pé. innsean & inuseachan, s. f. Is- 
land. 2 Sheltered valley protected by a wood. 
3 F'ield to graze cattle 1n. 4 Pasture, resting 
rnlace for cattle. 5 Choice plaee—1si*?»v. ü 


preparing, 





wheel. 





Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGNEEE 


3 Mien, ear- . 





1 | 
FÉ 
Sut 


? 
a 


= 


D 
d 


| 


| innis 543 lobairb 

innsear, fut. pass. of innis. Shall be told. 

innsgeanach, see innsgineach. 

innsgin, -e, s,f. Mind, courage, vigour. 

innsgineach, -eiche, @. Sprightly, vigorous, 
lively, energetic, cheerful. 2 Sagacious. 3 
Ingenious. 4 Vehement. 

——d, s.f. Sprightliness, liveliness, airi- 
ness, cheerfulness. 

innsidh, fut.af.a. of innis. 2 gen. sing. of inn- 


Headland. 7 Haugh, riverside mealow. 8 
1n Ross & Suth'd applied to a low-lying and 

| sheltered place, where cows are gathered to 
| be milked, and where they lie out at night 
9** Distress, misery. I. nam bd laoigh ’s nam 
f fiadh, a resting-piace for milch-cows and deer. 
|. 4innis, pr.pt. ag innseadh, v.g. Tell, declare, re- 
| late, report, inform. I. dhomh, tell me ; ciod 
| a’s fheàrr a dh’ innseas an cladh na 'n eag- 
, Jais ? what better guide to tke churchyard than 
D the church ? 
| “innisg, -ean, see inisg. 

——— each, see inisgeach. 

iunis-inhuir, s.f. Archipelago. 

ìnnleachd, -an, s.f. Device, contrivance. 2 In- 
| genuity. 3 Invention. 4 Evil device or strat- 
agem. 5 Machine. 6 Art, 7(MS)Adroitness. 
Cha’n "eil e am i.-sa sin a dheanamh, it is 
not within (he power of my invention to do 
that ; dealbhamaid innleachdan, let us devise 
devices ; ni aire i., necessity is the mother of in- 
vention ; am bheile'nad i. mis’ à leigeil air 
falbh ? is it within the compass of your inven- 
tion to let me go? droch i., a wicked contrivance; 
cha’n fhiacb duine gun neart gun i., œ man i$ 
of litile worth without strength or device. 
—ach, -aiche, a. Ingenious, inventive, 
adept. 2 Subtle. 3 Cunning. 4 Cunningly 
' contrived. 5 Artificial. 6 Sagacious, Gu h- 
E 3, ingeniously. 







































— 


seadn. 

innsreadh,(MS) s.m. Apparatus. 

innsridh*,* spl. Effects, furniture, movables, 

innsrumaid, see ionnsramaid. 

innt-, Í The form taken by the prep. inn- bee 
fore s. (inold Gaelie only.) 

innte, prep.pron. In her, init (f.) 2 Inher 
power. 

Tinnte, s.f. Kernel. 

innteach, Ach, s.m. Way, road, gate. 

innteart,* see inntreadh. 

inntil,** s.f. Budget, wallet, satchel. 

inntile, see imideal. 

inntinn, -ean, $.f. ‘he mind. 2 Intention, pur- 
pose, 3 Will, pleasure. 4 Intelligence. 5 
Ingenuity. Suil bhur n-i, the eyes of your 
mind ; i. dhùbailt, a double mind ; a dh’ aon 
i., with one mind or accord. 

——_——-each, -eiche, a. Sensible, wise, intel- 
lectual. 2 High-minded, high-spirited. 3 
Hearty, merry, sportive, jolly. 4 Earnest. 5 





—————aiche, s.m. Contriver, inventor, de-| Conceited. ` 
|J „ signer, deviser, ingenious person. inntinneachd, s. f. High-mindedness. 2 Con- 
5 ——--— —aiche, comp. of innleachdach, ceitedness, 3 Sprightliness. 

——— —-—ail, see innleachdach. inntinneas, -eis, s.m. Jollity. 

——_———air, s.m. Inventor. inntinneil,t{ æ. see inntinneach. 


inntinn-eólas, s.m. Metaphysics. 

— -edlaiche, s.m. Metaphysician, 

inntir,* see inntrinn. 

inntleachd, see innleachd. 

— — ——— ach, see innleachdach. 

Tinntliomh,** s. Treasury. 

inntreachduinn, $.f. d pr.pt. of inntrinn, 

inntreadh, -idh, s.m. Beginning, commence- 
ment. 2 Act of beginning or entering upon. 
3 Entering, entrance. Ag i—, pr. pt. of innt- 
rinn, 

inntreas,** eis, s.m. Entrance-money. 

inntric, see inntrig. 

inntrig, see inntrinn. 

——-—eadh, see inntreadh. 

inntrinn, pr.pt. ag inntreadh & ag inntreachd- 
uinn [ag inndreachdan in Suth’d] v.a. Begin, 
originate. 2 Enter. 

,** s.f. Entrance, admittance. 2 Com- 
mencement.  €ha'n'eili, an seo, there is no 
admittance here, 

————eadh, 3rd. sing. & pl. imp. of inntrinn. 
I. e, let him enter ; i. iad, let them enter. 

insgineach, see innsgineach, 

—— — —-—d, see innsgineachd. 

insene,** St Sex, gender. 2 Speech, 

insiubhal, aile, æ. see ion-siubhal. 

intleachd, see ìnnleachd. 

——.--——ach, see innleachdach. 

intreabh,** s.m. Want, poverty. 

iob,tt a, -annan, sf. see ubag & uibe, 2(DO) 
s.f. Forward woman, hussy—Perthshire. 

iob, -a, -an & -achan, s.m. Lump ofdough. 3 
Cake before being fired. 3**rarely Death. 

iobach,tt a. Full of, or pertaining to lumps of 
dough or unbaked cakes. 

iobag, see iobalag. 

ìobair, pr.pt. ag ìobradh, v.a. Sacrifice, immo 
late. Dh’ i. iad uan, they sacrificed alamd ; 
cha’n i. sibh, ye shall not make an offering. 

ìobairt, -e, -ean, s.f. Offering, sacrifice. Faigh 
ear gu hi tri uain, let three lambs be got fos 


| —Aan, n. pl. of innleachd. 
^ asais s.m. Artificiality. 2 Mechanics. 
— jnnleadh, -idh, s. m. Aiming, purposing, pro- 
jecting, preparing, preparation. 
jiunleag,* s.f. Child's doll. 
innlich, v.a. Aim, project, devise, 2[ Desire. 
+innlidh, s.f. Forage. 
-.  jnulinn,-e, s.f. Forage, provender, fodder. 2 
d The third part of te straw left by the tenant 
a who is removing for the one entering the farm, 
for bedding to the cattle to help manure. Os 
- ceann 'innlinn, over its fodder. 
—— —— each, -eiehe, a. Abounding in provender. 
innlis,** s.f. Lamp, lantern. 
— Annrig,(MS) v.a. Begin. 
'* ——vadh,(MS) s.m. Beginning. 2 Adit. 3 
| Access, induction. 
inuse, see innseadh. 
ach, -eiche, a. Abounding in islands. 2 In- 
sular, peninsular. 3{f{Having good pasture. 
4 'Tattlinv, given to telling or relating. 
achail, ft -e, a. Indicative. 
innseachan, n.pl. of innis. Islands 2 The Indies, 
innseadh, -aidh, s.m. "Telling, act of telling, in- 
forming, rehearsing, relating, intelligence, 
information. 2 Report. 3 Sign. Is don’ au 
t-i ort, it is q bad report of you ; fear-innsidh 
nan uisgeachan or fear innsidh na h-aimsir, 
a look-out man in a boat, Ag i—, pr. pt. of 
innis. 
innseag, -eig. -an, s. f. dim. of innis. Little is- 
land. 2 Ait orisle in à river, 3 Detached 
field or pasture. 4(MS)Tale. 5**Little patch 
e eround, as in hilly or wooded coun- 
ries. 
———ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in small is- 
j lands, little fields, or level downs. 
M -< ail,it -e, æ. Telling of tales, lodging of 
— complaints. 
———an, n.) l. of innseag. 
jnnsean, m.pl. of inuis. 
innseanzaeh, s.m. Islander. 2 Indian. 








——— 











Original from 
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


B INTERNET ARCHIVE URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


iobairt 


sacrifice. Rinn thu i, dheth, in Blair Atholl 
means you have made a muddle or æ hash of it. 

——— -buidheachais, s.f. Thank-offering. 

———each, a Abounding in sacrifices. 

———eachadh,(MS) s.m. Immolation. 

———ear, s.m. Sacrificer. 

7 —— -fhion, 8.f. Wine-offering. 

—— —ich, see iobair. 

-——— e S D 

eg adi erch \ sf. Burnt-offering. 

iobalag, CR) s.f. Dowdy, untidy woman— W. of 
Ross-shire. ‘ 

iobartan, -ain, s.m. Means to do evil, 

iobhlair, see iolair. 

iobrachadh, s. m. Act of immolating. 2(MS) 
Mactation. 

ìobradh, -aidh, s.m. Sacrificing, sacrifice, 2 
Act of sacrificing. Ag i—, pr. pt. of ìobair.. 

—— —7, rd. sing. & pl. imp. of ìobair. I. e, 
let him sacrifice ; 3. iad, let them sacrifice. 

lobraim, ( for iobraidh mi) I will sacrifice. 

To topi) Ist. sing. imp. of iobair. Let me sacri- 

ce. 

loc, ice, s.m. Rent, payment, 2 Medicine, heal- 
ing, remedy. 3 Requital 4 Compassion, 
clemency, humanity, mercy, kindness, good 
nature,generosity. 2 rarely Children. I.-éiric, 
kindred-money, ransom ; dean do ghearan ri 
fear gun i. is their e ** tha thu bochd,” com- 
plain to a man without compassion, and he will 
say ''you are poor " ; dean i., have pity. 

loc, pr. pt. ag ìocadh, v. a. Pay, render, retri- 
bute. 2 Heal, cure. 3 Reward. 4 Suffer, 
PEANN Iocaidh iad umhla, they shall pay a 

ne. 

tocach, æ. Ready to pay or requite. 

iocadh, -aidh, s.m. Paying, payment, render- 
ing. 2 Act of rendering. 3 Requital. 4 Cur- 
ing. 5'Rewarding. 6 Suffering. Ag i—, pr. 
pt. of ioc. : 

tocadh, 3rd. sing. & pl. imp. of ioc. I.e, let him 
pay !ì. iad, let them pay ! 

iocaidh, fut. af. a. of ioc. Shall pay. 

hocaidh, -ean, s.m. Tenant, farmer. 

locail, -e, a. Merciful, compassionate, tender- 
hearted. 

iocalachd, s.f. Mercifulness, compassion, tender- 
heartedness. 

Ocar, TT aire, a. That pays rent or tribute. 2 
Submissive. 

ioc-ar-nac, Willy-nilly. 

iocas, -ais, s,m. Payment. 2 Requital, remun- 
eration, 

Tioc-éirie, sm. Kindred-money, ransom. 

iochd, s. f. ind. see ioc. 

1ochdail, see iocail. 

iochdar, -aire, a, see ioemhor. 

iochdar, -air, -an, s.m. The bottom, lowest part. 
2 Foundation. An i. dheth, under, worsted, 
cheated ; i. is uachdar, top and bottom ; i. nan 
enoc, the foundation of the hills ; 1. a? ghlinne, 
the lowest part of the valley ; tha e an l., he is 
beneath. 

iochd-ar-n-achd, see ioc-ar-nac. 

ìochdarach, -aiche, a. Lower, the lower, neth- 
er, nethermost. A’ chlach-mhuilinn i., the 
nether millstone ; ifrinn i., the lowest hell ; lon- 
aidean i. na talmhainn, the nether places of the 
earth. 

ìochdaran, -ain, s.m. Inferior, 
tern, uuderliug. 

iochdaranach, a. Inferior. 

lochdaranachd, s.f. Inferiority. 

jochdarauta, a. Deputed. 2 Tributary. 

iochilar-chanuis,tt s.m. Bass in music. 

iochdmhor, see ioemhor. 

ioch:il-ochd (CR) Nolens volens—W. of Ross. see 





subject, subal- 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


544 


locnihoire, 


- OE a 10S ASPIRE 
ioc-ar-nae. 

ìochdrach, see ìochdarach. 

ìoc-luibh, -ean, see ioc-lus. 

ioc-lus, -uis, -an, s.m. Medicinal herb. 2 Heal. 
ing by herbs. I. an aonaich, the healing herb 
of the plain. 

loc-Insach, -aiche,a. Abounding in healing herbs, 

Sof Mercifulness, compassionaté- 

ness.. | 

ioemhoire, comp. of iocmhor. 

iocmhor, -oire, q. Merciful, clement, humane, 
compassionate, kiad, ` Righrean i, merciful 
kings. 

ijocmhorachd, s.f.índ. Compassion, 
mercy, kiudness, regard. 

loc-shlaint, -e, -ean, s. f. Balm, salve, cordial, 
balsam, remedy, nectar, healing draught, 
medicine. Bheirinn mar i. mo chiochan do 
'm ghaol, as a cordial I would give the milk of 
my breast to my love ; b’ e sin an l., that was 
the cordial ; beagani. a little baln ; i. chluas, 
acoustics. 

loe-shlàinteaech, -eiche, a, Healing, cordial, 
soothing, alleviating, salutary. 2 Balsamic.. 
3 Abounding in cordials. 4 Benign.. 

iod ! int. Alas ! 

iodaltach,(MS) a. Lazy. 

fiodh,(AC) s. Corn, food. 

iodh,l -a, pl. -anna & -annan, s. f. Cramp, 
spasm. 2(MS) Fit. 3**Rheumatic affection. 
4 Pang. 5 Any severe pain. 6**Chain, collar. 

iodh, see iogh. 

iodha, (MS) s, Pinch. 

iodhach, -aiche, a. Spasmodic. 

iodhal, -ail, an, s.m. Image, idol. 

iodhalach, æ. Idolatrous. 2 Full of idols. 

iodhalachd, s.f. Idolatry. 

iodhal-aorach, -aiche, a. Idolatrous. 

iodhal-aoradair, -ean, s.m. Idolater. 

iodhal-aoradh, -aidh, -ean, s. m. 
Luchd iodh al-aoraidh, idolaters. 

iodhal-aoraidh, -an-aoraidh, s.m. Image to be 
worshipped. 

iodhalt, Suth’d for iodhal. 

iodhan, -ain, s.m. Spear, pike, javelin. 2 Affect- 
ion. 3 Obedience. 4(AC) Small strip of land 
under corn. 15 Confirming, 

tiodhan, a. Sincere. 2 Pure. 3 Clean. 

iodhan,tt -ain, -an, s.m. Throes of child-birth. 

iodhanna, n.pl. of iodh. 

iodhanadh,(MS) s.m. Torture, 

iodhannaeh, a. Spasmodic. 

iodh-chosgach, œ. Anti-spasmodic. 

iodh-chraobh, s.f. Cypress. 

iodhlach, see iodhlachadh. 

iodhlachadh,(AC) s.m. AI handling of corn 
from cutting tostaeking—Skye.  . 

iodhladair, see iodhal-aoradair. 

iodhladaireachd, see iodhalachd. 

iodhlain, v.a. Leap, skip. 

iodhlan, -ain, s.m. Leap, hop, skip. 2 Hero. 

iodhlanadh, -aidh, s.m. Skipping, leaping. 

iodhlann, -aiun, -an, s.f. Corn-yard, stack-yard. 
2 Circle (enclosure.) 3**Any fenced place. 

a ach, -aiche, o. Abounding in corn-yards 
or stack-yards. 

iodh-leighiseach, ff siche a. Anti-spasmodic. 

fiodhna, -ai, sm. Spear, lance. 2 Protection, 
safsguard. 3 Brightness, purity. 

Tiodhnach,-aich, s.m. Gift. d 

t-————, @. Valiant, warlike, martial. 2 
Like a lance or spear. À 

iodhnadh,|| -aidh, -ean, s.m. Pangs of child- 
birth, see iodhan. 

iodhol, see iodhal. 

iog,** s.f. Deceit, cunning. 2 rarely Mother. 

iog»^^, a Deccitful, cunning. 


clemency, 


Idolatry. 


Original from 


1ozach vA 





"— Ss 
Gg de P "29 zi. 
3 Ces < 
ae m eg, Gë Zeg 


Ki 
A 


p^ dex am 





UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS EMI 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


Li 
| 


— 2 


iogan 515 lolair-riabhach 
logan, -ain,-an, s.m. Deceit, fraud. 9 Bird's | 
claw. De’ni., mhallachadh ’s de ghò, oi de- 
ceit, cursing and fraud. 
loganach, -aiche, a. Deceitful, false, treacher- 
ous. 2 Reluctant. 3 Like the claw of a bird. 
4 Having a claw, Mionnan i., false oaths ; 
gu h-ì., deceitfully. 
loganaich, s.f. Reluctance, backwardness, tım- | 
orousness, indecision, flinching. 











jogannachd,** s.f. Deceitfulness, falseness. 
iogara,** a. Low, humble. 
jozaras,** -ais, s.m. Uprightness, honesty. 
iogarnach, æ. see ioganach 
iogarnachd, s.f. see ioganachd. 
iogh, see iodh. 
iogh, s. The yew-tree, old Gaelic name of the 
letter I. 
iogha, see iodh. 
loghair, see iongar. 
iogùanna, n.pl. of iogh. 
ioghannan, n.p!. of iogh. 
ioghar, -air, s.m. see iongar, 
ioghlacadh, a. Tractable, easily caught. 
ioghnadh, -a1dh, -ean, see ionghnadh, | 
ioghnadh,(MS) s.m. Pageant. I 
ER s. Pylorus, lower orifice of the stom- 
ach. | 
iozhrach,** -aich, see iongarach. 
ioghrachadh, -aidh, see iongrachadh. 





ioghraich, see iongraich. 402. Iolair-bhwidhe. 
ioghras, -ais, sm. Uprightness. 2(AF) Ossifrage. 3 see iolair-mhara. 
jognach, a. Covetous. iolair-Ghreugach,(AF) s.f Gier eagle. 

|. lol-.f prefix, Many, iolair-iasgaich, s. f. Osprey—falco hahaétus. 


iol,** v.g. Vary, change, chequer. 2 s. see iola. 

iola, chan, s.f. Fishing station, fishing-rock on 
shore, fishing-bank at sea.—Jsles. 2 (DMy) 
Fishing with rods ın a boat.: 

iolaeadh, see tiodhlacadh. 

iolach, -aich, -aichean, s.f. Shout, cry, crying in 
exultation or triumph. 2 ttRoar, 3**Dam- 
age, loss. I. bhroin, @ shout of grief; an 1. 
bhronach is ait fa seach, the shout joyful and 
sad by turns. 

iolachdach, -aiche, a. Shouting for joy, merry. 
2 Disastrous, destructive. 

ìolachdadh, see tìodhlacadh. 

ioladh, -aidh, s.m. Fun, merriment, raillery, 
merrymaking. Cuir air 1., make light of, make 


d of. 

ioladhach,** o Merry. 2 Sprightly. 3 Hu- 
morous. 

iolagall,** -aill, s.m. Damage. 2 Dialogue. 

.iolaie, see tiodhlaic. 

iol-ainmeach, a. Polyonymous. 








SS e 


= 
c 


= — = Ae AX 


Ku - 
eS 
ECH 


E E = 


= iolainn, see iodhlann. 

= jolainneach, see iodhlannach. 

: iolair,{t a. Plural, of the plural number. 

| jolair, -e & iolarach, pl. -ean, s. f. Eagle. 2 


Swift. Do luathas mar 10lair, thy speed like 
S ag ; aghaidh iolarach, the. face of an 
eagle. 

 Jiolair, s.m. Much, diversity, plenty. 

jol-àrreamh, v. Annumerate. 

- jol-àireamh, -eimh, s.m. Anaumeration. M: 

... iolair-bhan, -e-bàine, -an-bana, see iolair-mbara. 403. Iolaiv-iasgaich. 

|... iolair-bhreac,{[ -e-brice, -an-breaca, s. f. Spot- | iolair-iasgair, see iolair-iasgaich. 

|. ted eagle—aquila nevia. OChiefly found in iolairig, s.f. V-shaped structure, not necessarily 





3 B E E » 





LI 
-— a 
>= —_ 


Med Skye. Dr H 

We: e^ K ] i artificial, wide at one end and narrow at the 
= iolair-bhuidhe, äi -e-buidhe, -ean-buidhe, s. f.| other, into which deer were driven, and shot 
BR Golden eagle—aquila chrysaétos. with arrows as they came out. 

e" Ee, s. f. White-tailed eagle, see decade Ka EE Ve 
m. - talr- dét, AN | iolair-mhaol,{ -e-maoile, -an-maola, s.f. Ba 
M. jolair-dhubh, see iolair-bhuidhe. 2 Ring-tail eagle. d H 

=Z eagle. EUM j iolair-mhara, -e-m-, -an-m-, s.f. Sea-, or white- 
nx laireach, æ. Abounding in eagles. 2 Likean| tailed eagle—haliaéius albicilla. 

m. eagle. iolair-mhonaidh, see iolair-bhuidhe. 


Wi i olair-fhionn, s.f. Gier-eagle.—falco ossifragus. iolair-riabbach, see iolair-mhara, 


Re Original from 
Ki? ] 


| ^ 


9 Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
id 


CG INTERNET ARCHIVE URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


INTERNET ARCHIV| 


iolair-shuüil 





404. Iolair-mhara. 

iolair-shuil, -shül, s.f. Eagle-eye. 
the eagle eye of the sun. 

jolair-shüileacn, a. Eagle-eyed. 

ivlair-stil-na-yréine, see iolair-mhara. 

iolair-bhimchi.l!ach, s.j. Gier eagle, see iolair- 
fhionn. j 

jolair-uisge, s.m. Osprey, see iolair-iasgaich. 

iolaman,(CR) sm. Piece of skin tied over the 
mouth of the undhuideal with strong thread. 

Jolan,** a. Sincere. 

iolanach,** o Ingenious, learned, skilful. 

10ianachd,** s.f. tngenuity, learning. 

iolann, see iodnlaun. 

iolar, edv. Downwards —Perthshire. 
I. shìos, down below, 

iolar,(DC) s. m. Bottom of water, or of a loch. 
2 Foot of a hill or rock— Perth, N.Argyll. I. 
na beinne, the foot of the mountain. 

iolar,** -eir, s.m. Variety, plenty, much, di- 
versity. 

iolarach, gen.sing. of iolair. 

ioilarach, a. Various, varied, variegated, cheq- 
uered. 

io'avh,** s.m. Disport. 

iol.^héist, -e, -ean, s.m. Serpent, snake, adder. 
2H Wild beast. 

iol-bheusach, -aiche, o Versatile, various in 
manner. 2 Arch,sly. 3 Multifarious. Gu 
h-i., archly. 

iol-bhuadh,** -aidh, s.m. Victory, triumph. 

iol-bhuadhach, -aiche, a. Victorious, triumph- 
ant, gaining many victories. 

iol-chainnteach,** o, Polyglot. 

iol-chéard, -éird, s.m. see iol-chéardach, 

———— ach, s.m. Jack-otf-all-trades. 

iol-chearnach, -aich, s.m. Polygon. 

iol-chéarnach, -aiche, a. Polygonal,multangular. 

iol-chéarnag, s.f. see iol-chéaruach, s. 

iol-choimeasgta,** q. Mixed, miscellaneous, 

iol-chosach, a Many fo ted. 

iol-chosach, -aich, s.m. Centipede. 

iol-chridheach, -eich, a. Fickle, 
deceitful, double-hearted. 

iol-chruthach, -aiche, a. Multiform, various. 
2 Inconstant, changeable, as clouds. 3 Well- 
proportioned, well-featured, comely. Gu h-i., 
changeably. 

jol-chuire,** s.f. Sadness, lamentation. 

iol-chumasg,** s. Miscellany. 

iol-danach, -aiche, a. Ingenious, well-gifted. 
Gu h-i., ingeniously. 

jol-danach,** -aich, s.m. Jack-of-all-trades. 

io!-dannsa, -ichean, s.m. Ball. 2 Promiscuous 
«ance. 3 Country dance. 

ioi-dathach, -aiche, a. Many-coloured. 2 Dis- 
coloured. 

ioldhathach, see iol-dathach. 

iol-dealbhach, -aiche, «. Well-favoured or fea- 


I. na gréine, 


see ioras. 


inconstant, 


Digitized by 


546 


| ivl-ghilleach, -eiche, a, Complex. ; 
|iol-ghineach,** o. Heterogeneous. Gu h-i., heter- 


|iol-ghniomhach, -aiche, æ. Ingenious. Ott In- 


liol-ghonach, -aiche, æ. Vulnific. 2 Painful. Gu 


Vitti RVR aA ea 
TS ES, BENZ ea 

d al Y scm a e eae p g wy 
n "» ^ à | 


uo b. At 3 


iomacharag 


cured. 2¢+Multiform. 
iol-dhuil, s.f. Great desire, avarice. 
iu]-f. ileadh,** s.m. Complication. 
iol-fhillte,** a. Complex, complicated. 
Tiolga,** s.pl. Tongs. 


ogeneously. | 
iol-ghleusach, -aiche, a, Manifold, complicated. 
iol-ghnéitheach, -eiche, a. Of all kinds, various, 
heterogeneous. 2 Many-coloured,. Gu h-i., di- 
versely. 


dustrious. 


-~ h-i., painfully. 

iol-ghràineach, -eiche, o, Very ugly, horrid, 
causing disgust., 

tiol-ghreasach,** -aich, s.m. Inn, lodging. 

iol-ghuth, a. see iol-ghuthach. 

iol-ghuthach, -aiche, a. Of various tongues, 
polyglot. 2**Having a great compass of voice. 

. 3**Having various voices, as.a vocal mimic. 

iolla,* $.f. Sight, view. Gabh i. ris, just look at 
tt. 2 see iola. 

vn s. Fishing rock generally covered at high 
ide. 

iolladh,(DC) s.m. Fishing ground— Uist. 

iollag, s.f. see iullag. 

iollagach, -aiche, see iullagach. 

iollagaehd, see iullagachd. 

iollain, -e, a Expert, mechanical. 

iollairce, pl, -an, Hiding-hillock in deer-hunt- 


ing. 

iollaisg,(DU) adv. Wrong, astray. Chaidh ei, 
he went astray or wrong. 

iollan, see iollain. 

iollanaiche,** s.m. Expert of any art. 

iollapach, see iullagaeh. 

iol-leabhar, -air, -bhraiehean, s.m. Volume. 

iol-mhaitheas,** eis, s. m. Much good, great 
advantage. 

iol-mhaoin, -e, s.f. Opulence, riches. 

iol-mhao1ineach, -eiche, a. Opulent, rich. 

iol-mhodhach, -aiche, @ Manifold, various. 

iol-oilean,** s. Polymaéthy. 

iol-phosadh, -aidh, s.m. Polygamy. 

iol-phosda,** a. Often married. 

iolrach, see iolair. 

iol-shioladh,** -aidh, s.m. Polysyllable. 

iol-shlisneach,** -ich, s.m. Polygon. 

iol-shlisneach,** o. Polygonal. 

ioltag, -aig, -an, s.f. seeialtag. 

iol-thilgte,** a. Amphibolous. > 

iom-, or ioma-,ja. Used as a prefix in compounds — 
(the broad vowel form of the prefix im-.) 

iom-, prefix, About, round. 2 Entire. Iomlan, 
quite complete; iomaghaoth, whirlwind. 

ioma, o Much, many, numerous, also iom- 
ad, iomadh & 10madaidh. 

ioma-bhallach, a. Circummured. 

ioma-bhiorach, a. Prone to rebuke or check. - 
Causing a rebuke. 

ioma-bhreitheach,tf «a. Multiparous. 

ioma-bhriathrach, -aiche, a. Multiloquous. 

ioma-bhruidhneach, -eiche, a. Multiioquous. 

iomacach, -aiche, see imeach. 

iomach,** -aich, s.m. Colt. 

iomach, see iomadh. 2 Parti-coloured, of varë 
ious colours. : 

iomachagair, s.f. Kind regards, compliments. 

iomachain, see iomaguin. 

iomachaineaeh, see iomaguineach. 

ioma-chainnteach, a, Having many languages. 

ioma-chanaineach, a. Having many languages. 

iomachar, see iomchar, : ' 

iomacnarag, -aig, -an, sf. Compliments, friend- 


` 






Original from l 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 

















iomacharag 547 iomair 
ly message. rammar. I. savilh is digh, man; 
foma-eaasach, œ. Polypous, many-footed. ibi maiden. 3 sapis d. 
iomachd, seeimeaechd, ioma lhall,** -aill, s.m. Sin, iniquity. 
Eo -aich, s.m. Any close private we -aiche,a. Parti-coloured, change- 
place. able. 
ioma-cheannach, a. Many-headet. ioma-dhathte, past pt. Many-coloured, dyed 
ioma-chearnach,** a. Many-eornered. with many colours. 
ioma-chéarnachd.ff s.f. Multangularness. ioma-dhortach, -aiche, a. Circumfusive. 
|» joma-chéiu, see imn-chian. ioma-dhórtadh, -aidh, s.m. Circumfusion. 
ioma-cheist,** see imcheist. ioma-dhruid, pr. pt. ag ioma-dhruideadh, v. a. 
ioma-cheisteach, see im-ch2isteach. Enclose, besiege, shut up close 
ioma-chiallachd, ** s.f. Amphibology. | — —— ———eadh, -idh, s.m. Enclosing, act of 
.ioma-chian, see im-chian. | enclosing. 2 Besieging. 3 Siege. 4 Euclo- 




















sure. 
—— ——. —te, past pt. Cireummured. 
iomad-labhrach,(MS$) æ. Multiloquous. 
ioma-füilleadh. s.m. Circumplication. 
iomag, -aig, s.f. Margin, border. 
iomagail, s.f. Dialogue. 2 Dispute. 
iomagain, -e & -ain, pl. see iomaguin. 
iomagaineach, -eiche, see iomaguineach, 
fiomagallaimh, s.f. Counsel, advice. 
iomagan,** s. m. Restlessness, aaxiety. 2 
Flitting. 
ioma-ghaoth, -aoith, -an, S. f. Whirlwind, ed- 
dywind. I, foa sgiathaibh, œ whirlwind un- 
der his wings. 
ioma-ghaothach, @ Squally, whirling as an 
eddy-wind. 
ioma-ghlae, v.d. Grip, grasp, embrace. 
ioma-ghnèitheach, -eiche, a. Various, manifold. 
2 Parti-coloured. 
iomaghonach, -aiche, a. Giving many wounds. 
iomaguin, -e & Ain, pl. -an, Aaxieby, grief. 2 
Solicitude. 3 Distress. 4 Agony. Sheas i le 
h-i., she stood perplexed; an i. gheur, im sore 
distress ; fo i., solicitous. 
iomaguineach, -eiche, œ. Anxious, solicitous, 
distracted, perplexed. 2 Causing pain, dis- 
tress or anxiety. 
——-d, s.f. see iomaguin, 
tiomaich, s.f. see iomaigh. 
tiomailh,** s.f. Envy. 
tiomaidhvhear, r. q. Check, rebuke, 
iomaidheachd,(M 3, s.f. Diversity. 
iomaidiblh, see iomadaidh. 
iomvigh,** s.m. Border. Z Open ehampaigu 
ground. 
iomaill, g^n.sing. of iomall, 
iomain, pr.pt. ag iomain, v.&. Urge, lrive slow- 
ly as cattle. 2 Toss, whirl, roll. 3 Conduct, 
4** Drive anything forward on the ground, 
kick forward, as a football. 5 Play as at 
shinty, football, or any driving game. lomain- 
idh iad, they shail drive ; ’gan i. 'sa curéh, 
driving them backward in battle ; aa bheil tha 
dol a dr’ iomain Pare you going to pay? ciod 
ean ioinsin ? what game ? ; adh’ i. chaman, 
am ball ioinain, or am ball iomanaca, sAinty. 
iomain, -e &-each, -ean, sS. f. Driving, acé of 
driving or urging. 2 Drove of black ct6io. 3 
Tossing, act of tossing, 4 Whirünz, roling. 
5ft Crowd. 6** Drove of sheep. 7**3ouni- 
er of swine. Ag i—, pr.pt. ofiomain. Gaca 
i. teatha féin, sach drove by itself; a ivan- 
tuinn nan iomaine, followiny tha droves ; lorg- 
iomain or slat-iomain, an ox-goud ; is leòir a 
++Moving, flitting. Air i., adrift ; leòn noi.| tha thu a’ gabhail iomain, you dré being driv- 
no bron, neither wound nor anxiety nor grief. en back badly. 
iomadanach, -aiche, a. Pressed by disaster. 2 iomain-cuaiu, œ. Driven by the storm. 
Sorrowful, sad. 3 Changeable, fluctuating. iomaiueach, -eiche, «. Coercive. 
— A Restless, unsettled. 5 Moving to and fro, | iomiiuiche, -an, s.m. Driver of cattle, drover. 
Beie Gu h-i., changeably. 2 Player. 
tomadanach, -aich, s.m. Fickle fellow. iom-ainmeach, ft -eichs, a. Multinomial, 
lomadanachd, s.f, Changeableness, fickleness. | iomair. v. see imir. 
madas,(MS) -ais, s.m. Abundance. iomair, -ean, s.m. see imir, [omairatn cian, 
adh, & Much, many, divers. 2 Plural in| Zong ridges. 


iomna-ehladhadh, s.m. Cireumvallation. 
iom-choire, see iomchar. Beul na h-iomchoire, 
said of one prone to find fauib. 
ioma-chomhairle, -an, s.f. Doubt, suspense. 2 
Perplexity, indecision, halting between two 
opinions, 
ioma-chomhiirleach, -eiche, a. Doubtful, un- 
steady, undecided, fickle. 
ioma-chrith,** st Trembling, tremor, violent 
tremor. 2 Earthquake. Air i. chum dioghailt, 
trembling for revenge. 
ioma-chruth,tt a. Multiformed, various. 
iomi-chruthach, -aiche, a. Multiform, various. 
ioma-chruthach lft s.f. Multiformity. 
ivuma-chuidheachd,(MS) s.f. Pertinentness. 
—. iom -chuimhn', see iomiguin. 
- joma-cuuimhneach, see iomaguineach. 
iomachuinge, s.f. Narrowness, extreme narrow- 
mindedness. ` 
jomachumhann,* a. Very narrow, narrow-mind- 
ed, nigzardly. 
ioma-chladhai'h, v.a. Circumvallate. 
iomad, see iomadh. 
iomadach, -aiche, a. Numerous, many, abun- 
dant. 2**'foo mung, I. uair, often ; i. té, 
many a female; i. fear, many aman ; i. seor-a, 
many a kind ; na slòigh gu h-i., the people in 
numbers. 
iomadachadh, -ailh, s.m. Multi plying, multi- 
pliea!ion. 2 Numbering. Agi—, pr. pt. of 
iomadaich. 
iomadachd, sse iomadalachd. 
iomadaich, pr. pt. ag iomadachadh, v.a. Multi- 
ply, increase. 
iomadaidh, -e, s.f. Multitude. 2 Too much, 
superfluity. Is co math na's leòir is i., enough 
is as good as super fuity. 
ioma laidh, a. Manifold, several, superfluous. 2 
Frequent. Néamhnaid nan i. buaidh, a pearl 
of manifold virtues. : 
iomadaidheach, -eiche, a, Legionary. 
iomadaidheachd, s. f. Abundance, plurality, 
multiplicity. 2 Superfluity, redundance, 
fom 2dail,-e, œ. Multiplicable. 211 Miscellaneous. 
jomadalachd, s.f. Multitude, abundance, plur- 
ality, numerousness. 2 Lucrease, multiplica- 
tion. 3 Multifariousness. 4{{Miscell..neous- 
ness. Oir thig aislingean le i. ghnothaichean, 
for dreams com? through a multitude of busi- 
mess. [Not good Gaelic idiom.] 
iomadan, -ain,-ano,s m. Concurrence of disasters. 
2 Lamentation, mouraing, 3**Anxiety, soli- 
citude. 4 Restlessness, discomfiture. 5 
Sadness. 6**Changeable or fickle fellow, 7 





Original from 


A 


Digitized SU TET ba ës rb fb ae EREM 
gitized by UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


| Me L d e A E P D | j i (E * 
ER | NTE RI d ET FT L. H VE ' A D H B N A. E 4 A d D A E A 


iomair 

iomair, pr.pt. ag iomairt, v. a. Employ, exer- 
cise, use. 2 Conduct, behave. 3 Contest, 
engage. 4 Wield, play, as in fencing. 5 Play 
at cards, backgammon, &c. 6 Frolic. 711Need. 
SttMove. 9 Serve. I. i 'san àrach, wield it 
in (he batile-feld. 

iomair, pr.pt. ag iomram, ag iomradh & ag iom- 
airt, v.a. Row,asa boat. I. am bata, row 
the boat; an ramh a’s fhaisge 1., row the 
nearest oar 31.’ Eachainn, dean fodha a Ruair. 
idh, row Hector, back water Rory. 

fomairc,* see imrich. 

iomaire, see imir. 

ach,tt a. Abounding in ridges of land. 

achd,** s.f. Courting. 

ag,** -eig, ef Skirmish. 

iomairg,** s. f. Plundering, devastation. 2 
Plunder. 3 Skirmish. 

iomairich, s. see imirich. 

—, v. see imirich & imrich. 

— ———te, see imirichte. 

jomairidh, see imiridh, 

lomairl, see iomrall. 

iomairt, ean, s. f. [McL & D gives s.m. but 
-e for the gen. sing.) Employing,exercising,act 
of employing. 2 Conduct, behaviour. 3 En- 
gagement, contest, conflict. 4 Bustle, agita- 
tion, confusion. 5 Playing, gaming. 6 Frolic. 
7** Exertion. 8**Labour. 9**Restlessness, fid- 
geting. 10 Distress. 11** Moving. 12 Wield- 
ing. 13**Making use of. 14**Operation, pro- 
cess. 15IIRowing. 16* Danger. Agi. air na 
cairtean, playing at cards;'s ann orra a bha ’n 
i., they were greatly confused; ciùin, tlàth ann a 
h-i., mild and gentle in distress ; ag i. saighde 
mar lann, using an arrow like a spear ; am 
bheil thu ag i. seo P are you using this? i. nan 
laoch, the exertion of the heroes ; i. nan tonn, 
the agitation of the waves ; is ann ort tha 'n 
i. ! how you do fidget; i. nan lann, the play- 
ing of-swords. Ag i—, pr.pt. of iomair, 

(AC) s. Cloth striped lengthwise only, 

not both ways like tartan. 

each, -eiche, a. Employed, active. 2 

Playful.  3*Betting, laying wagers. 4 Lav- 

ish. 5**Bustling, agitating.  6**Fidgeting. 

restless. 7¢ftStirring. 8tfThrifty. 2 Indus- 

trious, 

eas, -eis, see iomartas. 


iomairt fhaochag, s.f. Whelk game, or chuckie 
stanes, a girl's game, played with smal! whelk 
shells. Alexander Morrison in an article on 
Uist Games in Celtic Review, No. 16, says :— 
“I have taken some trouble to understand 
this intricate game, but have not succeeded. 
I have done the next best thing, however, for 
I have got all the different moves, which none 
but a feminine mind could remember. 


1 
(a) Sgabadh aon 
(b) Dubhas a h-aon 
(c) Trithis a h-aon 
(d) Cairteal a h-aon 














2 
Sgabadh a dha 
Dubhas a dha 
Trithis a dha 
Cairteal a dha 


4 
Sgapadh a Ceithir 
Dubhas a Ceithir 
Trithis a Ceithir 
Cairteal a Ceithir 


3 
(a) Sgapadh a tri 
(b) Dubhas a tri 
(c) Trithis a tri 
(d) Cairteal a tra 


6 
Sgapadh a Gobagan 
Gobagan a h-aon dhiu 
Gobagan a dha dniu 
(d) Cairteal a Còig — Gobagan a tri dhiu 
(e) Gobagan a ccithir dhiu 
(/) Gobagan a còig dhiu 


5 
(a) Sgapadh a Coig 
(b) Dubhas a Còig 
(c) Trithis a Col: 


Digitized E y 


NTERNET ARCHIV 


548 | 


jomall-traigh 

7 8 
Sgapadh na Goraiche Sgapadh a h-aon 
Goraich i ihéin Dubhas a h-aon 

Trithis a h-aon 

Cairteal a h-aon 

9 y 10 
(a) ’S a bhireach 'S a Seachdadh 

11 

Sgapadh a h-aon dëm chriche 
Dubhas a h-aon dém chriche 
Trithis & h-aon dém chriche 


Cairteala h-aon dém chriche 
og a h-aon dém chriche 


12 
Sgapadh a Gobacan dém chriche 
Gobacan a h-aon dém chriche 
Gobacan a dha dém chriche - 
Gobacan a tri.dém chriche 
Gobacana ceithir dém chriche 
Gobacan a còig dém chriche 
13 Sgapadh an goraich dém chriche 
Gorach i fhéin dém chriche 
’S a bhireach dém chriche 
’S a seachdadh dém chriene 
Sgapadh do w’ bhig 
Sgapadh na reis (—=snan} 
Reis a h-aon lisbag 
Reis a h-aon bhocag 
Reis a dhà liobag 
Reis a dhà bhocag 
Sgapadh a h-aon 
Dubhas a h-aon 
Trithis a h-aon 
Cairteal a h-aon 


I shall not attempt to describe these steps, 
for I cannot. They are all variations of Sgap- 
adh a h-aon or the common *' chuckie-stanes'' 
method." 


iomairtiche, an, s.m. Gambler. 2 Busy fellow. 

liomaith,** v.a. Check, rebuke. 

-— ————bhiorach, -aiche, a. That checks or re- 
bukes. 

-—— —— fhear,** -fhir, s.m. Man who rebukes, 
or chides. . 

-— — —- -fhearach, -aiche, a. That checks or 
rebukes. 

ioma-labhairt, s.f. Circumlocution. 

ioma-labhradh, o Circumlocutory. 

iom-à!ach, -aiche, a Multiparous. 

ioma-lionach, a. Circumfluent. T 

iomall, -aill, -an, s.m. Border, extremity, limit. 
2 Suburbs ofa town, 2 Fault. 4* Refuse, 
remainder. 5 Coast. 6**Frontier. 7**Rim, 
edge, border of a vessel. 8**Skirt. 9**Hed- 
dles of à loom. 10**Fringe. An i. na 
dùthcha, in the outskirts of the country ; i. a’ 
bhaile, the suburbs of the town; aon i. a bhios 
aca, any refuse they may have; crùn oir d a 
i., a golden crown for its border; i. nan stuadh, 
the border of the waves, the shore ; i. a’ chuirn, 
the extremity (verge) of the cairn ; gu 1. na 
talmhainn, to the ends of the earth. 

ach, -aiche, a. Remote, uttermost, utter, 

distant. 2 External. 3**On the frontiers. 4 

Having borders. ES 

aiche, comp. of iomallach. O na h-àitibh 








a/s i., from the uttermost carts ; a’ chuid ab 
iomallaiche de ’n t-sluagh, the uttermost of ` 


ihe people. : 
aiche,(MS) s.m. Accolent. 
anach,(MS) s.m. Accolent. 











ty— Perthshire. vik 
iomall-soillse,** s.m. "Twilight. 
iomall-traigh,** s.m, Sea-side,edge of the shore, 


Original frem 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


as, (CR) -ais, s.m. Hesitation, uncertain- 





PU M 
" "TOS. 


NU ORE 


iomaltar 549 iomchubhaidh 
iomaltar,** -air, s.m. Centre. . ?(DMO) Find fau:t, blame. 
ioma-lübach, -aiche, a. Intricate. iomehainich, see iomchain. 








te, past pt. of iomchainich. 

ium-chainnteach,** æ. Expressive. 2 Talka- 
tive. 3 Polyglot. 

iomchainte, past pt. of iomchain. Borne,carried, 

iomchair, see iomchoire. 

iomchair, pr.pt. ag iomchar, v.g. Carry, bear. 
2 Conduct, dewean, behave. 3**niure. 4 
(CR) Accuse, blame —Skye. 

iomchan, -ain, am, s.n. Bearing, carrying, act 
of carrying. 2 Behaviour, comportment. Ag 
i—, pr.pl. of iomchain, 

iomchaomhnas,** ais, s m. Question. 

iomchar, -air, s.m. Bearing, act of carrying. 2 
Behaviour. 3 Com. orüment, moving, gait. 4 
** Bier, 6**Carriage. L. nam beus, moral 
conduct ; i. uallacn, stately ga't; fear-iom- 
chair airm, qi a mour-bearer. Agi—, pr. pt. 
of iomchair. 6(CR) Accusing, blaming—Skye. 
Tha e agi, air, Ae is accusing or lumi: g him; 
a di’ iomchar fios do "n t-seann righ, to car- 
ry word to the aged king. 

iom-charachd,(MS) s.f. Altcrnity. 

iom-charag,** -aig, s.f. Female porter. 

iomcharan, s.m, Bearing, carrying—Dàin Iain 
Ghobha. 

iomchas,** v.n. Murmur, complain. 


ioman, see iomain. 
iomanaiche, s.m. Driver, 2(AH) Shinty-pliyer. 
iowansachd,** Gaelie spelling of immensity. 
joma-phosa'th,** -aidh, s.m. Polygamy. 
iomarach,** -aich, s.f. Border, margin. I.-na- 
ban-righinn, the place-name Queensferry. 
iomaraiche, s.m. Rower. s 
iomaral, see iomrall. 
iomarasg,** -aisg, s. Prophecy. 
iomarbhaidh, -ean, s.f. Struggle, strife. contro- 
versy, debate. 2* Hesitation. 3 Confusion. 
i**Skirmi»h. 5**Lie.  6**Deceit. 7**Com- 
arison. 8 see iomramb,.  [** gives iomar- 
hadh, s.m. e. g. Seachd oidbche ag iomar- 
bhadh, seven nights contending.] 
each, -aiche, a. Prone to strife or 
controversy. 
iomarbhuidn, s.f. Hesitation, confusion about 
what to do, or how to proceed. 
iomarbhas,** -ais, s.m. Sin. 2 Banishment. 3 
Strife. | 
iomarcach, -aiche, a. Many, numerous. 2 Su- 
perfluous, redundant, 3 Excessive. 4 Op- 
pressive. 5*1n many straits, distressed. 6(CR ) 
f Trying, hard to bear, as cold, &e.—Arran. T? 
| òigridh i., thy numerous youth ; á h-uisgibh 
























p i., from many waters ; gu h-i., numerously. i —aid,** s.f. Complaint. f 20 
= jomarcaidh, -e, s.f. Abundance, superfluity, ex- iom-chathamh,** s.m. Whirling drift, Thig i, 
c cess, numerousness. a whirling drift shall come. 


iom cheaugailf v.a. Oblige, make obligatory. 

iomoenein, see iin-chian. 

iom-cheist, see imcheist. 

— — ——— each, see imcheisteach. 

iom-cheumnacha:lh,-aidh, s.m. Perambulation, 
walking round. 

iom-cheumnaich, v.n. Walk round, pace round, 
perambulate. 

iom-chian, see im-vhian. 

iom-chlaidheamh,** -eimh, s.m. Sword-fighting, 

fencing. 

-——_——air,** s.m. Sword-fighter, fen- 


fiomarehur, -uire, s, m. Rowing or steering 
"with oars, seulling. 2 Tumbling. 3 Wallow- 
ing. 4 Erring,straying. 5**HError. 
iomardadh,** -aidh, s.m. Reproach. 
jomarlaeh, see iomrallach. 
jiowa-rol, v.a. Circumvolve. 
adh, s.m. Cireumvolution. 
jomarsgal,** -ail, s. m. Wrestling, struggling. 
d Seachd là ag i., seven days wrestling. 
— joma'sgleo, see iomarsgal. 
iomartach, -aiche, a. see iomairteach. 
fiomartar, see iomaltar. 
iomartas, -ais, s. m. Industry. 2 Motion. 3 
Activity, bustling about. 4 Necessity. Dirt 
Sufficiency. 6ttCompetency, 
iomasgaoil, see iomsgaoil. 
| -—te, see iomsgaoilte. 

-—teach l, see iomsgaoileadh. 
fiomasgrach,** -aich, s.m. Lnn, lodging-house. 
2 Lo.givgs. 

loma-sheól, see jom-sheol. 

—adair, see iom-sheoladair. 

e —adh, -aidh, see iom-shedladh, 

: ioma-shiollach, -aiche, a. Polysyllable. 

ioma-shliosach, -aiche, a. Multilateral, 

- ioma-shluaghach, æ. Many-peopled. 
ioma-shruth, see iom-shruth. 
Bee ët, see iom-shruthach, 
ioma-thaobhach, a. Multilateral. 
ioma-theangach, a. Many-tongued, 
ioma-tholltach, -aiche, a, Multicavous. 
tiombath,** s.m. Adjoining sea. 3 Sea encom- 

passing an island. 








cer. 
iom-choimhead,** id, s.m. Guarding, protect- 
ing. 
iomchoire, -an, s.m. Reflection, blame, grudze, 
accusation. 2 Complement. A’ cur i. orm, 
rejleciing on me. 
..—————ach, -eiche, d, Reflective, censuri- 
ous, blawing, accusing, 2 Worthy of blame 
or reflection. . 
iomchoirich, v.@. Blame, reflect on. 2 Rebuke, 
chide, ceusure. 
iom-choirueach, a. Having many corners. 
iom-chomairich,** s. f. Petition, request, far 
vour. 2 Farewell. 
iom-chomare,** -aire, s.m, Present, donation. 
iom-chomhairle,** s. f. Perplexity, doubt, di- 
lemma. 2 Jeopardy. Aunn an i., perplexed. 
— ——aàch,** a. Causing doubt or per- 
lexit erplexed. 
d NE P end. s.f. Unsettledness. 
iomcehomhare, see iomachagar. 
, v.a. Overwhelm. 2 Fall into a swoon. iom-chóirhdaicn,if v.g. Mowrap. d 
+ ——ailh, -aidh, 8. m. Overwhelming. 2 iom-chdithradh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Thesis, 
Swoon. 3(AH) State of being halt-drowned. |, subject of dis utation. 
Thainig iad do ’n phort seo air iombathadh, iomchorag, Suth’d for iomehoire. 























> they landed in this port in a half-drowned state, | iomchorc, see iomachagar. ; 
iom-bathadh,(WC) adv. On purpose. Thàinig e iom-ehràbbaeh,ff -aiche, œ. Ascetic. 
air i, 'ga iarraidh, he came purposely for it. jom-chras,** -ais, s.m. Deportment, grace. 
- iom-bhaidh, see ioma-bhaidh. iomchruthach, -aiche, @ see ioma-chruthach., 
 —  iom-bhuail, see ioma-bhuail, iomchuairtich, v.a. Block, blockade. 
bh iom-bhualadh, see ioma-bhualadh, iom-chuartachach, -aidh,s.m. Blockade. Agii- , 
iomchaidh,(DC) a. Circumspect. Duinei,, @ yr.pt. of iomchuaircich. 
circumspect man — Uist. iom-chuirteach, a. Ambient, mazy. 
lomchain, ar pt. ^g iomchan, v.a. Bear, carry. iomehubhaidh, see iomchuidh. f 
XN Original from 
i erg > UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
d i Sh ARCHIV s DOAR “LIA REP F alle e 
aM INET CH R CHI i E A RBAM A-CHA I p Al G d 


INTERNET ARCHIV 


iomchuidh 


icmchuidh, -e, a. Fit, meet, proper, decent, 2 
Convenient. 3 Necessary, suitable, expedi- 
evt. Is i. sin dhuit, that is befitting your case ; 
mar chi thusa i., as you see fit ; is i. dhuit dol 
dhachaidh, it is proper that you should go 
home ; an am i., in good time. 

iomchuidheach, a. Applicable. 

d, s. f. Fitness, meetness, suit- 
ableness, applicability. 2 Propriety, decency. 
3 Expediency, adequateness. 4 Convenience, 
advantageousness. 

iouchuidhead, -id, s.m. Fitness, degree of fiit- 
ness, propriety, convenieuce, suitableness, ex- 
pediency. 

iomchuinn, see iomchan. 

tiom-dha, -ai, s.m. Anger. 
shoulder. 

iomdhathach, see iomadhathach. 

iomdhaithte, see iomadhaithte. 

iom-dhealaichte,tf a. Insulated. 

iom-dhealbhach ff -aiche, a. Mosaic. 
iom-dhearbh, v.a. Prove, demonstrate. 

: adh, -aidh, s.m. Proof, demonsira- 
iion, Bheir mi dhuit i. air, I will give you a 
proof of it. 

iom-dhearbbail,** o, Demonstrative, capable 
of proof or demonstration. 

ion-dhearbhta,** past pt. Proved, demonstra- 
ted. 

Tioin-lhearg,** v.a. Reprove, rebuke, reproach, 
dispraise. 

+i m-dheargach, æ. Prone to reprove or rebuke. 

tiom-dheargta, past pt. Reviled, reproved, re- 
buked. 

iom-dhìol,** s.m. Feast. 

iow-dhoigheach,{f -eiche, a. Diverse. 

iomdhorus, -uis, -dhorsan, s.m. Liutel of a door. 
2 Back door. 3 Porch. 

iom-dhreachmhor, -oire, @. Changeable. 

iomdhruid, pr.pt. ag iomdhruideadh, v.g. En- 
ciose, surround, shut in. 2 Besiege. 

—each,** @. Surrounding, encompass- 
ing, hem:ingin, 2 Besieging. 

——— .-ealh, -idh, s.m. Enclosing, act of en- 
closing, surrounding. 2 Enclosure., 3 Sicge, 
besieging. Tha iad air i., they are hemmed in 
on all sides, Ag i—, pr.pt of iomdhruid, 

—te, past pt. of iomdhruid. Enclosed, 
surrounded. 

iom-eagal, -ail, s.m. Terror, fright. 

—— —— —ach, a. Fearful, terriule, frightful. 

iom-eud, s.f. Jealousy, extreme suspicion. 

air, s.m. Jealous man, suspicious man, 

—-——— hor, -mhoire, a. Jealous, suspicious. 

iom-fhacal, -ail, sm. Circwmlocution. 

iom-fheadan, s.m. Discomfiture. 

jom-fhill,ff v.a. Enwrap. 

—teach,tt a. Many-folded. 

—teachadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of folding 

frequently making manifold. Ag i—, pr.pt. 

of iom-fhillrich. 

tich, v.a. Fold often, make manifold. 

tichte, past pt. of iom-fhilltich. Oftea 
folded, made man fold. 

tiom-fhorail, s.f. Superfluity, extravagance, ex- 
cess. 

tiom-fhorran, -ain, sm, Skirmish. 2 Baitle. 3 
Comparison. 

iow-fhuadan, s.m, Discomfiture. 

iom-fhuasgail, v.g. Trade. 2 Relieve, loosen, 
slacken. 

jow-fhuasgailteach, -eiche, a Nimble. 

jom-fhuasgiach, -aiche, a. Giving imuediate or 
temporary relief. 2 Apropos, seasonally use- 
ful. 3 Auxiliary. 

jom-fhuasgladh, -aidh, -aidhean, s. m. Relic, 
release, convenience, assistance.  2* Trafiic, 





2 Bed, couch. 3 




















Di gitized t y 


550° 


iomlaideachd 
trade. 3 Something to trade with. 4 House- 
keeping. 5 Minor equipment, small conve- 


niences, as those of the work-basket. 
sheall air t i. it is you that looked on your 
many-sided relief—said when a person does a 
strange thing he might have done much bet- 
ter in another way. 


iom-fhulang, -aing, -an, s. m. Patience, long- 


suffering, forbearance. 

— ach, -aiche, a. Patient, forbeariug. 
iom ghabh, v.a. Take, conquer, reduce, ca; ture. 
2 Err, stray. 3 Avoid, shun. 4 Wander. 

—ail, -ala, s. m. Taking, act of taki'g, 
reducing or conquering. 2 Erring, straying, 
3 Shunning. Agi-—, pr.pt. of iom-ghabh. 

iomghaoth, see iomaghaoth. 
—— — —.— ach, -aiche, see iomaghaothach. 
Tiom-ghnüis, s.f. Wonder. 








iom-ghlainte, past pt. of iom-ghlan. Purificd, 


iom-ghlan, v.a. Cleanse, purify. 
—adh, -aidh, s.m. Purifying, act of puri- 
fying. Agi—, pr.pt. of iomghlan. 
cleaned. 
iom-ghloir, s.f. Noise of a multitude. 
iom-ghnéitheach,** æ. see ioma-ghnéitheach. 
——— -—d, s.f. see ioma-ghnéitheachd, 





(appendix.) r 

iom-ghointe, past pt. of iom-ghon. see ioma- 
ghvinte, (appendix.) 

iom-ghon, v.a, see ioma-ghop (appendix.) 

—ach, -aiche, a. see ioma-ghonach. 

—adh, -aidh, s.m. see ioma-ghonadh, (ap- 
pendix.) ; 

iom-ghuin,** s.y. see ioma-ghuin, (appendix. 

——each,** a. Painful. 2 Causing a var- 
iety of wounds. 3 Inflicting many wounds. 
Gu h-i., painfully. 

iomhach,** a. Envious. 

iomhadh,** -aidh, s.m. Envy. 

iomhag, $.f. Ivory. : 

— —— —neh, a. Ivory, pertaining to ivory. . 

ìomhaigh, -ean, s.f. Image, statue. z Like- 
ness, similitude. 3 Countenance, expressiou 
of countenance. 4** Idiom, figure of speech. 
Na i, féin, in his own likeness ; 1. mhór, o 
great image; cha tuig thu a hi, you will 
not understand its idioms. ` 

-——— each, -eiche, a. Full of images. 

- — — —eachd,** s.f. Imagery. 21fImagination. 

iomharraichte,(MS) a. Peculiar. 

tiomhas,** -ais, s. m. Knowledge, judgment, 
learning. 

iom-itealaiche, s. Cireumvolution, 

iomla, see iomluath. 

iomlach,$ s.m. The cup-shaped frond from 
which the long thongs spring in seawecd he- 
manthalia lorea. 

iomlag, see imleag. ; 

iom!agach, -aiche, @ see imleagach. 

iom'aid, -ean, s.f. Exchange, barter. 2 Cia: ge. 
3 Act of exchanging. 4* Course, duration. 
5** loving, gesture, Dean i., exchange; ann 
au i. da la, in the course of two days ;i. chiom- 











ach, an-eachange of prisoners ; fear-1., @ bro- — 


ker ; luchd-i., brokers ; am bheil i. not agad ? 
have you change for a £1 bank-note ? Agi-, 
pr.pt. of iomlaid. | 

, po, see iomlaidich. 





each, -eiche, a. Moving, fickle, prone to 


change. 2* Tossing, as a sick p-rson, restless. 

stEluctuating, 4** Exchanging, bartering. 
side i., changeable weather. ; 

eachadh, -aidh, s.m. Changing, fluctua- 
2 Act of changing or exchanging. 





` e 


ting. Omg 
Winding, rolling, turuing. Ag i—, pr .pt. of 
iomlaidich. 


eachd, s.f.ind. Rolling, turning, 





Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGINS 


Is tu. 


cout E 


D 


wind- 





* 


iid sc 


D 
Aes 


i: AË ce 


— — 8**Velocity. 4(MS) Solicitude. 


iomlaideachd 


fickleness, 2 Exchange, barter. 

iomlaideadh, see iomlaideachadh. 

iomlaidich, pr.pt. ag iomlaideachadh, v.g. Ex- 
chanze, change, barter, commute. 

iomlailiche, s.m. Barterer, exchanger. 

iomlaine, s.f. see iomlanachd. 1. cridhe, in- 
tegrity of heart. 

, comp. of iomlan. 

achd, see iomlanachd. 

iomlan, -aine, oc. Full, complete, perfect. 2 
Sound. 3 Absolute. 4 (DMC) Changeable. 
—Harris. Duine i, a perfect man ; fo i. 
blàth, in full blossom ; gu h-i. completely. 

, ain, s.m. Whole, all. An t-i. dhiubh, 

the whole of them. 

achailh,** -aidh, s.m. Act of carrying to 

completion, completing. 

















ity. 2 Integrity. 3**Completion, consum ma- 
tion, fulfilment, accomplishment. 

-———aich, pr.pt. ag iomlanachadh, v.a. Fulfil, 
complete, consummate. 

aichte, vast pt. of iomlanaich. Consum- 

mated, perfected, completed. 

tachd, sce iomlanachd. 

jiomlasgadh, see iomluasgadn. 

iomlat,** -ait, s.m. Gesture. 

iom-leabbar,** -air, -bhraichean, s.m. Volume. 

ioin-leag, see imleag. 

ach, see imleagach. 

iom-loisg,** v.a. Parch. 

te, a. Adust. 

iom-losgadh,** s.m. Adustion, parching. 

2** Great 














551 


ing, tumbling, unsteadiness, changeableness, | 


achd, s.f.ind. Perfection, fulness, matur- | 
iompadh,(CR) s.m. Advice, counsel. 


iomrallach ` 


.—each,** a. Careful, intent. 2 Solici- 
tous, anxious. 

-————eachd, s.f. Anxiety, solicitude. 

iomauachadh,** s.m. Polygamy. 

iomauachar,** -air, s.m.. Polygamy. 

GEAR -eiche, a. Polygonous, multan- 
gular. 


— 








: --——— d, s.f. Mul5bangularness, 

VERI egi -aidh, s.m. Reproach, expostula- 
lon. 

iomorran,** -ain, s.m. Comparison, 

iompachadh, -aidh, s.m. Conversion, turning, 
converting. 2 Act "of converting. 3**Peti- 
tioning, beseeching. Tha e air i., he i$ com- 

_ verted. Ag i—, pr. pt, ob iompaich. 

iompachail,** a. Convertible. 

iompachair,** -ean, s.m. Con verter. 

iompachan, -ain, s.m. Convert, proselyte. 2 
** Penitentiary. 

Thug e i. 


air, he advised him ; Luchd-iompaidh, the 

. Cabinet. Skye. 

iompaich, pr.pt. ag iompachadh, v. æ. Turn. 
reel. 2 Convert, persuade, constrain. 3 Be- 
seech, pray. 

————ear, fut.pass. of iompaich. 

— — —idh, fut.aff.a. of iompaich. 

———-—te, past pt. of iompaich. Converted, 

_ persuaded. 

iompaidh, see impidh & iompaichidh. 

—---——,(MS) s. d v.a. Bias. 

--—— — ——each,** a. Intercessory, mediatory. 

--— ————each, ‘s.m. Intercessor, petitioner. 

, Converter. 

iompair, s.m. see impire, (appendix.) 





yiomluadh, s. m. Talking much. 
praise.. eachd, s.f.ind. see impireachd, 
-—,** y.q., d n. Speak often or too much. —eil, a. see impireil. 
2 Praise often or too much. jiompoich, see iompaich. 
iompoidh, see impidh. 


-—,(MS) a. Maggotty. 
—ail, -e, &; Wandering, straying. 
iom-luagach, a. Apt to stray, waudering, strag- 








iompoll,** -oill, s.m. Error. 
Loge -aidh, s.m. & pr.pt. see imreach- 
a 


gling. e í , t 
iom-luagail,** s.f. Straying, wandering, strag- iomrachan, -ain, -an, s.m. Carriage, bier. 
gling. iomradh, v.n. Report, publish, divulge. 
tiomluaiche, s. see iomluadh. iomradh, -aidh, -aidhean, s. m, Fame, report, 
iom-'uaidh,** s.f. Great praise. mention. 2 Reporting, mentioning, act or 
iomlnaineach, -eiche, a. Inconstant, unsteady. mentioning. 3 Rumour, saying. 4** Me- 
mory. 5**Abundance. 6 see iomramh. 7 


d, s.f.ind. Fickleness, inconstan- 
cy, unsteadiness, fidgeting. 

jomluaineas,(MS) s.m. Humorousness, 

iomluaisg, v.a. Confuse, disorder. 2*Toss, tum- 
ble. 3 Move often. 4** Move hither and 
thither. 

—te, past pt. of iomluaisg. 2 Confused, 
disordered. 3 Rocked to and fro, moved 
hither and thither. 4 Moved often. 

iomluas, see iomluathas. 

iomluasg,** -aisg, s.m. Anxiety. 

ach, -aiche, a. Anxious, fidgeting, 

restless, 2 Moving to and fro. 3 Agitating, 

rocking, tossing to and fro. 4(MS) Giddy- 
headed. Gu h-i., witha rocking motion. 

—adh, -aidh, s. m. Commotion, confu- 
sion. 2 Act of confusing, disordering or de- 
ranging. 3 Agitation, ‘restlessness. 4 Mov- 
ing, or rocking to and fro. Ag i—, pr.pt. of 
iomluaisg. 

iomluath, -uaithe, a. Inconstant, wandering, 
giddy, arbitrary, wavering, fickle, changeable. 

iomluathachas, see iomluathas. 

iomluathas, -ais, s.m. Inconstancy, fickleness. 
2** Lightness, freedom from weight or burden. 

5(MS) Giddi- 





— — — 














(DMC) Consideration, thought, "Tha "n leith- 
id sin dei. am measg dhaoine, there is such o 
report among people : duine gun È., an obscure 
man; gu’n sgathadh e an i, that he would 
cut off their memory. 

iomraich, see imrich. 

-— ————te, see imrichte. 

iomraideach, -eiche, see iomraiteach. 

tiomraidh, pr. pt. ag iomradh, v. a. Mention, 
publish, report, repeat. 

iomraidh,(DMy) s. Anxiety. Tha i. agam air 
an son, I am anazious about them. 

iomraidhteach, see iomraiteach. 

iomraidich,( WC) v.a. Carry a burden. An i. 
thu sin ? can you carry that ? 

iomraim, see iomramh. 

iomraiteach, -eiche, a. Famous, famed, emi- 
nent, renowned, celebrated. Nii., a notori- 
ous thing ; tha do chliù i., your fame is well- 
known ; dh’ fhàs iad 'nan daoine i., they be- 
came men of renown. 

d,ti s.f. Famousness. 

iomrall, -aill, -an, s.m. Error, wandering, stray- 
ing, aberration, departing. 2 Entanglement, 
entwining. Air i., astray ; chaidh laithean 
na seachduin i. orra, they lost count of the 








. ness. 6: M8) Humorousness. 
iomnach,(MS) a. Anxious. 2 Vigilant. . days of the week, 
jomnaidh,** s. f. Care. 2 Diligence, 3 Anx- iomrallach, -aiche, 9. Erroneous, wrong, stray- 
jety, solicitude, 4 Haste. ing, wandering, errant. 
Origir al from 
EE UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
, [ , AG TUN . PCM UN Lë AWE ër KA? 
INTERNET ARCHIVE URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


iomrallachd 


iomrallachd, ft s.f. Preposterousness. ; 


Air i., straying. 

iomrallaich,tf v.g. Bewilder. 2 Blunder. 

--—e,tt s.m. Blunderer. 2 Wanderer, 
straggler. 3 Vagabond. 

iomram, see iomramh. 

iomramh, v.d. see iomair. 

iomramh, -aimh, sm. Rowing, act of rowing, 
asa boat. Agi—, pr pt. of iowair. Ise i. 
an droch là a ni là math gu i., practise rowing 
in a rough sea dnd soon the rough sea. will 
seem calm to you—lit. 'tis the rowing of the 
bad day that makes the good day for rowing 
—a proverb that may be applied to matters 
of greater importance than the rowing of a 
boat. 

ionirimha!che, -an, s.m. Rower. 

jorura-gal,** -ail, s.m. Wrestling. 

iom-reuson,** -oin, s. m. Verbal controversy, 
wrangle, dispute, argument. 

ach,** æa. Controversial, inclined to 





-———— 





wrangle. 
——-———aiche,** 
sialist, disputant. 
iomridh, see feumaidh. 2 see iomraitl’. 
iomrol,** see iomrall. 
—w—ach, see iomrallach. 
iom-ruag, po, Disperse, rout, pursue. In- 
4 Defeat. 
2 Persecuüing. 


s.m. Wrangler, controver- 


vale. 3 Persecute. 
iom-ruagach,** æ. Scattering. 
3 Pursuing, 4 Scaring. 
iom-ruagadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Persecuting. 
2 Act of persecuting, persecution. 3 Dispers- 
ing, routing, rout, irregular scattered pursuit. 
5 Defeat. 
2 Invader. 


4 Invasion. 

iom-ruagair, -ean, s.m. Persecutor. 
3 Pursuer. 

iom-ruagte, past pt. of iom-ruag. Persecuted. 
2 Dispersed, routed. 3 Invaded. 

iom-ruaig** see jom-ruag. 

-—, s.f. see iom-raagadh. 

-—————— te, see iom-ruagte. 

Tiomruin, po, Assign, appoint. 

+——_——eadh, s.m. Assigning, appointing. Ag 
i—, pr.pi. of iom-ruin. | ; 

jowruitheach, -eiche, a. Current, circulatory. 

Tioinsach, a. Revengeful, enraged, furious. 

Tiomsachan, -4iu, s.m. Rage, fury. 

iomsgair, v. œ. Separate, disperse, rout. 2 
Scare. 3 Excommunicate. 

iom-sgaoil, v.g. Disperse, rout, scatter in var- 
ious directions. 2 Scare. 3 Slack, loosen, 
untighten. 

jiom-sgaoileadh, -idh, s.m. Dispersing, routing. 
z Act of dispersing. 3 Scaring. 4 (MS) Cur- 
reney. 

iom.sgaoilte, past pt. of iom-sgaoil. Dispersed, 
routed, scattered. 

iom-sgaoilteachd,* 
freedom. 

iom-sgaoiltear,** s.m. Disperser. 

iom-sgapadh,(MS) s.m. Currency. 

iomsgar, see iomsgair. 

iom-sgarach,** o, Dispersing, separating, rout- 
ing. 2 Scaring: 

d,** st Separation, dispersement, 
scattering. 

‘om-syarichiluinn, see iom-sgaradh. 

iom-sgara lh, -aidh, s.an. Separation, dispersion. 
2 Excommunication. 3 Act of separating or 
excommunicatiug. 

iom-sgobadh, -aidn, -aidhean, 
anxiety. prov. 

iom-sgoilt, v.a. Split into many pieces. 

jom-sgoilte, past pt, of iom-sgoilt. Split into 
many pieces. 


iowralladh, -aidh, s. m. Straying, wandering. 
4** Scared. 





s. f. Slackness, looseness, 








s.m. Excessive 


—M—— ———— EE — 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


552 


ionaid 

iom--goultadü, -aidh, s.m. Splitting. 2 Act of 
spli.ting into many pieces. st{Superfluity, ex- 
Cess. 

iom-sheol, v.a. Cireumnavigate. 
—adair, s.m, Circumuavigator. 
—adh, -aidh, s.m. Cireumnavigation, 
iom-shruth, s.m. Cireumfluence. d 
———-——ach, @ Circumfluent. 
iom-shiolladh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. 
lable. 

iom-shiubhail, po, Go round. 2 Surround. 3 
Walk about, ramble. 

iom-shiubhal, -ail, s. m. Walking about. 2 
Ramble. Ag i—, pr.pt. of iom-shiubhail. 

iom-shiubhlach, o, Erratic, wandering. 

iom-shluaghach, -aiche, a. Many-peopled. 

iom-shniomh,** s, m. Care, anxiety. 2 Rest- 
lessness, 3 Convolution. 4 Twisting. 5 
Diligence. 

——--ach,** -aiche, o Ghastly. 2 Rest- 
less, uneasy, anxious. 3 Twisting, convolving, 

iomshruth,-uith, -uithean, s.m. Eddying stream 
or tide, eross-current. 

iomshruthach,-aiche, œ. Having counter-tides. 

iom-shüileaen,1f a Muitoeular. 

iom-s:nuaiuien, v.a. Balance in the mind. 

tiomtheach |, -an, see imeachd. 

iom-theangach, -aiche, o Of many tongues, 
polyglot. 

tfiom-thnüth, -a, -an, s.m. Zeal. 2 Envy. 

tiom-thnuthair, -ean, s.m. Zealous lover. 


Polysyl- 





tivui-thoineadh, -idh, -idhean, s.f. Digression. 3 


Year. 

iom-throm,** æ. Very heavy. 

Hom-thuathaen, -aiche, @ Boundless, immod- 
erate. 

iom-thus,** se m. 
Chance. 

tiomthusa, s.pl. Adventures. 2 History. 

iomuireadh,** -idh, s.m. Excess, 2 Exacting. 

ion, -e, a. Fit, befitting, suitable, proper. [Used 
as à prepositiou i: compounds to signify fit- 
ness.] Is i. dbuit teicheadh, you have great 
reason to flee ; cha/n i. dhòmh-sa ach a bhi 
'gad mholadh, it is befitting indeed that I 
should praise you; cha’n i. ni sam bith a 
dhiültadh, nothing is proper to be refused. 

ion-, prefix, Fitness. Lonmholta, worthy to 
be praised, 

ion-,1 negative prefix an before d, for g. 

ion, adv. d prep. Almost, all but. I. is iomlan, 
almost perfect—-Dain I. Ghobha. 

tion,** prep. In. Tuagh i. a làimh, an aze 
in his hand. 

tion, A. -an, s.m. Image. 2**Sun. 3**Circle. 

ion-acain, -e, a. Lamentable, deplorable. 

iona-chasach, (WC) s.m. Seaweed black and 
very bushy on each stem found at low-water. 

ionach,** -aich, s.m. Dirk. 

ionad, -aid, -an, s.m. Place, room, abode, off- 
ice. 2 Position. IL. naomh, @ sanctuary ; i. 
aoraidh, æ place of worship ; i. tasgaidh, store- 
hous?, granary. 

tionad, see annad . 

ionadach, -aich, s.m. Enallage in grammar, 
inserting one word in place of another. 

ionadach,** -aiche, œ Local. 2 Representa- 
tive, deputy. 3 Fond of one's place. | 

ionadachd, s.f.imd. Locality. 2 Deputation, 

ionadal, (DMC) o, Friendly, hospitable, 
Claunish. E 

ionadalachd, s.f. Kind disposition, fraternity. 

ionadas,** -ais, s.m. Locality. 

ionad-ciüil, s.m. Choir, part of a church. 

ionadh, see ionghnadh. f 

ionadh, (e.g. œ iona ? ore’ ion?) Whither ? 

ionaid,** s.m. Vicegerent. 


Departure, migration. @ 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY. OF ILLINOIS E 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGNE 

















. fonar,** -air, s.m, 


. fionaradh,** -aidh, s.m. Clothing. 


 ionbhar, -air, s. m. Confluence of waters. 


"sa 


ional 
- om r 


fonal, v.g. see ionnlaid. 
ionailt,(MS) s.f. Feed, grazing. 
(ag) ionaltradh. 
jonailte, see ionailt. 
tionair,** v. Clothe. 
** gm. Pudenda. 
Numerable, that may be 





Ag i—, see 


tion-airmhichte, a. 
numbered. 

ion-àiteachaidh,** a. Habitable. 

ion-àiteachail,-e, o, Habitable. 

lon-àitiehte, a. Habitable. 2 Arable, fit for cul- 
tivation. 

ionalach,(MS) a. Generative. 

ionaltair, -ean, s.f. see ionaltradh. 

————, pres. part. ag ionaltradh [and ag 
jonailt,] v.a. Pasture, feed, browse, graze, 
feed in rough ground, or in the fields after the 
removal of the crops. The word implies more 
of movement on the part of the animal than 
is required in an enclosed field of good grass. 
When used of animals in such a field, the 
word means that they are eating, not lying 
down or standing still. The word is also used 
of poultry wandering about in search of food. 

ionaltrach,** o Grazing. 

ionaltradh, -aidh, s.m. Pasture. 2 Pasturing. 
feeding, grazing. 3 Act of pasturing. Ag i—, 
pr.pt. of ionaltair.  . 

jonamhuil, a. Like, equal, the same, well- 
matched, seeming, comparable. 

ionann, @. Equal, alike, similar, the same, 
** ditto, " just so, all thesame, in like man- 
ner, ina suitable manner, Is i. sin is mara 
thachras dhuit, just so shall happen you ; is i. 
sin, that is all the same ; is i. iad, they are all 
the same or identical ; cha’n i. dhaibh, they are 
not the same ; cha'n i, a fhreagras dà là marg- 
aidh, two market days do not correspond ; cha 
"n i. athig an cota glas dona h-uile fear, te 
grey coat does not become everyone equally w ll; 
i. agus am fiaclan air chrith, even their teeth 
chattering ; tha i. an Donais ort, you have the 
appearance of the Evil One ; i. agus sinn, equal 
to us ; i. 's a bhi rùisgte, the same as if naked; 
uile i., all the same, quite the same. 

ionnanach, œ, Identical, equal, the same, 

ionannachd, s. f. ind. Equality, equalization, 
identity, similarity, sameness. 

ionannaich,it v.a. Compare, assimilate, 

ionannas, -ais, s.m. Mediocrity. An i., tolerable 

ionaol,** v.a. Whitewash. 2 Plaster. 
ion-aoraidh, o, Adorable. 

Kind of mantle, 2 The bow- 


A SS 2 (DMy) 
Tossing or moving violently with-the feet. 
ionarbhach,** -aich, o am,  Banisher. 2 Des- 

troyer. 


els, 3 Burden. 


jonarbhadh,** -aidh, s. m. Banishing, banish- 


ment, expulsion. 
tion-bhaidh,** s.f. Time of a woman's bearing. 
2 Parturition, 3 Time or hour. 
2 
Mouth of a river. 3 Cove or creek at the 
mouth of a river. 
at the confluence of two waters, 
spelt inbhir, 


t Should be 
Definitions are consequently 


) . 5 inserted here in error s of on p. 611 


n-bholg,** v.a. Swell, bu 
. wind. 
-— — — adh, ** -aidh, s.m. Swelling,bulging out. 
ion-bhreith,** s.f. Perfect birth. 


ge out, as a sail with 





__ionbhruich, -ean, see eun-bhrigh & eanraich. 


——— 





——-——each, -eiche, see eun-bhrigheach. 
ionbhuadhach, -aiche, a. Victorious, triumph- 


ant. 
foncamas,** -ais, s,m. Gaelic spelling of income. 


553 


4* Angular piece of ground | 


fongantachd 


ion-cheaidachas,(MS) s.m. Allowableness, 
ion-cheannachach,** a. Purchasable, 
ion-chliüiteach, -eiehe, à. Admirable. 
-—(d, s.f. Admirabieness. 
ion-choimeas, see ion-choimeasail. 








ion-choimeasail,** o Comparable. 2 Easily 
matched. 
ion-choimheartaich,(MS) v.n, Allude. 


iou-choimhead,** o Conservable, easily pre- 
served, 
ion-choimheartas,(MS) s.m. Allusion. 
ion-choimheartach (MS) a. Allusive. 
ion-chuluinneadh,** -idh, s.m. Incarnation, 
becoming incarnate. 
ion-choimeas,** a. Comparable, easily matched. 
ion-choireach, -eiche, a. Blameworthy. 
————— —— — d, s.f. Blameworthiness. 
ion-choluinnich,** v.n. Become incarnate. 
———te,** past pt. Incarnated, bes 
come incarnate. 
ion-chomharraichte, a. Remarkable, notable. 
ion-ehónspoideach, -eiche, a. Debatable. 
ion-chosanta,** a. Defensible. 
tion-chosg, -choisg, s.m. Impediment, hinder- 
ance. 2 Desire. 3**Instruetion. 
tion-chosgair,** sm. Teacher. 
tionchrasal, -ail, sm. Excrement. 
ion-chruinn,** a. Homocentric. 
ionchuinneach (MS) æa. see eanchainneach, 
ion-chuimhneachadh, -aidh, a. Memorable, 
ion-dhea!aiche,(MS) s. Separability. 
ion-dhéanta, a. Feasible, practicable. 
ion-dhioladh,** o, Vendible. 
ion-dhitealta,** o Indictable. 
ion-dhitidh, a. MIndictable. 
ion-diolaiche,** s.m. One able to pay. ` 
ion-duile,** o Desirable. 
ion-duthras,** -ais, s.m. Negligence. 
ion-éirigh, s.f. Late sitting, Moch éirigh is 1., 
early rising and late sitting. 
ion-fhaic-ianeach, -eiche, a. Worthy to be seen. 
2 Notable. 
ion-fhaileas, -eis, -an, s.m. Kind, sort, species. 
ion-fhir,** o, Marriageable, fit for a husband. 
ion-fhochaideach, -eiche, a. Mockable. 
ion-fhorran,** -ain, s.m. Fight, skirmish. 
ion-fhreagarrach, -aiche, a Apt. 2 Fit. 
ion-fhulang, o, Passable. 
ionga, ingne, pl. ingnean [ionganan & inean,] 
s. f. Nail, claw, talon. 2 Hoof. 3 Cloven 
hoof. Inean a’ ghrapa, the prongs of the dung- 
fork; inean na cléithe, the harrow’s teeth ; 
ionganan mar spuirean, nails like claws;chaidh 
am prine 'san ionga, the pin touched the quick; 
i. eòin, œ bird’s claw ;i. eich, a horses hoof ; 
is ann air 'ingnean a dh’ aithnichear duin’- 
uasal, the gentleman is known by his nails— : 
an old Hebridean rule for judging the rank of 
unknown bodies washed ashore by the sea. : 
Neatly-pared nails were held to denote the 
gentleman, and insured for the corpse at 
least decent burial; blanag nan ingnean, the. 
quick of the nails. 
iongach, -aiche, «e. Having nails, clawed,hoof- 
ed. 2**Having long nails or claws. 3 Hav- 
ing strong hoofs, 4**Miserly, avaricious. An 
galar i., agnail. 
iongadach, -aiche, og. see iongantach., 
iongaideach, see iongantach. - 
iongain, Suth’d for ionga. 
used as nom. 
iongannach, see iongach, 
iongantach, -aiche, o. 
ing, strange, extraordinary. 2 Droll. 
i., @ droll fellow. 
—————.—0,** s.f. Astonishment. 2 Maryel- 
lousness, miraculousness, so 3 Ad- 
2 





Old oblique case 


Wonderful, surpris- 
Fear 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


Digitized by 


IMTERNET ARCHIVE 


EE 


iongantachd 





mirableness. 
iongantaich, v.d. Astonish. 
———e, comp. of iongantach. 
iongantais, gen.sing. £ n. pl. of iongantas. 





iongantas, -ais, -an, s.m. Wonder, miracle, sur- | ion-mheasta, o. 


prise, astonisbment, marvellousness. 
Curiosity, phenomenon. 3 Mark of admira- 
tion in grammar (!). Ghabh mi i., Z wondered; 
tha thu ’cur i. orm, you surprise me. 

iongantasachd,** s.f. Admirability. 

iongar, gen. -air & iongarach, pl. -air, s. m. 
Matter, purulent matter, pus, corrupted hu- 
mour. 

———ach, -aiche, 9. 
purulent matter. 

achadh, -aidh, s.m. £ pr.pt. see iongrach- 


Purulent, abounding in 





adh. 

longaraich, v.n. see iongraich. 

tion-ghabh, v.a. Manage, conduct, guide, lead. 
2 Attack. 3 Subject, reduce. 

——— —--—ail, s. f. Management, reputation. 
2 Conduct, gesture. 3 Circumspection. 

ionghar,** air, see iongar. 

————ach, see iongarach. 

ionghnadaireachd,(Ms) s.f. Serateh. 

ionghnadh, see iongnadh. 

ion-ghnétheach,** a. Homogeneous. 

ion-ghràidh,1t -e, a. Worthy to be loved, lovely, 
becoming. 

—achd, s.f. Charmingness. 

ionglan,** a. Dirty, nasty, unclean, 

iongmhas, see ionmhas, 

—- ach, see ionmhasach. 

iongna, see ionga. 

iongnach, -aiche, y. Pounced. 

iongnadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Wonder, sur- 
prise, astonishment. Chant leam, J @m not 
at all surprised ; gum’ i., to my astonish- 
ment, 

-— — a. [given as iunadh by **] a. Strange, 
wonderful, odd, curious. 

iongneach, a. see iongach. 

iongrach, see iongar. 

-————,tt a. Suppurating. 

——-.— -&adh, -aidh, s.m. Suppuration, act of 
suppurating, 2 Abscess. Agi—, pr. pt. of 
iongraich. 

-—-—ail, see iongarach. 

iongraich, pr. pt. ag iongrachadh, [& ag ion- 
gradh,] v. a. Suppurate. 2**Digest. Dh’ i. 
a chas, his foot suppurated. 

—-—-——te, a. & past pt. Suppurated. 

ids weds -e, a. Worthy to be loved, dearly 
loved. 

ionladh,** -aidh, s.m. Washing. 2 Thing ac- 
ceptable. 

ionlaid, see ionnlaid. 

ionlairt, (ion+labhairt) s.f. Tautology, repeat- 
ing the same word often. 

ionlasda,** œ. Inflammable. 

ion-leighis, -e, d. Curable. 
ion-leithsgeulach, -aiche, qd. 
ionmail,(AF) s. Cattle. 
ion-mhagaidh, -e, a. Ridiculous. 

ionmhainn, see ionmhuinn. 

ion-mhaith,** a. Ignoscible, pardonable. 

—_——--—te, a. Pardonable, 

ion-mhall,** a. Slow. 2 Fatigued. 

——-.———, s.m. Slowness. 2 Fatigue. 

ionmhas, -ais, -an, s.m. Treasure,wealth,riches. 
Moran ionmhais, or ionmhas mor, much_trea- 
sure. 

ionmhasach, -aiche, 
Wealthy, rich. 
$onmhasair,-ean, s.m. Treasurer, 

——-—eachd,** s.f. Treasurership. 

Aonmhas-àite,** -achan, sm. Treasury. 





eee 





Excusable. 


a. Full of treasure. 2 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


554 





ionniach 


ion-mheadhonach,** a. Moderate, temperate, 
ion-mhealita, e, Fallible, prone to err. 2 © 
**Hasily deceived. | 





ion-mheasail, -e, @. Estimable. 
Reverend. Jl 
2 **|ion-mhiannachd, s. f. ind. Appetizement. 2 
Desirability. do / 


ion-mhiannaichte, o Desirable. AM 
ion-mholaidh, a. Adorable, praiseworthy. K 
ionmholta, @. Praiseworthy, laudable, desery- 
ing. ^ 
ionmholtachd,** s. f. Admirableness, praise- 
worthiness, meritoriousness. ! 
ionmhothuichte, o Perceptible. 
ionmhüchta, e. Quenchable. Y 
ionmhuinn, comp. -e, annsa & ionnsa, a. Dear, 
beloved, 2 Loving. 3 Kind, courteous. 4** 
Lovely. A mhac i, his dearly beloved son: ` 
mar a b’ i. leis, as he greatly desired ; is i. le 
gach neach a choslas, every one is fond of 


EL 











his like. + 
-——,** s.f. Beloved person. I. bhàn, @ 
fair-haired beloved om». 
-——each, -eiche, œ. Beloved. 2 Love- 


ly, lovable, desirable. 8 (DMC) Well-to-do, ~ 
consequential. 4 Courteous, amiable. Du.ne ` 
i., a manof position. | 
eachd, s f. State of being beloved, 2 

Endearment. 3 Amiability. 4 Kindness. 5- — 
Courteousness. z 
-——ich, v.a Endear, make atiached. E 











ion-mhuthachd,(MS) ap, Alterableness. i 
ion-mhuthta,(MS) a. Alterable. e 
ionn-,f prep. prefix signifying Against, to. [Of X 

same force as frith or ri.] We: 
tionn, prep. now written ann. Ze 
tionn, -a, $.f. Upper part, head. Ad 
ionnach, see iomach. EC 
tionnad, see annad. ry 
tionnaibh, see annaibh. e? 
ionnail, v.g, see ionnlaid. x 
ionnail(AF) s. Cattle. ye 





Tionnainn, see annainn. D 

ionnairidh, -ean, s.f. Watching at night. Luch@ 
na h-ionnairklh, the night watch. 

ionual, see ionnlaid. 

adh, see ionnlad. EL 

ionnaltoir, -ean, s.f. Bath. [** gives ionnaltair.]  . 

tionnam, see annam. ER 

ionnan (gu h-), adv. Answerably. ECH 

tionnar, -air, s.m. Gift.. 

tionnarachd, s.f- Gift, donation, reward. 2) 

tionnaradh, -aidh, s.m. see ionnarachd, 

ionnas (gu h-) MS adv. Answerably. 

ionnas, conj. (ionnas gu) Insomuch, so that. 
2trAlmost, nearly. ©’ ionnas ? how ? E A 

,-ais, s.m. see ionmhas. 

tionnehuir, v.a. Ingraft. 

t — — — —eadh, -idh, ? s.m. Ingrafting. Ag i—, 

ionnchur, -chuir, pr. pt. of ionnchuir. | 

ionndag, see deanntag. 

—ach, see deanntagach. | ai 
ionndraich, v.d. see ionndruinn. 
-——inn, see ionndruinn. 
ionndrain, see ionndruinn. 
ionndruich, see ionndruinn. : 
ionndruinn, pr.pt. ag ionndruinn, v. n. Miss 

long for, feel the want of. Có tha thu ag i. ? 
who do you miss ? TES E 
— —— —-—, -ean, s.m. Missing, act of missing. 
2 Want, feeling of want. 3 Straying, wander- 
ing. 4 The thing amissing. Am fac thu m’ 
i. P did you see the thing I am missing ? 
ionnduras,** -ais, s.m, Purity, chastity. 
ionndustaigh,(AC) s.m. Treasure-house. 
ionnlaeh,** -aich, sm. Fault, blemish. 2 Ac 
cusation. 



















ionntad 


s.m. Wa:hing, act of washing, 


jonplad, -aid, | 
Agi-, pr. pt, of ionn- 


cleansing or bathing. 
laid. 

———ach, -aiche,a. Abluent. 

ionnlaich,** v.g. Complain, 2 Accuse. 

ionnlaid, pr.pt. ag ionnlad, oo Wash, bathe. 
2 Cleanse, purify, purge. 

———each,** a. Abluent. 
fying. 

—-—eacbd,** s.f. Bathing. 2 Cleansing, 
purification, state of being cleansed or puri- 
fied. 

ionnlaidte, past pt. ofionnlaid, Bathed, wash- 
ed. 2 Cleansed. 

ionnlaigh,** s.f. Accusation. 2 Fault, blemish. 

ionnoir,** s.pl. Bowels, entrails, 

tionnrac, -aice, o. see ionraic. 

ionnracan, -ain, see ionracan. 

Tionnracas, see ionracas. 

tionnrach, -aich, see ionrach. 

tionnradh, see ionradh. 

t——--——ach, -aiche, see ionradhach. 

ionnraic, see ionraic. 

ionnrain,** v.g. Count, reckon, calculate. 

tionnramh,** -aimh, s.m. Service, attendance. 

ionnran,** -ain, 8.m. Account, reckoning, 
ionnrosg,** -oisg, s.m. Word. 

lonnruith, -e, @ see ion-ruith. 

ionnsa, see ionmhuinn. 

ionnsach,** o, Sorrowful, fatal. 

ionnsachadh, -aidh, s.m. Learning, information. 
scholarship. 2 Act of learning. 3 Teaching, 
art of teaching, training, instruction. Ag i—, 
pr. pt. of ionnsaich. 

Jyonusaich, pr.pt. ag ionnsachadh, v. o Learn. 
A o wa educate, instruct, train. 3** rarely 

isit. 

—— ———te, a. & past pt. of ionnsaich. Learn- 
ed, exercised, taught, trained, educated. 

ionnsaigh, see ionnsuidh. 

ionnsamhuil,** y. Comparable. 

,'* e Similitude. 

ionnsramaid, Gaelic spelling of instrument. 

ionnsuidh, -ean, s. m. Attempt. 2 Invasion. 

. 3 Attack, assault,onset. Ar Rush,dash. Thug 
e i. orm, he rushed at me. 

—— —— —, prep. (a dh! ionnsuidh) To, toward. 
Used substantively with possessive pronouns, 
do m’ i, tome; do d' i, to thee; d à i., to 
him; d'ah-i, lo her; d ar'n-i, to us ; do 
bhur n-i., to you ; d' an i., to them. 

T—————, v.a. Attack, assault. 

-— ——-—each, -eiche, a. Irruptive, offensive. 
2 Aggressive, apt to attack. 

—— ———each,** s.m. Aggressor. 2 Invader. 

——-——-— ear,** s. m. Assailer, assailant, at- 
tacker. 

ionnta, see annta. 

tionntadh, see tionndaidh. 

ionntag, -aig, see deanntag. 

ach, -aich, s see deanntag. 

+-———ach, -aiche, a see deanntagach. 

ionntas, -ais, -an, see ionmhas. 

lonntlas, -ais, an, s.m. Delight, bliss. 2 (WC) 
Pity— Poolewe. Chuire i. orm, I pitied him. ` 

-— ach,(WC) Pitiful. Nach i.e? is it not 
pitiful 2 

jiountraich,f see ionndruinn. 

ionnuil, v. see ionrlaid, 

jonnus, see ionnas. 

. ion-ogha, see fionn-ogha, 

-jon-oibrichte, æ. Malleable. 

. ion-olta, a. Drinkable. 2 Palatable,as drink. 

ion-pheanasda, a. Punishable. 

ion-phosaidh, see ion-phósda. 

jon-phósda, a. Marriageable. 

ionracan, -ain,,-an,_s.m. Upright or righteous 


2 Cleansing, puri- 











Digitize 


L mpe pm p g EE 8. rh gm rp 
l TORIC CL Li "a — 
NIERNET ARCHIVE 


555 





| ionraice, comp. of ionraic. 


iorgull 


man.  'Muaira throideas na meairlich, thig 
an t-i. 'ga chuid, when thieves cast out, the hon- 
est man gets his own. 

ionracas, -ais, -an, s.m. Righteousness, just- 
ess, innocence, integrity. Fear ionracais, œ 
righteous man ; fear na h-ionracais, the righe- 
cous man ; luchd-ionracais, righteous people ; 
luchd na h-ionracais, the righteous people. 

fionrach, -aich, s.m. Medical tent. 

ionrachas, see iouracas. 

ronradh,** -aidh, s.m. Plunderiug, laying waste, 
devastation. 

iouradhach,** o. Devastating, laying waste, 
destroying. 

— ,** s.m. Plunderer. 2 Depopulator, 

ionraic, -e, @ Righteous. 2 Just, faithful, 
honest. 3 Chaste. Duinei., a just man. 

An ti a’s ionraice, 





the most upright person. 


| ionranach, -aich, s.m. Accountant. 


ion-roghnuiehte, a. Preferable. 

ion-roghnuidh, -e, @ Eligible. 2 Preferable. 

ion-roghnuidheachd, s.f. Eligibility. 2 Prefer- 
ableness. 

iouruic, see ionraic. 


ion-ruith,** o, Having a level, regular pace, 2 


Running with equal speed. Each i, a lepel- 
pa-ced horse. 
tion-samhuil, a. Like, such like, just like, com- 
parable, 
ionsanach,** a. Tardy. 
doi senna -aich, s.m. Looseness of the 
skin. 
ion-sgaraidh,(MS) s.f. Separability. 
ion-shamhlachadh,(MS) s.m, Allusion. 
ion-shamhlachaidh,.ff a. Imitable. 
ion-shamhlaich,(MS) v.n. Allude. 
ion-shamhlaichte,** @. Comparable. 
ion-shamhuileach, a. Imitable. 
ion-sheachnach, -eiche, a Aveidable. 
ion-shealgach, -aiche, a. Chaseable. 
ion-shiubhal,** o Passable. 
ion-smachdachaidh, a. Punishable, torturable, 
ion-smuaineach,** a. Imaginable, supposable. 
tiontadh, -aidh, -aidhean, see tionndadh. 
ion-thaitneach, -aiche, a. Cloyless. 
ion-thollta,** a. Penetrable, easily bored. 
ion-thruasach, -aiche, œ. Pitiable. 
———__——_—-d, s.f. Pitiableness. 
ionus, see ionnas, 
iorailte,** s.f. Ingenuity. 
ach, a. Ingenious, inventive, well-con- 
trived. Am feadan i., the qwell-contrived flute, 
————achd, s.f. Ingenuity, inventiveness. 
ioralt, -an, s.m. Trick,  lIoraltan, harmless 
tricks, 
ioralta, -ailte, 2 Distinct. 3 
Artificial. 
loras, adv. Down, below. 
ioraslaich, v.a. see irioslaich. 
iorball, -aill, -an, see earball. 
—-—ach, -aiche, a. see earballach. 
iorbhail,t -ean, s.f. Infection, corruption, nox- 
ious taint. I. gach gaoid, the taint of each 
blemish. 
iorcallach, -aich, s.m. Robust or strong man. 
iorchadach, -aiche, o. Evil, pernicious. 
ior-dhalta,** æ. Certain, constant, continual. 
——chd,** s.f. Certainty, constancy. 
iorgail, see iargall. 
iorgal, -ail, s.m. see iargall, 
iorghuil, ean, see iargall, 
iorghuileach, -eiche, see iargallach. 
Tiorghuis,** s.f. Prayer, request, 
iorgull, see iargall. 
iorguilleach, see iargallach. 
iorgull, see iargall. 


a. Ingenious. 





iorlann 556 nt 


iorlann,** s.m. Cellar, buttery, larder. 

iormadh, Lewis for iomradh. 

tiormailt, -ean, s.f. see iarmailt. 

iormall,(DMK) W. coast of Ross for iomrall. 

jorna, see iarna. 

iornalais,* s.f. Lumber. 

jornan, see iarnan. s 

Tiorpais, ean, s.f. Dropsy. 2 Restlessness, fid- 
geting. 3 Wrestling, striving. 

iorpaiseach, a. Dropsical. 2 Restless. 

iorrach, -aiche, a. Quiet, undisturbed. 

iorrais,(DMC) s.f. Noisy, fidgety bebaviour. 

iorram, -aim, s.m. Boat-song, rowing-song. 
**ledious rhyme. 3** Song sung during any 
kind of work, by way of lightening 1ts burden. 
4**Fidgeting. 5(DMO) Anything said repeat- 
edly. 

iorramach,tt a, Belonging to boat-songs, like a 
boat-song. 

ios, prep. (a dh’ fhios) To. A dh’ fhios an aite, to 
the place. 

1os,** v.a. Eat, dine. 

tios, adv. Down. 2**East. 

ios ! int. Cry to incite a dog after any animal 
tame or wild. 2(DMC) Cry to stop a horse. 

iosad, see iasad. | 

tiosadh, -aidh, s.m. Eating, act of eating. 

ìosal, isle, a. Low, not high. 2 Low, humble, 
poor. 3 Low, mean, abject. 4**Downcast. 
Os i., Secretly, privately. 

iosban, see isbean. 

ioscaid, -ean, see iosgaid. 

Tiosda, -ais, s.m. House, dwelling: 

tiosdail,** a. Convenient, commodious. 

tiosdan,** -ain, s.m. Cottage. 

iosdas,** -ais, s.m. Entertainment, 
modation, lodging. 

iosgad, -aid, see iosgaid. 

iosgaid, -ean, s.f. The hough, ham, thigh. 

losgaideach, -eiche, a. Belonging to houghs. 2 
Having large thighs. 3 Having slender thighs. 

iosgaideach,* s.m. Term of contempt for a tall 
slender person. 

iosgann,** -ainn, s.m. Thigh, hip. 

iosgannach, a. Having large thighs or hips, 2 
Of, or belonging to the thigh. 

iosgaidh ! int. Call to a dog to drive away cattle. 

iosgas ! int. Call to a dog to drive away cattle. 

losg-thad tint. Cry to a dog to drive away cattle. 

ioslachadh, see isleachadh. 

ioslaich, see islich.. 

ioslann, s.m. Pantry, storehouse, buttery. 

iosop, -oip, s.f. Hyssop—hyssopus officinalis. 

iosp, s.m. Clasp for a padlock on a door, meal- 
chest, &e 2 (WC). Tool used by tinkers for 
putting finishing touches on horn spoons. 

iospainn, s. see isbean. 2 (DMy) Entrails. 

iostal, Suth’d for ìosal. 

ics-thad ! int. Cry to incite a dog after any ani- 
mal, tame or wild. 

iosuid, s.m. Jesuit. 

—-—each, a. Jesuitical, 

iota, see iotadh. 

ìotach, -aiche, see ìotmhor. 

iotadh, -aich, sm. Thirst. 
edness. 

lotail,** a. Thirsty. 

iotan, see iotadh. 

lotar, see ìotmhor. 

iotas, -ais, s.m. see iotadh. 

fioth, s.m. Corn. 

ioth-chruinnich,** v.g. Purvey, forage. 

ioth-ghaireach, a. Fertile, productive. 

-——d, s.f. Fertility. 

iothlann, see iodhlann. 

foth-losgadh, -aidh, s.m. Parching.of corn, 2 
Blasting of a standing crop. 


2 Accom- 


2 Drought, parch- 








Digitized by 


NTERNET ARCHIV 


iothros,$ s.m. Poppy, see meilbheag, 2 Corm 
cockle, see lus loibheach. 

iotmhoire, comp. of ìotmhor. 

——--——achd, sf. 'lIhirstiness, droughtiness, 
parchedness.. 

iotmhor, -oire, a. Thirsty, dry. 2 Parched. 

ir,(AF) s.f.. Squirrel. 

tir, af, Gift Es 

ir,(AU) Step. Treòraich oir gu ir mi, lead me 
from step to step. 

fir,s.f. Anger, 2 Satire, lampoon. 

irchiullach, -aich, sam, Monster.. 


2|ircilt, s.f. Side-post of a door. 
ire, s. f. ind. Degree of growth, progress. 2. 


State, condition. 3ttMaturity. An i. seo, 
this condition ; gu h-ì., abou: ; cuir an i., up- 
bred, reproach ; 2 cause to believe ;-3 lay as an 


obligation upon ; ni a thoirt gu h-ìre, to effect-- 


or accomplish a thing ; thàinig e gu ire, he is 
full-grown ; tha rai an ire maith leis, J am well 
on with it. 

tire, s.f. Ravage, plunder. 

tire, s.f. Ground, land, field, soil, earth. 

tireall,** s.m. Response, reply. 2 Salutation, 
greeting. 

ireann, s. f. Patriarchal woman, mother of & 
raee, 2 Dam. Sar-Obair. 

Tireas, -eis, s.m. Occursion, collision. 

irich,* see éirich. 

irimich, Badenoch & Gairloch for imrich. 

irimidh, Badenoch for imiridh 

irinn, Suth’d for inghean (daughter.) 

irinn, S@r-Obair tor ifrinn. 

irionn, s.m. Field. 2 Land, ground. 

iriosal, -aile, a. Humble, low. lowly, mean. 

——--, -ail, s.m. Lowly or humble person. 

irioslachadh, -aidh, s.m, Humbling, act of hum- 
bling. 2*Debasement, degradation. 3 Con- 
descension. Ag i—, pr. pt. of irioslaich. 

irioslachd, s.f. Humility, lowliness. 2 Debase- 
ment, degradation. 3 Condescension. 

irioslaich, pr.pt. ag irioslachadh, v.a. Humble, 
lower, degrade, humiliate. 2 Condescend. 

————-—te, a. & past pt. of irioslaich. Hum- 
bled, 

tirire, -an, S.f 
3 Blame. 

iris, -ean, s.f. The handle of a basket. by which 
to carry it or sling it to a pack-saddle, 2 
Hen-roost or perch. 3 Crupper. 4* Braces. 
5(WC) Small of the baek. I. an droma, the 
small of the back ; dh’ fheudadh gu'n toirinn- 
sa air an i. agad, I might strike you in the 
small of the back.. 

tiris, -ean, s.f. Friend, lover. 
3 Description. 4 Discovery. 
tory 6 Law. 7 Faith, religion. 
era. 9 Brass. 3 1 

iris-cleibh, (DU) s.f. Rope-band for carrying a 
creel. 

iris-eallaich, s.f. Rope round a bundle, as of 
straw. 

iriseileachadh, see irioslaehadh. ` : 

iriseach, -eiche, @ Furnished with slings or 
bandles. 2 Abounding in hen-roosts. t3 Just, 
judicious, equitable. 4**Lawful. 

iriseal, -eile, æ. see iriosal. 

—— -—ach, see iriosal. 

iriseas, ** -eis, s.m. Present. 

iris-mhuineal, s.f. Shoulder-band of a creel. 

irisleabhar, -air, s.m. Magazine. 2 Commons 
place book. see aithris-leabhar. 

irisleachadh, see irioslachadh. 

irisleachd, see irioslachd. 

irislich, see irioslaich. t 

tirr,** s.f. Tail, as of a fish. 2 End, conclusion. 

irt,** s.m. Death. 


Curse, malediction. 2 Anger. 


2 Assignation. 
5 Record, his- 
8 Epoch, 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGNE 











— he is a hound ; cha bu tu bean a’ mharsanta: 


| xk 


is 557 


is,(AF) s. Ox. 

is, conj. And. [t Seemingly an idiomatic use 
of is, is—consider the idiom, ni e sin is mise 
an seo, he will do it and I here (lit. he will do 


| 


it, lam here.) It is usually regarded as an | 


abbreviation of agus, hence the forms a’s and 


"us Is, according to Windisch, is not! 


an abbreviation of agus. Et was the word 
originally (from Latin) brought into use asa 
monosyllabic copulative for the use of the 
bards. The old mouks wrote it ei, and it gra- 
dually slipped into the form 7, still retained 
in printed lrish Gaelic. It is pronounced like 
English ws. See note under agus.] : 

is, pres. nd. v. def. £& irreg, Thus conjugated: 
Jnd. pres. is mi, 1 am ; is tu, thou art ; is e, 

-he ws: is i, she is ; is sinn, we are; is sibh, 
you are ; is iad, they are. 

Ind. past, bu mhi, it was I, bu tu, it was 
thou; &c. [Also used with à present mean- 
ing, see note * below.] 

Sub). pres ma 's mi, if it be I ; ma! s tu, 
€f it be thou ; £e. Ged is mi, though it is I.&c. 
Subj. past, na’m bu mhi, if it were I, dc. 

Interr. pres., am mi ? ist 1? , an tu ? is it 
thou ? au e, is it he ? £c. Nach mi? is it not 
d? de, Su 

Interr. past, am bu* mhi, was it I ? dc. 

nach but mhi ? was it not I? dc. 

Negative pres. cha mhi, it is not I; &c. 

past, cha bu* mhi, it was not I ; &c. 


It is remarkable that in the pret. interr. and 
negative, no part of the verb ts is seen at all, 
the conjunctions am, cha, nach, gur, mur, &c. 
with the pronouns annexed to them, convey 
the sense as distinctly as if the verb were ex- 
pressed. Nach e seo an t-each ban P (is) not 
this the white horse ? This omission of the verb 
to be occurs in the same way in Welsh, as, nid 
bara a brynwyd, (it was) not bread that was 
bought. ` 

Is is used in describing the name, profession, 
identity, state or condition, under which ob- 
jects definitely exist or did exist —Is mise Pea- 
dar,l am Peter; is tulmo bhrathair,thou art my 
brother ; is caiptean am fear ad, yon fellow is 

o captain; is iarunn seo, this is tron; bu 
chlachair e, he was q mason ; bu nàmhaid e, 
he was a foe; cha bu robairean iad, they were 
not robbers. When the subject is pointedly 
and emphatically expressed or addressed, the 
verb isis used, as, is tus’ an duine, thou art 
the man. ln many cases tha cannot be used 
in place of is. We cannot say, tha thus’ an 
duime, tha thu mo run, tha seo umha, &e., we 
must say, is tus' an duine, is tu mo rùn, is 
umba seo, &c, When an adjective 1s in the 
predicate, either b: or is may be used, as tha 
a’ chlach seo mor or is mór a’ chlach i seo, 
this stone ıs great ; tha do cheum mall or is 
mall do cheum, thy step is slow ; but in all 
‘such cases when ıs is used the meaning is 
more emphatic. Js implies a more perma- 
pent state than tha ; contrast ''is leam e" 
with “tha e agam " ; and '*is i is màthair 
* Bu,is also used with à present meaning, as, 
cha bu tu mi, 's cha bu mhi pen you are not I 
and I am no cur—a Celtic way of telling a man 


/ 





mhóir, you are not as the big merchant's wife 
—you do not do as she does. Bu, 1s, of course, 


an entirely different word to ts, bnt as it 1s 


generally treated by grammarians as the past 
tense of is, examples of its use have been in- 
serted here under that word, to enable read- 
ers to find them without difficulty. 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 








nRn————————————————————————————————— 
——————— 
— —M 


is 


dhomh ” with '' tha i 'na màthair dhomh.” 
Is ann chan ann, the fact is that it is not 

$0; is math an airidh, it is well deserved ; is 

math an airidh e, he well deserves it; mais 

fior dhuit e, if it is the truth (as told) to you ; 

ec’ ail’ an Lamb dhuit ? where is your abode? ; 

an slàn dhuit ? are you well ; nach e seo an t- 

each bàn P is not this the white horse? ; cha 

bu gheamhna dhuinn air móran barrachd, i£ 

would not be good enough for us even though 

much more were offered. (lit. for much more) ; 

na’m b’ fhior sin, or mab’ fhior sin, were i£ 

nota sham. 

Some idiomatic uses of is :— 

is àbhaist dhomh, I use, am wont. 

is Abhaist dha, he is used or wont. 

b’ abhaist dhomh, I used, was wont. 

is ag leam, J doubt. 

is àill leam, I wish, desire. 

is ait leam, I rejoice, am glad. 

is aithne dhomh, I know, am acquainted with. 

is aithreach leam, I repent. 

is annsa leam, I prefer. 

is àrd leam (e), I think (it) high. 

is beag leam, I think tt too little. 

is beag orm, I hate, dislike. 

is beò dhomh, I live, am in life. 

1s binn leam (e), I like, think (it) melodious. 

is caomh leam, Z love, like. 

is coir dhomh, I ought. 

is coms leam, L care not, do not like ; is coma 
leam dol ’na dhàil, Z don’t like to have 
anything to do with him, 

is cruaidh leam, J am sorry. 

is cuimhne leam, I remember. 

is dana leam, itis presumptuous of me, I dare. 
Usually used inthe negative—cha bu d. 
leam, J would not dare. 

is daor leam (e), I think (it) dear. 

is deòin leam, J am willing, wish. 

is quens leam, I suppose, think, think it proba- 

e. 

is dócha leam, I prefer. 

is dual dhomh, ut i$ natural to me, 

is duilich leam, I regret, am sorry or vexed. 

is eagal leam, I fear, am afraid. 

is éigin dhomh, 1 must. 

is éis dhomh, I delay, am detained. | 

is eòl dhomh, I know, am acquainted with. | 

is fada leam, I long. l 

is fèarr dhomh, it is better for me. 

is fèarr leam, Iam more glad, had rather, I 
rather wish, prefer. 

is fhiach leam, I value, condescend. 

is fiach dhomh, i£ is worth my while. 

is fuath leam I hate, dislike. 

is gàbhaidh leam, I wonder, am surprised. [it. 

is cann orm a chreidsinn, 7 can hardly believe 

is gasda leam, I delight. 

is grain leam, I abhor, disdain. 

1s ion dhomh, it becomes me. 

is leam, I own, possess permanently. Am fear 
leis an leis mi, the man whose I am. 

is leas dhomh, I ought. 

is léir dhomh, I see, perceive. 

is leisg leam, Zam loath. 

is lugh’ orm, I hate more. 

is math leam (gu), Z am glad (that), wish, am 
willing. 

is miann leam, I wish or desire. 

is mithich dhomh, itis time for me. , 

is mó leam, I think more of. 

is mor leam, I think wt too much ; is mór leam 
e. I think much of ıt, or too much of it. 

is nàir leam, I think it a shame. 

is narach dhomh, J am ashamed. 

is neónach leam, J wonder, am surprised, 


Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


Hm 


l 


AT 


is 


is og leam (e), J think "Js be loam (e), J think Gt) young. | fatalis CERE QUERER young. 
is olc leam, Į regret. 
is tagh leam, see is toigh leam, 
is taitneach leam (e), (it) 1s pleasant to me 
is toigh leam, I prefer, like or love. 
is trom leam sin, Z think that heavy. 
1s truagh leam, ] pity, am to be pitied. 
is ullamh le neach, one is prone to, or ready. 

is beag nach, adv. Almost. 

isbean, -ein, -an, s.m. Sausage. 

isbeanach, -aiche, a. Of, or pertaining to saus- 
ages, 2 Full of sausages. 

ise, pers. pron. emphatic of i. She herself. 

iseag,tt -eig, see uiseag. 

iseal, isle, see iosal. 

isean, -ein, -an, (pl. in Suith’d isean witb the 
sound of final syllable lengthened.) s. m. 
Chicken, the young of any bird or of the 
smaller quadrupeds. 2 Opprobrious term ap- 
plied to an ill-mannered young person, or a 
dirty child, brat. 3 Puny person. 4 Gosling. 
5tt Term of endearment to an infant. 6 Mis- 
enievous child—Argyll. 7(AG) in Suth’d ap- 
plied only to quadrupeds. I. ron the young 
of the seal—Uist; i. eich, the young of the 
horse— Lewis ; i. cait, a kitten—Suth'd. 

iseanach, -aiche, a. A bounding in chickens, 
young of birds or resembling them 2 Per- 
taining to, or like an ill-brought-up child, 3 
Dirty, asa child. 4 Like a gosling. 

iseanachd, s.f. Mischief, as in chnldren—Argyll. 

isearan, Arran for eisearan. 

isgeas,** -eis, s.m. Doubt. 

is gann, adv. Scarcely. 

Tisin, for an sin. 

isle, s.f.ind. Lowness. I. mara, low tide 

isle, comp. of ìosal. Lower, lowest. A’ chuid a 
b' i. de "n t-sluagh, the lowest of the people. 

ìsleachadh, -aidh, s.m. Humbling, act of hum- 
pling, humiliation, condescension. 2 Abase- 
ment. 3 Subsiding. 4 ,Abjectness. Agi i—, 
pr. pt. of ìslich. Tha ’n abhainn jairi., (the 
water of ) the river has subsided. 

isleachd, s. f. ind. Lowness, abjectness, little- 
ness. 2 Lowliness, condescension. 

ìslead, -id, s.f. Degree of lowness or abjectness. 
2 Littleness. 

islean, -ein, s.m. Low or humble person ; in pl. 
the common people, the lower classes, 

isle contraigh, (AH) s.f. Neap-tide. 

isle mhara,(AH) s.f. Low water, low ebb. 

islich, pr.pt. ag isleachadh, v.a. & n. Bring low, 
humble, abase. 2 Become low or humble, sub- 
side. 3 Condescend. 

islichear, fut. pass. of islich. Shall be lowered. 

islichte, past pt. of islich. Lowered, brought 
low, humbled, abased. 


isneach, Ach, -ichean, s.f. Rifled gun, rifle. 
isop,d s see iosop. 

ist | int. Hush ! hist ! whist ! 

ite, -an, s. f. Feather, quill. 2 Fin of a fish. 


3 Artificial fishing fly. 4(AH) Blade of an oar. 
5(CR) Adze— Perthshire. 6(DMK) Blade of 
the propeller of a steamer— W. coast of Ross. 
7**Down. 8**Wing. 

itean gedidh, goose- quills ; ; 1. tombac, d snuf- 
quill. 

iteach, ich, s.m. Plumage, feathers, wings. I. 
éisg, the fins of a fish. 

iteach,,-eiche, a. Feathered, feathery, plumy, 
winged. 2 Finny, of many fins. Am bradan 
i,, the finny salmon. 

iteach, -ich, s.m. Art or act of fishing or angling 
with a fly. 2 Flight, flying, as of a bird or an 
arrow, Ag i—, pr pt. of itich. 

iteachan, -ain, -an, s.m. Weaver's bobbin, reel, 
or spool. 


Bp Epa Hee rre CH 
dIERNET ARCHIV 


558 


Itean éisg, fins of fish ; 


REES EE E 


iteag, -eig, -an, S.f., dim. of ite Feather, lit- 
tle feather, plume, quill. 2 Fin. 3 Flight of 
& bird. 

iteagach, -aiche, a. Of many feathers, feathery, 
winged, feathery. 2 Finny. 

iteagachadh, :aidh, s.m. Flying low, act of fly- 
ing low. Ag i—, pr.pt. of iteagaich. 

iteagaich, pr. pt ag iteagachadh, (ag iteach in 
Gairloch} v.n. Fiy low or near tue ground. 

iteagaich, s.f. see itealaich. ` 


iteagh, s.m. see iteodha. 
iteal, il, s.m. Flight on wing, flying. 2 Flutter- 
of wings. Airi., on wing. 


iine ach, -aiche, o. Winged. 2 Flying. 3 Ho- 
vering, fluttering. 

itealachadh, s.m. see itealaich, 

itealachd, see itealaich. 

itealaich, -ean, s.f. Flying, act of flying, avola- 


non 9 Fluttering. Ag 1—, pr. pt. of iteal- 

aic 

itealaich, pr .pt. 28 itealaich, v.n. Fly in the 
air. 2 Flutte 

itean- id dabas cid $.pl. Primaries, see eun, 6, 
p. 98. 


itean-sgéithe, see eun, 6, p. 398. 

iteodha,$ &f'-oidhe, s. Hemlock. Cameron (§) 
suggests a derivation from ite, the idea being 
“ feather-fledged.” 

ith, pr.pt. ag ith & ag itheadh, v.a. & m. Eat, 
2 Gnaw, chew, devour. 3 Corrude. 4 Consume, 

ith, **-g 7. Eating. Ag 1—, pr.pt. of ith. 

tith, see ioth. 

ith, ** s. Fat, tallow. 2 Corn. 

tithche, -an, $.f. see itheadh. 

ith-dhias, ** -dhéise, s.f. erof corn. 

itheadh, -idh, s.m. Eating, act of eating, chew- 
ing, or gnawing. 2 Corroding, corrosion. Ag 
i—, pr.pt. of ith. 

itheam, Ist. sing. imp. of ith. Let me eat. 

itheannaich, s.f.ind. Eating, feeding. 2* Dam. 
age done by cattle. 3 Something to eat, 

ithear, fut. pass. of ith. 

tith- -fheun, -a,-an, s.m., Corn-dray. 

ithidh, fut, aff. a. of ith. 

ithinnich, see itheannaich. 

ith- iomradh, -aidh, s.m. Backbiting, slanderous 
report. 2 Murmuring. 

fith-iomradh, v.a. dn Grumble. 2 Backbite. 

ith- iomraiteach, a. Slanderous, backbiting, 
abusive. 2 Murmuring. 

tithir,** s,f. Corn-fieid. 2 Arable land, soil. 

ithte, vast pt. of ith. Eaten. 2 ig 

ith-teodha,(AC) s. Hemlock— Lismore, & N.Ar- 
gyll see minmheur. 

ithte, past pt. of ith. Eaten, consumed. 

i-tiach, see de-tiach. 

itich, pr. pt. ag iteach, v.a. Fish with a fly. 

fi- -tigheach, Ach, -ichean, s.m. Gullet 

it-ioch, s, see de- tiach. 

it-ros, ** "sqm. Headland, promontory. 

Titu, s.m. Thirst, see iotadh. 

iubhaidh, see fiübhaidh. 

tiubhal, -ail, s.m. Time. 

iubhar, -air, -an, sm. Yew-tree—faxus baccata. 
Badge of ‘the Frasers. 2 Bow. 3 Arrow. 
4*Juniper. Cha dearg i. mi, no arrow skall 
wound ne. 

iubharaeh, -aiche, a. Of, or abounding in, yew- 
trees. 2 Made of yew. 8 Like yew. 4 Abound- 
ing.in, or armed with, bows. Na h-òighean 
1., the ‘daughters of the bow, huntresses. 

iubhar-beinne, s. J mn iat 

iubhar-chreige,f{ s.m. Juniper 

iubhar-sléibhe, tł s.m. Ambrosia (plant.) 

iubhar- thalmhainn, tł s.m. Juniper. 

iùbhrach, -aiche, a. see iubharach. 

iùbhrach, -aich, SE Yew-grove, group of yews 


LB 


- 


— S ER 44 


= iùl, iùil, iuilean, s. m, 


L 


iùbhrach 


2 Stately woman. 
male archer. 5 Wherry, barge, skiff, cutter, 
seep. 78. 6 Vessel under sail. 7 Rod. 

iùbnraich see fiodhraich (under bàla.) 

iubbhran, (AF) s.m. Castrated goat. 

iùc, see niüc. Slit scallop, fissure. 2(AH) One 
of the two lower corners of a bag of potatoes, 
meal or grain. Eare iüe, slit-eared cows, or- 

 dinarilv called torc-chluasach, notch-eared, 
or crodh-mara, $ea-cows, 

iuchair, -chrach, -chraichean, s. f. Key. 2 
Screwed handle of a spinning-wheel to tight- 
en driving cord. 3 Spawn or roe of female 
fish. [Roe in the immature or soft condition 
called ** mealag ’’—Lorn (Vionn.) Applied 
only to herring and salmon in W. of Ross, 
where bròg is used of cod and other large sea- 
fish—CR. In Gairloch both ‘ brog truisg "' 
and ''iuchair truisg” are used—DU.] I. 
bodaich ruaidh, cod's roe— Argyll. 

iuchaireach, -eiche, &. Furnished with keys. 2 
Abounding in fish-spawn. 

juchaireag, -eig, -an, s.f., dim. of iuchair, Lit- 
tle key. 2 Feimale fish, spawner. 3ftSpawn. 

juchair-na-ciche, sf. Key to adjust frame of 
flyers of spinning-wheel to tighten the cord, 

juchairneag,(AF) see iuchaireag. 

Iuchar, air, sm. The dog-days, warm month, 
July. [Preceded by the art. an t-.] 

iucharag, see iuchaireag. 

iüchd, see iùc. 

iuchrag, -an, see iuchaireag. 

iuchraichean, pl. of iuchair, 

judasach, -aiche, a. Treacherous, like the trai- 
tor Judas. 

iudasach, -aicb, s.m. Traitor, infamous, treach- 
erous or villainous fellow. 

Tiudh, -a, -an, s.m. Day, 

tiudiceacnd,** s.f. Judgment. 

iudmhail, s.m. Fugitive. 2 Coward. 3 Low, 
feeble fellow. 

iugh,f-a, sm. The posture in which the dead 
are placed. ’Na luidh’ air aniugha, lying in 
the position of the dead, 

iughar, see iubhar. 

iugharach, see iubharach & iubhrack 

Hoi, s.f. Arrow, (fiuthaidh.) 

Hal, Iùil, s.f. Month of July. ) 

Guidance, direction. 2 
Course, way. 3 Guide. 4 Land-mark at sea, 5 
Knowledge, acquaintance, 6 Learning. 7 
Art. 8 Judgment, 9 Chi.f, commander. 10 
flService, attendance. lift Mariner’s com- 
pass. Chaillean t-i., he lost the course ; ni 
mise dhuibh i., Z will be your guide. 

iülach,** a. Having knowledge. 2 Guiding, 
directing. 3 Rational. 

iuladh, -aidh, see ioladh. 


— . fiülaigh, -ean, s.m. Leader. 


julainn, see iodh!ann. 

iülaz, -aig, -an, s. f. Small mariner's compass. 
2ttSmall chart. 

inlag,** see 1ullag. 

jiülan-riaghlaidh, s.pl, 

jular, see 1ülmhor. 

iülar, Reay country for ùrlar. 


Politics. 


` jiülarachd, see iülmhorachd. 


iül-chairt, -ean, s.f. Mariner’s compass. 2ft 

, Chart. 

iulla, pr. pt. ag iulla, v. a. Fish from a small 

- boat with flies, usually for *''sillocks." An 
robh thu ’g iulla an.raoir P Dia, agus fhuair 

= ami leth-cheud saighean (or saoidhean), were 
| you fishing last night ? Yes, and I caught fifty 

, saith—Lewis. 

iulla, (DU) s.f. Rock round which “ sillocks ” 
Are plentiful, generally submerged. 


559 
gege 
S**Aclivefemale. 4**Pe-|iullag, ai, -an, s. f. .Sprightly, affected littie 


jutharnach 


female. 2* Skip, trip. 

iullagach, -aiche, œ. Light, airy, tripping light- 
ly along. 2 Sprightly, cheerful, gay, frolic- 
some. 3 Giddy. 4 Making short steps. 5 
Florid. 

iullagachd,tt s.f.ind. Jauntiness. 

iullagaiche, st Lightness, airiness, sprightli- 
ness, cheerfulness. 

—————-—, comp. of iullagach. More or most 
light, airy, &c. 

iulla-ghuanach, 
banner. 

iullanaiche, s.f.ind. Lightness, airiness, cheer- 
fulness, spiightliness. 

iullagaiche, comp. of iullagach. More or most 
light, airy, &c.  . f 

iullar,(WC) adv. Down— Perthshire. ` 

iùlmhor, -oire, a. Wise, learned, sagacious, sen- 

- sible. 2(MS) Skilful. 3 Polite. 

iülmhoraehd, s.f.ind. Wisdom, judgment, sa- 
gacity. 2 Politeness. 

iùl-oidhche, s.f. Name of a star. 

iumaidh, s.f. Level ground. 2 Open country, 

iumaidh, a. Having level ground, 

iumain, see iomain. 

iumairt, see iomairt. 

iumhrach, -aich, -aichean, see iürach. 

iun,** s.m. Naughty creature. 

iunadh, see iongnadh, 

iünadh,** a. Strange, wonderful, odd,curious. 

iumarach,** -aich, s. m. Change of place, re- 
moving. 

iünais, s.f. Want, deficiency. Tha i. iomadh ni 
orm, I want many things. More frequently 
used as a prep. phrase conjoined with the 
prep. as, as, as iunais do chuideachaidh, with- 
out thine aid ; as t’ iànais, without thee. 

idundrain, see ionndrainn, [pest. 

iunnrais, -ean, $.f. Stormy sky. 2 Storm, tems 

iünnraiseach, -eiche, a. Stormy, tempestuous, j 

iunnras, -ais, see iùnnrais. 

junnsachadh, see ionnsachadh. 

iunnsaich, see ionnsaich. 

iunvsaichte, see ionnsaichte. 

iunntas, -ais, -an, see ionmhas. 

iünntasach, -aiche, @ Rach, opulent, 

iuntas, see ionmhas. 

iuntrain( MS) v.a. Balk. 


iur, see iubhar. 
2 Bloodshed, slaughter, 


s. The name of MacTrein's 


yiur, s.m. Plunder. 

iürach, -aiche, -ean, see iùbhrach, 

tiuramh, adv. Afterwards. 

iüran, -ain, -an, see fiùran. 

iüras,^* sm. Felon (whitlow.) 

jurghuileach, s.m. see iargallach (appendix,) 

iurpais,-ean, s.f. Restlessness, fidgeting. 
Wrestling, struggling. 3**Dropsy. 

iurpaiseacb, -eiche, œ. Restless. 2 Prone to 
strife or quarrelling. 3 Dropsical. 

iurram, -aim, -an, see iorram. | 

ach, see iorramach. | 

tiurrunn, -uinn, -uinnean, St, Want, defect. ` 

iursach, -aiche, a. Dark, black. 12 Suspensory. 

iursach,* -aiche, $.f. Girl. . | 

iüsan,*-ain, s.m. Giddiness, levity. 2 Sudden: 
whim. | 

iusanach, v. Whimsical, giddy, light-headed. . 

iùthaidh, -ean, s. f. seefiuthaidh. 2 (DMy) 
Quality. I. mhath, said of a mast, oar, Kach 
that stands a heavy strain, or of boots 
clothes that wear well. 

iuthair, gen. sing, of iuthar. 

iuthar, -air, -airean, see iubhar. 

iutharach, see iubharach & iubhrach. 

iutharn, -a, -airn, see ifrionn. 

iutharnach, -aich, see ifrionnach, 


2 











Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN: 


Digitized by 
rS 


AE INTERNET ARCHIVE 
Jet, 


560 





labhar 





I. i 


l, luis, the quicken tree. The tenth letter of the 
Gaeiic alphabet now in use. When it is pre- 
ceded by itself, or by any other consonant, 
and followed by a, o, or u, it has a broad lin- 
gual sound, to which there is none like in the 
English language ; as, làn, full ; lom, bare; 
lus, a herb. When / is immediately followed 
by e or i, it is pronounced like the Italian gl 
in gle or gli ; as, litir, a letter ; linn, an age. 
In the case of nouns beginning with J, if the 
masc. poss, pron. go before, / is pronounced as 
in English ; as, à litir, Ais letter ; which dif- 
fers essentially in sound from, a litir, Aer let- 
ter. With regard to verbs beginning with J, 
the preterite is pronounced as in English, and 
in most other situations it is pronounced as dd, 
The letter / when aspirated is not followed by 
h in writing, and the diference between the 
plain and aspirated sounds is generally only 
distinguishable to a keen ear, and is almost 
lost on most people, but when labhair, speak, 
which is plain, and labhair e, he spoke, which 
is aspirated, are correctly pronounced, the 
difference should be easily discernible. 

là, oi làithean & lathachan, s. m. Day, space 
from evening to evening. 2 Daylight. 3 On 
2, certain day, one day. 

An là a cbi's nach fnaie, every day— present 
or absent, one of the most frequently used of 
familiar sayings—generally added toa fare- 
well as, ** beannachd leat, an la a chi’s nach 

.. £haic," or "a h-uilela” ; pre simn an dà là; 

. what a change of days ! it is common to hear 

' **'s ann air à thàinig an dà là " said of a per- 

' son whothas suffered a change of cireumstan- 

: ees ; air là àraidh, ona certain day; a h-uile 
la, every day ; a h-uile là riamh, every single 
gou ; là mi-shealbhach, là corr or là seach- 
antach, an unlucky day ; là féille, holy day, 
holiday, market day; là breith, æ birthday; là 
fliuch, a wet day ; la gailbheach, a stormy day; 
là brèagh, a Jine day ;là math, a good day ; 

; là seachduin, a week-day ; la Domhnuich, e 

; Sunday ; la Luain, a Monday, also a day that 

 Bhall never arrive or one to which the moon 

! gives light, Nevermas, the last day ; là buan 

- an lin, Nevermas; ala or do là, by day ; gu là, 
tl daylight. 
là na bliadhn’ ùire, New Year's day. 
là fhéill nan righ, Epiphany | 
là fhéill Brighde nan coinnlean, Candlemas. 
là cath choileach, St. Bridget’s day 14th. Feb. 

Q. S.—2ud. Feb. N. S. (lit. the day of cock- 
fighting.) 
là ínéill Muire nan coinnlean, 
là Dhaibhidh, St. David's Day. 

; là Càisge, Easter Day. 

| là Muire, là na caillich, Lady-day. 
là Bealltuinn, May-day 

, là na Crois Naoimhe, Day of the Holy Cross, 

| làaisig Rìgh Thearlaich a dha, Restoration Day. 
là fhéill Eoin Baiste, St.John's Day (24 June.) 
là Liünasd, Lammas-day. 
là breith Muire, Mary's Nativity. 
là fhéill Màrtuinn, Martinmas. 
la fheill Mìcheil, Michaelmas. 
là nan uile Naoimhe, là Mairbh na cruinne gu 

eoitehioun, là Sàmhna, an t-Samhuinn, All- 
hallows, All-Saints’-day. 

| là Nollaig, Christmas Day. 
là fhéill Eòin, St. John's Day. 
là fhéill Padruig Earraich, là nan tri seall- 

adh, on St, Patrick's day in spring, three 


Purification 
[Day. 


Digitized by 
INTERNET ARCHIVE 

















sights may be seen—i.e. ploughing, sowing, 
and harrowing. Some versions mention 
seven sights. St. Patrick’s day is also called 
“là nan seachd oibrichean fichead,” the day of 
the twenty-seven works, meaning that twenty- 
seven different kinds of work are done on a 
farm on that day. La sheachnaidh na bliadh- 
na, the day of the week om which 3rd. May fails 
—on this day the Gael seldom began any work 
he wished to finish with expedition and suc- 
cess ; Nicolson says some apply the name to 
2nd. May, and some to 5th. May—he does not 
say the days of the week on which these days 
fall, all through the year, which Armstrong’s 
reference to 3rd. May seems to imply. 

là,* adv. Once on a time. 

là, adv. see làmh. 

tla, prep. see le. 

Hab, -a, -an, s.m. Lip. 

làb,* -aib, sm. Day's labour. 2 Mud, dirt,mire. 
3**Puddle. 4 Swamp, bog. 

labail,** a. Dirty. 2 Puddly. 

làbair,** s.m. Dustman, labourer. 

laban, am, s.m. Mire, dirt, 2 Dirty work, 
drudgery. 3 Muddy place. 

làábanach, -aiche, o Miry, muddy. 2 Marshy. 
3 Belaboured, laborious. 

labanach, -aich, s. m. Plebeian, day-labourer, 
drudge. 2 Dustman. 3 Smearer, dauber. 4 
Slovenly fellow. 5 Draggier. 

‘abanachadh,** -aidh, s.m. Dirtying, smearing, 
draggling. 2(DMC) Drenching by rain. 

labanachd, sf. Draggling, drenching. 2 Low 
dirty work. 3 Labour. 

labanaich, v.a. Puddle, moil. 2 Bedraggle. 3 
Smear, daub. 

làbanaich, gen. sing. d' n.pl. of labanach. 

làbanaiche, an, s.m. Drudge, draggier. 2 La- 
bourer, plebeian. 3 One who works in clay 
or puddly ground, 4 Painstaking person. 

làbanta,fi -ainte, a. Plebeian, servile. 2 Drag- 
gling. 8 Vulgar. 4 Like a labourer. ` 

labaonach,** a. Dissembling, pretending. | 

tlabaonadh, -aidh, -aidhean,s. zn. Dissimulation. 

làbarach,(MS) a. Limous. 

labaranach,(MS) a. Limy. 

labh, -aibh, s.m. Word 2 Lip. 

labhach, s.m. Mire, mud. 

labhach, æ. Miry, dirty. 2Swampy. [** gives 


làbach.] 

tlabhachd, s.f. Matter ` 

labhair, pr,pt. a’ labhairt, v.a. Speak, say on, | 
2 Talk, commune. Labhair romhad, say on. 

— ———-e&ch, see labhairteach. | 

labhairt, s.f. Speaking, act of speaking, speech. 
2 Oration. 3 Conversation, discourse. 4 
Language, utterance. 5 Voice, expression, 
A’ |—, pr.pt. of labhair, Fear-l, a speaker,in- 
terpreter ; 2 spokesman ; thar 1., beyond expres- 
sion ; droch 1., bad speaking ; is math an 1l. a 
th' air, what a good delivery he has ! 

labhairte, past pt. of labhair. Said, spoken. 
—_—— ach, -eiche, a. Loquacious, inclined to 
speak, 2 Loud. 3 Utterable, expressible. 4 
t{Oral. 

———achd, s.f ind. Loquacity, noisy boast- 


- Fo 


. DEZ. 
ing, talkativeness, KH 
labhairtiche,** s,m. Orator, spokesman. 2 Talk-  — 
ative fellow s 
la-bhallan,-ain, -an, $.f. Shrew, waber-shrow or SS 
mouse. 2(AF) Weasel. 3 Mythical animal, ` — 
supposed to be larger than a rat, and very d 


noxious and to live in deep pools. 
tlabhar, -air, s.m. Gaelic spelling of laver (ewer. 
labhar, -aire [labhra & **labhara] a. Loud, lou 
ly sounding, noisy. 2 Boastful, clamorous. 3 
Speaking loudly, loquacious. 4 Eloquent. D 


Da? 


Original from 


^ 20 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS Saas 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGH 


labhar 
Audible. 


561 
Is fearr cu luath na teanga l.,|lachan,f -ain, s.m. Loud laughter, Scots word. 


lach-shith 


better ig a nimble dog than a loud tongue ; cho | lachan, “ain, s.m. Common reed. 
l. ris a’ ghaoith, as noisy in speech as the storm; | -———-aich,* sf, Loud continued laughter. 


cath labhar, a war of words. 

labharra, see labhar. 

labhra, comp. of labhar. More or most noisy or 
loquacious. 

labhrach, -aiche, a. see labhar. Is labhrach 
na builg fhàs, emp!y bays are lowd-sounding. 

21 ————@, St Loudness. see labhairteachd. 

labhrad, -aid, s.m. Loudness, degree cf loud- 
ness. 21tLoquacity. 3* Noisy boasting. 

labhradair, see labhraiche. 

labhradh, a. labbar. ; 

labhradh, -aidh, s.m. Speaking. 2 Speechify- 
ing. 3 Speech, discourse. B'el.a mhill e, 
speaking was his bane ; ur-l., utterance, elocu- 
tion. 

labhraiche, s.m. Orator, speaker. 
a distinct speaker. i 

labhran,(AF) s.m. Young rabbit or hare. 

labhras,$ -ais, -an, s.m. Laurel, bay-tree—lau- 
rus nobilis, (not the common garden laurel.) 
Badge of the MacLarens, } 

labhram, 1st. per. sing. imp. of labhair. Let me 


speak. 

tlac,(AF) s.f. Sweet milk. 

lach, -a, pl. -an [-aidh, -ainn, lachaichean & 
lachainnean,] s.f. Wild duck—anas boschas. 

:.2.8. m. Wild drake. 8*Widgeon. 

lach, -a, -an, s.m. Reckoning, expense of enter- 
tainment at an inn, fare. 2* Reckoning ata 
penny wedding. 4 Contribution per head. 
Horse laugh, loud burst of laughter. ‘og an 
l., raise or collect the reckoning. 

lach,(DU) v.n. Laugh loudly and for a long 
time, 


L. pongail, 





405. Lach-a’-bhlair. 


lach-a’-bhlair,1 s.f. Bald coot, common coot— 
fulica atra. 

lacha-ceann-ruadh, ff -an-ceamn-ruadh, 
Celandine (plant.) 

lachach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to, wild 


ducks. 2 Like à wild duck or drake. 


lach-a'-chinn-uaine,q s.f. Golden eye—fuligula 
clangula. 2(AC) Mallard or common wild 


duck. 
lachadaich, see lachanaich. 
lachadair,(AF) -ean, s.m. Diver (bird.) 


lachadh,** -aidh, s,m. Act of diving like a wild 


duck. 


lachag, -aig, an, s. f. dim. of lach. Little or 


young wild duck. 2 Small reckoning. 


~ ——ach,tt a. Abounding in little ducks, 


lachaidh, n.pl. of lach. 

lach-Aigir,(AC) s.m. & f. Teal, elf-duck, 
lachair,-ean, s.m. Diver. 

lachaire, see lachadair, 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


$. m, 








lachan-coille, s.m. see cuilc-fheur. 

lachan-nan-damh,) s. m. Jointed rush, wood 
small reed—juncus articulatus. 

lach-an-sgumain, (AF) s. Tufted or crested duck, 

lachan-gàire, s. Horse-laugh. 

lach-Aoisgeir,J st Eider-duck, see lach-Loch- 
lannach. 2 (AF) Velvet scoter. 

lachar, -air, s.m. Vulture. 2(AF) Any large bird 
of prey. 

lachardaich, see lachanaich. 

lach-bheag.(DMO) s.f. ‘Teal. 

lach-bhinn,d[ s. f. Long-tailed duck, see eun- 
buchainn. ' 

lach-bhlair,(DMC) s.f. White-headed coot. 

lach-bhreac, T s. f. Goldeneye, see lach-a’» 
chinn-uaine. ?(AC) Mallard. 

lach-ceann-molach,(AF) s.f. Tufted duck. 

lach-ceann-ruadh, s.f. see ceann-ruadh. 

lach-chiun-uaine, see lach-a’-chinn-uaine, 

lach-Cholasaidh,« s. f. Eider-duck, see lach 
Lochlannach. 

lach-crann,(AF; s. Teal. 

tlachd, s.m. Family, see luchd. 2 see lac. 

ach,** a. Asphaltic. 

lach-dhearg-cheannach,fi s.f. Pochard, see lache 
mhasach, 

lach-dhioladh,(MS) s.m. Amercement. 








406. Lach dhubh. 
lach-dhubh,€| s.f. Velvet scoter—oidemia fusca. 
tlachdmhor, see lacmhor. 
lachduinneachd, s. f. }{{Infuscation, 
thiness. 
lachdunn, -uinne, a. Dun, tawny, swarthy, din- 


2 Swar- 


gy, khaki, bomespun grey. 
coma leam a’ bhriogais l., 
breeks. 

lach-eigir, (AF) s.f. Little or dwarf duck. 

lach-fhiaeailleach,f s. f. Goosander—mergus 
mervanser, 

lach-ghlas,f st Gadwall—anas strepara. 2 
Mallard. 3(AF) Widgeon. 

lach-liath,(AC) s.f. Long-tailed duck. 

lach-Lochlannach,@ s.f. Eider-duck—somaterta 
mollissima. (see illust. 407.) 

lach-mhara,(AF) s.f. Sea-duck. 

lach-mhasach,@ sf. Pochard or dun bírd—fuli- 
ga ferina. (see illust, 408.) 

lach-Mhoire,(AC) s.f. (Mary's duck) Mallard, 

tlachmhor, -oire, a. Comely. 

lach mhór,s.f. Harris tor lach Lochlannach. 
2(AF) St. Cuthbert's duck, 3 (DMC) Rider: 
duck— Uist. 

lach riabhach,(AC) s.f. Mallard, 

lach ruadh,(AC) s.f. Mallard. 

lach sgumanach,(AF) s.f. Tufted or crested 


duck. 
lach-shith,(AC) s.f. Teal, elphin duck. 


2** Clumsy. Is 
I hate the grey 


Original fram 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


lach stitireach — 562 | làgan 


procacious, 

-——achd,tt s.f. Mapisterialness. 

ladh, -a, s.m. Sending, deputation, mission. 

ladbadair, s.m. Plasm 

ladhaich, for laghaich, dat.sing. fem. of laghach. 

| Jadbainn, -ean, see laghadair. 

ladhan, see làgan. . 

ladhar, -air & -dhra, pl. -dhran, s.m. [ f. in Bad- 
enoch.] Hoof. 2 Toe. 3 Claw. 4 Prong, fork. 
b Ludicrous name for a shanky leg. 6**Sin- 
gle hoof of a cloven-footed animal. Ladhar is 
toe (of a man) in Arran & Islay, where 
hoof is crodhan. Gach aon a sgoltas an L, 
every one that has a cloven hoof; a’ cur bruic 
& ‘ladhran, kicking badgers out of his toes— 
said of one in a great rage; teas na luaith- 
reach ’nan ladhairean, the heat of ashes in 
their feet — A rran ; barail a’ bhruic air aladh- 
ran, the badger’s opinion of his own claws—a, 
poor opinion ; cho bith ris an luch fo l. a? 
Chait, as quiet as a mouse under the cat’s paw; 
cha téid mo l., not a bit of me will go ; chaidh 
a’ bhròg oirre 'nuair a bha barr nan 1l. gearr- 
ta dhi, the shoe went on her ( foot) when the 
tips of her toes were cut off. 

tadharg, aire, -an, s.m. Thigh, 

tiadhna, sm. Dumbness. 






**Having large hoofs or claws. 3** Having 
large toes. 4 Forked, pronged. 5** Shanky. 
6**Hasty. Tarbh l., a bull with large hoofs ; 
ord l., a claw-hammer. làdhrach in Gatrloch, 


prong. 

ladhran, see ladhran-tràghaid. 

ladhran-tràghaid,(AF) s.m. Sandpiper, sand- 
snipe. 

ladorna, see ladarna. 

ladornachd, see ladarnachd. 

ladornas, see ladarnas. 

fladran,-ain, s.m. Robber, thief, 2 Highways 
man. 

ladurna, see ladarna. 

la-féill, pl. làithean-féill, s.m. Holiday. 

lag, luig (& laig,] an, s.m. [ f. in Badenoch, 
Poolewe, &c.] Hollow, cavity. 2 Cave, den, 
3 **Pit, dell. 4 **Feeble person, 6 (DMC) 
Hollow between two knolls. L.a shléisde, 
the hollow of his thigh ; lag a’ mhionaich, the 





408. Lach-mhaàsach. 

lach stiüireach,(AC) s.f. Long-tailed duck, rud- 
der-duck, pintail, 

lach stuadh,(AF) s.f. Wave-duck. 

lach-uaine, s.f. Mallard. 

tiacmhor, -oire, a. Giving much milk, 2 
Abounding in milk. 3 Prolific, 

lad, -aid, -an, s.m. ( f. in Badenoch.] Load, bur- 
den, cargo, freight, lading. 2**Crowd. 3** 
Volley. Thoir à staigh lad uisge, bring in 
two bucketfuls (a load) of water—A rayll; thàin- 
ig dà lan oirnn, our boat made two heavy seas 
— Lewis. (Pronounced lòd in Argyll, Poolewe, 
dc.] 

lad, -aid, -an, s.m. Water-course, 2 Mill-lead. 
3 Puddle, stagnant water, foul pond 4 Loud 
talk, clamorousness. 

ladach, -aich, s.m. Volley. 

làlach,tt a. Loaded, burdened. 

làdach, (DMC) s.m. Burden of anything, armful. lagach, -aich, s.m, Weakling, feeble person, 2 

làdail, e. Heavy laden, bulky, clumsy, cum- **Helpless person. Chaidh na lagaich a 
bersome, ‘thaobh, the feeble departed from him. 

ladair, gen.sing. & n. pl. of ladar. ."* a, Full of dens, pits or hollows. 

ladar, air, s.m Ladle, spoon, scoop. 2**La- adh, -aidh, s.m. Weakening, act of weak: 


dieful, 3 Church ladle. Gabh an L. no an ening. 2 Becoming weak, A’ l—, pr. pt. of 
taoman, take the ladle or baling-dish laganaich. 


llàdar, air, s.m. Thief, robber. ailt} -e, a. Infirmative. 
lad:rach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to. ladles lagadan cul a’ chinn,( DU) s.m. Hollow at the 
ladar-miot,tt s.m. Scrimmage, melée. back of the head where the neck begins, 
ladarna, -airne, a. Bold, daring, impudent, lagadh, see lagachadh. 
shameless, 2 Loquacious, clamorous  L. is t ‚aidh, s.m. Praise, fame, honour, 
faoin, rash and vain ; gu làmhach, 1., rzady- lagadrag,** -aig, s.f Thigh 


weak ; lagan loisgeach, burning pits. 
lag, laige, a. Weak, feeble, faint. Duine lag, 
a weak man. 


my soul fainted. 

















handed and bold. lagaich, pr pt a‘ lagachadh, v.a. & n. Weaken, 
chad, s.f. see ladarnas fatigue 2 Become weak. 3 Give up with fa- 
ladarnas, -ais, s.m. Boldness, impudence, au-| tigue. 4 Diminish 5$ Become fatigued. 
dacity, impudent loquacity. lagaichte, past pt. of lagaich. Weakened, be- 
ladas (CR) -ais, s.m. Loud talk— Blair Athole) come weak, diminished, tatigued, debilitated, 
& Loch Tay. ?**Boldness in speech. lagair, CMS) v.a. Slacken. 
Jadas,** s.m. Lordliness, làgan, ain, s.m. Flummery, sowens, a kind of 


-——ach, -aiche, a, Rich, lordly. 2 Having| food made from oatmeal by boiling the acid- 


Original trom 


Digitized by | | UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS im 
INTERNET ARCHIVE URBANA-CHAMPAIGNE 





many loads, burdened. 3** Bold in Speech, EF 


ladhrach, -aiche, a. Having hoofs, hoofed, 9 


ladhrag,** -aig, s. f. Toe. 2 Hoof. 3 Fork, 


abdomen ; an cùis nan lag, in the cause of tha ` 


lag, v.n. see lagaich. Tra lag m'anam, when 





ka 
e 


—— 


mw f ‘ 
Ae "m 


4 
r KA 





lagan 

ulated juice to the consistency of a thick jelly. 

lagan, n.pl. of lag. j 

————, -ain, -an, S.M., dim. of lag. Little hol- 
low or cavity. 2 Little pit or den. 3* Meal 
recziver in a mill. Lagan maise, a dimple, as 
on the cheek ; 1. uaigneach, a lonely dell. 

ach, -aiche, a. Full of dells or little hol- 
lows. 2 Like a dell. 

lagarach, -aiche, a. Of, belonging to, or like 
sowens or flummery. 

lag-analach,** s.m. Asthma. 2 Gasp. 

lagan-meath-ghair,** s.m. Dimple. 

lagaraid,(MMcD) s.f. Flood, tidal wave, espe- 
cially in a narrow estuary or loch of the sea. 

lagaranaich,(DMC) s.f. The last throes of death. 

. lag-bheart, -eirt, -an, s.f. Weak instrument. 2 
` Silly performance. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Weak. 2 Artless, 


—achd, 
frailty. 

lag-bhrigheach, -eiche, a. Of little substance 
or small value. 

lag-chiall,tt -chéille, s.f.ind. Indiscretion. 

lag-chridhe, s.f. Faint heart, chicken heart. 
Dejected heart. 

—ach, -eiche, a. Faint-hearted, cow. 
ardly. 2 Feeble-minded. 3 Dejected 1n heart 
or spirit. 

-——— — ——aáchd, s. 7. ind. Faint-heartedness, 
cowardliness, abjectness, dejectedness. 2 
Frailty. 

lag-chuiseach, -eiche, a. see lag-chridheach. 2 
** Unenterprising. 3(DMC) Without help, 
friendless. 4 Weak. 5 (PJM) Wanting in 
pluck, mentally weak. 

d, s.f. see lag-chridheachd. 

lagh, -a, pl. -anna & -annan, s.m. [ f. in Baden- 
och] Law. 2 Order, method. 3 Act of Par- 
liament., 4 Stretch or bend of à bow, L.na 
dùthcha, the law of the land; bogh' air l., a 
bow on the stretch ; 1. nan deas-ghnath, the 
ceremonial law; 1. a chóir-cheartais, the judici- 
al law ; l. nam modhan (or modhannan), the 
moral law ; 1. na h-eaglais, the canon law ; fo 
chasan an lagha, under the feet of the law— 
said of anyone who has committed a crime ; 
air l., trimmed, ready for action ; chan 'eil 1. 
no binn agam dha, I have neither law nor sen- 
tence for him—I don't want to have anything 
to do with him, I despise him. 

lagh,ff v.a. see logh. 

lagh,(DU) v.a. Mould to a certain shape, par- 
ticularly applied to wood. 
laghach, -aiche, a. Decent, tidy, neat. 2 Pretty. 

— 8 Nice. 4 Kind. 5(DMO) Obligmg. Duine 
l.,a kind man ; ni L, a fme thing; is 1. à 

` fhuaireadh e, he did pretty well ; 2 he did sur- 

risingly ; is 1. an duin’ e, what a nice man 
eis ! tha mi gu l., I am weil, 

làghach, Gairloch for laghach. 

laghadair, -ean, s. m. Mould used in shaping 
horn spoons. 

laghadh, see loghadh. 

lagh-agartach,ff -aiche, a. Litigious. 

 laghaich,** v.a. Permit, allow. Chal. mi dhuit 
a dhèanamh, I will not permit you to do it. 

lagh-aicheadh,(MS) s.m. Antinomy. 

laghaig, see laghaich. 

laghail,-e, a. Legal, legitimate, lawful, right- 
ful. 2 Litigious. Nil., a lawful thing ; duine 
1., a litigious person. 

eachd, see laghalachd. 

laghairt, ean, s.m. & f. Lizard. 

—laghalachd, s. f. ind. Legality, lawfulness. 2* 

Litigiousness.  3** Allowableness, rightful- 

ness. 4(DMO) Disputing, argumentation. 








silly. 


s. f. Silliness. 2 Weakness, 





2 














| 


Digitized by 


Cece RICT A Fa e UJ 
ut d L. AN | E CH [A a H M 


563 


làidir 

làghan, Gairloch & Lewis for lagan. 
lavhar, -ghra & -air, pl. -ghran, see ladhar, 
ach, see ladhrach. 

laghard, s.m. Law-giving, moot-hill. 
lagh-chlcacndach, -eiche, a. Judicial. 
laghdachadh, -aila, see lughdachadh. 
Alloy. 

laghdaich, see lug'daich. 

— ————-—te, see lighdaichte. 
lagh-ghnàthaen,1i a. Judicial. 

laghrag, -eig, see ladhrag. 
lagh-stéidhichte, a. Legislative. 
lagh-thabhairteach, -eiche, a. Legislative, law- 
giving. 





Vë, 


el, LI s.f. Legislatorship. 
lagh-thabhairtear,(Ms) s.m. Lawgiver. 
lagh-thartas, -ais, -an, s.m. Legislature, act of 
legislating. 
lagh-thagairteach, -eiche, a. Litigant. 
lagh-thagradair, -ean,s.m. Litigant,law-pleader. 
lag-lamh, -laimh, s. f. Weak hand, pithless 
arm. 2 Weakliness, helplessness, 
-—_——_—-ach, -aiche, a Weak-handed, feeble. 
handed, helpless. 
.— — ——aáchd, s.f. Weakness of hand. 
lag na h-achlaise, s.f. Armpit. 
flagsaine, s.f. Freedom, liberty. 2 Remission. 
lagsainn, see laigsinn. 
lag-thaisde,** s.f. Abatement ina bargain. 
lagus, -uis, s.m. Marl. ; 
lai, Poetical abbreviation of laithe or laithean, 
n. pl. of là. 

làib, ean, s.m. Mire, clay. 2 Sediment. 3 
Puddle, Cha 'n'eil dorus gun l., there is no 
door without a puddle. 
—each, -eiche, a. Abcunding in mire, miry- 
2 Clayey, full of clay. 3 Abounding in sedi- 
ment. 
laibeart, -eirt, -an, s.m. Tailor’s sleeve-board. 
làibeil, -eile, see làibeach. 
laibh,** s.f. Clay, mire, dirt. 
Tlaibhinn, s.f. Leaven. 

—each, a. Like dough or leaven. 2 
eee of dough or leaven. 3 Raw, unfired as 
read. 





+————ich, v.a. Leaven. 

laibhreach, a. Of, or belonging to laurel or bay. 
laibhreach,** -ich, s.f. see luireach. 
laibhreal,** s. Bay tree. 

laibhrichte, a Laureate. 

laibhreas, see labhras. 

laibhrig, -ean, see laimhrig. - 
laichneas, -eis, s.m. Joy. 

laidh, v.n. see luidh. 

laidhe, see luidhe. 

achan, see luidheachan, 

agan, see luidheagan. 

laidhm, see laom & laoim. 

laidh-siübhla, see luidhe-siübhla. 
Làidinn-nan-céard, s. Tinker's language. 
Làidinnear, -eir, s.m. Latin scholar. 
Làidinnich, v.a. Latinize. 

Laidinneach, -eiche, a. Latin. 
Laidionnachadh, -aidh, s.m. Latinizing, act of 
A’ 1—, pr.pt. of Lai- 








translating into Latin. 
dionnaich, 
Laidionnaich, v. a. 
Latin. 


Latinize, translate into 





——— te, past pt. of Làidionnaich. La- 
tinized, translated into Latin. 
làidir, o. 1st. comp. làidire, ?nd. comp. làidirid, 
8rd. comp. làidiread, [The forms treise, treasa, 
treasaid and treasad, given in Gaelie gram- 
mars as comparatives of làidir are not so. 
These are comparatives of treun.] Strong, 
stout, able-bodied, powerful. 2 Potent, in- 
toxicating. 3 Fortified, secure from attack, 


T. d og 
ae c | 


J d oJ 


i 
W Í j , l —= 


Tu m ERE " Vë, 8 Tuo = 
| | KA LJ Pn i "ng RA i ` 
1 T (EM -| Lx n E |n ll 

eat 1 EL. i T L| d" Lm 


NOIS 


p my 


Tä 
J 1 


"A 

[ làidir 
having great force or power. 4* Surprising, 
wonderful. 5łł Hard of digestion, strong 6 
II Strong in smell. mar na daragaibh, 
strong as the oaks; duine L, a strong man ; 
deoch 1., intoxicating liquor , dun 1., a well- 
secured fort; 's ann 1s l. a gbeibnear thu, 
you act or behave surprisingly weil. 

làidire, comp. of laidir 

achd, s.f. Strength,fortitude,power force, 

2 Ableness. 3(MS) Raciness. 

ad, -eid, $.f, Strength, degree of strength 
a a laidiread ‘sam bheil e, however strong 

e be. 

làidireas,** eis, sm Strength, force. 

laidirich, see Jaidricn., 

làidreachadh, -aidh, sm. Strengthening, grow- 
ing strong. A l—. pr. pt of Iaxdrich. 

làidread, see làidiread 

laidrich, pr.pt. a laidreachadh, v a. Strengthen. 
2 Grow strong, 

laig, gen, eng, of lag. 

laige, comp, of lag. Weaker, weakest. 

see laigse. 

laigead, -id, s.f. Degree of weakness or langour. 
A’ dolan L, growing weaker ; air l. a neirt. 
however weak his strength. 

laigh, see luidh. | 

laighe, an, s.7. Spade, shovel. 

laigheagan,tf -ain, s.m. Lying down, reclining. 

laighean, -ein, s,m. Spear. 

laigheur,** -eir, s.m. Verjuice. 

laight,* s. f. Shape, mould. 2 Order, trim. 
Sr AH) Associates, company. Tha e ‘san droch 
l., he is mixed up wth a bad set , chuir thu m’ 
ad as al., you put my hat out of its shape ; 
cuir ^na l. e, put it in uts natural order ; bogh’ 
air l., & bow on the stretch. 

laigse, an, s.f. Weakness, debility, infirmity, 
feebleness. 2 Faint, langour, fatigue. Chaidh 
e an laigse, he fainted , do 1., your weakness. 

laigsinn, s.f. see laigse. 2 rarely Liberty, per- 
mission. 

lail$ s. f. Tulip—Aemerocalleo. Not the com- 
mon tulip, but one which differs from it only 
in haviug the corolla and calyx joined togeth- 
er forming a long tube, and some of this var- 
iety have no bulb but tubers. 

Jàilt,** s. f. Clay, mould. 

——each, ** a. Clayish. 2 Having mould. 

làimh, gen.sing. of lành. 

làimh,** v.a. & n. Attempt, accomplish,venture. 

-bhasb,** v.g. Fence, practise the art of 

fencing. 

-bhasbaireachd, s.f. Art of fencing. 

-chéairde, see làimh-chéaird. 

-cheard, -aird, pl. -an & -cheairde, s. f. 

Handicraft, mechanical trade. 2 Mechanic, 

artisan. 

-chéardail,** æ. Mechanical, like a me- 

chanic. 2 Ingenious. j 

-chleas, -a, -an, s.f. Sleight of hand. 

-chleasaiche, -an, s.m. Juggler, sleight- 
of-hand man. 

làimhdeachas, -ais, s.m. Captivity, slavery. 

De dhia, -dhé, -dhiathan, s. m. Household 
eod. 

laimheach, gen.sing. of làmh in Skye, 

laimh-fhoilead, ** -aid, s.m. Handkerchief. 

laimh-ghleusach,ft -aiche, a. Manual. 

làunhich,** see laimhsich. 

laimh-inneach,(AF)s. m. Octopus, 

làimhreagadh.(DMK) s.m. Mixture of oatmeal 
and water added to the water in which meat 
had been boiied, thus making it into soup— 
Cailhness. 

làimh ri, prep. phrase. By, near, near to, at 
hand. L. rium, near me ; laimh ris an tobar, 








-—, s/f. 























Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


564 





làireach 2 NA 
near the well. | M 
làimhrig,-ean, s.f. Landing-place, shore, nae 
tural landing-place on the shore. 2 Quay. 3 
Harbour. 4 Ford. L. baintighearna, an easy — 
landing-place—lit. a lady’s Janding-place. X 
làinnseach, s.m. see làimhseachadh. / 
-—, -elche, @ Handling. 2 Prone to 
handle or meddle, apt to feel. 
-—adh, -axih, s m. Handling, act of — 
handling. 2 Discussion, act of discussing or ` 
treating a subject. 3 Treatment of a person 
orthing. 4* Trade. 5 Management. 6f) 
Feeling with the fingers, fingering. 7 Wield- 
ing, as Of a manual weapon.  8** Practising Mc 
or exercising, as of an implement or tool. Ai - 
1—, pr.pt. of laimhsich. L. an ni sin, the ` 
management of that affair ` am bheil l san  . 
bith aige P has he any dealings among hands: — 
l lann, handling or wielding of swords; i 
goirt, a severe handling. P. 
laimh-sgiath, -sgéithe, see làmh-sgiath. E 
laimhsich, pr.pt. a’ làimhseachadh, v.g. Feel, 
handle, touch with the fingers, finger, 2 —. 
Handle or treat a person, thing or subject, ~ 
manage, 3 Deal. 4 Exercise, wield an ine © 
strument. - 
—te, past pt. of làimhsich. Handled, . 
fingered, felt. 2 Exercised, wielded. 3 Treat- 
i ag Etage | 
aimh-theann, -einne KÉ 
làimh-theannach, : see làmh-theannach. ` | 
làimh-thionnach, see làmh-thionnach. 
làimrig, see làimhrig. 
lain-cheathairne, see lan-cheathairne. B. 
làin-chéimnich, see làn-chéimnich. | 
làin-deanta, see làn-deanta. : 
laine, s.f. Fulness, repletion. 2 Completeness, ` 
L. mara, high water. E i: 
laine, comp. of lan. Fuller, fullest. M. 
laine,** s,f, Gladness, merriment, cheerfulness. 
laineach, -eiche, see loinnear.  2**Glad, joy- — 
ful, merry. Gu l., joyfully. OF 
laineachd, see lanachd. . 
lainead, -id, s.m. Fulness, degree of fulness. E: 
laingean,** o Faithful. 2 Steady. 3 Steadfast. - 
lainn, gen.sing. & n.pl. of lann. 
, see loinn. 
lainne, see laine. 3 
lainneach, see laineach. - 
làinneach, -eiche, o see lannach. 
lainneil,** a Buxom, handsome. B 
lainnir, -e, s.f. Good polish, brightness, brill 
iancy, beauty. 2 seelannair. NM 
lainnireach, see loinnreach. E. 
———--—d, see loinnearachd. 
lainnirich, see loinnrich. 
lainnreach, see loinureach. 
lainntear, see lanntair. 
laipeid, s.f. Gaelic spelling of lappet. K 
laipheid, -ean, s.f. Instrument used in shaping © 
horn spoons. H 
làir, -e & làrach, pl. -aichean, lairidhean & -idh- — 
nean, s.f. Mare. L.-asal, œ she-ass. 8 
lair, s.f. Offence. Cha ruig thu leas a leithid ` 
del. a ghabhail as, you need not pique your- 
self so much on that. ` 3 
làir, gen. sing. of làr. 
lair,** s.f. Thigh, haunch. 
làir-bhreabach, s. 7. Rocking-horse. 
saw—Argyll. 3 (WC) Turf-parer. . 
làirceach, -eiche, o Stout and short-legged. ` ` 
-— — —— , -aich, s.m. Man with thick short legs, 
fleshy, gross person. ca 
làirceag, -eig, -an, $.f. Short fat woman. kb 
Jàircean, -ein, -au, s.m. Bulky, fleshy or fat boy 
or child. i m] 
làir-ach, -eiche, a. Having many mares, abound- — 


D 
J 














` Zä 





2 Seo 






Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOISS 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGIS 


làireach 


| ing in mares. 

- làireach,(AF) 3.7. Filly. 

(O——————, see làrach. 

. laireag, s.f. see learag. 2(AF) Lark.. 

_ lair-fligh, s. Pine grosbeak, see cnag. 2 Wood- 
E pecker. 

| Hairge, s.f. Thigh, haunch. 

< tiairic, see làirig. 

. làirich, see làirig. 

. làiridhean, n.pl. of lair. 

. làiridhnean, n.pl. of làir 

| 3lairig, -ean, s. f. Moor, hill, sloping hill. 2 
- Way or pass between two mountains.  3** 
^. Burying-place. 

. lairigidh, see lair-fligh. 

` làir-mhaide(CR) s.f. See-saw—W, of Ross. 2 An 
| Jairanbaide (the wooden mare, ) an Uist 
| game, generally played indoors, though some- 
- - times outside also. A trapeze was made by 
means of two pieces of rope tied toa rafter 
and let down from the ceiling, with a pole 
= tied to them at a distance of about three feet 
| from the ground. On this pole the player had 
to balance himse f, sitting astride. He held 
. another pole in his hands. The object was to 
- strike the ground on both sides with the pole 
— without falling, Whenever one fell off, in ad- 
. dition tothe severe shaking, one was out of 
the game. This game provided very beneficial 
... exercise.—'' Uist games ”’ in Celtic Review, No. 









= 46. Cuiridh mi air an làir-mhaide thu (I will}, 
put you on the wooden 1nare,) is used as a| 


| — threat in Argyll, referring to the punishment 
. of carrying a person astride on a pole resting 
D onthe shoulders of two others.—(AH) 

d lais,(DMy) s. Slap. L. ’san lethcheann, a slap 
swith the open palm on the cheek. 

Hais, see las. 2** Hand. 3 **Cry. 

| laisceanta,** a. Flaming. 2 Inflammable. 3 
| A Passionate, furious. Gu 1l., passionately. 

. laisde, a. Easy, in good circumstances, comfor- 
IC table. 

| laisde,** an, s.f. Latchet. 

| ———Ach, a. Having latchets or thongs. 2 Full 
= .oflatchets, 8 Like a latchet. 


e" 
A 
















| 
| fort. 

— laise, am, s.f. Flame of fire. 
— laiseach,** a. Flashing. 
W mable. 

 laisgeanta, -einte, a. Fierce, fiery. 
——-—chd, s.f. Fierceness, fieriness. 

. laiste, past pt. of las. Kindled, lighted up. 2 
D Enraged. 

— dour for battle. 


L. le boil chath, kindled with ar- 
— Jaistean, -ein, -an, s.m. Gold or silver lace. 
— laith,(AF) s.f. Sweet milk. 
Math, zz s.f. Multitude. 2 Ale. 3 Feast. 4 
| Stomach. 
| laithe,(AF) s.f. Sweet milk. 
. laithe,** s.pl. Jeweller’s scales. 
làithe, Lan, of là. 


“fh 
` Jáithean, 

| laithich,** s.f. see lathach, 

| laithigh, s.m. see làthach. 

| laithilt,** s.m. Weighing, as with scales. 

| ]làithir, -e, s.f. see làthair. 

- làithre,(AF) st Cow. 2 see lair. 

RA ach, -ich, -ichean, see làrach 

Ts achd, see làthaireachd. 

— laithrich,** v.n. Appear. 

- Jaitis,**- s.f. Gaelic spelling of lattice, 
_flalach, -aich, s.m. Giant, champion. 

T -luain, s.m. Doom's day, the last day. 

| lamairean,(CR) s.m. Trifler, dawdler— Arran. 
-= lamairig, see laimhrig. Eadar long is L, be- 
tween the ship and the pier—Arran. 


2 Flash. 
2 Flaming. 3 Inflam- 


m 











565 


Tlamais,** s. Poet. 

lama3lach.(AC) æ. Corrupt. 

laimanta,** a. Menstruous. 

lamarag,tt -aig, -an, s.m. Awkward fellow. 2 


que — aehd, s.f. Easiness in circumstances, com- | 
d 


lamhag 


Cowardly fellow.. 
ach,tt -aiche, 
ardl 


a. Awkward. 2 Cow, 


y. 
lamaranta,(DMC) a. Soft. 2 In a half-boiled or 


half-baked condition. 


lamban,f-ain, s. m. Milk curdled by rennet, 


see slaman. | 
ach, -aiche, œ. Abounding in or like 
curdled milk. 


làmh, làimh (gen. làimheach in Skye), pl. -an,s.f. 


Hand. 2 Arm. 3 Handle of a tool or instru- 
ment. 4**Attempt, attack. 5* Hand, one of 
à crew. L. an uachdar, the upper hand ; 
thug el air, he attacked him, or he attempted 
it ; cuir dol. leinn, lend us æ hand; mo l. 
dhuit, (lit. my hand to you) I can assure you; 
lamh air làimh, hand in hand; rug e air 
làimh oirre, he shook hands with her ; a’ cum- 
ail laimh rithe, paying his addresses to her, 
keeping her in hopes of marriage ; tha e an 
làimh, he is in custody, or he is in a strait ; fo 
àimh, under his hand, under his command 3 
culm air do làimh, stay thy hand ; aig làimn, 
at hand ; mun làimh, in hands, indifferently ; 
cha’n "eil ann ach rud mu'n làimh, it is but 
an indifferent matter ; as an laimh, out of the 
hand, aside, of-hand ; gabh os làimh, under- 
take, engage in, assume; tha iad ag iomairt an 
lamhan a chéile, they understand each other, 
there is a eollvsion between them ; tha eeann 
mo lamhan air at, my hands are swollen ; 
cuir l. rithe, sign, endorse. For meanings of 
* an làmh ud thail,” and "ran làmh seo 
fhéin "' see p. 77. 


lành,f v.v. & n, Dare. 
lamh,'a@. Able. 


lamhach, -aiche, @ Having hands or handles. 
2*Dexterous, masterly, adroit. 3 Daring. 4 
Presuming. 

lamhach, -aich, s.m. Slinging, casting with the 
hand, 2 Firing, shooting, report of guns. 3 
**Military manoeuvres. 4tr Snappishness. 
5 Haft. 6 Volley. Luchd-làmhaich, artil- 
lerym?n, bowmen, slingers. 

làmhach, -aich, s.m. Gleaning, act of gleaning. 
2 The thing gleaned. A’ l—, pr. pt. of làmn- 
aich, 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Handling, act of hand- 

ling, fingering, feeling, groping. A’ l—, pr.pt. 
of lamhaich. 

lamhachair, -e, see lamhchair. 

—eachd, see lamhachaireachd. 

lamhachas, -ais, s.m, Exercising of the hand or 
arm. 2 Dexterity. 3** Cannonading.  4** 
Grovelling. 5t}Snappishness. 6** Military 
evolutions. 7**Activily 8**Management. 9 
Groping, handling. 10tfTaking, seizing, cap- 
ture. lltiReadiuess to finger. 12** Firing of 
guns. 138**Artillery. [tt gives s. m. for 11, 
and s.f.for 10.) Luchd-làmhachais, artilery- 
men, archers ; lel. laidir, by force. 

lamhachas-laidir, s.m. Force, compulsion, un- 
due exercise of power. 

lambachd, s.f. see làmbach. 

làmhachdradh,tt -aidh,s.m. Needless handling. 
2tiPawing. 

làmhadair,* see lamhainnear. 

lànhadh,(CR) -aidh, s.m.. Axe—Suth’d. 
Pawing, handling, groping. 

lamhag,tt s.f. Small hand. 2 Axe. [This should 
be spelt lamhadh, but it is pronounced lamh- 
ag im Gairloch, &c. This peculiarity in tue 
Gairloch dialect extends to most terminations 


EEN 


Den 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


Digitized by 


WINTERNET ARCHIVE 





lamhag 


in -adh, e.g. padhag for padhadh, thirst.] 
an, -ain, -an, sm. Handling, fingering 
2 Glove. 





va. Glean, as corn. 2 Handle. 
**Tlake in hand. 

—+—-—te, past pt. of lamhaich. Gleaned. 
Handled, felt with the hands 


làmhaidh, s. Razorbill, see coltraiche. 


Guillemot. ' 
làmhainn, -ean, s. f. Glove, especially a kid 
glove. 2 Mitten. 3 Gauntlet. 


làmhainn cat leacainn,§ s. Navel-wort, wall- 
pennywort—cotyledon wmbilicus. Used as a 
poultice for scalds or pimples. 

-—each, -eiche, a. Having gloves, abound- 
ing in gloves. 

-—— ——— ear, -ir, -an, s.m Glover 

-— — —-earachd, s.f. Art or trade of glove-ma- 
king. 

-— — —-ich, v.a. Provide with gloves, put 
gloves on the hands. 

~———--—iche, see lam!;ainnear, 

: ichte, pas! pt. of làmhainnich. 

làmhair,** s.m. Gunner, shooter 

làuihaire,* s.f. Right hand stilt or handle of a 
plough. (ihe left one is called corrag.) 

lanihairic. see làimhrig. 

làmhairt,** e, €. Handling, fingering. 

lamhalan, see labhallan. 

Jamhan,** ap, s.m. Glove, gauntlet. 

lamh-anart, -airt, -an, s.m. Towel. 

làmhan cat leacainn,** s.m. Common navel- 
wort, see làmhainn cat leacainn. 

lamhannan,** -ain s.m. Bladder. 

lamhargan,(CR) s.m. Handle of a flail-—4A rran. 
lamhas, -ais, s.m. Glove. 

làmhchair, -e, a. Ready-handed, handy,cleyer, 
active, dexterous, adroit. 

-—e20hnd, sJ. Ecady-handedness, dex- 
terity, adroitness. 2 Sleight of hand. 3 
Knack. 

làmhchar, see làmhchair. 

lamh-charach,(MS) æ. see làmhchair 

—————d,(MS) * f. see lambchaireachd. 
lành-chéardail, -e, a. see iaimh-cheardail, 
lamh-cheird, see là mih-ehieard. 

————— il, see làimh-chéardail 

Yamh-chlag, -chluig, s.m Hand-bell. 

lamh-chleas, -an, see laimh-chieas. 

—-—achd, see laimh-chleasachd. 

———_——aiche, see laimh-chleasaiche. 

Jamh-ehli, s.f. The left hand. 

làmh-choille, s.f. Cubit. 

:——-—ach, a. Cubital. , 

|làmh-chomuart, -airt, s. m. Clapping of hands 

.lamh-chómhraie, s.m. Combatant 

làmhehradh, (CR) s.m. Handling of 
cattle—Skye, 2(Fionn) Pawing. 
handling. 

lamhchran, see'làmhrachan. 

lamh-chrann, s.f. Handstaff of a flail, 2 Tree of 
a harp. 3 Handle of a plough. 

jlàmh-chrathadh, s.m. Hand-shake, 

i làmh-dhéanadas, ais, s.m. Handiwork. 

‘lamh-dheanas, ais, s.m. Restraint. 

jamb-dhéanta, G. Manufactured, hand-made. 

'lamh-dheantas, see lamh-d heanadas, 

làmh-dheas, -an-deasa, s. f. The right hand, 
Si EN na laimhe deise, to the right 

Qua. 

Jàuh-dhruidh, ean, s.m. Chiromancer, palmist. 

MM ta rd 
IScry. 

làmi-fhadach, -aiche, a. Longimanous, 

lamh-fhail, -ean, s.f. Bracelet. 

—each,(MS) a. Armillary. 








= ii 











Digitized | 


ibd rcs AM. 
TERNET ARCHIVE 


566 


 lamih-fhual, see famh-blual. 
'jamhgar, s.m, 


| ' Slippery seaware—Lewis ; eu. sgeir lamhgair, 
làmhaich, pr.pt. a’ làmhach & a’ làmhacliadh, làmb-ghlais, 
9 Finger, 4 


2 |làmh-gülas, -ais, -an, 


sheep and | lamh-stiuradh, | | 
3 Needless | lamh-threoraebadh, -aidh, s.m. Manuduction, 








lampar e 


Sunk ledge of roc* covered with 


v.a, Manacie, hapdeut. 
——— fe, past nt. 
cled, handcuffed. 





8. f. Manacle, handcuff, 
(better glas-làmh.) 


2 (AF) | lauh-gh'a:adh, -aidh, s.m. Manacling, act of 


manacling, handeuffing. A’ I—, pr. pt. of 
làmh-ghla is. 

làmh-ghleusach,(MS) a. Manual. 

làmh-ghreim, s.f. Handle. 

lamh-laidir, -àinh-, s.m. Force, oppression, vio- 
lence. 2 Strong hand, Le L, with a strong 
hand—motto of the Mackays. 

lainb-léigh, -ean, s.m. Surgeon. 

— - ———-eachd, s.f. Surgery. 

lamh-lorg, -luirg, an, sr Handstaff of a flail. 

lcs dcs inn, -uilnean, s.m. Hand- 
mill. 

tlanhnadh, -aidh, 8. m. Bringing forth, nati- 
vity. 

lamhnain, s.f. see lanan & lanann. 

làmhnan, -ain, s,m. Bladder. 

lamh-oibre, -an, s.m. Workman, labourer. 2 
Good workman. . 

làmh-oibriche, see làmh-oibre. 

làmhrachan, -ain, s.m. Handle, shaft, 2 (DMC) 
Big stick. 

làmhrachdaich, e, m. Handling, act of handling 
awkwardly. 2 





Grope. 

larahrachdas,** ais, s.m. Groping, handling, 

làmhrag, -aig, an, s.f. Awkward, slovenly or 
indolent woman, siut. 2 Dowdy. 3**Silly 
woman. 

iàmhragan, -ain, s.m. Awkward handling or 
using of anything. 2 Groping. 3 Lazy or 
“Overy habit. 4(DMC) Slowness in doing a 
hing. 

làmhraganach, -aiche, o Of awkward, indo- 
lentor slovenly habits. 





.“* v, a. Handle clumsily. 


lamhraich, pr.pt, a’ lamhrachadh, v.a. Handle 


awk wardly or unskilfully. 2 Grope. 
lambraig,(AF) s.f. Allen hawk. 
lamih-rod, -did, s.m. By-road, footpath. 
lamhsaich, see làimhsich. 
lamhsatd, see langasaid. 
làmh-sgiath, -sgéithe, an. 
làmh-sgrìobhadh, 

Manuscript. 
Jauh-sgriobhaidh,** et see làmh-sgrìobhadh. 


-aidh, s.m Handwriting. 3 


s.f. Target, shield, — , 1 


of lamh-ghlais. Mana- — 


Ai 


see Ee TNT 
ES E er a er IO an! 


D 


& 
; 


- A 


Së 


E 

A 
A 
May 


KT ef 







làmh-sgriobhair, -ean. s.m. Clerk, amanuensis, 


lamh-speic, -ean, s.f. Hand-spike. 
-—each, a. Abounding in hand-spikes. 
aidh, s.m. Manuduction. 


lamh-theann, -einne, a. see làmh-theannach. 


~——ach, -aiche, a. Close-fisted, grip- — 


ping. / à 
làmh-thionnach,** o. Desirous, eager. 2 Given 
to chiromancy. 
lamh-thuagh, s.f. Axe. 


| lamh-uaireadair, s.f. Hand of a watch or clock. 3 
fambuinn, 


see làmhainn. 
——each, see lamhainneach. 
:—ear, see lambainnear. 


—— ———-—earachd, see limhainnearachd. 


— eh, see lamhainnich, 
—jente, see làmhainnichte. 


s.f. Chiromancy, palm-,làmh-uisge, s,f Sluice-handle. 
lamna, s.m. à 
Tlamnad, s, Parturition. 

lampa, s.m. Gaelic spelling of lamp. : 
lampar,(AF) air, ssm. Small or unfledged bird. 


Space of time, 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF 


V I Fel 


LJ R, B A, N A " D H A M D A | 3 N | E 









if lanaig, (MMcD) s. 


M Tlànamhas, -ais, 


à A 


]ànadair, -ean, 


^ lamprag 


shniomhain. 

lamrag, -aig, -an, see lamhrag. 

lamraig, see làimhrig. 

lamraig,** s.m. Black bird with white spots, 
supposed to be an allen hawk. 

lan, laine, o Full. 2 Complete, perfect. 3 
Filled, satiated, satisfied. Lan tghdarras, 
fuil authority ; 1. dhamh, æ full-grown stay 
or hart ; 1. chothrom, ample justice, best op- 
portunity * |. chumhachd, diseretionary power, 
Jull authority, carte-blanche ; thal. fnios ag- 
am air sin, I know that quite well. 

làn, làin, s.m. Full, fulness, repletion 2 The 
tide, flood tide.  3**Corpulence 4 rarely 
Church. 5 Lane, 6 **Swell, as of water. 
[MacAlpine gives ‘‘ pique," wnicn should be 
lair.) Rug an l. oirnn, the tide overtook us ; 
L broinn, og beliyful ; 1. beoil, a mouthful ; ’s 
ann innte tha 'n ]. ! how corpulent she is! ] 
dùirn, à handful ; 'e ann "san abhainn a tha "n 
làn! what a swell there is in the river ! 1. a 
chridhe, enough, plenty ; thuge l a chridhe 
dha, it gave him as much as he was fit for ; 

thàinig l. orm, my eyes suffused with tears. 

adv. Completely, wholly, quite. Lan 
cheart, quite right; 1. fhiosrach. fully cer- 
tain; 1, fhoghainteach, fully equal to, fully 
competent. 

lanach, o Fruitful. An grùnnd a b’ fhèarr 
o shliabh gu tràigh, gu fasach, lànach, sult- 

 mhorra, the best of land from hill to strand, 
productive, fruitful, fertile—Filidh, p, 22. 
lanachadh, -aidh, s m. see lànachd. 

lànachd, s.f. Fulness, abundance, repletion. 2 
Completion, fulfilment. 

s. m. Smith's iron wedge or 
mould-piece, with which to shape the eye of 
an axe or hammer, 2 Funnel, filler. 

lànag, s.f. Radius. 

Narrow path for cattle 
through the crofts in a township. 

lan-aighear,tt s.m. Mirth, merry-making. 

lànain,** -ain, an, $J. see lànan. 
lan-amhare, tt aire, s.m. Perlustration, 

see Jananas, 

lànamhnas, see lànanas. 

lànanas, -ais, s.m. Congressus venereus, 

lànamhainn, see lànan. 

lanamhuin, see ]lànan. 

lanan, -ain, -an, s.m. Couple, pair or brace. 2 
Married couple. 3 Roof couple. Gu ma buan 
do "n l. uasal-! long may the noble couple live ! 
1, pòsda, à married couple. 

lànann, see lànanm. 

lan-aois, s.m. Fullage, advanced age. 


- làn-aosda, a. Full of age, of an advanced age. 


làn-aosdachd, s.f. Fulness of age. 


X. Jàn-bharail, s. Conviction. 


K lan-chothromach, -aiche, a. 
E ee. 2 Of full weight. 


RE of weighing thoroughly. 


. làn-cheathairne, -an, 
. 3làn-chéimnich, 


2 Confidence, 
self-confidence. 


lan-bheachdail, -e, a. Confident 
Jàn-bhuidheann, -bhuidhne, -dhnean, sf. Full 

band, gang, garrison, complement of men, ` 
s.m. Guard, garrison, 
v.n. Wander, ramble. 


lan-chothrom, -oim, -an, s.m. Ample justice. 2 


Lë i 


Full weight. 3**Good opportunity, Tha ’n 
1. agad, you have a good opportunity. 
Affording ample 


3**Quite conveni- 


ent. 
lan-chothromachadh, -aidh, s.m. Weighing, act 
A’ l—, pr.pt. of làn- 
chothromaich. 


 Iën-chotbhromaich, v.g. Weigh thoroughly. 


at 


Ki? 


ian-chothromaichte, past pt. Fully weighed, 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


567 
flamprag, -aig, s. fe Glow-worm, see cuileag- | lan-chriochnachadh, -aidh, s.m. 





langaiche 

ICN: Finishing, ac- 

complishing, act of completely finishing, com- 
pletion, accomplishment., A’ 1—, pr. pt of 
lan-chriochnaich, 

lan-chriochnaich, pr.pt. a’ làn-chriochnachadh, 
v.a. Complete, perfect, accomwlish a work. 

lan-chriochnaichte, past pt. Accomplished, quite 
finished, brought to a final conclusion. 

tàn-chrodha, o Very brave or powerful 

lan-chruaidh,** a. Quite hard, well-tempered. 
Lannan l., wel.-tempered swords. 

làn-chumhachd, an, s.m. Full power, plenipo* 
tence 

Jan-chumhachdach,-aiche, a. Having full power. 
plenipotent. 

làn-chumhachdach, -aich, s.m. Plenipotentiary. 

Hand | s. Scale. 

lan-daingneachd, an, s.m. Perfect hold or hold. 
ing. 2 Perseverauce, firmness of purpose. 

làn-damh, -aimbh, s.m. Full grown stag or hart, 
S FOX." 

Jan-deanta, a. Quite finished, perfectly formed, 
2 Perfectly trained. L. ri airm, well-trained 
to arms, 

lan-dearbh, v a 
Try thoroughly 

lan-dearbhachd, an. s.m. Full proof, full con- 
viction, assurance. Lel., with full assurance. 

lan-dearbhadh, -aidh, s.m. Demonstrating, acb 
of demonstrating, fully proving. 2 Full as- 
surance, conviction. 8 Complete trial. L. 
air gach duine, every man fully persuaded. 

lan-dearbhta, o & past pt. of làn-dearbh. 
Fully proved, demonstrated,tried thoroughly, 
fully convinced. 

làn-deimhinn, -ean, s.m. Certainty, full assur- 
ance or persuasion, Bha l. aige, ke was fully 
persuaded. 

lan-dhearbh, see làn dearbh. 

lan-dhearbhta, see làn-dearbhta, 

lan-dhearcadh,tt -aidh, s.m. Perlustration. 

làn-dochas,fI] -ais, s.m. Assurance, certain er, 
pectation. 

Jàn-duirn,** s.m. Handful, maniple. 

iàn-dubhlan, -ain, an s. m. Open challenge, 
open defiance. Bheirinn l, do d' namh, I 
would give an. open challenge to thy foes. 

lan-fhios, -an, s. f. Full certainty, assurance, 
knowledge, conviction. Tha 1. agad, you know 
full well. 

lan-fhiosrach, .aiche. o Fully assured or cer- 
tain. Tha mil air, Zam quite certain of it. 

làn-fhiosrachadb, -aidh, sm Making certain, 
act of making certain, assuring, convineing, 
conviction. 

làn-fhiosrachd, see lan-fhios. 

lan-fhiosraich, pr.pt a lan-fhiosrachadh, 
Make certain, convince. 
made certain. 

lan-foiosraichte, past pt. of lan fhiosraich. Ful- 
ly assured, made certain. 

lang,** -aing, s.m. Feast. 

tlang, s.f. Falsehood, treachery. 

langa,tt s.f. Lank female. 

langa, s. f. Ling (plant), see fraoch.  2(AF) 
Line (fish.) Isian 1. mart-fheóil na mara, 
ling is the beef of the sea. 

langach, T -aich, s.m. Common .guillemot, see 
eun-dubh-an-sgadain. 

langach, -aiche, œ. Slim, slender. 
False, treacherous. 

langach,** -aich, s.m. Ling. 

langadal,(DMC) s. Slow female— Harris. 

langadar, -air, s.m. The top of duidhean, a kind 
of seaware longer and smaller than tangles. 


Demonstrate, prove fully. 2 


v.a. 
2 Be assured or 


2 rarely 


langaiche, s.f. Slimness, slenderness. 2 False- 
ness, 83 Slender, slim person, 
Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


A 


AT 


= 


langaid 


langaid,* -ean, s. f. Horse-fetter—Islay. 2 
tGuillemot—TIsles, 


langaideach, -eiche, a. Fettered, as a horse. lannaibh, 


z Of, or belonging to horse-fetters. 
horse-fetter. 

langaidh, T s. Common guillemot, see eun-dubh- 
an-sgadain. 

langaidich,(MS) v.a. Clog. 

langain, v.n. Low, as a cow or deer. 

— — ——, gen. sing. of langan. 

langair,** s.m. Seam. 2 Glutton. 

langaire'(AH) s.m. Linksand hook connecting 
muzzle iron of a plough and the big swingle- 
tree, commonly called the ** bridle.’’ 

langais, (AH) s.f. Tow-rope. 

largaiseachadh, s.m. Towing a boat by a rope 
from the shore. A’ 1—, pr.pt. of langaisich. 

langaisich, pr.pt. a’ langaiseachadh, v.a. Tow 
a boat along the shore. 

langan, -ain, -an, s.m. Noise or bellowing of a 
deer, bray. 2 Noise, harangue. 3** Monotony 
of the human voice, 4**Cant. 5**Breast. 6 
** Shotten fish. 

langanach, a. Continued bellowing or lowiag, 
as a deer. 

langinachd,** s.f. Diatribe. 

langanaich, -e, s.f. Lowing, bellowing. 2 Mon- 
otonous sound. 3**Cant. 4(DMC) Yawning. 

langanaich, v.n. Low, bellow, as a deer. 2 Mak > 
a monotonous sound. 

langan-braghaid, -ain-bh-, -an-b-, s.m. The wea- 
sand, windpipe. 

langar, -air, -airean, s.m. Seam. 2 Fetter. 
chain. 3 Horse-fetter. 4 see langasaid. 

langar-Ileach, -air-Ilich, -an-Ileach, s.m. Lam- 
prey. 

langasaid, -ean, s.f. Kind of sofa, couch or 
seitee. 2**Courtesy. 3**Crouching 

làn-ghealach,** -aich, s.f. Full moon. 
lan-zhealaich, the full moon’s light. 

làn-ghéilleach, -eiche, a. Non-resistant. 

làn-ghuin, s.f. Period, full stop in writing. 

langrach,a. Full of chains or fetters—-Sar-Obair. 

Jan-laghadh, -aidh, s.m. Plenary indulgence. 

lan-luach, s.m. Full price. Air al., at its full 
price. 

làn-mara, -àin-mh-, s.m. Tide, full or high tide. 

lan-mhath, adv. Full well. 

lànmhor, -oire, a. Full, complete, plentiful. 

lann, -a, -ainne, -aiun & -oinne, pl. -an, s. f. 
Blade of a sword or knife. 2 Sword. 8 Lan- 
cet. 4**Knife, 5 Weapon, any bladed instru- 
ment. 6 Disc. 7 Scale ofa fish. 8 Scale or 
rove, round piece of metal on which nails are 
clinched inside a boat. 9 Film. Lannan is 
itean an éisg, the scales and fins of the fish; 1. 
na sgéine,the blade of the knife ; 1. liomhaidh, 
a polished sword; l. thana, a thin blade ; ma 
liubhras mi mo chlaidheamh, is ann an agh- 
aidh na lanna, if I give up my sword, rt shall 
be point first—i.e. you must fight for it ; thar- 
ruing iad an lann, they drew their swords ; 1. 
Spàinndeach, a toledo ; 1. a’ bhàis air a shùil 
ean, £he film of death on his eyes. 

lann,* v.a. Scale, take scales off fish. 2**Put to 
the sword, 3 Exercise or fence with the sword 

lann, lainn, an & lanndaichean, s.f. Enclosure, 
2 House. 3 Church. 4 Repository. 5 Stud, 
or boss, as on a shield. 6 Gridiron. 7 Scale 
(balance.) 8 rarely Land. 9 rarely Veil. 10 
Corn-yard, 

lannach, -aiche, a. Armed with swords. 2 
Scaly, covered with scales. 3 Studded, bossy. 
4** Gleaming, coruscant. 5 Biaded. Am 
bradan l., the scaly salmon. 

lannachd, s.f. Scaliness. 

lannadh, -aidh, s.m. Peeling. 


Solus na 


2 Putting to the 


568 


lan-shoillse 


sword. 3 Sword exercise. 
S 


4 Scaling as of 
dat. pl. of lann. 


3 Like a |lannair, s.f. Glitter, radiance, gleaming, reflect- 


tion of rays from a polished surface. 2**Great 
flame. 3 Phosphoric glitter from fish scales 
in the dark, phosphorescence. 4(AF) Lanner, 
falcon, peregrine falcon. 5 (AF) Cow. 6 
Splendour. 7(DMC) Calm or glitter caused by 
oil on water. Do shùil gun 1.,thine eye without 
radiance, e : 

lannair, œ. see lannaireach, 

lannaireach, -eich, o Gleaming, glittering, 
Shining, radiant, phosphorescent, burnished, 
beaming. 2 Fond of sword exercise. Clog: 
aidean l., gleaming helmets. 

lannaireachd, s.f. Gleaming, shining, radiance. 
2 Sword exercise. 3 Feats of arms. 4 see — 
loinnearachd. : 

lannair-sheilge,(AF) s.f. Hunt-gleamer hawk, 

lann-amhare,** sm. Amphitheatre. 

lannan, n.pl. of lann. 

‘annar,** a Bright, gleaming, beaming, radi. 
ant. Bul. a shnuadh, bright was his aspect. 

lann-bheach,(MS) s.f. Apiary. 

lann-bhuidhne,** s.f. Garrison, barracks. 

lann-chuisle, s.f. Lancet. 

lanndaichean, n.pl. of lann. 

lanndair, see lanntair. 

lann-gleidhte,** s.m, Enclosed place, enclosure. ` 
2 Repository. 

lann-ghorm, -ghuirme, o. Blue scaled, having 
blue seales. 

lannrach, -aiche, see lannaireach. 

tlaunrach, -aich, -aichean, s.f. Vast flame,blaze, 
sudden conflagration. i 

lannrachadh, -aidh, s.m. Gleaming, glittering, 
glistening, flaming, shining, 

lannraich, v.n. Gleam, glitter, 
spangle. 

lannsa, s f. Gaelic spelling of lance. 

lannsach, a. Furnished with lances or lancets. 

lannsaich, v.a. Bleed, let blood. 

lannsaiche, s.m. Lancer, pikeman. 

lannsaid,(CR) s.f. Gairloch for langasaid. 

lannsair, sm. Gaelic spelling of lancer. 

làn-sgaoilte, œ. Full-spread. 

lann-smig, s.f. Razor. 

lanntair, -ean, s.m, Gaelic spelling of lantern. 
2 Pantry, partition. 3(CR) Inner part of old 
houses—A rran. 

lanntair,* s.m. Landscape, beautiful side of à 
country, full of wood and arable land, facing 
the sea. 

SEN a. Furnished with lanterns. 2 
Safe. 


shine, blaze, be- 


làn-phune, -uine, pl. an & -annan, s.m, Full 


stop, period in writing. $ 
làn-sgrüd, v.g. Examine minutely. 2 Catechize. 
3 Consider fully. p 
lan--gridadh, -aidh, s.m. Minute examination 
or consideration. 
lan-shealladh, -aidh, s.m. Perlustration. 
lan-shoilleir, -e, @ Very clear, refulgent. 2 
Evident, fully seen or understood. 38**Noto- 
rious. 
lan-shoilleireachadh, -aidh, s.m. Makiug clear. 
act of making perfectly clear or intelligible. 
2**Brightening. A7 1—, pr. pt. of làn-shoill- 
eirich. p XE 
lan-shoilleireachd, s.f. Full or complete light. 
an-shoilleirich, pr. pt. a’ lan-shoilleireachadh, 
v.a. dn. Make quite clear. 2 Become quite 
clear or evident. 3**Become bright. e 
làn-shoilleirichte, past pt. Made quite clear. 2 
Become quite clear. . 
lan-shoillse, s.f. Perfect or clear light, 2 Per- 


Original from 








UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOISEEES 
URBANA-CHAMPAlGÉM 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 





lan-shoillse 


ect day, broad daylight. , 
Bight of the full moon ; 1. na gréine the univer- 
sal light of the sun. 

lan-shoillseach, -eiche, a. Giving perfect light. 
2 Giving general light. 

làn-shoillseachadh, -aidh, s.m. Giving of per- 
fect light, act of dispensing perfect and gen- 
eral light, lighting wholly and completely. A’ 
1—, pr.pt, of iàn-shoillsich. 

Jan-shoillsich, pr. pt. a’ lan-shoillseachadh. v.a. 
& n. Give perfect or complete light. 2 Make 
quite clear or evident. 

làn-shoillsichte, past pt. Perfectly or complete- 
ly lighted. 2 Made quite clear or evident. 

Jan-shuil, -shüla, -shüilean, s.f Full eye. 

làn-shüileach, eiche, o. Full-eyed, having full 


eyes. 
lanta,(MS) a. Abundant. 
lantachd, s.f. Plethora, amplitude. 
flantair, see lanntair 
làn-thlachd, s. f. Perfect liking, full content- 





ment. ! 
làn-thoil, s.f. Full satisfaction. 2 Concurrence, 


3 Satiety. 

lan-thoileach, a. Fully satisfied, quite content- 
ed. 2 Quite willing. Tha mi l., Z am quite 
contented, 

làn-thoileachadh, -aidh, s.m. Giving or act of 
giving complete satisfaction, A’ l—, pr.pt. of 
Jan-thoilich. 

lan-thoilich, v.a. Give full or complete satisfac- 
tion. 2 Please to the utmost. 

làn-thoiliehte, past pt. Perfectly satisfied, well 
pleased, quite contented. 


 làn-tholl, -thuill, s.m. Perforation. 


lan-tholladh, -aidh, s.m. Perforation. 

lan-thorach, a. Fully pregnant. 

làn-üghdarach, -aiche, o Having full power, 
plenipotent. 

Jàn-üghdarach, -aich, s.m. Plenipotentiary. 

lan-ughdaras, ais, s. m. Full power, full au- 
thority. 

laob,(AF) s.m. Cow. 

laobh, a. Partial, prejudicial. 

lao’cionn, see laoigh-cionn. 

laoch, -aoich, s.m. Hero, champion, warrior. 
Term familiarly used in applauding a youth. 

laochail,-e, a. Heroic, brave, soldier-like. 
Enterprising. 3 Chivalrous. 

laochaileachd, $.f. Heroism, bravery. 

laochalaehd, see laochaileachd. 


2 
2 


. laochainn, s.m. Spiritless fellow—Suth’d. 


... of wood. 


a- 


laochan, -ain, s.m,, dim. of laoch. Little hero. 
2 Young champion. 3 Familiar term in ad- 
dressing or applauding a man or a boy. 4 
Would-be hero. Sin thu fhéin a laochain ! 
that’s your sort, my little hero;—a boy 1s almost 
- always addressed by this term. 

laochar, see laochmhor. 

laochinhor, -oire, a. Heroic, brave, soldier-like, 
chivalrous. Giùlan 1l., heroic conduct; gu 1., 
heroically. 

laochmhorachd, s.f. Heroism, bravery. 

laociraidh, s.m. & f. [Not pl. as given by McL 
& D] Heroes, warriors. 2tt{ Infantry.  3** 
Militia, 4* Corps of reserves for emergencies. 
Dh’ eug an l. gharg, the band of fierce war- 
riors has perished. 

laochraidheach,(MS) a. Heroic. 

Jaochraidheachd,( MS) s.f. Heroism. 

laodag, see lùdag, 

laodhan,{ -ain, s. m. Heart ofa tree. 2 Pith 

3 Pulp, as of potatoes, wood, &c. 
4**Marrow. 5 Remains of potato when seed 

slips are cut off (also glaothan & glaoghan.) 6 

-Glutinous substance. Brìgh 41, nam maoth- 

shlat, juice from the pith of twigs. 


Digitized b 


LEES en cm as = ; rg 
i. FPE ALC n p i Lic 
' Site) = mibi F E 


569 
L. na gealaich, the | laodhanach, -aiche, a. Pithy, having pith, as 


Jaoisgean 


wood. 2**Marrowy. 
laogh, -aoigh, pl. laoigh & laoghan, s.m. Calf, 
the young of a cow or deer. 2 Term of en- 
dearment for a child. 3*Friend. Is binn guth 
laoigh á beinn, pleasant is the voice of a fawn 
from the mountains ; mo laogh geal ! my dear 
soul—lit. my white calf, which looks comi- 
cal when trànslated—the English use ‘ducky’ 
in the same sense ; A laoigh mo chridhe ! my 
darling ! Oidhehe Shamhna theirear gamhna 
ris na laoigh, at Hallow Eve calves are called 
stirks. 
laoidh, s.f. Pith of wood—ZIslay. 
laoghach, -aiche, œ. Abounding in fawns or 
calves. 2 see. laghach. 
laoghail, -e, a. Calf-like. | 
laoghain, s.f. see laodhan, 2. 
itera st Linen gauge—Sgeulaiche-nan- 
ol. 
laogh alluidh, s.m. Fawn. 
ghan, $.m., dim. of laogh. Little calf. 2 see 
laodhan. ’Sal. ’ga leanntainn, «nd her young 
(deer) following her—Beinn Dóran. 
laoghanach, -aiche, a. Abounding in little cal- 
ves. see laodhanach, 
laoghar, see ladhar. 
laogh-bailceach,(AF) s.m. Fair, strong: calf. 
laogh-bailgfhionn,(AF) s.m. White-bellied calf. 
laogh-balgain,(W C) s.m. Imitation calf, stuffed 
calf used to deceive the com, her own calf's 
skin being used, tulchan-calf. 
laogh-eilid,( AF) s.m. Fawn. 
laogh-féidh,tt s.m. Fawn. 
laoghfheoil,** s.f. see feoil-laoigh. 
laogh-gogain, s.m. Calf brought up by hand. 2 
* Mammie’s pet." 
laogh-ligheach, s.m. Newly-calved cow. 
laogh-lus, see lus-nan-laogh. 
psg tuga dede CWC) Sam. €alf brought up by 
and. 
tlaoi, see là & làithean. 2 Hire. 3 Tail. 
laoicionn, see laoighcionn. 
laoidh, -ean, s.m, Verse. 2 Hymn, sacred song. 
3 Poem or song in general. 4* Anthem. 
laoidh, a. Exciting, animating. 


d 


Tlaoidh, v. a. Exhort, admonish. 2 Excite, 
animate. 

laoidheach,** a. Hymnal. 2 Exhorting. 3 Ad- 
monishing. 4 Exciting. 


Tlaoidheadh, -idh, s.m. Exhorting. 2 Advice, 
3 Hymn-singing. 4 Excitement. 

laoidhean, -ein, s.m. Pith, pulp, marrow. 

laoidheanach, a. Pithy, pulpy. 

laoighcionn,f{ s.m. Tulchan-calf, calf-skin, 
laoigh, calf-skin ; 1. searraich, colé’s skin. 

laoighfheoil, see fedil-laoigh. i 

tlaoi-leabhar, -air, -bhraichean, s.m. Diary,day- 
book, journal. 

laoim, gen.sing. of laom. 

laoim,** v.n. Lodge or fall flat to the ground, as 
standing corn. 

laoim,(DMK) s.f. Shift, Gheibh mise laoim mo 
chridhe ort, Z will be revenged on you to my 
hearts content—W. coast of Ross. 

laoimte, past pt. of laoim. Lodged, lying on the 
ground, asa corn crop. 

laoineach, -eiche, a. Handsome, elegant, neat, 
shows, stately. 2** Foppish. Og 1., an elegant 
youth. À 

laoir, v.a. Drub most lustily. : 

laoireadh, -idh, s.m. Rolling in the dust or mire, 

flaoi-reult, -a, -an, s.f. Morning star. i 

laoisg, (DMC) s. f. Number of little ones, litter, 
rabble. , 

laoisgean, see laoighcionn, 


L. 


20 


L. 


laom 570 lasair ) 
laom, -aoim, -an, s.m. Crowd. 2 Blaze of fire. Ree, a. Lame. 2 Feeble, physically 
unfit. 


3 Sudden flame. 4 Gleaming. 5 Overgrowth| ` 
without fruit. làpanach, -aich, s.m. Full-grown individual who 
laom, pr.pt. a’ laomadh, v.a. & n. Lodge, fallto| isundersized although sinewy and muscular. 
the ground, as corn from exuberant growth. | lapasdair,(MMcD) s.m. Clumsy, inactive, awk- 
2 Cause to lodge or fall tothe ground. 3(C| ward fellow. UL. duine, a clumsy fellow. 
R) Go to shaw or tops (of potatoes.)—Skye.  |lapraich,(MS) v.n. Lap. — 
Jaomach, -aiche, a. Glittering, gleaming, blaz-|lapranaich,(MS) v.n. Lap. 
i lar, see lair. ` 


ing. 2 Crooked, curved, as the shores of al lar, se 
lar, -àir & -a, s. m. The ground, earth. 2 Floor, 


lake. 
ground floor. 3** Centre. 4 Low ground. 5 
(CR) Applied to the floor of any room when 

formed of stone, elay or earth, in W. of Ross. 
Air 1., on the ground, on the floor ; a’ dol mu 
L5 going to nought ; cuir mu làr e, abrogate it; 
mu L Jorgotten, neglected ; 2 lost ; 3 abolished ; 
do thuineadh mu l.,£hy dwelling underground; 
nèamh is l., heaven and earth. 

W^ d Ur làn. Lar-bhurraidh, æ complete block- 

ead. 

làrach, -aich, -aichean, s.f. Site of a building, 
vestige. 2 Ruin. 3 Field of battle, scene of 
a battle, 4 Habitation, abode. 5 Farm. 6 
see laireach. 7(DMC) Mark, sear. An 1. nam 
bonn, on the spot—lit. in the print of the soles. 

làrach, -aiche, a. see làireach. 

làrag, s.f. Larch-tree. 

làr-bhrat,-bhrait, s. Carpet. 

lar-chaibe,(AH) prov. for caibe-làir. 

lar-mhaide, see lair-mhaide. 

tlarum, -uim, Gaelic spelling of alarm. 

larumach, @ Giving an alarm or warning. 

las, pr.pt. a’ lasadh, oo & n. Kindle, light. 2 
Get into a passion, enrage. 3 Sparkle, 
flash, shine. 4 Burn, blaze, gleam, inflame, 
L., an teine, kindle the fire ; 1. a’ choinneal, 
light the candle. 

las, s. Flame. 

las, a. W. of Ross. for lasach. 

lasach,-aiche, æ. Slack, loose, loosened. 2 Fiery, 
inflammable. 3 Not firm. 

lasachadh, -aidh, s.m. Slackening, loosening, 
act of slackening. 2 Remission, cessation, 
relaxation. 3 Relief. 4 Ease. A’ 1l—, pr.pt. 
of lasaich. Tha na teudan air 1., the strings 
have become loosened ; fhuair e l., he got re- 
lief ; beagan lasachaidh, some relaxation. 

lasachail, a. Anodyne, antalgic. 

lasachd, s.f. Looseness, slackness. 

lasaiche, see lasachd. 

lasadair, -ean, s.m. Inflamer. 

lasadan, -ain, s.m. Match to set on fire with, 

lasadh, -aidh, s. m. Lighting, act or state of 
lighting. 2 Blazing, shining. 3 Flame. 4 
Flaming. 5 Flush, blush. 6(MS) Animosity. 
7 Lust. 8 Lace. 9 Inflaming. L. nah-oidh- 
che, the fame of night (a beacon); a’ cur lase 
aidh 'na gruaidbibh, giving a flush to her 
cheeks. A’ l—, pr. pt. of las. 

lasag, -aig, -an, s.f. Little flame or blaze, scan- 
ty fire. 2 Fit ofanger. 3 Faggot. 4 Pas- 
sionate woman. 5 Combustible substance. 

lasagach, -aiche, a. Burning in little flames. 
2 Blazing. 3 Combustible. 4 Passionate. 

lasaich, pr.pt. a’ lasachadh, v.a. Slacken, loose. 
2 Ease, relieve. 3 Remit. 4 Intermit. 6 
Give over, cease, 6 Flag,lag.  L. an córd, 
slacken the rope ; nach 1. thu ? will you not give 
over ? 

lasaichear, fut.pass. of lasaich. 

lasaiehte, past pt. Slackened, loosened, eased, 
relieved. 

lasail, -e, a. Fiery, inflammable. 

lasair, -srach & -sair, pl. -sraichean, s.f. Flame, 
flash of fire. 2 Spark, 3 Flashy young fellow. 
L. feirg, a flame of anger ; o chumhachd na 
lasrach, from the power of the flame: 






















(DU) s.f. Piece of land where corn falls 
flat from exuberant growth. 

laomachd, s.f. Crookedness. 2 Winding, cur- 
vature. 3 Gleaming. 

laomadh, -aich, s.m. Blazing. 2 Abundance, 
abounding. 3 Falling to the ground, lodging 
of corn. 

laomaich,(WC) s.f. Lodged corn or grass. Cha 
robh ann ach l., it was only lodged corn. 

laomaidh, a. Loamy. 

laom-chrann,tt s.m. Main beam, rafter. 

laomsgair, e o Great, prodigious, vast. 2 
Fierce, fiery, bold.  3**Abundant. Coire is 
laomsgaire barr, œ dell with most abundant 
crops—i. e. a grassy dell. 

laomsgaireachd, s. jf. Vastness, greatness, 
prodigiousness. 2  Fierceness, furiousness, 
barbarity. 3 Abundance. ` 

laomsgiorra, a. see laomsgair. 

laomsgiorrachd, see laomsgaireachd. 

laomta, past pt. Lodged, laid to the ground, 
as corn. 

laomunn, -uinn, see leòmann. 

laor, s.m. Toe, see ladhar. 

laoran, -ain, -an, s.m. Person too fond of the 
fireside. 

laos-boe, -uic, s. m. Castrated goat, wether 


goat. 

laosg,(CR) s.m. Rabble. 

Jap,(WC) ap, s. m. Defective spot in colour 
painting or dyeing. 

lapach, -aiche, a. Faltering, stammering. 2 
Feeble, decrepit, impotent,spiritless. 3 Slim, 
4 Frost-bitten, benumbed, 5 (MS) Lame. 

lapach, -aiche, see labanach. 

làpach, -aich, s.f. Marsh, swamp, bog, puddle. 

lapach, a. Skinny. i 

lapach, a.  Benumbed. 2 Frost-bitten. 3 In- 
active. 4 Awkward. Neo-l. "sa chómh-stri, 
active in the combat. 

làpachadh, -aidh, s.m. Benumbing, state of be- 
coming benumbed, feeble or spiritless. 2 Be- 
coming swampy or marshy. Tha mo làmhan 
air l., my hands have become benumbed. |. A? 1., 
pr.pt. of lapaich. 

lapachas, ais, s.m. Faltering or stammering 
habit. 2 Feebleness, impotence. 3 Sluggish- 
ness. 4 Pliability. 

lapachas, -ais, s.m. Swampiness, bogginess. 2 
Benumbedness, 3 Failing. 4 Mistake. 

lapadan, -ain, s.m. Species of sea-fish, 

lapadh, -aidh, s.m. Paw. 2 Claw. 3 Clumsy 
fist. 

lapaich, pr.pt. a’ lapachadh, v.a & n. Be be- 
numbed or stupified, become feeble or spirit- 
less, 2 Benumb, stupify. 3 Become frost- 
bitten. 4* Flap. 5 Flag, lag. Fear nach l, 
clachain-meallain,a man whom hailstones can- 
not benumb. 

lapaiche, s. Lameness. 2 Debility. 

lapaichte past pt. Benumbed, stupified, enfee- 
bled. 2 Frost-bitten. 

lapan,(AH) -ain, s.m, Sound of footsteps with 
wet feet, noise made by water in boots. 

Japan,(WC) a. Spotted, as in colours. 

làpan, see làban. . 

jApanach, -aiche, see làbanach.. 





Original from 


Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOISEEE 


TERNET ARCHIVE URBANA-CHAMPAIG RASS 
e i 










lasair-chéire 
 JYasair-chéire, s.f. Waxlight, candle-light, 


see clach-lasair. R 
— Jasair-choille, -srach-, -sraichean-coille, 5. 





ri 409. Lasair-choille (1) 410, Lasair-choille. (2) 

= Iasair-ehoille, T ert. Green woodpecker—picus 

~ _ wirrdis. 

. lasaireach, a. see lasrach. 

= lasair-leana,S s.f, Spearwort, see glas-leun. 

= Tasan, -ain, An, s.m. Anger, passion. 2 Fit of 

= passion. 3 Flame of wrath. 4 Spark. 

. lasanta, -ainte, a. Fiery, passionate, subject to 

—-. fits of anger. 2 Brave. 3 Hot. 

— lasantachd, s.f.ind. Fierceness, fieriness, pass- 

=~ . jonateness, 2 Inflammableness. 3° Ardour, 

.. Jasarach, see lasrach. 

= Jasarachail, see lasrachail, 

_ Jasarachd, see lasrachd, 

errs. a. Combustible, 2(MS) Acrimonious. 

|. 3(MS) Ardent. 4(MS) Hot. 

— lasartha, see lasradh, 

| . Jasd,** -aisd, s.m. Ballast. 2 Lading. 

~ Jasdach, -aiche, see lastanach. 

| lasdachd, s.f. Lordliness, 

— Jasdadh, s.m. Lace. 

—— JAsdadh,(MS) s.m. Lastery. 

.. làsdail, a. Lordy, imperious, saucy, boastful. 

| - Air tionndadh an diugh cho lasdail, has be- 

(a come to-day so lordly—Duanaire, 166, 

. lasdaire, see lasgaire, 

|. làsdalachd, see lastan. 

| lasgaire, -an, s.m. Youth, young man, “spark,” 

ei fop, beau, dandy. 2 Champion. 3**Macaroni. 

— lasgaireach, -eiche, a. Foppish, beavish. 

_ lasgaireachd, s.f. Foppishness, beauishness. 
lasgan,(AH) -ain, s. m. Slight outburst. L. 

~ gàire, merry peal of laughter ; 1. gaoithe, fresh 

breeze. 

` dasganta, a. Ardent. 

. lasgar, -air, -ean, s.m. Sudden noise. 

. Jasgarra, a. Active, brave, fiery. 2 see lasarra. 


. . 3 see lasgaireach, 
Shed -aiche, o Flaming, burning, emit- 


N 


E 


et 










_ , ting flames. 2 Combustible. 3 Passionate. 
lasrach, gen. of lasair. 

» “ich, s,m. Flames, 

. lasrachail, a. 

. . Combustible. 

_ dasrachd, s. f. Combustibleness, tendency to 

. . Kindle or flame. 


| S sradh,** -aidh, s.m, Flaming, burning, gleam- 
Tn 


' 
j 











flashes of light. 
Flaming, burning, gleaming. 2 


asradh, s.m. Lastery, red colour, 
, dasraich,* s.f. Conflagration. 

| E see lasd. 

D astain, s.f. Hem, fringe, edge, 

| lastan, “ain, s.m. Pride, sauciness, lordliness, 
_ boasting for nothing. Oh 


d Digitized by 
BY PERNET ARCHIVE ` 


— lasair-chlaeh, -chloiche, pl. -sair-chlachan, 8.f. 
\ 


Goldfinch—carduelis elegans. 2**\Voodpecker, 





571 le dy 

lastanach, -aiche, a. Proud, lordly, 
perious, overbearing. 

lastanachd, s.f. see lastan. 
lasuchadh, see lasachadh. 
lasuich, see lasaich. 

flat, s.m. Foot, 

tlath, -aith, sm. Youth. 2 Champion. 3 Dog. 

lath, pr.pt. a’ lathadh, v.a. & n. Benumb, be be- 
numbed. 2 Besmear. 

latha, pl, -chan & làithean, see là. 

làthach, -aich, sr Clay, mire. 2 Puddle, 
swampy place. 8ttSoft clay on the sea-shore. 
4 Mortar. 5 Sea-weed, sea-ware. 6 Stuff 
drifted to the shores of a sea or lake. Post 
an l., tramp the mortar, 

lathachach,** a, Cloddy. 2 (DC) Muddy, bog- 
£y. 3 Clayey. 

làthacbail,.-e, œ. Religinous, limous. 2** Muddy, 
marshy, puddly. 3** Full of seaweed or sea- 
ware, 

lathachan, n.pl. of là. 

lathadh, -aidh, s.m. Besmearing. 2 Act of be- 
smearing. <A’ l—, pr.pt. of lath. 

lathaich, s. Moss, moor, peat-moss—Suth’d. 2 
(DMK) also Mnud— W. coast of Ross. 2 (DC) 
Clay, mud on shore. 

lathaichean, n.pl. of là. 

lathail, -e, æ. Daily. 

lathailt, e, -ean, s. f. Knack, art, method. 2 
Limit, bound. 3* Mould, shape. 4 see laith- 
ilt. Cuir an 1, arrange ; fhuair mi an l. 
air, I have got the knack of it. 

each, -eiche, a. Having a knack or right 
method of doing anything, methodical. 2 
Adequate. 3 Becoming. Gu l., aptly. 

— ———-eachd,** s. f. Method. 2 Methodical- 
ness. 3 Adequateness. 4 Seemliness. 5 (DC) 
Bragging— Argyll. 

làtbair, e, s.f. Presence, existence, company, 
sight. 12 Victory. Na tig an L, do not pre- 
sent yourself ; mach as mo làthair ! out of my 
presence ; an l. a chéile, face to face, in the pre- 
sence of each other ; cum as an L, keep out of 
sight. (an làthair is not an adv. & a. as given 
by McL & P and Armstrong, but always a s.) 
An làthair, Present. 2 Near, at a small dis- 
tance. 3 Alive, surviving, remaining. 4 
Truly, indeed, verily. Am bheil e an l. ? ig 
he in existence ? neas a bhios mi an !., while 
I am present, while I live ; am fear nach 'eil 
an l., he that is no more, or he that is ab- 
sent ; an robh ean l. ? was he present ? gun 
chrioman an l., without o morsel remaining ; 
thoir an l., produce, put down before me. 

lathaire,** s. f. Thigh. 2 (DC) Splay-foot— 
Argyll. 

lathaireach,** a. Present. 

— — — -- —d, s,f.ind. Presence, company. AL, 
his bodily presenee. 4: 1 

Tlathar, -air,-ean, s.m. Acquisition. 2 Provi- 
sion. 3 Hidden meaning, mystery. 4 Secret, 
private story. 5 Strength, vigour. 6 Know- 
ledge. 7 Assembly. 8 Place of meeting. 9** 
Narrative. 

làthar, s. see (an) làthair. 

làth-leabhar, see leabhar-là. 

lathrach, -aich, see larach. 

lathus, s.m. see spealt. 

la-traisg, pl. laithean-t-, s.m. Fasting-day. 

aidh, Gairloch e, for là-traisg. 

le, prep. With, together with, in company with. 
2 With. by, by means of. 3 In possession of. 
4 In favour of, ou one's side. 5 Along with, 
down with, down with the current. 6 In es- 
timation of, with, in feeling or sentiment, 
Bhuail e i le cloich, he struck her with a stone ; 
tha e le 'r càirdean, he is along ae in the ine 










Saucy, ime 


| ? Lica Lf ga 
| | d YER [ 


ILLINOIS AT 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 










SERO le 572 leabhar-cünntais 
terest of, or he belongs to, our friends ; V fhada | MER e, p 
le Seumas an là, Jomes felt the day tedious ; | ANC NETT 


sith le d’ anam, peace with thy soul, le mnaoi, | 
by means of a woman ; le seo, by the way , le 
d' chead, by your leave ; iad-san is le Oriosd, | 
they who are Christ's ; na dealbhan bu le a h- 
athair, the pictures that were her father's , le 
d' chead, by your leave. 

Thus combined with the personal pronouns : 
leam, with me, leat, with thee ; leis, with 
him; leatha, with her; leinn, with us; leibh 
with you ; led, with them. Emphatic forms : 
Sing. 1 leam-sa, 2 leat-sa, 3 m leis-san, f. 
leatha-sa ; plur. 1 leinne, 2 leibh-se, 3 leò- 
san. 

Jea, see leatha. 

Jéab, -a, -an, prov. for leòb. 

leaba, see leabaidh. 

leabach, gen. sing. of leabaidh. 

leabach, -aiche, a. see leobach. 2**Awry. 3** 
Awkward, staring. 

Jeabachadh, -aidh, s.m. Imbedding. 2 Lodging. 
A! 1—, pr.pt. of leapaich. Tha 'n t-uisge a’ 
1. an seo, the water is lodging here ; a l. ‘nam 
fheoil, imbedding in my flesh. 

Jeabachan, -ain, -an, s.m. Bedfellow. 

leabachas, -ais, s.m. Lodgment. 

Jeabadh, see leabaidh. 

ni -aig, -an, s.f.dim. ofleabaidh. 2 Little 

e 






earr. 
léabag-ghlas, s.f. (Lewis) Flounder. 
léabag-leathann, (DC) s.f. Halibat— H . coast. 


at 
413  Léabag-ch 
2 Sole. 





LIL. Léabag-mhór. 
léabag-mhór, s.f. Plaice (fish.) 
léabag-uisge, sf, Whitch 
leabaich, pr.pt. a’ leapachadh, v.a. 

Lodge, as water. 
leabaichean, n.pl. of leabaidh. 
leabaidh, gen. leapa & leapach, pl. leapaichean, —— 


Imbed. 2 


te 


a xy 


lèabag, aig, -an, s.f. **Auricle. 2**Flap. 3| $^. Bed, couch. 2 Channel ofa river. . Na 
* : l.in his bed; al. dhoilleir, its gloomy chan- 
Anything that hangs broad and loose. 4| v2 71 lithaidh, or l thogalach, à folding bed; — 


** Leaf of a door. 

Jéabag,-aig, -an, St Flounder.—plewronectus 
solea. 2**Loch Lomond flounder—pleuronectes 
Levinic. 3 Sole (fish.) 


1. chül-béince, æ bed intended for the promiscu- 
ous repose of a family and of guests—it was 
formed by the cottage wall on one side, and 
by the trunk of a tree or à plank on the other, 
with a sufficient quantity of heath, fern or 
straw and some blankets ; 1. chlòimh or l. it- 
ean, @ feather-bed ; 1.-chonnlaich, or l.-fhodair, 
a straw-bed ; 1.-fhraoich, œ heather-bed ; l.- 
luachrach, a bed of rushes ; l.-mhuill, a chaf- 
bed ; 1.-na-taoim, 1.-thavim, }.-na-taoma or l- 
taomaidh, place where the water gathers for — 
the baling-dish. e 

leabaidh-laoigh,(DU) s.f. Uterus (of the lower 
animals. 

leabaidh-loisgte,(CR) s.f. Ricochet—Gairloch. 

leabaidh-righe,(CR) s.f. Ricochet— Loch broom. 

leabaidh-righe. s. f£ Bier or bed on which | 
a dead body is straightened. 

leabaidh-shiübhladh, see- luighe-siübhladh. 

leabh, see leugh. 

adh, -aidh, see leughadh. 

Hleabhadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s. f. Race, genera- 
tion. 

leabhaireachd,(MS) s.f. Reading. | 

leabhar, -air, -bhraichean, s.m. [ f. in Badenoch} | 
Book, volume. Leabhar Eoin (given by Mac- 
Alpine, apparently for leabhar sheun), @ book 
full of receipts for witchcraft and incantation: | 
l.-ürnuigh, œ prayer-book ; an l. dearg, the Red 


dU. p 
M ug 1 
AECH 
qi Pure 


A 
l 


A 
Y 


























; 411. Léabag (1.) 
leabagach, -aiche, a. Abounding in little beds. 
Jéabagach, -aiche, a. **Flapped. 2 Hanging 
loose. 3 Folding, as a door. Dorus l., æ fold- 
.Ung door. 
léabagach, -aiche, a. Abounding in flounders. 





i 
i 
4 
VA 
6 


Big) Vie 
A eM ANE EU RSS 
d ie SNORT 











INTERNET ARCHIV 





dee á 
EE e Book, a MS. collection of ancient Gaelic poetry- — — 
AREE EE iei as a. see EECH IN 
lee See leabhar-ceasna chaidh, at CH 
EE leabhar-ceasnaich, | DE Ostechiom > 
LT ce uere M ay a leabhar-cheangladair, see leabbar-cheanglair. 
a Sut cup leabhar-cheangladh, -aidh, s.m. Bookbinding: —— 
ife ae SE leabhar-cheanglair, -ean, s.m. Bookbinder. M 

Ip SWB M leabhar-cheist, s.m. Catechism. a 

3 WEN leabhar-chlàr, Air, s. m. Pasteboard. 2 The - 

SAY “ boards " of a book. ; i 

Lë Léabag-bhrathainne. leabhar-choimhead, s. Book-keeping. 

lèabag-bhrathainne, (AF) s.f. Turbot. leabhar-chóir,** s.f. Copyright. et 
léabag-bhreac, s.f. Plaice—Levwis. leabhar-chuimhneachain, s.m. Album. 2 Note- — 
léabag-chéarr,(AF) s.f. Sole (fish.) ill. 413. book. . X ^ 
3éabag-chlogaide, s.f. Beaver (hat.) leabhar-cünntais, s.m. Account-book. É 
i 
"ge 


Digitized by 





Original from $ 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 
Uu NA-CHAMPAIOGNEE 


EN EA P 
RADA 





leabhar-fhiach 


Ledger, account-book. 

Jeabhar-la, s. m. Diary, journal. 
book. 

Jeabhar-laimh, s.m. Manual. 

leabhar-lann, -ainn, -an, s.m. Library. 

—_—__—..--—__gir,** s.m, Bookseller. 

leabhar-poc, s.m. Pocket-book. 

Jeabhar-reiceadair, s.m. Bookseller. 

eachd, s.f. Bookselling, busi- 
ness of bookselling. 1 

leabhar-reicear, see leabhar-reiceadair, 

leabhar-thràth-eachdraidh, -air-, -bhraichean-, 
s.m. Chronicle. 2**Minute-book. 

leabhar-ürnuigh, s.m. Prayer-book. 

leabhodach, see lethbhodach. 

leabhrach, -aiche, @. Bookish, abounding in 
books. 

leabhrach,** -aich, s.f. Library. 

1. — an, -aim, -an, 8.44. Pamphlet. 

leabhrachan-crabhaidh, s.m. Manual. 

leabhradair,* -ean, s. m. Publisher, editor, 
author. 

leabbradan, -ain, -an, s.m. Library. 

leabhragan, -ain, -an, s.m, Library. 

leabhraiche,* s.m. Librarian. 2 Bookseller. 

——— — -..—8n, n.pl. of leabhar. 

leabhran, -ain, -an, s.m., dim. of leabhar. 


2 Account- 








de E ; e 
Adr eS A 4 v 


VEN 


He Lit- 
si tle book, manual, pamphlet. 


ach,ft a. Abounding in small books. 
leabhrathair, see lethbhrathair. 
leabhruadair, see lethbhruadair. 
leabhruich, see lethbhruich. 
leab-luidhe,** s.f. Confinement to bed. 2 Ly- 
ing in bed. 
each,** o, Bed-ridden. 
&leac,** v.a. Flay. 2 Destroy. 
leac, lice [& **lic] pl. leacan, s.f. Flag, slab, 
flat stone. 2 Tomb-stone, 3 Plate, as of 
metal. 4 Slate to write on. 5 Declivity. 6 
Cheek. 7ttpoetically Hill, declivity, summit 
of ahill. 9 (DMy) Ledge of rock jutting out 
from the foot of a cliff on the foreshore, and 
covered by the sea at flood tides. 8 House, 
Taobh na lice, at the side of the tomb-stone ; 
- gul. an rìgh, to the king’s house ; do ’n òg- 
mhnaoi a b’ àillidh leac, to the virgin of fair- 
est cheeks ; 1l. an teallaich, the hearth-stone ; 
l. an teintein, the hearth ; 1. eidhre, œ sheet of 
ice; mbaolaich an leac a bhàrr, the plate 
blunted its (the tool’s) point. 
leacach, -aiche, æ. Abounding in tomb-stones, 
flags, plates or slabs. 2{{Having large cheeks. 
LE 3**Slaty. 4 Flat. 5*Granite. 6 Having de- 
clivities. Sròn 1., œ flat nose. 
, -aich, -ean, s.f. The bare summit of a 
hill. 2** s.m. Side of a hill. 
adh, -aidh, s.m. Paving, act of paving or 
laying with flat stones. A’ l—, pr. pt. of 
' leacaich, 
—— ]Jeac-a'-chealaich, s.f. Flue-stone of kiln, see 
el under ath. 
|. deacadan,** -ain, s.m. Chin-cloth, child's bib. 
leacadair, s.m.  Tiler. 
leacadh,** -aidh, s.m. Destroying. 
|. with flags. 
leacag, -aig,-an, S.f., dim. of leac. 
stone or flag. 2**Slate. 
ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in small flat 
stones or slates. 
leacaich, pr.pt. a’ leacachadh, v.a. Pave or lay 
with flat stones. 2 Tile. 
te, past pt. of leacaich. Paved, laid with 
flat stones. 
leacaid, -ean, s.f. Stroke on the cheek. 
— each, -eiche, e. Placoid, plate-like, 
leacainn, see leacann. 








ee 


" 
< 


vc 


ntes 
fra 2 wc - 


cure: iei. 


| 








2 Laying 
Little flat 





aro nt 











573 
Jeabhar-fhiach, -air-, -bhraichean-fiacha, s. m. | leacainneach, see leacannach. | 


leac-lithidh 


leacainte, see leacanta. 

eee -ain, Ae Navel-wort, wall-penny- 
wort, penny-leaf, penny-pies,—cotyledon umbi- 
licus. 2**Little flag. j| 4 


415. Leacan. 
leacanachadh, -aidh, s.m. Making flat. 2 Act 
of flattening or making flat. A’ 1--, pr. pt. of 
leacanaich. 
leacanaich, pr.pt. a’ leacanachadh & a’ leacan- 
aich, v.a. Flatten, make flat. 2 Get insep- 
arably fond of, as a child of a nurse. 3 (DMy) 
Lay awake in bed. 4 Recline and idle away 
the time outside. A’ leacanaich air a leab- 
aidh, lying lazily on his bed. 
— ————-—te, past pt. of leacanaich. Flattened, 
made fiat. 
leacann, -ainn,-an, $s. f. The broad side of a 
hill, broad slope, steep shelving ground. 2** 
Steep green surface. 3** Shelvingness, 4** 
Downhill. 5 Side of the head, cheek, see leth- 
cheann. Sruth na leacainn, the stream of the 
mount ain-side. 
ach,** o Having steep surfaces. 
Hilly. 8 Having large cheeks. 
leacanta, -ainte, a Laid with flat stones. 2 
Full of flat stones or flags. 3 Stiff, precise, 
rigid, exact, punctilious, formal. 4 Forward, 
impudent. 5 Ceremonious. 6 Starched, 7 
Neat. 
chd, s.f. Stiffness, rigidness, precision, 
exactness, punctiliousness. 2 Ceremonious- 
ness. 3 Impudence, forwardness, 4 Neat- 
ness. 
leac-an-tealaich, s. f. Flue-stone of a kiln, see 
àth. 2 (DMK) also Hearth-stone of a dwell- 
ing ,house— W. coast of Ross. : 
leac-chré, s.f. Tile. 
leac-deighe, s.f. Flake of ice. 
leachd, see leac. 
ach, see leacach. 
ann, see leacann. 
leachdanntachd,(MS) s.f. Prolation. 
leachlach, see lethchlach. 
leachrun, see lethchrun. 
tleacht, s.f. Lesson. 
+ an, -ain, s.m. Lecture, lesson, 
leac-iobairt,* s.f. Altar. 
leaclach,* s.f. Granite. 
leac-lighe, s.f. Grave-stone, tombstone, monu- 
mental slab. 
leac-lithidh, see leac-lighe 


959 














m 


leac-oighre 


leac-oighre, see leac-eidhre. (Kai 

leac-ruaidhe, s. The rose (disease) when it is 
hard and flat. So 

leac-ruiteach, -eiche, a. Ruddy-cheeked. Ribh- 
inn l., a rosy, ruddy-cheeked girl. 

leac-shuaine, s.f. Tile. 2 (DMy) Slate. 

leacta,** past pt. Flagged, paved with flags or 
slabs. 

leac-thana, s.f. Lamina, very’thin slab. 

leac-theallaich, see leac-an-teallaich. 

leac-uaighe, s.f. Grave-stone, tombstone. 

leac-urlar, -air, s.m. Pavement, paved floor. 

lead, see leud. 

lead,* see leadan. liodair in Argyll—DC. 

leadain, gen.sing. & n. pl. of leadan. 

leadair, pr.pt. a’ leadairt, v. a. Mangle, rend, 
maim, bruise, torment. 2* Drub, lay hold of 
& person's hair in one hand and belabour him 
furiously with the other. 3 Abuse. 4**Mas- 
sacre. 5ffTrample on. TAM 

leadairt, s.f Tearing, mangling, maiming. 2 
Abusing. 3 Massacring, massacre, Air an 
l. le geur lainn, they being mangled by sharp 
swords. A'l—, pr. pt. of leadair. 

leadairt, v.a. see leadair. 

e,** a. Weary. 2(DC) Draggiled. 

leadan, -ain, -an, s.m. Teazle—dipsacus sylves- 
tris. 2 Notesin music. 3 Head of hair, long 
flowing hair, lock of hair, ringlet. [* gives 
Little pretty head of hair. 4 The Litany. 5 
Barnaclefgoose, see cathan. 6jfThe Rosary 
L. bréige, false hair. 








416. Leadan. 
leadanach,** -aich, s.m. Cloth dresser. 


—, -aiche, a. Musical, melodious. 2 
Abounding in teazle. 3 Having long and fine 
hair, 4 Precise. 5 Belonging to the Litany. 

leadan-an-fhücadair,] ssm. Fuller's teazle—dip- 
sicus fullorum, 

leadan liosda,§ s.m. Burdock, see suirichean 
suirich. 

leadarra, a. Harmonious, melodious, musical. 
2 Elegant. 3 Sharp. 4 Mangling. 5 (AH) 
Fastidious in choice of words, (applied to 
children and others inclined to indulge in 
elegant and laboured platitudes. 

chd, s.f.imd. Harmoniousness, melodi- 
ousness, 2 Elegance. 2 (AH) Finicalness in 
conversational diction or choice of expressions. 

leadhmann, see leomann. 

leadraigeadh,(DMy) s.m. Leathering, flogging. 

feafhacal, see leth-fhacal. 

leag, pr. pt. a’ leagail & a’ leagadh, po & m. 
Throw down. 2 Demolish. 3 Lay, lay down. 
4 Lay with, as paving, 5 Cool. 6ffFell 7* 
Put down, as a wrestler. 

Leagaidh mi thu, I will knock you down; 
1. do cheann far am faigh thu ’sa mhaduinn e, 
lay your head where you will find it in the 
morning ; l. mi mo chas air an fhàradh, J set 
my foot on the ladder; 1l. mi mo chas a dh’ ionn- 
suidh a’ chaisteil, J bent my steps towards 








574 


Team 
the castle ; l. mi m’ uchd (or earraig m’ uchd} 
air an t-snàmh, I set forth swimming, began 
to brewst the wave ; cha do 1..a lùdag air fead-. 
an piobaire a b' fhéarr, no better piper ever laid 
his litile finger on œ chanter ; leagaidh tu do 
chùrsa a’ cheart thaobh a ghabh iad, you wili 
$^! your course inthe precisz direction they have 
taken, chaidh amharus a leagail air, suspicion 
was laid upon him; cìs a leag na Lochlannaich 
air Albainn, a tribute which the Lochlanners 
lard on Scotland ; 1. iad peanas oirnn, they 
laid penalties upon us ; leagadh dleasdanas 
cudthromach orra, heavy responsibilities were 
laid on them ; feumaidh iad a bhi leagta ris a” 
bhreith siu, they must bow to, be satisfied with 
that judgment ; thog a’ Ghréig a cùis a dh’ 
ionnsuidh nan rioghachdan móra, agus dh’ 
aontaicn 1 bhi leagta le ’m breith-san, Greece 
appealed, and brought her case before the Great 
Powers, and agreed to abide by their decision z 
leig bunait, lay a foundation. 
leagach,** a. Dilatory. 2 Dowdy. 
leagadh, -aidh, s m. see leagail. 
Adam’s fall.—tt 
leagaid, s.m. Legate. 2 Offering. 
leagail, gen. leagalach, $. f. Fall. 2 Throwing 
down, act of throwing down or demolishing. 
3 That part of a boat that is flattened out 
before building up the sides. 4(DMC) Lay- 
ing down. An am togail na sìthne agus a 
leagalach, between descrying the game and 
bringing it down. 
-Shaighdear, s.m.. Uist game, see propa- 
taireachd. 
leagair,** s.m. Idler. 2 Jogger (man.) 
——-—eachd, s.f. Lagging. 
leagait, see leagaid. 


An Leagadh, 





leagarra,tt a. Plausible, smug. 2 Insinuating. 


2 Self-satisfied. Argyll. 

tleagfadh, -aidh, see leagadh. 

leagh, pr.pt. a’ leaghadh, v.a. & n. Melt, cause 
to melt. 2 Melt, dissolve, become liquid. 8 
Fuse. 4 Thaw. 5 Smelt. L. mo ciridhe, 
my heart melted. 

léagh, see leugh. 


leaghach, -aiche, œ. Soluble, that can be mei, 


ted, colliquent. 
Tleaguad, -aid, s.m. Bandage, band. 
leaghadach, -aiche, a. see leaghach. 
leaghadaar, -ean, s.m. Melter, smelter,founder. 
-—eachd, s.£ind. Melting, process of 
melting or smelting, foundry. 


leaghadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Melting, act of ` 


melting, dissolving. 2 State of becoming li- 
quid. A’ 1l—, pr.pt. of leagh. 

Tleaghan, -ain, -an, s.m. Liquor, liquid. 

leaghantachd, 3.f.ind, Liquescency. 

leaghta, past pt. of leagh. Melted, smelted, 
molten, dissolved, become liquid. An iomh- 
aigh 1., the molten image. 

ch, -aiche, a. 


— see leaghach. 
leaglaidh, s. pl. Rushes. 
leaghtach, see leaghach. 


leagta, a. & past pt. of leag. Thrown down, 
demolished. 2 Laid down. 3 Resolved, in- 
tent upon, bent;on. 4 Let fall, overturned, 
thrown. 5 (DMK) In agreement with. 6 ** 


Felled. Tha mi leagtale sin, Z agree with 
that. 
lealamh, see lethlamh. 





—ach, see lethlamhach. 

lealg,** pr.pt. a’ lealgadh, v.a. Lick. 

leased -aidh, s.m. Licking. A’l—, pr.pt. of 
ea!g. 

leam, prep.pron. With me. 2 By me. 3 In my 
favour, on my side. 4 In my opinion or est 
mation. 5 Along with me. 6*By my means, 
7 Mv rronerty. 


al trom 


Origil 





HN 





Di UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 
TERNET ARCHIVE RBANA-CHAMPAIGN Y 
5 p DN V = F7 i L H LT, is A VILI TI Ch Se | P1 a * 
| = » MI 





e ieam 575 leamhranan 

In Ys leamsa seo, this is mine; thalla (falbh) leamhan, gen. -ain & leamhna, s.m, Elm, the 
à leamsa, come along with me ; rinneadh sin elm-tree—ulmus campestris. 2 Wood of the 
Ki leamsa, that was made by me ; agus thubhairt | elm-tree. 

S e “còis leamsa ? ” and he said ‘‘who is on 

v my side?” is duirvh 1. a chreidsinn,. I can 

iv hardly believe it ; is soirbh leam sin a chreid- 

|y sinn, I can easily believe that ; thar, dar, ar, 

f^ leam, I would suppose, 1 think ; leig 1., let me 

v. alone ; leig 1. i, let her accompany me ; is math 

Ki l. sin, that pleases me ; cd leis an cu ? tha e 

H leamsa, or is leams’ e, whose is the dog ? it is 

D mine; shaoil L, I thought ; théid 1., I will pros- 


i per ` l. fhéin, alone, by myself; ge b oil 1., in 
yi spste of me ; bu mhithich 1. sgeul fhaotainn,?f 





N seemed to me time to get information ; leam 
H leat, fickle—lit. with me and with you ; ar leam 
GI eum bheil, I think that it is so; marbhar 
R leam e, he will be killed by me, For many id- 
d iomatic compounds formed by is and leam, 
AN ‘ses under is. 418. Leamhan. 
léamaun, see leómann. leamhanach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to, elm- 


leamh,-a, @ Importunate, troublesome. 2| trees orelm-wood. 21iHaving much pith of 
Flattering, mealy-mouthed. 3 Silly, foolish, wood. 
insipid, jejune. 4 Raw. 5 Pertinacious 6 |leamhan-bog,$ gen. -ainebuig [McL & D. gives 

| Officious. 7 Unmannerly, impertinent,saucy.| also leamhna-buig for the gen. sing., which 
Wir S Barefaced, shameless. 9 Fastidious. 10] would imply that it is sometimes f.] s. "me. 
D Vexing, galling. 11 Busy. 12 Greedy. 13| Hornbeam—carpinus betulus. 
Sneering—Arran. Bul. leam, I thought it|leamhar, see leobhair. 
) galling ; nis bha seo l., «ow this was galling ;|\eamhas, see lethmhas. , 
SÉ blas 1., an insipid taste. 
4 A leamh,(CR) a. Annoyed, provoked—Arran. Is 
Ka mi tha 1. dhe, how annoyed I am with him. 
n leamh,(DMy) s. Disgust, annoyance. 
tleamh, leimh, sam. Rower. 2 Elm. 3 Oar. 
leamhach, -aiche, a. Flattering. 2 Insipid, 
D tasteless. see also leamh. 

) --————adh, (MS) -aidh, s. m. Harassing, irri- 

| tation, annoyance, 

-—————A$8,-ais, s. m. Importunity, 2 Perti- 
nacity. 3 Indiscreetness. 4 Impertinence, 
impudence, sauciness. 5 Fastidiousness. 6* 

n Vexation. 7 Insipidness, 8 Greediness. 9 
lh Foolishness, silliness, 10 Irksomeness. 11 
(MS) Plague. 
leamhachd, s.f. see leamhachas. 
leamhad, -aid, s.m. Degree of importunity, per- 





| tinacity, impertinence, impudence, sauciness, T 
| or vapidness. 
H leamhadair,(MS) s.m. Molester. 
=  Jeainhadas, s.m. see leamhachas. 419. Leamhan-bog. 420. Leamhnach. 
leamhadh,** -aidh, s.m. Marsh mallows—al- | leamh-dhàn, -dhàine, a. Forward, insolent. 2 


—achd,s.f. see leamh-dhanadas. 

adas, -ais, s. m. Forwardness, inso» 
lence. 2 Foolhardiness. 3 Importunity. 

leamh ghàire,** s, Smile. 

leamh-lachd,** s.f. Sweet milk. 9 Insipid milk. | 

leamhnach,§ s.(? f.) Common tormentil, blood- | 
root, potentil—potentilla tormentilla. [** gives. 
leamhnachd, Common tormentil, septfoil— 
tormentilla erecta. 

leamhnachadh, -aidh, s.m. Stopping, 2 Grow. 
ing insipid, 

leamhnachd, see leamh-lachd. 2 see leamh- 
nachd. 

leamhnad,t see leamhragan. 

leamhnadan, see leamhragan. 

]leamh-nàire, s.f.ind. Bashfulness, foolish shame, 


thea oficinalis. Foolhardy. 3 Importunate. 











coyness. 

417. Leamhadh. —— — ———ach, -eiche, d, Bashful, coy. 
leamhadras, ais, see leamhachas. —— —— achd, s.f. see leamh-nàire. | 
leamhaich,tf v.v. Plague, tease, aggrieve, irk, | leamhnan, : 

harass, exasperate, — — — achd, \ see leamhragan. 





e. —ead, -eid, s.m. Degree of insipidity. |leamhnanan, 
“leamhan,** s.m. Inner rind of a tree. 2 Row- |leamhragan, -ain, -an, s.m. Pimple*on the eye» 
er. 3 Moth (for leòmann.) 4 Night butter-| lid, stye. 
fly. 5ffPith of wood, 6(MMcD) Quern-wedge | leamhran, see leamhragan. 
=- Lewis. leamhranan, see leamhragan, 





leamlachd 


leamlachd, see leamhnachd. 

leam-leat, a. Double-faced, fickle, infirm of pur- 
pose. Teanga l., æ deceitful tongue ; duine 1., 
is fhèarr leat na leam, the double-faced man, 
let him be your friend, not mine. 

.—— ————, s. Deceit, fickleness, irresolution. 2 
Fickle person. 

leamnacht,f see leamhnachd. 

leamsa, emphatic form of prep.pron. leam. 

léan, léin, s.m. see lèana. 

lean, pr. pt. a’ leantuinn, Tal leanmhuinn, a 
leanachd, a’ leanail & a’ leanailt,] v. a. & m. 
Follow. 2 Pursue, chase. 38**Trace, 4 Ad- 
here, stick, cleave to. 5 Continue. 6 Per- 
severe. 7**Imitate. L. siun iad, we followed 
them ; lean e rim’ làmban, it adhered to my 
hands ; leanadh mo theanga ri m' chiobhaH, 
let my tongue cleave to my jaw ; ma leanas an 
uair tioram, if the dry weather continues; lean 
mar sin, persevere thus ; na l. orm na’s fbaide, 
don’t importune me farther ; lean mise, follow 
me—the Breadalbane Campbells’ motto ; 1. 
gu dlùth ri cliù do shinnsre, follow close the 
fame of your forefathers, supposed to be 
Ossianie, being said by Fingal to Oscar—a 
common motto for so-called Gaelic and High- 
land societies. 

lean, v.a. see leun. 

tlean, s.m. Sorrow, ruin. 

leana, -n, sm. Meadow. 2 Swampy plain. 3 
**Vield of luxuriant grass, green. 

leanaba (al— !) voc.pl. of leanabh. 

leanabach, see leanabanta. 

leanabachas, see leanabachd. 

leanabachd, s.f. Infancy, childhood. 2 Boy- 
hood. 3 Childishness, pusillanimity. 4 Boy- 
ishness, boyism. 5**Dotage. 

leanabaidh, -e, a. Childish, puerile, infantile. 
2 Having many children. 3**Pusillanimous, 
4 Boyish. 'Na aois l., in his dotage. 

—— —--—, s. dim. of leanabh —Swut^'d. —bairnie. 

--——eachd, see leanabachd. 

leanabail, see leanabanta. 

leanabainte, æ. see leanabanta. 

leanabalachd, see leanabachd. 

leanaban, n., gen. & dat.pl. of leanabh. 

-—, -ain, -an, $. m. dim. of leanabh. In- 
fant, little child. 2 in derision, Silly person. 
3 Petted child, spoilt child. M’ aon L, my 
only child. 

.— ————aách, -aiche, æ. see leanabanta. 2** 
Spoiled or petted as a child. 

.— — achd, see leanabachd. 

leanabanta, d. see leanabaidh. 

leanabantachd, see leanabachd. 

leanabas, -ais, s.m. see leanabachd. 

leanabh, leinibh, s.m. Infant, child, 2 in deri- 
sion, Childish person. 
Thus declined :— 
Nom. Sing. leanabh 








Plur. leanaban 


Gen, leinibh leanaban 
Dat. leanabh leanaban 
Voc, a leinibh ! a leanaba ! 


leanabh-altruim, foster-child, nursing. 
-ciche, a babe. 
—— ——— -gille, male child. 
inane | puppet, doll. 
-mic, male child. 
— ——— -nighinne, a female child. 
leanabhan, see leanaban. 





SEN 


Teannan 


thin. A’ I—, pr.pt. of leanaich. 

leanachd, prov. for leantuinn. 

leanadail,** a. Attendant. 

Tleanadar, v. They followed—Irish form. 

lèanag, -aig, -an, $&:f.dim. of léan. Small mes- 
dow or lawn. 

leanaich, (MO) pr. pt. a’ leanachadh, v. à. 
Make thin, flatten out, press out bread, as in 
the last process of kneading in making scones. 

emen } prov. for leantuinn, pr. pt. 

leanailteach, -eiche, a. Adhesive, adherent. 2 
Persevering. 3 Enduring. 4 Incessant. 5 
Following. 6**Clammy. 
rain ; 1. air obair, persevering at work. 

———— —— ;* -eich, s.m. Adherent. 

d, s.f.ind. Adhesiveness, adhesion. 
2 Perseverance, continuance, incessantness, 

leanamhain,** e, Goods, substance, 2 Spouse, 
sweetheart. 3 Pet. 4 Concubine. 

leanan, -ain, s.m. Haugh. 

leanar, fut.pass. of lean. Shall be followed. 

leanartach.$ -aich, s.m. see leamhnach. 

léan-ghobhrag,(AF) s. Snipe, see gobhar-athair. 

leanmhuinn, s. m. Following, act of follow- 
ing, or pursuing. 2 Adhering, adherence. 8 
Emulation. 4* Kindred, clanship, bond of 
connection, tie of kinship. 5**Tracing. 6** 
Imitation. 7**see leanamhain. A’ l—, pr.pt. 
of lean. 
Tha 1l. à thaobheiginn eatorra, there is some 
bond of connection or clamship between them ; 
tha iad a’ l. air an teaghlach sin, they have 
some claim on that family ; tha ea’ l. orm-a 
seo, he claims this from me, he insinuates his 
claim to this from me ; a luchd-leanmhuinu, 
his followers, kindred, vassals, minions ; 'gam 
l., following me. 

leanmhuinneach,** s.m. Follower, adherer. 

———, -eich, à. Following, pursuing. 
2 Adherent, adhesive. 3 Importunate. 
Emulative. 5* Having claims of kindred. 6** 

7**Clammy. 

——d, s.f. Adherence, adhesion. 2 

Incessantness. 

leanmhuinniche,** s. 
lower. 

leann, -a, pl. -tan & -taidhean, s.m. Ale, beer. 
2 Liquor, drink. 3 pl.{Humours of the body. 4 
(AC) Pool (for linne.) 5 rarely Coarse cas- 
sock. 6 Coat of mail. 7**Sore, ulcer. Deoch 
leanna, a drink of beer ; taigh-leanna, @ beer- 
house ; droch leanntan, bad humours ; l. caol, 
small beer ; 1. làidir, strong beer ; eadar dha 
leann, 'twixt sinking and swimming (Ut. be- 
tween two liquids, i.e. the upper and lowe’ 
water ; 2 water-logged, as a boat. 

leannach, -aiche, a. Abounding in ale. 

-——_——_,, -aich, see leannachadh. 

-————-adh, -aidh, s.m. Suppurating, state of 
suppurating, suppuration. 2 Inflammation. 3 
Ulcer, ulceration. 4 Boil. A’ l—, pr. pt. of 
leannaich. 

-—————ail,** a. Ulcerous, like an ulcer. 2 
Suppurating, tending to suppurate. 3 Caus- 
ing ulceration or suppuration. 

leannaich, pr.pt. a’ leannachadh, v.a. Suppur- 
ate. 2 Ulcerate. 

—— te, past pt. of leannaich. Suppurated. 

leannain, gen.sing. & m. pl. of leannan. 

leannair,** s.m. Brewer. 








Tracing. 


Adherent, adherer, fol- 





leanabh-luasgadh, -aidh, s.m. Rocking, as of a | leannan, -ain, -an, s.m. & f. Spouse. 2 Lover, 


cradle. 
leanabuidh, see leanabaidh. 
-—eachd, see leanabachd. 
léanach, -aiche, a Swampy, marshy. 
leanachadh, -aidh, em. Pressing out, making 





Digitized | 


ILICE Li 
. ewe Re ei — yE 
` 1 vw ri 1 |! 
YNTERNET ARCHIVE 


mistress, concubine. 3 Sweetheart, beloved 
person, pet, darling, gallant. L.-peacaidh, 
darling sin; 1. dinsich, an idiot’s choice ;1.-sith, 
given in the Bible for a familiar spirit, but 1$ 
really means @ fairy sweetheart. 


Oy iginal fram 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINO/ Sam 


IIRRANA-CHAMPAICGE m 
Un DAINm-L mne mas ah | 
- ith | 

r | 


Uisge l., incessant 





leannanach 577 learg-choileaeh dhubh 

learag,$ -aig, -an, s.f. Larch-tree—jinus tari. 
2 Larch-wood. 

—— —ach, -aiche, œ. Abounding in larcb-trees. 

tlear-dhromain, s. Ridge ot a hill. 

learg,-eirg,-an, s.f Rain-goose. 2 (AF) Cor- 
morant 3 see learg-mhadaidh. 

learg, leirg, an, s f. Plain, plain field. 2 Little 
eminence, small hill. 3 Beaten path. 4 Shore, 
sea-cuast, beach. 6 tf{sloping declivity of a 
hill. 6**Field of battle.. 7** Surface of the 
sea. 8 The sea. 9* Sloping place exposed to 
sun and sea. 10**Sloping green, green slope. 

learg ! (DU) int. Term of contempt - Slowcoach! 


0028 ares LEER d iiec 

leannanach, -aiche, a. Amorous, gallant. hay- 
ing many sweetheart: 2 Intriguing. 3 
Buxom. 4 Wanton. 

leannavachd, s.f.ind. Courtship, gallantry of 
lovers, intriguing, blandishment, dalliance. 2 
Flattery. 3ttWhoredom, fornication, 

leannan-locraidh, -ain-locraidh, s.m. Level, 
spirit-level. 

leann-caol, s.m. Small beer. 

leanndan, see leanntan. 

leann-dubh, -uibh, s. m. Sadness, melancholy, 
melancholia, tears, dejection. Bha’n l. air, 
he was dejected ; tha e (mi) fo 1., he is (1 am ) 
dej ected. 

-———ach,** a, Melancholic, despondent, 
hypochondriac. 

leanu-geur, s. Alegar, sour ale. 

leann-goile, s.m. Chyle. 

leann-goirt, s.m. Alegar. sour ale. 

leann-làidir, s.m. Strong beer, 

leann-loiszte, s.m. Dregs from distilling whisky. 
2 Dregs from which ale is brewed. 

leann-luibh, s. Hop, see lus-an-leanna. 

-—PeGach, æ. Aboundiug in hops. 2 Of, 
or pertaining to, hops. 

leann-meirbhidh, s.m. Chyle. 

leannra, s.m. Sauce, condiment, 2Soup. 3 
Aleberry. | 

leann-ràcadail, s.m. Ginger beer, 

]eannradh, see leannra. 

leann-ruadh, -aidh, s.m. Choler, anger. 

-———— —gijdh, s.m. Choler. 

leanntaidhean, pl. of leann. 

leanntalach,(M3) æ. Livelong. 

leann-tàlaidh, s.m. Allurement, power of enti- 
cing by charms, 

leann-tàth, -a, s.m. Cement. 2 Solder. 3 Hu. 
mours of the body. Chaill sinn uil ar l., we 
A all lost our esprit-de-corps (or stamina — 























dE 4 "Lem. t. 
e E SEH 
A UU EE 
e EE e cr E 
Ki SE ee 
E 4 


EVN) 
SSS ON d et d 
Gs SEL MAM Eech 
= N Go v A Ae [d RY E 


NV BERTON) 


POET pw 
x TA NI AA — ^ 
Dog S ei ^ p» 
Le p ANTE Porc 
eoque; 
J 
An 


mee, E 















—,v.a. Cement. 2 Solder. 
leann-tathaidh, s.m. Callus fluid, 2 Cement. 3 





bey ++Animal spirits in the body. 3 

A leanntan,* s. m. Anger. 2 pl. of leann. The 

M passions, the humours, the vapours. 

= leanntras, -ais, s.m. The vapours, humours of 

EN ^. the body. 421. Learga. 

e leann-ubnall, s.m. Cider. learga, T s.f. Black-throated diver—colymbus 


arcticus. 

ch, -aiche, a, Steep, sloping. 2 Hav- 
ing many slopes. 3 Of, or connected with 
plains, or 4 with Rain-geese. 5j{Beachy. 6 
(DU) Slow, inert. 

learga-chaol,f s. f. Red-throated diver, see 
learga-mhór. 

learga-dhubh,(AC) s.f. Black-throated diver. 

learga-fairge,f s. f. Red-throated diver, see 
learga-mhór. 

leargaidh,** s.f. Slope ofja hill. 2 Side of any 
high eminence. 

leargainneach,** a. Sloping. 2 Steep. 3 Harv- 
ing steep pasture-ground, 

leargair,** s.m. Sluggard. 2 Sailor. 

learga-mhór,4 s.f. Red-throated diver—colym- 
bus septentrionalis, see ill. 422. 2(AC) Black- 
throated diver. 

learga-mhór chaol, see learga-mhór, 

YE RR -ain, -an, s.m. Sloping green, side of a. 

ill. 


E leantach, -aiche, see leanailteach. 

A . ,-aiche, o, Subjunctive (in grammar.) 

——  ]éantach, -aich, s.f. Country of plains, place a- 
bounding in plains. 2*Extensive plain. 

leantail, a. Sticking. 2 Following. 

leantaiach, (MS) a. Adherent, gummy 2 
Importunate. 3 Persevering. 4 (DMC) Fol- 
lowing. L. air 'obair, persevering at his work ; 
tha’n glaodh l., the glue is adhesive; l. air 
an uisge, raining incessantly. 

--d,(MS) s. f. Adherence. 2 Pursu- 
ance. 3 Success. 4 Track. 5 Continuance. 

leantalas, s.m. see leantalachd. 

leantuinn, s.m. & pr. pt. Following, act of fol- 
lowing, pursuing. 2 Adhering, state of ad- 
hering,’cleaving, see leanmhuinn. 

——each, -eiche, a. Successive, 

—eachd, s.f. Adhesiveness. 

leapach, gen.s?ng. of leabaidh. 

leapachan, -ain, -an, see leabachan 

—— ———, n.pl. of leabaidh. 

leapaich, see leabaich. 

leapaichean, see leabaichean, 

| leaphunnd, see lethphunnd. 

— lear, s.m.ind. The sea, poet. 2 The surface of the 
— - gea. 8 see learg-mhadaidh. Bhuail i gu lear, 
she made towards the sea. 

tlear, a. Clear, discernible. 

learach, for leathrach. 














artes 
E "ne 3 
= : 


ZE 
3 





— 
e ZS E eg 


a 
oa. 








——— ach, -aiche, a. Sloping. 2 Having slop- 
ing greens. 

leargann,** -ainn, s.f. Small sloping green field. 
2 Side ofa green hill. 3 Steep pasture ground. 
4 Slope of a country side. 

learga-uisge,f s.f. Red-throated diver, see 
learga-mhór. 

learg-choileach dhubh, see learg-choilearach 


nal fron 


pp opem. Jg — y = p 
= 


E Z Ga EISE F 
LL d L A i d 
Kell L | d LJ 3 e, 


Digitized by UNIV 
M vL. 


BUTERNET ARCHIVE URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 





422. Learga-mhór. 
dhubh. / 
learg-choilearach, (Zit. ringed or collared diver) 
s.f. Black-throated diver. | 
learg-choilearach dhubh, s. f. 
diver. 
learg-mhadadh, -aidh,(AF) s. m. Dog fish, sea- 
dog, sea-fox. 
learguin, see leargainn. 
learinan,§ -ain, s.m. Wood-rush, 
eoille. 
learthag, see laireag. 
lear-thaod,** -aoid, s.n. Spring-tide. 
lear-thoid,** s.m. Football. (for leath-throid) 
lear-uinnean,$ s.m. Squill (lit. sea-onion.) - 


scilla verna. 
X V 
2w f 
KN : CS 


Black-throated 


see luachar- 





428. Lear-uinnean. 

leas, -a, prefix. Nick-, step-, additional. 

leas,** a. Proper, fit. Cha leas cadal gu moch, 
it is mot fit to go to sleep early—i. e. going to 
sleep early is no advantage. 

leas, -eóis, prov. for leus. 

leas, leis, leasraidh, see leis, s. f. 

leas, -is, s.f. prov. for lios. 

leas. s.m.ind. Benefit, advantage, profit, good. 
2"*Improvement. 3**Reason, motive. Sea 
bh' air do leas, it is he that had your interest 
in view ; cha'n e mo leas a bh’ air t fhaire, 
tt was not my interest you had in view: na’m 
bitheadh e air do leas, if he had your interest 
at heart ; cha ruig mi leas, I need not. 

—ach,* -aiche, a. Trifling. 2 Sheep-shanked. 

-—ach, -aich, s.m. Manure, see leasachadh. 

—— 2ch,** .aiche, s.m. Rennet. Baigean leas- 
aich, a rennet-bag. 

léasach, -aich, prov. for leusach. 

leasachadh, -aidh, s.m. Improving, actor state 
of improving, amending, benefiting, repairing 
or correcting. 2 Improvement, reparation, 
amendment, correction. 3 Manuring. 4 Dung, 
manure, 5 Increasing. 6 Appendix. 7 Guer- 


leat 


don. A’l—, pr. pt. of leasaich. A' ], an 
fhearainn, manuring the land ; a’ l. a’ ghnoth- 
aich, improving the thing ; a’ cur a mach an 
l., carting dung, laying out manure; cha 1. 
air sin an ni sin, that is no reparation for that 
affair ; chum leasachaidh, for correction. 

leasachail, -e, a. Improvable, that may be 
put to rights, corrigible. ~ 

leasachail, -e, a. Escharotic, caustic, 
produeing a blister on the skin. 

leasachair, s.m. Improver, reformer, repairer. 
2 Amender. 

leasaich, pr. pt. a’ leasachadh, v. a. Rectify, 
correct, amend, repair. 2 Supply. 3 Fill, re- 
plenish, renew. 4 Improve. 5 Manure, culti- 
vate. 6(DU) Increase. L. an ni sin, im- 
prove that thing; l. am fearann, manure the 
land ;1. do bheusan, correct your morals ea 
an eibhle, put fuel on the fire; a’ bhean a l 
an stop, the woman who filled the tankard. 

leasaiche, -an, s.m. see leasachair. 

leasaichte, past pt. of leasaich. Rectified, cor- 
rected, amended, improved, repaired. 2 Sup- 
plied, filled, replenished. 3 Manured. 4 Ad- 
vanced. 5**Renneted, as milk. 

leas-ainm, -ean, s.m. Nick-name. 

—each, a. Apt to give nick-names. 
leasan, -ain, s.m. Gaelic spelling of lesson. 
leas-athair, -ar, -athraichean, s.m. Step-father. 
leas-bhrathair,** s.m. Step-brother. 


epispastic, 


jleasdair, s.m. Lamp. 2 Light, effulgence, 3** 


Crack. 
fleasg,** s.f. Hood. 2 Rod. 
leasg, a. see leisg. 
leasg,** -eisg, st Rain-goose. | 
leasgach, -aiche, a. Lurkish. 
leasgan,(MS) s.m. Drone. 
———ach,ft -aich, s.m. Cripple, deformed pere 


3 Spot of ground. 


son, 

leas-inghean,** -inghinn, s.f. Step-daughter. 

tleas-luan,** -ain, s.m. Step-son. 

leas-leathann,itf -ainn, s. Beaver. 

leas-luidhe,** sr. Reclining, leaning. 

leas-mhac, -mhie, s.m. Step-son. 

leas-mhathair, -ar, -mhàthraichean, S.J. Step. 
mother, 

leas-mhursaid,** s.f. Gallon. 

leas-nighean, -nighinn, -nigheanan, e f. Step- 
daughter. 

leas-òifigeach, s.m. Non-commissioned officer. 

leas-phiuthar, -pheathar, -pheathraichean, sf, 
Step-sister. 

Heasrach, -aich, s.m. Thigh. 2 Loins. 

leasradh, see leasraidh. 

leasraidh, s. f. coll. The loins. 

— — ————eaoeh, -eiche, a. Lumbar, 

leas-righ, s.m. Regent. 

leastair, ean, prov. tor fleisdear. 

leastaireachd, see fleisdearachd. 

leastar,** air, s m. Small boat. 2 Cup, vessel, 
3 Furniture ofa house. 4 Vessels of a house. 
5 Stale butter. 6(AF) Milk-dish. 

leasuich, see leasaich. 

leat, prep.prom. With thee. 2 By thee. 3 To 
thee. 4 Along with thee. 5 In thine opin- 
ion or estimation. 6 In thy favour. 7 You, 
yours. Bithidh mi leat, I will be with you: 
ciod th’ air leat P what think you? an leat seo ? 
is this yours ? seo leat ! Zere's to your health ! 
tha mo ghuidhe leat, mu desire is the same as 
yours ; leig leat, said by one who knows things 
are not as they have been related by the other; 
nach truagh mi leat ! said to a guest who does 
not take as much as is offered to him ; also 
used as an equivalent to what a nuisance you 
are ! cha téid sin leat, that «ill not succeed 
with you ; coma leat e! never heed him ! 


Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


ae me 


~- 2^ 


em d e wi 


ts. 
seg ge 


` 


TN ! 
t$ . do: e apes s E 


D 


‘eg 


Amy 


^ T 
4 
= = = - 


D 
Gi 


d 
e 














Ree Cae: 


EGO — 

^ 4 ele a We Bé 
"ow ae) om 

a e Y em s 
Talla. Kee E E = 
r e et " E 


e 


-r 
~ 
e 


besse 
e * 


4 


v 
“we 


= —--—achd, s.f.ind. Pregnancy (of women 


leibeann,** Ann, s.m. Long stride. 2 Stretch. 


 fleibheann,** -einn, s.f Deck of a ship. 2 Scaf- 


leatach 


leatach,(CR) a. Remote, isolated—Perthshire. 

leath, -an, s.m. prov. for leth. 

leatha, prep. pron. With her. 2 By her. 38 
Along with her. 4 In her opinion. 5 In her 
favour. 6 Hers. 

leatha, comp. of leathann. i 

leathachas, -ais, $. m. Partiality, unfairness, 
injustice. Na dean l, sam bith air, sow him 
no vartiality. 

leathad, -aid & leòthaid, pl. leoidean, s.m. De- 
clivity, side of a hill, slope, haif-ridge, broad 
slope, brae. LA" dol le leathad, declining, going 
downhill, 

ach, æ. Declivitous. 


leathag,** s.f. Plaice. 2 Flounder. 

an,? s. see liaghag & see;stamh. 

-bhàn,(AF) s.f. Sole. 

-dhearg,(AF) s. f. Flounder, fluke. 

-fior-uisg’,(AF) s.f. Flounder, 

-mhara,(AF) s.f. Turbot, talbot. 

leathamaid,* s.f. Idiot. 

leathanach, s.m. Hoar-frost—A rran. 

leathann, leithne & leatha, a. Broad. 2 Spa- 
cious.  'Leathann ri leathann is caol ri 
caol," broad to broad and narrow to narrow, 
an important rule observed by most writers 
of Gaelic, and which prescribes that the vow- 
eis next before and next after any given conso- 
nant in any given word shall be either both 
broad or both narrow, unless divided by a hy- 
Ginen, Many of the past participles of verbs 
do not conform to this rule, but they are the 
ouly exception, [MacBain spells leathann 
leathan.) - 

-—-——aàchd, s,f. Wideness. 

leathar, gen. leathair, leathrach E leathraich, 
s.m. Leather. 2 Hide. L. fionnta an daimh 
òig, the young ox’s hairy hide ; brògan leath- 
rach, leather shoes. 

-sgiunein, see leathar-sginneir. 

-sginneir, ssm. Bufř-leather. 

leatha-sa, prep.pron., emphatic form of leatha. 

leathnaich, v. Flatten. 2 Malleate. 

leathoir, see leth-oir. 

leathrach, gen.sing. of leathar. [ * and McL & D. 
give. nom, leathrach, gen. -aich.] 
— ————àail,ii a. Leathery. 

leath-throid,** s.m. Football 

leathuillinn, see lethuilinn, 

leathunnsa, see lethunusa. 

leatrath see lethtrath. 























leatrom, -truim, s. m. Burden, weight, 2 
Grievance. 3 Injury. 4 Injustice. 5 Pr.g- 
nancy (of women only.) 6 Oppression, 7** 
Counterweight. 





— ach, -aiche, a. Burdensome, weighty. 
2 Grievous, oppressive, unjust. 3 Pregnant 
(of women only.) Dh’ fhas i L, she became | 
pregnant. 


only.) 2**Counterweight. 

leatromas, see leatromachd. 

leatruime, see leatrom. | 

Lebhitheach, s.m. Levite. 

T.ebbitheachail, a. Levitical. 

le bruthach, adv. Downhill. 

le chéile, adv. With each other, together. 
Mharbh e iad le chéile, he killed them both. 


leibh, prep.pron, With you. 2In your favour, 
ou your side. 3 By you. 4In your opinion or 
estimation. 5 Along with you, 6 By your 
means. 7 Your property. 


E MM MÀ— ——— —MM— — 


fold. 3 Gallery. 4 Side of a hill. 


leibhidh,-ean, s.f. Race, generation, 21fSwarm, 
multitude, levy. 


Digitized by 


INITERNET ARCHIVE 


579 


M — H— Ó— MÀ € M M ————— M ———  MÀ— —— Ha 


leig 

leibbist,(DMy) s. Half idiot. 

leibhliadhna, see lethbhliadhna. 

leibhreac, see lethbhreac. 

leibid, -ean, s.m. Trifle. 2 Trifling accident. 
misehauce. 3 Uerm of contempt. 4t+Dwarf- 
ish fellow. 5 I Dirt. L. ort ! mischance be- 
fall you ! fie! out upon you ! 

leibid,* s.f. Paltry female. 2 Paltry considera- 
tion. 

each, -eiche, æ. Trifling, mean, worthless, 

contemptible. 2 Accidental. 3 Awkward. 

4 Avaricious. 5 Tawdry. 6 Shabby, vile. 7 

Long-legged. 8 (DU) Annoying, vexatious. 

Is l. an taigh nach toill fear cile thathast, it's 

a poor house that won't hold another still—a 

very hospitable sentiment ; is l, saoghal na 

sulach, paltry is the part of the world seen by 

the eyes. 

eachd, s.f. Avarice, meanness, scantiness. 
pettiness, paltriness. złtțt Silliness. SII Awk- 
wardness. 4**Tawdriuess, shabbiness. 65 
Worthlessness. 

leibidean, -ein, s.m. Contemptible fellow,trifler. 
'Nuair a gheibh anl. a staiyh, 'se fear an 
taigh an truaghan, whentrijler gets in, pity the 
goodman of ihe house. 

léic, -e, s.f. Neglect. 

leiceanta, see leacanta. 

—chd, see leacantachd. 

leiceas, see leigis. 

leiceid (CR) Loch Tay for leacaid. 

léich, -ean, s.m. Physician. N'am b’ urrainn 
mi, dheanainn léich dhuit, if I could, I would 
uct as physician to thee—Duanaire, p. 16, (see 
léivh & lighiche.) 

leieheatura, see lethcheathramh. 

leicheid, Blair Athole for leacaid. 

leicis, see leigis. 

leid, s. f. tLonging, desire. 2 (MMcD) Shake- 
down or bed mad: on the floor. 

léideach, -eiche, æ. Strong, robust. 

bristly. 

—adh, s.m. Convoy. 

Tléidich, v.a. Convoy forza short way. 

fiéidig, see léidich. 

léidig, Caithness for léitig. 

léidinn,** s.m. Conduct. 

—————,** v.a. Convoy. 

leidir,* v.a. see leadair. 

leidire,(AF) s.m. Wolf. 

léidmheach, -eiche, a. see léideach. 

léig, -ean, s.m. see leug. 


leig, pr. pt. a’ leigeil & a’ leigeadh, v. o & n. 
Permit, allow. 2 Slip, as dogs to the chase. 
3 Let out, let go, let off. 4 Milk, as cows. 5 
Rain, commence raining. 6f{Apply to, com- 
mence. 7{{Break off, as an imposthume, 
ttLay, lay upon. 9f{Set out. 10**Overturn. 
11**Place. 12** Lower. 13**Diminish. 14 * 
Broach. 15*,Fire. 16* Lance. 


Leig (or ghabh) sinn oirnn, we pretended, 
assumed ; leig ort a bhi tinn, pretend to be sick; 
cha do leig sinn dad oirnn riutha, we disclosed 
nothing to them, we never made @ sign to show 
them what we knew, we did not ‘let op" to 
them ; leig ris daibh, explain to them ; dume 
ris an leiginn ris mo bhriathran, one to whom 
I could unbosom myself. 


Leigidh mi an ath ’na teine, I will set the 
kiln on fire ; leig aomadh anns a’ phosta, put 
the post in a slanting position ; leig as, let go ; 
leig as na siùil, unfurl the sas; leig as an 
leac, drop the flagstone ; leig as am ball tang- 
ais, let go the towing-rope ; leig mi emu bharr- 
aibh nan tonn, I d ed it into the waves, I 
confided it to the mercy of the sea. 











2 Shaggy, 





INTERNET ARCHIV 


leig 


Leig na coin anu, set the dogs at him ; cum 
do chu ri a leigeil, keep your dog till it is time 
to slip hin ; is tric a bha leigeadh fada aig 
fear gun chu, œ man without means (lit. with- 
outa dog) haus often hada lony slipping (i.e. a 
long innings) ; leig chun a chéile iad, iet them 
at each other ; leig air an adhart iad, let them 
inove forward ; leig air, begin, commence ; leig 
lad ris na deagh ghadhair, they let slip the 
good hounds at him ; leig an t-saighead, an 
urchair ris, let fly the arrow, the shot at him; 
leig an gunna, fre the gun ; leigidh mi peilear 
annad, 4 will drive a bullet into you; a’ cheud 


daiianaich 
bhraiphtscal ra leig iad, the first volley, 


lamhach 
Uroadside, they fired ; leigidh mi fios chugad, 
dhuit, Z will send you word ; lig gu a luim 
féin e, leave him to his own resources, devices. 


Leig iad e gu radh a’ chlaidheimh, na sear- 
raig, they referred it, appealed, to the sword, 
to the bottle\they made the sword or the bot- 
tle arbitrator) ; feumaidh tu leigeadh leamsa 
sin à ràdh, ars am breitheamh, you must leave 
that to me to say, said the judge ; leig sin an 
urra riumsa, entrust that to me ; leigeamaid 
chum tuigse a’ mhinisteir teagasg a thoirt, let 
us leave to the minister's judgment the question 
of the giving of teaching. 


Leig e cead ruith leis an tòrr bhuntàta, he 
Allowed the pile of potatoes to slide (in all di- 
rections) ; leig cead dha, let him alone; leig an 
linne, let the water out of the reservoir ; leig 
ruith leis an uisge, let the water run forth ; 
leig am moll leis a’ ghaoith, let the chaff go 
with the wind ; tha fear ann a leigeas a mhaid- 
ean le sruch, there is one that lets his wood go 
with the stream ; leig am buideal, broach, tap 
the barrel; leig an crodh, mitk the cattle ; leig 
fuil, lance for blood ; leig an lionnachadh, lance 
the tumour; an là a’ brath leigeil fodha, the 
day threatening to rain ; leig e, it has begun to 
' gain; leig t anail, teke it easy, take a breath; 
leig fead, whistle (thou) ; leig e glaodh as, he 

. uttered @ cry ; leig beum leis an sgòd, let the 
sail-sheet suddenly out; leig sìos, diminish, less- 
n ; 2 let down; leig cudthrom, or leig taic, 
ean, 


Leig leinn e, let him come with us ; let it go, 
-S0 that we can take it with us ; leig leinn, let us 
alone, let us go on as weare ; leig leat, you may 
go on talking, acting as you are doing, if you 
wish, but I will beeven with you later on ; also 
said tO one who is exapgerating.; leigidh mi 
sin leat, I will make that concession to 
you, L will allow you that ; leig iad leatha car 
treis, they let her alone, let her go on fora 
wie ; leigidh sinn leis a’ chùis an dràsd, 
we will leave the matter alone just now ; lagh a 


tha 'g òrdachadh leigeil leis a’ ghiomach,.a | 


(aw making a close time for lobsters compulsory; 
Tuigidh na féidh aois mhór ma leigear led, deer 
reach œ great age if left alone ; cha leig mi 
ieis an seoe, I will not let the matter rest 
here; cha’n fhaigh thu leat e, you shall not 
Ge allowed to carry it out, you shall not have 
your own way in the matter ; cha leig iad leis 
a dhìth, they wiil not allow him to perish; 
gun leigeadh Dia ! God grant! nar leigeadh 
Via! God forbid ! cha leig i leis car a dhean- 
amh, she will not let him do a single hand’s 
turn; cha leig an t-eagal leam, fear will not 
permit me; cha leig an naire leam, shame 
will not permit.me ; leig mi led faighinn as.a’ 
ghàbhadh a tharruing iad orra féin, I let them 
get oul of the aificulty which they had brought 


Digitized by 


530 


leigheas 
upon themselves. 


Leig dhomh an t-òran a chluinntinn, let me 


hear the song ; leig dha falbh, let him go ; leig 
iad siubhal a chas do ’n each iaruinn, they 
let th» iron horse start away ; cha do leig e 
stad dh? a chois gus, &c., he never halted un- 
til, £e. ; leig dhuit, go on your own silly way; 
leig da, do not have any more to do with it ;, 
leig tàmh dha, let it alone, give it rest ; ma, 
bha iad gu math, is math—’s mur robh, leig- 
ear dhaibh, tf they were good, all right—and 
if they were not, let them be ; leigeamaid do 'n 
ghlaodh gus an cluiuu sinn a riunisd e, let the 
Shouting be, let us take no notice of the shout, 
tL we hear it again; na leig a dhith a’ Ghàidh- 
"n let not the Gaelic language come to grief, 
ie. 


Leig eadar sinn féin ’s na biodagan, leave 
us to light it out with our dirks ; na cuireadh 
sin dragh 'sam bith ort, leig eadar mise agus 
sin, don’t let that trouble you, I will manage 
that, leave it to me. 


Leig iad dhiubh a bhi 'gabhail cüraim, they 
ceased taking precautions, they ceased to be con- 
cerned ; leig iad dhiubh a’ chlach-neart, they 
ceased. practising with the putting-stone ; leig 
mi dhiom mo dnreuchd, 4 resigned, relinquish- 
ed my ofice ; leig dhìot, desist, cease ; leig dhiot 
PANES bheag de d bhoile, caim yourself a 
little. 


Leig e seachad a’ chòmhrag, he let the mat- 
ter of the combat pass ; leig seachad gus an 
ath àireamh e, postpone it tid next number ; is 
imo chewhairie-sa dhuit an oidhche 'nochd 
a leigeil le cach, my advice to you is to do to- 
night as yow have done on other nights ; leigidh 
siad an eueoir thairis orra, they will permit 
errors to pass—said of book-critics. 

leig, Often used for ruig in parts of Argyll, 
Skye, &c., e.g. cha leig e leas, which is com- 
mon for cha ruig e leas. 

leig,** -e, s.f. Spade, mattock. 

léig, gen.sing. of leug. 

léig, pl. -ean, $.f. Marshy or miry pool.—Lewis. 
Name given by the Fingalian bards to a lake 
in Ireland. 

leig-chritheach, s. Quagmire. 

léige,(MS) s.f. League (3 miles.) 

leigeadair, s.m. Spigot. 

counts -idh, s.m. d pr.pt. Same meanings as 
eigeil. 

léizeart,** s. Leaguer. 

leigeas,** -eis, see leigis. 

leigeil, gen. leigealach, s.m. Permitting, act of 

permitting, allowing or granting. 2 Milking, 

act of miiking. 3 Letting go, lettiug out, let- 

ting off. 4 Setting on, urging,as of boys. 5ff£ 

Applying. 6{f Breaking, as of an impos: 

thume. 

raining. DOIT Throwing down. 

11** Letting fall. 

pr.pt. of leig. 

leigeil, s. m. Letting go, the hand is lowered 
to let the spun thread run on to the reel of 
spiuning-wheel. 

léigh, -ean, s.m. Physician, surgeon. 

léizh,* st Medicine, 1 

léigheadair, see léigh. 2**Pharmacopolist. 

——— — ——eachd, s.f. Pharmacy. 1 

léigheagan, -ain, -an, s.m. Stone superstitious- 
ly supposed to possess medical virtue. 

léighean, -ein, s.m. Instruction, erudition. 

— ———ta,** q. Proficient. - 

leigheas, -ghis, -an, s. m. Cure, remedy, medi- 
cine. 2 Healing, curing, act of curing. A’ 
1—, pr.pt. of leighis. L. a dbeanamh, to wer 


10**Lowering. 
12** Qverturning. A’ l—, 


Original fram 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 


URBANA-CEAMPAIG 


7 Setting out. SffRaining, act of: 


-— 4A we ae 


Wis 


Bea ee 


Lt Ae 


w 


EIRETAT 


T ka 
iais 


e 






leigheas 


a cure. 
—— —-ach, -aiche, a. 
ing, remediable. 
achd, s.f. Curableness. 
adh, -aidh, see leigheas, 
————aiche,** s.m. Physician. 
ail, (MS) a. Remediable. 
-uisge, s.m. Hydropathy. 
leigheil,tt e, a. Medical. 
leighicbe,(MS) s.m. Practitioner. 
leighis, pr.pt. a’ leigheas, v.a. Cure, heal, re- 
medy. 
each, see leigheasach. 
eachd, see leigheasachd. 
—— te, past pt. of leighis. Cured, healed. 
léigh-lann, -lainn, s.m. Dispensary, ; 
léigh-loisg, v.a. Cauterize, burn with caustic. 
léigh-losgadh, -aidh, s. 7n. Cautery, act of cau- 
terizing. 2**Caustic. A'l—, pr.pt. of léigh- 
loisg. 
leigis,§ s. Leek—a/lium porrum. 


Medicinal, curing, heal- 





























la 
a each,** œ. Abounding in leeks. 2 Like a 
CN leek. 

ieigiun,** -iuin, s.m. Gaelic spelling of legion. 


leigte, past pt. of leig. Permitted, let out, let 
otf. 2 Milked. 3łł Set out. 4 Laid, laid 
upon. 5**Overturned. 6**Lowered,diminished. 
7* Lance, 

léim, -ean & -eannan, 

——, v.a. see leum. 

leimhe, comp. of leamh. 

, s.f.ind. Sauciness, impudence. 2 Fas- 
tidiousness. 3**Simplicity, folly. 4**Impor- | 
tunity. 

leine, for leithne, comp. of leathann. 

léine, pl. léintean, s.f. Mau's shift, shirt or 
smock. 2 Woman’s chemise. 3 Shroud, wind- 
ing sheet. 4ffJacket. Tha e as a l., he has 


see leum. 








his coat of, nothing on but his shirt ; gun 
chiste, gun léintean, without cofins or shrouds; 
E - éin'-ioehdar, wunder-shirt ; léine-thuilinn, shirt 


of twilled linen. 

|‘ Iéineag, tt -eig, -an, s.m. Little shirt. 

; —— ach, a. Having little shirts. 

léine-aifrionn, s.f. Surplice. 

léme-bhàis, s.f. Shroud. 

léine-bhàn,(AH) s. f. Distinctive smock, which 
transgessors of ecclesiastical law were at one 
time obliged to wear in church during publie 
worship on one or more Sundays—also called 
“ gùn odhar " and “gùn na h-eaglaise.” 

oe uhoa, (DU) s.f. Inner lining of an egg- 


shell. 

léine-chaol, s.f. White linen shirt (i.e. the shirt 
that has fine threads used in weaving the ma- 
terial of which it is made.) 

léine-chneis, Same as léine-chrios. Tha thu d 
dhalt aig a bhan-righinn, mar léine-chneis 
aiga bràthair, you are the queen’s foster-brother 
and the body-guard of her own brother— Filidh. | 

léine-chrios, s. m. Confidant, intimate, atten- | 
dant, valet. 

léine-chroich,** s.f. Saffron shirt or mantle, so ! 
‘called from its being dyed with saffron. Ir 
was worn in former times, by people of rank i 
among the Gael, especially in the Western | 
Isles. It was an upper garment, and con- 
sisted of 24 ells, tied round the middle by a | 
belt, and reaching below the knees. | 

léine-mhairbh,(DU) s.f. Shroud. 

1éine-sheacair,(MMcD) s.f. Narrow striped or 
pleated shirt, 

— leinibh, gen.sing. of leanabh. 

: -luasgadh,** -aidh,see leanabh-luasgadh. 

leinn, prep.pron. With us. 2 By us. 3 To us. 
4 In our fayour, on our side, ours. 

(| company. 


— Fe mmm 





. Digitized by 
BITERNET ARCHIVE 





581 
(falbh) leinn, come along with us ; bi leinn, De 


Leig leinn, let us alone ; thalla léirte, past pt. of léir. 


léirte 


on our side ; cuir do làmh leinn help us. 
leinne, emphatic form of leinn. 


! Jéinteach, a. Having shirts, shirted. 


— —-— —, -eich, s.f. Shirting. 

léinteag, -eig, -an, s. f. dim. of leine. Little 
shirt or shroud. 

leiphiutnar, see lethphiuthar. 

léir,** a. Visible. 2 That can see. 

léir, s.n. ind. Sight, perception, power of seeing 
or being seen. 2(MS) Plague. Used witu 
the prep.prons. dhomh, dhuit, &c., as, cha léir 
dhomh, 4 do not see ; an léir dhuit e? do you 
see it ? is léir dhomh e, J see it ; cha 1. dhoma 
sin, Z cannot see that ; isl. a bhuil, the result 
is obvious ; mar is l. dhomh, as far as I can 
see; is math is l. dhomh, Z can see well ; cha 
1. dhomh do dheireas, 4 cannot perceive your 
deficiency. 

léir, adv. (i.e. gu léir) Altogether, wholly. 

léir, pr.pt. a’ léireadh, v.a. Pain, torment, dis- 
tress, harass, suffer. 2 Wound. 3 Steal. 4 
Trample. 5 Vex, oppress. 6 Pierce. 7 Thrill. 
8 Aggrieve. 

fléir, s.m. Aggregate. 

tléir, -e, œe Conspicuous, open, plain, obvious, 
evident, 2 Destructive, terrible. 3 Wise, 
prudent. 4 Close, managing. ` 

léir-chreach, s.f. Complete spoiling, utter de- 
vastation. 

léir-chunntas, -ais, -an, s. m. Census, general 
numbering. 2**General calculation. 

Heire, s.m. Austerity, piety. 

léireadh, -idh, s.m. Paining, act of paining, 
tormenting, distressing. 2 Wounding. 3 
Stealing. 4 Trampling. 5 Torment, oppress- 
ion, harassing. A'l—, pr. pt. of léir. 'Gam 
l., tormenting m», giving me the most acute 
pain ; a’ l. nan sléisnean, paining the thighs. 

tléic-fholach, -aich, s.m. Canopy. 

leirg, -e, -ean, s.f. see learg. 2tf see làirig. 

tleirg, -e, -ean, s.f. Reason, motive. 2 Road. 

léir-ghlac,** s. Engross. 

leirin-sugach,? s. Mushroom, see balg-losgainn. 

leirist, -e, -ean, s.m. & f. Foolish senseless per- 





son. 2 Slovenly woman, slut. 3 Awkward 
person. 
each, -eiche, œ. Senseless, stupid. 2 
Sluttish. 
léir-laghadh,** -aidh, s.m. Amnesty. 


léir-mhillteach,** a. All-consuming. 

léir-mheas,** s. m. General consideration. 2 
Full or general estimate. 3 General view. 
4 Census. 5 Balancing, weighing, pondering. 

léirse,** s.f. see léirsinn. 

léir-sgrios, -an, s.m. Utter destruction, com- 
plete ruin. 2**Carnage, massacre. 

—, v.4. Destroy utterly. 

—ach, -aiche, æ. see léir-sgriosail. 














— aii, -e, @. Destructive, utterly ruin- 
ous. 

—ta, past pt. of léir-sgrios, Ruined, 

utterly destroyed. 2 Ravaged. 3 Defaced. 


léirsinn, s,f. Vision, sight, seeing. 2 Intellect, 
understanding. 3 Insight, knowledge, per- 
ception. A’ dalladh a l., blinding his vis- 
ion; snitheach gun L, tearful and blind** ; 2 
leaky and dark—applied to a house with rain 
coming through the roof (DMC) ; am bheil thu 
a’ léirsinn ? do you see ? 

léirsinneach, -niche, œ. Seeing, perceiving. 2 
Intelligent, discerning, enlightened. 3 Visi- 
ble. Gul, visibly. 

d, s. f. Light, vision. 2 Intelli- 

gence, understanding, sagacity. 3 Visibility. 


2 








5 In our | léir-smuain, s.m. Consideration, refiection. 


Pained, distressed. 


léirte 582 


Wounded, pierced. 3 Stolen. 

léirtixeas, s.m. Two fourpenny lands (a measure 
9i sand.) 

léir-viionail, pr.pt.a' léir-thional, v.n. Congre- 
gate, gather together, muster. 

lé:r-thional, -ail, s.m. General assembly, gene- 
ril gathering, muster. A’ l—, pr. pt. of léir- 
thionail. L. Eaglais na h-Alba, the General 
Assembly of the Church of Scotland ;1. chrodh, 
a general gathering of cattle. 

leis, -e, -ean, s.f. Thigh. Sùil na leise, the hip- 
joint. 

léis, gen.sing. of leus. 

leis, prep.pron. With him or it. 2 In his com- 
pany, along with him. 3 Being his property 
or right. 4 By means of, with what. 5 By, 
by reason of. 6 In favour of. 7 Belonging to. 
8 Dowuhill. 9 Down tne stream. 

A" doll., going along with him ; 1. fhéin, all 
alone, without assistance ; L an t-sruth, down 
the stream ; ciod leis a ghlanas an t-óganach 
"ule shlighe féin ? by what means shail the 
young man purify all his ways? có Ll. thu? 
whose are you ? tha mi leat-sa ma cheannaich- 
eas tu mi, 7 am yours if you bribe me well ; 
is leis an duin' uasal seo mi, Z am the son (or 
daughter,or servant) of this gentleman; ciod leis 
à ni thu e? by what means will you do it 2 
co leis an téid thu? with whom will you go ? 
leat-sa, along with uou ; leis an dithis seo, by 
mans of these two; leis a’ chabhaig, on ac- 
count of the hurry ; is aithreach leis, he re- 
grets; co leis a tha thu? on whose side are you 2 
leis a’ ghaoith, with the wind ; leis a’ bhruth- 
ach, down the hill ; leig e leis, he fainted, fag- 
ged ; 2 he permitted him ; bha leis eum faod- 
adh e a h-earbsadh riutha, he thought he might 
trust her with (to) them; cuiridh mi tuillidh 
neart leis A chloich an ath uair a thilgeas 
mi i, Z will apply more strength to the stone 
the next time I throw it ; ‘an duine is leis iad 
(aiso, leis an leis iad and d' an leis iad,— 
bad idiom. MM) the man to whom they belong. 
[For other idiomatic uses of leis, see under 
is. | 

In Arran, cuidich leat féin, help yourself ; 
cuidich leis leis an obair, help him with the 
work ; 

In Lochalsh, thug mi leis e (for thug mi 
leam e), I brought it with me; a’ bhean leis 
an robh i generally used to signify the woman 
whose she was, is in Lochalsh changed to, a’ 
bhean a bha i leis. [DMK says that in Loch- 
alsh such improper expressions, are only made 
use of by the younger people and that he has 
heard some of the older people express their 
disgust at them. ] 

leis,* a. Lee, leeward, larboard, (port) side of a 
vessel. Air an taobh leis, on the larboard 
side; am fearann leis, the land to leeward ; leig 
leis ! slack sheet ! let go before the wind ! leis 
oirnn, to leeward of us ; cum leis oirnn, keep 
to leeward of us ; a’ ruith leis, running before 

^ the wind. 

leis-bheart, -eirt, -an, s.f. Armour for the thigh, 
cuish. 2 Trousers, breeches. 

Icis-phrat, -ait, -an, s.m. Pair of trousers, 

leiscioball,* -aill, san, Minion, vassal, creature. 
leisdcar, -ir, -an, see fleisdear. 

leisdeireachd, s.f. see fleisdearachd. 

leise,** s.f. Happiness. 

adh,** -aidh, s.m. Mocking. 

leisg, -e, a. Lazy, indolent, slothful. 2 Loath, 
reiuctant, unwilling, Duinel, an indolent 
man; isl. leam, Jam loath ; is 1. leam eur a 
mach air, 1 feel reluctant to cast out with him 5 
is 1, leis sin a dheanarah, he feels reluctant to 





leithid 


4 Tramoled.| do that; gnothach a’ ghille 1. 'san fhoghara 


—théid e fada leis, ’s bithidh e fada ris, tke 
lazy fellows business in harvest-time, he goes 
far with it and takes long to do it, [* and tf 
spell this word ''leisg," McL & D and give 
“ leasg” and “ leisg " but both prefer “leasg,” 
** gives “leasg ” ouly, MM says * leisg’’ is 


wrong and “leasg ” right but that the er- 


ror has got into literature.  * Leisg "' is cer- 
tainly the usual pronunciation at present. } 

leisg, -e, s.f. (m. in Badenoch.] Laziness, sloth, 
slothfuluess, indolence. ’S ean L a thug ort 
sin a dheanamh, sheer indolence made you do 
that ; cha dean làmh na leisge beairteas, the 
lazy hand will not earn riches. 

leisge, comp. of leisg. More or most lazy. 

leisgeachd,tt 8.f.ind. Laziness, dulness, 

leisgean, -ein, -an, s.m. Sluggard, lazy person. 
2 Sloven. Seall thusa dhomh-sa an l., agus 
seallaidh mise dhuit-se am méirleach, you 
Show me the sluggard, and I will show you the 
thief. Another version is, baobach air an leisg' 
à th' ann, bheiria clann chum na croiche, 
(confound that laziness, it brings its children 
to the gallows.) 

leisgeanachd, &.f. Slothfulness, indolence. 

leisgeanta, a. Slothful, lazy, indolent, 

leisgeantachd, see leisgeanachd. 

leisgear, see leisgean. 

leisgeil, -e, a. see leisgeanta, 

peni see leisgeanachd. 

eisgeul, -eil, an, s. m. Excuse retence. 
Apology. 3 Defence (in law.) k Gabh mo "s 
EE me; al. sin doibh, their own affair 
e it. 

leisgeulach, -aiche, a. Excusin . 2 Read 
make excuses. 3 Mediatory. d P locari he, 

——, -aich, s.m. see leisgeulaiche. 

leisgeulachadh, s.m. Defence. 

leisgeulachd, $.f.ind. Habit of making excuses, 
evasiveness. 2ttExcusableness, 3 Advocacy. 

leisgeulaich,tt v.a. Excuse, colour. 

leisgeulaiche, an, s. m. Exeuser. 2 Mediator. 
3 Deprecator, 

kot e prep.pron., emphatic of leis. With him- 
self. 


leistear, -an, see fleisdear, 2**Table. 

——-—achd, see fleisdearachd, 

tleite, see lite. 

leiteachas,(DMC) -ais, s.m. Partiality, prefer- 
ence. 

leith,(MS) s.f. Nerve. 

leith, see leth. 

leith, gen. & voc. of liath. A dhuine léith ! Q 
grey-headed man! 

leith-bhreac, -ic, -an, $.m. & f. see leth-bhreac. 

leith-bhruthach, (DU) s.f. Gentle deelivity. 

leithcheann, see lethcheann. 

leichehinn, see lethcheann. 

léithe comp. of liath. More or most grey. 

léithe, s.f. Greyness, greyishness. 2 Mouldi- 
ness, staleness, as of bread. 

leitheach, -eiche, a. By half, half, as half-full. 
2 Half-way through, half-way on a journey. 
L. lan, half-full ; |. bhruich, half-boiled ; 
dhüiaeadh tu do chluasan mu'm bithinn l., 
yon Bi uld close your ears before I had half (fin- 
hea, 

leicheach, see leathag. 

leitheach-slighe,(DU) Half-way. 

léithead, -id, s.f. Greyness, degree of greyness. 

leitheag, see leathag. 

leithid, -e, -ean, s.f. The like, equal, compeer, 
fellow. Is ainneamha L, his match is seldom 
met with ; leithidean a chéile, the very pat- 
terns of each other. [Leithid is generally pre- 
ceded by a possesive pronoun and not by an 





Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 


HAMPAIGN Pn 


URBANA-C 


vá. mw 


ao ^^ 


leithid 


- — article, as, a leithid seo, the (his) like of this; 
chan fhaca mia l. riamh, Z never saw his (not 
the) like before ; in some cases the article is 
— A used, as an leithid mu 'n robh mi 'bruidhinn. 
" the like of which I was speaking.) 

- leithinn, see leathann, 

i léithne, comp. of leathann, Broader, broadest. 
$ ** 37, Breadth, broadness. 2 Exten- 





E sion. 
dr . achd,** s.f. Breadth, 
H Extension, 





spaciousness. 2 





Ei - ad,** -neid, s. Breadth. à 
- leithneagan,(DMy) ëm, Kiln-dried grain which 
i = is not dry enough to grind, and so gets flat- 
^ A tened out, 
— leithnich,** v.a. & n. Extend, enlarge. 2 Make 
— broad. 3 Become broad. L. an aran, roll 
- — eut the bread. 
te,** past part, Extended, enlarged. 
leithreachas,** -ais, s.m. Unjust dealing. 2 
Separation. i 
— leithridheach,** a. Partial, unjust, 
| ——— — —— —,** s. f. Partiality. 
— leithrinn,** s.pl. Chains, fetters. 
= leithrist, see leirist. 
.. leithse, see leatha-sa. 
y leithsgeul, -éil, -an, s.m. see leisgeul. 
—ach, see leisgeulach, 
———achd, see leisgeulachd. 
 Iéitig,** s.f. Convoy. "Thoirl. dha, give him a 
convoy. 
, V.a. Convoy. 
—eitir, -e & -treach, pl. -ean & -trichean, s. f. 
= Sideofa hill. Ort Place on the sea-shore. 
| 3 eoa slope. 4**Sloping shore, 5 Country- 
ED side. 
` le leathad, adv. Downhill. 
Pa En With their. Le 'm biodagaibh, with their 
AN AT $8. 
lem’, With my. Le mw’ each, with my horse. 
^. le"n, With their. 
Jee, prep.pron. With them, in their company. 2 
= By them. 3 Ontheir side. 4 In their favour. 
—— 5 In their opinion. 6 Theirs. Th’ air leo, they 
= thought, they should think ; bha i brònach leo, 
= she was sorrowful in their company ; is bòidh- 
each leo am fas, beautiful in their estimation 
Le their growth. 
|. leób, -oib & ledba, pl. ledban, s.m. Piece, frag- 
ment, slice, shred, as of skin or leather. 2 
Hanging lip. 3(DU) Big mouth. Bhur bois 
gun leòb chraicionn, your palms without a 
Shred of skin. 
leòb, pr.pt. a’ leobadh, go Tear into shreds, 
|. mangle. 
-~ leoba,(DMy) s. Small rig. An do chuir thu ’n 
= leoba ? did you sow the small rig ? 
 leoóbaeh, -aiche, a. In shreds or membranes. 2 
= Hanging in awkward folds or plaits. 3 Rag- 
— ged,tawdry. 4**Flabby. 5**Skinny..6 (DM 
|». K)Having hanging lips. 7((DU)Large-mouthed. 
— leóbadh, -aidh, s.m. Tearing, act of tearing into 
—— shreds or fragments. A’ I—, pr.pt. of leòb. 
— leòbag, -aig, -an, s.f.dim. of leòb. Little shred 
A or fragment. 
_———, prov. for lèabag. 
A ach, -aiche, o Abounding in shreds or 
__ fragments. 2 see leabagach. 
 leobhair, æ. see leobhar. 
. leobhar, see leabhar. 
leobhar, -aire & leoibhre,a. Unshapely awkward, 
~ tawdry, clumsy, trailing, juntidy, too long, 
— not fitting, as an article of dress. 
achd, s. f. ind. Unshapeliness, awk- 
M. wardness, clumsiness, untidiness. 
. leóbus, -uis, s.m. Hanging lip. 2 Ugly mouth. 
— L. odhar, a squalid ugly mouth. 


E Digitized by 
i IILERNET ARCHIVE 























583 


leòmach 


leòbusach, -aiche, a. Having an ugly mouth or 
hanging lips. 

ledcach, -aiche, a, Sneaking, mean, low, pitiful. 

leocaireachd, stad. Meanness, habit of mean 
or despicable acting. 

ledd,** -eoid, s. g. Cutting, mangling, maiming. 

leodag,-aig,-an, Sr. Slovenly untidy female. 
2 Prude. 3 Flirt. 

——ach, -aiche, a. Sluttisb, 2 Flirtish. 

leodair,(MS) v.a. Curry. 

leog, -eoig, -an, s.m. Idle talk. 12 Marsh. DC 
gives s.f. for No. 2. 

leog,* v.a. Fag on the stomach. 

leogach, -aiche, o Hanging loosely or awk- 
wardly. 2 Having long or hanging ears. 3 
Slovenly, untidy. 4 bull, slow, heavy. 5 
Fawning, meanly flattering. 6* Marshy, 
swampy. 7(DU) Broad and heavy. 8 Slow 
or deliberate of speech. 9(AH) Insipid and 
unpleasant in taste. 

leogair,-ean, s.m. Idle or foolish talker. 2 
Slovenly, lazy fellow. 

eachd, s.f.ind. Foolish or idle talk. 2 
Slovenliness, 3 Laziness. 

leogan, -ain, s.m. Slovenly untidy fellow. 2 
see leomann. 3(MMcD) Small stone, gene- 
raliy applied to a round pebble that is easily 
thrown with the haad. 

ach, -aich,-an, see leogan. 

ach, -eiche, a. Slovenly, untidy. 

leogh, see leagh, 

leoghan,** -ain, s.m. Trowel. 

leoghann, -ainn, -an, see leomhann. 

—ach, see leomhanta. 
—ta, see leomhanta. 

—tachd, see leómhantachd. 

leogarach, ** -aiche, a. Conceited, haughty, 
proud, 

leogaradh,** -aidh, s.m. Haughtiness. 

leoghantachd, s.f. Inconstancy, see luaineachd 
& luaineas, 

Tleoghar, -air, a. Stout. 

ledid, gen.sing. of leud. 

leoide,** s.f. Breadth. 

——-—ag, -eig, s.f. Disrespectful term for a 
woman, 

an, pl. of leathad. 

leoig,* s.f. Ditch. 2 Morass. 

leoime,** s.f. Pride, self-conceit. 2 Foppish- 
ness, prudery, coquetry. 

leoimean,** s.m. Fop, 

leòin, gen.sing. of leòn. 

leòinte, past pt. of leòn, Wounded, maimed. 

——-—ach,ft e. Hurtful. 

——-—achd,ft s:7. Hurtfulness. 

leòir, s.f.ind. Sufficiency, enough, as of food. 
Fhuair mi mo l., J have had enough. 

leòir, a. Enough, sufficient. 

leòis, gen.sing. & n.pl. of leus. 

ledlag,(MS) s.f. Babery. 

leolaicheann,§ 8. m. Globe flower, boits, golden 
ball—troiius ewropceus. 

leom, see leam. 

leòm, -eoim & -edime, s. f. Pride, conceit, gau- 
diness, foppishness, vain-glory, prudery.  2* 
Drawling pronunciation. 3 (AH) Flattery. 
B’ fhèarr furan a pòige na té ’gan l. a cuid 
eruidh, better the salutation of her kiss, than 
She whose pride is her cattle. 

-——ach, -aiche, @. Conceited, vain-glorious, 
affected, prudish, foppish, vain. 2 Hairy, 
shaggy, rough. 3**Big. 4 Prim. 5**Airy. 
e**Flirting. 7* Drawling in talk. 8 (DMC) 
Well-dressed. Chol. ris an aon fhaoileig a 
bh’ air taobh Chaoil-Muile, as conceited as 
t he one sea-gullalong the Sound of Muli—Long 
ago, the Mull people were supposed to be un. 














2 Brave, 





Iriginal from 


1 rpr-pgpm pL, wä EF 
UNIVERSITY OF 
d V I 


/ a = po 
YOS g 
Meo - LLIINVIO P 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


leomach 


able to support more thau one seagull, but 
that one seaguil, petted and spoilt to its 
heart’s content, was as conceited as all the 
other Hebridean seagulls put together ; cho l. 
ri da-bhliadhnach cait, as conceited as a two- 
year-old cat. 

*——achas, -ais, s.m. Vanity, affectation, con- 
cei. 2 Foppery, prudery. 
-——achd, s.f. see leomachas. [2 Prude. 
-——ag, -aig, -an, s.f. Affected, conceited girl. 

-——üich,(MS) v.a. Coquet. 

lcomainn, gen.sing. of leòmann. 

leoinair, -ean, s.m. Fop, conceited fellow, 

eachd,** s.f. Conceitedness. 2 Foppery, 

behaviour of a fop. 

leomais, s.f. Dilly-dallying— Dàin I. Ghobha. 

leòmann, -ainn, s.m. Moth. 2(AF)Leech. 3 
(AF) Weevil. 

ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in moths, 2 

Moth-eaten. 
-fiodha,(AF) s.m. Wood-bug. 

leòmhann, -ainn, pl. Lan &] -ainn, s. m. Lion. 
2 The sign Leo ($1) in the zodiac. 

——— ———-aàch, seeleoómhanta.  . 

leómhanta, -ainte, a. Lion-like, 2 Brave, 
Strong. 3 Applied to anyone strange in his 
behaviour. 

chd, s.f. ‘Bravery. 2 Strength. 

león, -eóin, -eóntan, s.m. Wound, hurt. 2 





a 





Grief, affliction, severe distress. 3** Sprain 
of the wrist or ankle. 4 Bruise. 5*Vexation. 
león, v.a. Wound, hurt. 2 Grieve, affiict, gall. 
3** Sprain the wrist or ankle, 4** Maim, 
bruise. 
leona, Bean-leona, a mid-wife. 


leonadh, -aidh, s.m. 
ing, hurting. 


Wounding, act of wound- 
2 Grieving, afHicting. 3 Af- 
flietion. 4 Maiming. A’ l—, pr.pt. of leòn. 

leonagan,|| see leamhragan. 

leondrag, T s.f. Snipe, see gobhar-athair. 

león-lorg,** s. Cicatrice. 

leònta. past pt, of leon. Wounded, hurt. 2 Af- 
flicted, grieved. 3 Pained. 4 Sprained, 
maimed. 

leontach, -aiche, a, Wounding, hurting. 2 Af- 





flictiug. Bei 
d, s. f. ind. Hurtfulness. 2 Afflictive- 
ness. 3 Bravery, brave actions. 4**Laxation. 


5**Keenness of morals. 

leòr, s.f.ind. & a. see leòir. 

leorachd,( MS) s.f. Amplitude. 1 

fleor-ghnionih, -a, s$. m. Satisfaction. 
of supererogation, 3 Abundant labours. 

tleos, -edis, s.m. Light, see leus. 2 Disclosure. 
3 Blush. 4**Reproof, 

ach,** s.m, Radius. 2 Ray. 

leò-san, emphat. form of leò. With themselves. 
Is leó-san rioghachd néiiuh, theirs is the king- 
dom of heaven. 

leosmhang, s. Radius. 

leotha, comp. of leathann. prov. 

leothad, -aid, see leathad. 

leothaid, gen. of leothad (leathad.) 





le'r, With our. 2 By our. 3 Belonging to 
our. 4 In favour of our. Le’r cliù, with our 
Same. 


le ’r, With your. 2 By your. 3 Belonging to 
your. 4 In favour of your. 

le-san, see leis-san. 

leth, s.m.ind. Half. 2 Side, share, interest. 3 
Charge. 4 Oneof a pair. Leth mar leth, share 
ani share alike; chaidh e as mo l., he sided 
witi me, took my part ; chuir iad sin as a l., 
they laid that to his charge ; air 1., apart, sep- 
aradiely ; largely compounded with names of 
weights and measures, as, lothphunnd, kalf- 
a-pound ; lethehlach, half-a-stone ; lethunnsa, 


D 


Log 8 — P = = LJ 
J IAIL. di 1 i 
ITERNET ARCHIV 


584 


2 Work |: 


-: leth-bhruadar 


half-«n-ownee ; &c..—gu leth signifies ** one 
half more" of any specified measure, as, 
troidh gu leth, a foot-and-a-half ; mile gu 
leth, æ mil-and-a-ha/f ;—leth slighe, half-way, 
midway, half the voyage; an l. a/s mo, the 
majority, bulk, greater part ; leth an t-Sàmh- 
raidh, midsummer ; la leth an t-samhraidh, 
Midsummer Day ; leth a’ Gheamhraidh, mid- 
“winter ; fa leth, severally, individually ; a leth, 
as leth, on behalf of, for th» sake of ; cuir as 
a leth, lay to his charge ; tha mi 'leth los, Z 
have half a mind ; leth ri (see below.) 

leth-, pref. Semi-, somewhat-, by-. 2 Dupli- 
cate, one of two. 

leth, s. Mule. Followed by name of animal to 
describe what species is signified, 

lethachas, see leathachas. 

leth-adnaire,(DMC) a. One-horned. 

leth-ainm, -eannan & -ainmean, s.m. Nickname, 

— ——each, -eiche, a. Given to nicknaming. 

lethallt,(DMK) s.m. Burn having a bigh bank 
on one side, 2(Fioun) Sloping land on one 
side of a burn. 

leth-a-mach,** s.m. Outside, exterior, 

——, 0. External. 








leth-amadan,**-ain, s. m. Ninny, half-witted 


fellow, 
leth-a-muigh,** s.m. Outside, exterior. 
l., from the outside, 
leth-anmoch,(MS) adv. Latish, rather late. 
leth-an-taighe, Bu tu gille mór leth-an-tighe ! 


O’n 


what a great half-the-house lad you are said 


to a man-servant assuming too much author- 
ity in the house—N.G. P. 

leth-aodach,"* & Deshabille. 2**Sheet of linen, 

leth-aon, -aoin, pl. -an & -aona, s.m. Twin- 
child. 2 Match, fellow. 3 One of a pair. 
Leth-aona 'na bolg, twins in her womb. 

leth-aonan (na), The sign Gemini (][) in the 
zodiac. 

leth-asal, s.f. Mule, 

leth-a-staigh,** e, m. Inside, interior, inward 
part. 

leth-bhàir, s. '* Hail” or goalin shinty. In 
Morvern & Mull, leth-bhair—1 hail ; bàire, 
2 hails ; bàire gu leth, 3 hails ; see bàire. 

leth-bhalach,(CR) s.m. Halflin, young plough- 
man—Perthshire & Argyllshire 2 (DQ) 
Young man before puberty, hobbledehoy. 

leth-bhalla, s.m. Battlement. 

leth-bhaun, adv. In gear, said ofa quern, see 
brà, No. 11, p. 112. 

leth-bharaille, s.m. Anker, kilderkin. 


lethbhliadhna, s.f. Half a year. An ceann l, — 


in six months’ time. 
letbbhodach, -aich, 
liquid measure equal to half an imperial pint. 
leth-bhonn, -bhuiun, s.m. Half-sole of a shoe, 
leth-buuinn, see leth-bhonn. 
leth-bhot, et Buskin. 
lethbhrathair, s.m. Half-brother. 
leth-bhreac, -bhric, s.m. Fellow, partner, one of 
a pair, duplicate, copy, half marrow. Leth- 


bhreacan a chéile, the exact models of each ` 


other ; mo l. fhéin, my own equal, my com- 

peer ; chan eil do l. ri fhaotainn, your match 

is not to be found. 

-——as,** -ais, s.m. Co-equality. 

leth-bhreath, see leth-bhreith. 

leth-bhreith, -e, s.f. Partial judgment, partial- 
ity, unfair decision. Gun l., without partial- 
iy. 








equal. 

——-—eachd, s.f. Partiality. 
leth-bhreth, see leth-bhreith. 
leth-bhruadar, -air, $,2$. Vision. 





each, -eiche, a. Partial, unfair, un- 








s.m. Half a mutchkin, à ` 


~ A^ px ze 


H4 


I4 


K Ki 
mann Tom um den los mn 


e 
en 


- 


» hus © bete a, v 


= 
as 


~ 


D, 
A 
IK 
P" 


Weg St 


—- 
=> 


leth-bhruich 


leth-bhruich, a. Parboiled. half-boiled, 
, V.a. Parboil, half-boil. 
leth-bhruthach,** ad». Aslope, on the slope. 


NL d 
SE 


REX 











es 


inclination. 
leth-chadal, -ail, s.m. Slumber, doze. 


x 


— A 





lethargic. 


half-hidden, 

cloud, 
leth-chairt,** s.f. One-eighth, as of a yard. 
leth-chairteil, DU) s. m. 


x rà 
A 


“ dà ùnnsa.” 
leth-chaoch,** æ. Half-blind. 


respects. L. acrach, somewhat hungry. 


SETI 


S e "a 
oct A 


leth-chois, siand (thow) on one foot. 
leth-chois.) 


~ 


[pronounced lei'chyen.] 


bashful. 








KZer a w COD -R F hs SA 
EO D EL es "éise ee: 


dm 


circle, 
leth-chearclach, -aiche, o. Semi-circular. 


y 
~ 


flank of a beast. 


e x g= T Ta 
en 2 
712 dën "e 


in part. 





hidden, 2 Seen in part. 


_ leth-chiailach,(DMK) s.m. Half-witted person. 
[ Pre- 


leth-chiallaich,tt v.a. Insinuate. 
|... Aethehlach, s.f. Half-a-stone (weight.) 
ferable to '*seachd puinnd 













” for 7 pounds. | 


leth-chliathaich, tt 

Jeth-chluasach,(DMC) a. One-eared. 

leth-chluich, s. Hail in shinty. 

ehluich means 1 hail, clüich, 2 
gu leth, 3 hails; see leth-bhair. 
leth-chodal, see leth-chadal. 

-———ach, see leth-chadalach. 

leth-choinean,(AF) s.m. Strange rabbit. 

_ leth-chois, s. Peculiar kind of land tenure by 
which the possessor, generally impoverished 
or without facilities for working the land, of- 

4 ten furnished the land and seed corn, and 

ke the tenant cultivated it, the produce being 

divided'equally between them. There have 
been. instances of it in our own day—Clan 
Donald, iii. 

leth-chos, see leth-chas. 

|. leth-chosmhuil, a. Somewhat like. 

= leth-chothrom, -oim, s. m. Weight, burden. 2 

_ Injustice. 

_— ach, -aiche, a. Unjust. 

= leth-ehruinn,-e, v. Oval 2 Hemispherical, 

= leth-ehruiune, s.f. Semi-circle. 2 Hemisphere, 

—. lethehrun, -uin, s.m. Half-crown (2/6.) 

= leth-chu,(AF) s.m. Lurcher dog. 

_ leth-chuairt, -ean, s.f. Semi-circle, 

T ————--— each, a. Semi-circular, 

___ leth-chuid, -chodach, -chodaichean, sf. Half- 

—-- share. 2 Partiality. 

leth-dheamhan,** .ain, s.m. Demi-d mon, 

. leth-dhéanta, a. Half-formed. 2 Ha f-perform- 

ed or executed, half-made, half-done, L. de 








$85 


»* $. m. Gentle slope, declivity, 


ach, -aiche, a. Dozing, slumbering, 


leth-chaillte,** a, Half-lost. 2 Half-concealed, 
L. 'an neul, half-hidden in a 


Half a quarter of a 
pouud, two oz, e.g. Leth-chairteil tombaca, 
is always used for two ounces of tobacco—not 


| leth-fhaicte, past 
leth-char, (a leth char) adv. Somewhat, in some 
leth-chas, -oiss,-an, s.f. One foot. 2**Left foot. 
3 One leg. 4 One of the twoj‘* casan gaoisid "7 
generaliv used on a hand fishing-line, see 
| dorgh. “‘ Air a leth-chois,” is a certain stage 
ea in the drying of peats, see mòine ; seas air do 
| (see also 


letheheann, -chinn, s. m. Side of the head, 
cheek, temple. Do lethcheann, thy temples. 


ach, -aiche, a Awkward, sheepish, 


leth-chearcall, -aill, pl. -aill & Elan, s.m, Semi- 


leth-cheathramh, * s.m. Two ounces, 2 Half a 
leth-cheil,** v.g. Half-conceal, half-hide. 2 See 


te,** past pt. Half-concealed, half- 


leth-chliathach, -aich, s.m. One side of the body. 
-ean, 8.f.see leth-chliathach. 


In Figg leth- 
hails ; cluich 


leth-rosg 


mhiig, half-formed of mist. 
leth-dhearbhachd,tt s.f.ind. Probability. 
ict Sibueach, (M8) $. Gullet. 
eun-dicheach, (MS) (for leth-de-tich 4 
Et A. Unda 
letheach, (MS) a. Subduple, 
lethein, s. see leth-aon. 


leth-edlach, -aiche, a. Half-acquainted. 2 Halt. 
Informed, 



















—, -aich, s.m. Novice. 

leth-eudach,** see leth-aodach. 

leth-fhacal, -ail, pl. -ail & -fhaclan, s. m. By- 
word, proverb, article, 

leth-fhaclach, -aiche, a. Proverbial, like a pro- 
verb. 2 Fond of proverbs. 

leth-fhad,** adv. aga ek on the slope, 

pt. Half-seen, partly seen, 

leth-fhaide, s.f.ind. Turbgoieden x 

leth-fhior, y, Somewhat true. 

leth-fhoghair, -ean, s.m. Semi-vowel, 

leth-gheamhradh, s. m. The Winter half of the 
year—Ist. Nov. to 30th. April, 

leth-gheur, a. Somewhat sour. 

tleth-ghrabal,** -ail, s.m. Halfpenny. 

leth-ghuilbneach,™ e m. Whimbrel, see eun- 
Bhealltuinn. 

leth-innis, -innse, -innsean, s.f. Peninsula. 

leth-iomall, -aill, -an, s.m. Border. 

i -—ach, a. Bordering, of a border. 

leth-lag,** a. Half-tired, halt-fatigued. 

lethiamh, -làimhe,-an, s.f. One hand, one arm. 
2 Left hand, left arm. Air leth-laimh, having 
but ome hand or arm ; claidheamh "na lethe 
làimh, o sword in one hand. 

-—ach,-aiche, o One-handed. 2 Awk- 
ward. 3 (DMC) Without support. 

leth-leabaiche, an, s.m. Bedfellow. 

leth-leann, -a, s.m. Small beer. 

leth-linn, s.m. Half-wit. Bha e 'na leth-linn, 
he was a natural, a half-wit. 

leth-luighe, s. m. Reclining posture. 2 Act of 
reclining orleaaing. Tha e’na L, he is re 
clining. 

leth mar leth, adv. 
share alike, 

lethmhas, Aus, -an, s.m. Buttock, thigh. 2 Hip. 

leth-mhéinn, -e, s.m. Antimony. 

leth-muigh, see leth-a-muigh. 

leth-oinnseach,** -ich, sr Half-witted female, 

leth-oir, e, s. f. One side or edge. 2 (DMy) 


Diffidence. 
Sideways, edgeways, to a side. 








Half and half, share and 





—, adv. 
each, -eiche, a. Superficial, indifferent, 
2 Partial, 3 Singular, 4*Remote, tonely, se- 
cluded. 5iiMarginal. 6 (DMy) Diffident, 

leth-phairt, s.m. Partiality. 

-——each, -eiche, œ. Partial. 

leth-pheighinn, s. Halfpenny land. 

lethphiuthar, s.f. Half-sister. 

lethphunnd, -uinud, -an, s. m. Half-a-pound 
(weight.) 

leth-rann, -ainn, s.m. Half verse, hemistich. 

—— ach, -aiche, o In half verses or hemi- 
stiches. 2 Partial. 

leth-rathad, -aid, -aidean, s. m. By-path, by- 
road. 

-—ach, -aiche, o Of, or belonging to 
by-paths. 

leth ri, adv. Towards. 2 Since, since it was so. 
att Close to. 4tfIn consideration of. Leth 
ri éirigh na gréine, towards the east, eastward; 
tha ’n cota leth ri m’ chraicionn, the coat is 
next my skin ; tha iad a’ cadal is na plaideach- 
an leth riu, they sleep with the blankets neat 
them—i.e. without any sheets. 

leth-rod, -roid, -rdidean, see leth-rathad. 

leth-rosg, -roisg, -an, s. m. One E 











leth-rosg 


blindness. 

———-—ach, -aiche, a. Having but one eye. 2 
ttPurblind, 3**Blear-eyed. 

leth-ruadh, -ruaidhe, @ Somewhat red, red- 
dish, brown. 

leth-sgoiltean, s.m. Semi-colon (;) in writing. 2 
Plank. 3 Joist. 4 Half handkerchief. 5 
(DMC) Half a ridge. 

leth-shamhradh, s.m. The summer half of the 
vear—Ist. May to 31st. Oct. 

leth-shean, a. Middle-aged. Bha leth-sheann 
té ann, a middle-aged female was there. [Be- 
fore d, t, l, or n, ** sheann ” is used. ] 

leth-sheise,** s.m. d' f. Partner, mate. 2 Spouse. 
3 Beloved person. Mol., my beloved. 

leth-shùil, shùla, -shüilean, s.f. One eye.. 

--—each, -eiche, a. Having but one eye, 
monocular. 2 Purblind. 

leth-tadhal,(AH) s.m. Hail in shinty. Tadhal 
=? hails, tadhal gu leth=3 hails, see leth- 
bhàir. 

Jeth-taobh, -aoibh, s.m. Side, one side,  2** 
Flitch, 3** (with art. an) Hysteries. A leth- 
taobh, aside ; thug e a leth-taobh e, he took 
‘him aside ; cuir air a leth-taobh e, put it on 
its side. Yn 

—ach, -aiche, a. Sidelong, sideways. 2 

Hysterical. 

——aich,(MS) v.a. Accumb. 

—— ————ail** a. Hysterical. 

leth-thràth,( DM C) a. Little too early. 

leth-titheach, -iehe -ean, s.f. seeleth-dibheach. 
leth-tra,(DMC) s. Half the day. 

Jethtrath,* s.m. Half rations. 2 Half allow- 
ance. 3 Milking once a day. 

IYeth-trom, see leatrom. 

—ach, see katromach. 

—achd, see leatromachd. 

leth-tromas, see leatromachd. 

Jeth-truime, see leatrom, 

leth-uan, s.m. Twin lamb. 
‘twin—Lochewe. 

leth-uidheam,** s. Dishabille. 

Jethuileann, inn, -an, s. m. One elbow. 2 

| Half an angle. 3**Acute angle. 4**Posture 
of half sitting half reclining. Air a leth-uil- 
inn, declining, going downhill. 

——Aach, -aiche, a. Having angles on one 

















2 (DU) Human 





side. 

fethunnsa,* s.m. Half-an-ounce. 

leub, see leòb. 

leubag, see leobag. 

E mhór, see lèabag. 

leubaideach see leibideach. 

d, see leibideacho 

Jeubh, see leugh. 

adair, see leughadair. 

adh, see leughadh. 

Jeud, leòid, -an, s. m. Breadth. 2 Degree of 
breadth.. 38** Extension. 4**Space, spaciness. 
L. ròine, a hair’s breadth ; air fad ’s air l., in 
length and breadth * còig troidhean air l., five 
feet in breadth ; 1. boise, a handbreadth. 

——-ach, a. Wide, ample, diffuse, spacious. 2 
Spreading, extending. Cainntl., diffuse lan- 














uage. 

en IN -aidh, s.m. Broadening, act of mak- 

| jng or becoming broad or broader. 2 Spread- 
ing, extending, widening. 3 Increasing. 4 
Extension. 5 Increase in breadth. A’ l—, 
pr.pt. of leudaich. 

leudachair,** s.m. Amplifier. 

leudachd, s.f. Ampleness, 

leudaich, pr.pt. a’ leudachadh, v.a. & n. Make 
broad or broader, enlarge, dilate, make spa- 
cious, bespread, diffuse, widen, extend, 
Become broader or larger. 3 Enlarge upon. 


580 


leumachan | 


Cha do]. e air sin, he did not enlarge upon 
that (matter.) 

— — te, past pt. of leudaich.. Enlarged, dila- 
ted, widened, extended, made spacious. 

nead cuts $.m. Bilge-piece of boat, see F 8 
p. 73. 

leug, léig, -an, s.f. Precious stone, jewel, ada- 
mant 2 Small stone or -pebble to which 
healing virtues are ascribed. 3 Beautiful wo- 
man. 4* Lye or ashes and water for bleach- 
ing. 5*Meteor. 6**Beloved person. 7 Sloth, 


laziness. — Órno l., gold or crystal; mar 1l. 
theine, like a meteor ; mo F, phrìseil, my pre~ 
cious jewel, my darüimnj.. 

—, a. see leugach.. 

——ach, -aiehe, a. Slow, dull,sluggish. 2 Of, 
abounding in, or belonging to precious stones 
or jewels. 3**Crystalline. 4**Like a meteor.. 
5*Drawling.. 

——aich,1i v.a. Bestud. 

——an, -ain, -an, $.. Lazy, inactive person, 23 
Little jewel. 

——anach, -aiche, a. Precious. 

——anta,** a. Adamantine, 

——art,** -airt, sm. Siege. 

leugh, pr. pt. a’ leughadh, v.a. & n. Read, per- 
use. 2 Read, perform the act of reading. 3 
Lecture, explaia. 4iftThiunk. Cha'n eil math 
dhomh a bhi leughadh sin dhuit-sa, it serves 
no end to explain that to you; a’ leughadh 
a chall ’s à chunnart, expatiating on Aug loss 
and danger. 

leughach,if oe Bookish, studious. 

leughadair, ean, sm. Reader. 
good reader, 

-——eachd, s.f.ind. Reading, act or office 
of reading, 

leughadh, -aidh, s.m. Reading, act of reading. 


2 Beautiful, 


Deagh 1., & 





2 Perusing.. 3 Lecturing. 4*Expounding, ex- 


plaining. A’ l—, pr.pt. of leugh. 

leughair, -ean, s.m. Reader. 

eachd, s.f.ind. Reading, habit or busi- 

ness of reading. 

leughta, past pt. of leugh. Read, perused. 

leug-reiceadair,f{ -ean, s.m. Lapidary. 

leum, pr. pt. a’ leum, a’ leumadh, a’ leumar- 
taich & a’ leumnaich, v.a. & Nn. Leap, bound. 
2 Leap over or across, 3Spring, skip, frisk, 
hop, jump. 4 Start. 5*Fight, quarrel. ff 
Shake. 7ttFlaw. 8 (MS) Cover. 9 Pass, 
as time, or through space. 10 (DU) Squirt 
out. 11 Make a slip of the tongue. Leum 
mo theanga(dh) orm, my tongue slipped, “I 
put my foot in it "—said by one who unwit- 
tingly says a thing that he regrets and would 
rather not have said—W. coast of Ross ; leum 
jad air a chéile, they quarrelled ; 'nuair a 
leumas e an Fhéill-Brighde, chan earb an 
sionnach 'earball ris an deigh, when Candle- 
mas is past, the fox will not trust his tai to the 
awe; l. air, attack suddenly, seize greedily. Le 
air a’ mheadhon-oidhche, it passed midnight z 
bho Chluaidh nan long gleusda gu'n leum e 


Port Phàdruig, from Clyde of the trim ships — 


till Port Patrick (in Islay) is reached. 

leum, léim pl. leuma, an, & leumannan, s.m. [ft 
in Badenoch.] Leap, bound, spring, frisk, start, 
shake. 2 Leaping, act of leaping, jump. 3 
Animal semen. 4 Emission. óffFiaw. 6 (D 
U) Sudden rage, impulsive anger. 7 (AF) 
Milk. L. gàbhaidh, a desperate leap ; thoir 
leum, leap; ghabh e seachd leumannan de 'n 
chaothach, he became exceedingly enraged, 
frenzied. A’ 1—, pr.pt. of leum. 

leum a’ bhradain,(DMC) s. The salmon leap. 


9|leumach, see leumachan. 


an, -ain, -an, sm. Frog. 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGI P 


Md m cn Pham Age 


" } t 
MS - 4 


P 





ER 





Lk 


leumachanach 


Jeumachanach, -aiche, a. Froggy, pertaining to 
frogs. 

as,( MS) ’s."m. !Dissilience, bursting or 
leaping asunder, starting asunder. 

leum-a-chrann,§ s.m. Honeysuckle or wood- 
bine—Strathardle, &c. see uilleann, 

leumadaich, see leum & leumnaich. 

leumadair, -ean, s.m. Jumper, leaper. 2 Dol- 
phin. 3 Kind of small whale. 4*Salmon be- 
tween the size of the grilse and a full-growa 
fish—Islay. 5 (AF) Skipjack, the blue fish, 
saurel, a fish resembling a lizard. 6 Busy- 
body in other people’s affairs. 7** Spark, or 
scale of iron. 

—eachd, s. f. ind. Jumping, habit of 

jumping, continued jumping. 

-—— -feoir, s. m. **Grasshopper. 2(AF) 

Cricket. 











-uaine,* sm, Green grasshopper. 2 








(AF) Cricket. 

leumadh, -aidh, s.m. & pr.pt. of leum, see leum 
& leuumnaich. 

leumaidh, fut.af.a, of leum. Shall or will start, 
leap, &e. 

leum ard, s.m. High jump. 

leumardaich, see leumartaich. 

lenmartaich, sf. Leaping, springing, frisking, 
hopping, caper, capering. 2 Repeated leap- 
ing. A l—, pr. pt. of leum. 

leum-droma, san, Lumbago. 

leum-fada, s.m. Long jump. 

]eumnann, s.m. Meal-receiver. 

leum-iochd, s.m. Balk, Is fhèarr 1. a’s t-Fhogh- 
ar na sguab a bharrachd, @ balk in autumn is 
better than a sheaf the more—the leum-iochd 
or baile (Scots bauk), is a strip of a corn-field 
left farrow. The fear of being left with the 
last sheaf of the harvest, called the ‘‘ caill- 
each " or “gobhar bhacach,” always led to 
an exciting competition among the reapers in 
the last field. 'l'he reaper who came on a leum- 
iochd would of course be glad to have so much 
the less to cut. Rev. Mr. Michie of Dinnet 
has heard the above saying used in a ditter- 
ent sense in the Highlands of Aberdeenshire, 
viz. that in lands allotted on the run-rig sys- 
tem, the crofter who got a balk attached to 
his rig was considered luckier than his neigh- 
bour with a somewhat larger rig, but without 
the balk, the grass of which was of more than 
compensating value.— N.G. P. 

leumnach, -aiche, a. Jumpivg, skipping, start- 
ing, bounding, hopping. 2 Dissilient, liable to 
start or burst asunder. Fuaim nan carbad 
l., the noise of the bounding chariots. 

leumnach, -aich, s.m. Frog. 2 Any creature 
that moves by leaping, see leumadair. 

— -uaine, s.m. Grasshopper. 

leumnaich, s.m. Jumping, act of jumping,leap- 
ing, bounding, springing or hopping, skipping, 
repeated leaping. A’ 1--, pr. pt. of leum. A’ 
l. o neul gu neul, bounding from cloud to cloud. 

e,** s.n. Caperer. 

leumrachan, see leumachan. 

leumraich, see leumnaich. 

leum-ruith,t{ -an-, s.m. Running leap. 

leum-shneachd, s.m. Avalanche. 

leum-uisge,* s.m.. Waterfall. 

leun, see leon, 

leun, léin, see léana. 

—ach, see léanach. 

—adh, see leònadh. Tha mo làmh air 'l., my 
wrist is sprained, 

leursainn, see léirsinn. 

leus, leois, s.m. Blaze, flame. 2 Light, ray of 
light, glimmering light.  3** Fir-candle. 4 
Torch used in fishing at night. 65 Blister. Ok 











Digitized b 


SN TERNET ARCHIVE 


587 


liadhag 


Cataract on the eye, blemish or white spot on 
the eye. 7**Link. 8 Gall. 9 Bladder. 10ft 
Lightning, flash of lightning. 11*Blink, glim- 
mer. 12 Young man. An dreach mar leois, 
their appearance like torches ; cha'n "el leus 
soluis an seo, there is not a ray of light here ; 
mil air do bheul ged robh leus air do theanga, 
honey on your mouth though a blister on 
your tongue ; l. teine, a flame of fire, blaze; 
duine aig am bh-il L, aman who has & spot 
on his eye ; leois air a basaibh, blisters on her 
palms. 

leusach, -aiche, a. Emitting light or rays of 
light. 2 Blazing, flaming, flashing. 3 ** 
Combustible. 4 Blistering, blistered. 5 
Having torches, abounding in torches. 6 Hav- 
ing a spot, spotted, marked. Suill., æ spotted 
or blemished eye. 

adh, -aidb, s.m. Biistering, act of blister- 

ing, rising in blisters. 2 State of becoming 

blistered. $**Flaming, blazing. A’ l—,p7.pt. 

of leusaich. 

ail, -e, a That raises blisters. 2 Blister- 
ed, having blisters. 3 Apt to blister. Làmh- 
an l., blistered hands or hands that are apt to 
blister. 

leusaich, pr.pt. a’ leusachadh, v.a. & n. Blister, 
raise blisters. 2 Become blistered. 3 Make 
a flame. 

——te, a. d past pt. of leusaich. Blistered, 
Làmhan 1., blistered hands. 

leusan,ftt -ain, -an, s.m. Small torch. 

leus-chnuimh, -e, -ean, ert Glow-worm. 

— each, -eiche, a. Of, or belonging 

2 Full of glow-worms. 

2 Sul- 











to glow-worms. 
leus-ghath, -a, -an, s.m. Ray of light. 
try beam. 

leus-mara, s.m. Beacon, 

leus-inüire, s.m. Morphew. 

leus-süil, s.f. Pearl-eye. 

leus-teine, leois-theine, pl. -edis-theine & leus- 
an-teine, s.m. Firebrand. 

'] fhios am bheil, Isit so ?—Arran. 

li, lithe, lithean, s.f. Paint, colour, tinge, hue. 
2**Complexion.  $**Prosperity. 4** Happi- 
ness, 5**rIestival. 6tfGloss. 7 (AC) Water 
(formerly fresh or salt, now fresh only.) f8 
The sea. 9**Solemnity.  10**Pomp. 11** 
Jewel, [No.1is generally used in giving an 
unfavourable opinion—AH.] 

li, a. Coloured, tinged. 

tli, see leatha, 

tlia, see leo. 

tlia, a. More. 2 Nimble, active. 3 see liath. 

tlia, s.f. [& **m.] Stone, great stone. t2 Hun- 
ger. 3i1fFlood. 4ttWelting. 5t{Hog, pig. 6 
** Stream. 

liab,(CR) s.m. Rag, tatter—Perthshire. 
for léab and leòb. 

liabag, see léabag. 

liae, (DMO) pr. pt. a’ liacadh, v. a. Besmear, 
spread anything soft. 

liacadh,(DMC) s.m. Besmearing. 
of liac. 

liach, see liagh. 

lia-chac,** s.m. Hog’s dung. 

liachd,** s.f. Multitude, great many. 

liachlan,** -ain, s.m. Spoonful. 

lia-chró,** s.m. Pig-sty. 

liad, see leud. 

liadh, léidhe, -an, see liagh. 

-——ach, -aiche, see liaghach, 

liadhag, -aig, an, s.f. Tangle, sea-oak (kind of 
seaweed.) 2(MMcD) Root-part of the stem 
of serrated tangle-leaf, sometimes used as 
food— Lewis. [Different from stamh in Gaira 


loch.] 3 ips 


prov. 


A’ l—, pr.pt. 


liadhagaech 


588 


liathcheare 


liadhagach, -aiche, a. Abounding in tangle or | liatas, § -ais, 3.m. Lettuce—lactuca sativa. 


seaweed. 

liadhbhog, see léabag. 

flia-fail, -e, s.f. The stone on which the Scot- 
tish, and as some say the Irish kings used to 
be crowned, now ın the coronation chair in 
Westminster Abbey, also called clach-na- 
cinneamhuinn, 

liag, see leug. 

—ach, see leugach, 

liagair, s. Loveage (plant)—Is/ay. 

liagan,** -ain, s.m. Obelisk, small stone. 

liagh, léigh, pl. -an & léigh, s.f. Ladle. 
ther or blade of an oar. 
4 (DMC) Brave fellow. Làn léigh, a (adieful ; 
nach b’ ean l. e? isn’t hea brave fellow € 

liaghach, -aiche, a. Of, or connected with ladles. 
2 Bladed, as an oar. 

liaghag,§ Top or leaf of tangle or oar-weed— W. 
of e see liadhag & stamh. 2ft Edible 
tangle. 

liagh-dhealg,** s.f. Bodkin. 2 Clasp. 3 Button. 

liaghra, s.f. Two sticks crossed together in the 
centre and set on a swivel-pin in a block of 
wood called the stoc. A pin of wood is fixed 
in each of the four extremities of the sticks, 
and round this a hank of thread is placed 
which is unravelled and made into a ball, as 
the operator spins the instrument round. 
Thread-winder. Also called ‘‘crann-tach- 
rais " ; na sgiathan in Caithness, crois-iarna 
in Gairloch, eachan (little horse) in Argyll, 
crois-lionraidh in Lewis, and bodach-sgiathan 
in Suth'd. 


2 Fea- 
3** Large spoon. 


Trewern = 





424. Liaghra. 

liamh, -a, see liomh. 

aie -a,-an, sm. Field, plain, meadow. 2 see 
ion. 

lian, see lion, Cia lian P=cia Hon? 

—— ach, -aiche, a Of many fields, plains, or 
meadows. 

— ach, -aich, s. f. Species of fucus, prov. 2 3 
Plants known as confervee, such as enteromor- 
pha and cladophora. 3**Sea-green plant, often 
applied by the Hebrideans to the temples and 
forehead to dry up the defluxions and also to 
draw up the tonsils, which among that people 
are apt to swell at certain seasons, see lìon- 
anach. / 

lianachan, -ain, s.m. Little meadow. 

lianag, -aig, -an, S. f. dim. of lian. Small field 
or meadow. 

ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in small fields 
or meadows, 

lianaich,** s.f. Sea-ware. 

lianaraich, s. see lionanach. 

liaphutag,** -aig, s.f. Pig's pudding. 2 Saus- 
age. 

liaragaich, s.f. Kind of seaweed—alga marina 
viridis. 

liaranaich, see liaragaich. 

lias, léis, s.f. Thigh. 

lias, leòis & léis, pl. -an, prov. for leus. 

lias, leis, s.m. Hut for calves or lambs. 
Lamb. 3(AF) Sheep-cot. 

—ach,-aiche, see leusach. 





2 (AE) 


——aich, see leusaich. 
Aias-m ro sen lens-maIraA, 
Digitized | 
NT p ri jd ET A m 





, -ais, s.m. Fustiness, mildew, blight, see 


liathtas. 
-a’-bhalla, Wall-lettuce—lactuca 


murialis. 





Zë, M. 








425. Liatas-a’-bhalla. 

liath, $. see liagh. 

liath, léitħe, @. Grey, grey-coloured. 2 Grey- 
headed, grey-haired. 3 Mouldy. 4** Lilac. 
5**Pale. Falt 1l., grey hair, aran l., mouldy 
bread. 

liath, v.a. & n. Make grey. 2 Become grey. 3 
Mould, grow mouldy. 4 Make mouldy. 5 
Grow pale. 6 Make grey-headed. Aran air 
liathadh, bread become mouldy ; liath e, he be- 
came grey-headed. 

liathach, -aiche, o. Greyish, somewhat grey. 2 
Pale. 3 Blank. 

— — ——aüdüh, -aidh, s.m. Making grey. 2 Grow- 
ing or becoming grey. 3 Growing mouldy. 
A’ 1—, pr. pt. of liathaich. 

——d,iis.f. ind. Staleness. 2 Whitishness. 
liathad, -aid,** s. Staleness, as of bread. 
liathadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of making grey. 2 

State of becoming grey or mouldy, 3** Grey 
tinge. A’ l—, pr.pt. of liath. 

liathag, -aig, -an, s.f. Salmon-trout, young fish 
of the salmon species, grilse. 

——-—ach, a. Abounding in salmon-trout. 

liathaich, v.a. d n. Make grey. 2 Become grey. 

— te, past pt. ofliathaich. Made grey. 
2 Become grey. ; : 

liathan,$ -ain, -an, s.m. Corn-marigold, see bile 
bhuidhe. 

——-—ach,(CR) s.m. Hoar-frost— A rran. 

ach, -aich, s.m. Grey-headed man. ' 

achd,** s.f. Mouldiness, 2 Fustiness, 

liath-bhàine, s.f. Paleness. 

comp. of liath-bhàn. 

liath-bhàn, -bhàine, a. Pale. s 

liath-bhrochan, s.m. Thick gruel made of milk 
and meal, well boiled with a piece of butter 
in it—Gazl. Soc. of Inverness, xiv, 149. , 

liath-bhuidhe,** a. Tawny. 

liathcheare, -chirce, -an, s. f. Heath-hen, fe- 
male of the black grouse or black-cock, see 
coileach-dubh. Liath-chearcan fraoich,heath- 
hens. Considered a bira of ill-omen. Am faca 
tul, an raoir? did you see a heath-hen last 

night ? is said to a person who looks pale and 














i ——— 





"Original from wi 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 
URBANA-CHAMPAILGIEEES 





EEN 
e < 
e - 


= 
- 


Tiathcheare 


worried. l 
liath-chluasach, :aiche, a. ‘Grey-eared. ` 
liathdras,**.-ais, s.m. Mustiness, mouldiness. 
liath-fàil, see lia-fail. VA 
liath-fheasgar, air, s.m. Evening twilight. 2** 

' Grey evening. T 
liathgad-mara,(AF) s.m. Limpet. (bàirneach) 
fliath-ghath, -ghaith, -an, s.m. Destructive dart. 

2**Violent dart. 
liath-ghlas, -aise, a. Light grey. 2 Hoary. 3 

2 


T = 


tat ee ven, 


- Ww 


** Bleak. 

liath ghorm, -ghuirme, a. Cerulean, azure, 
Columbine (colour,) 3*Lilac. 

liath-ghuirme, s.f.ind, Light-blue colour. 

i ———— —— — , comp. of liath-ghorm, 

R ———_—— achd, $.f.ind. Bluishness. | j 

2 liath-luidneach,** Ach, s.f. Banner of Diarmaid 

j O’ Duibhne, é 

liath-lus,§ Jus, -an, s.m. Mugwort—artemesia 
vulgaris. 

-——_———ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in mugwort. 
2** Like mugwort. 

liath-lus-roid,§ s. m. Common cotton rose—jil- 
ago germanica. 





f 426. Liath-lus-roid. 

liath-mhüig, e s.f. Grey mist. L. nan tonn, 
the grey mist of the waves. 

.liathnach,* s.m. Hoar-frost. 

liath-phurpur, s.m. Mauve. 

liathra, see liaghra. 

liathradh,** s. m. Mustiness. 

| ing. 3**Sprinkling. 

liath-reodh, see hath-reothadh. 

d liath-reoth, see liath-reothadh. 

| ——————.—aàdh, -aidh, s.m Hoar-frost. 

fliathroid,** s. f. Ball. 2**Roiler. 3**Knob. 
4**Chaff. 

liathruisg, see lhath-truisg. 

liath-ruisgean,(DMy) s.m. Name given to the 
months March and Apri when fodder is 

lis scarce. 

|^ liath-sgrath, s.m. Moss. 

liath-taois, see liathtas, 

liathtas, ais, s.m. Greyness. 2 Blue moull. 
L.-sneachd,sprinkling of snow suficrent to make 
the land grey. 

> ach, -aiche, œ. Mouldy. 

Ee } see liath-truisg. 

liath-trasg, see liath-truisg. : 

Path traisg, s.m. Fieldfare—turdus pilaris. see 
ill. 427. 

liathtus, see liatrus. 

liatrus, -uis, see liathtas. 

liatus, -uis, s.m. Lettuce, see liatas, 

libeag, dim. of lip. 2 see léabag. 

——ach, a. see léabagach. 

jlibh, see leibh. 

libheadan, -ain, s.m. Leviathan. 2**Dowry. 

libhearn,** s,m. Dowry. 12 Ship, galley. +3 


2**Sliding, rol- 





i] 





Digitized. by 


4 INTERNET ARCHIVE 


589 


Tineachadh i 








427. Liath-truisg. 


Habitation. 4 Cattle. Freothal mara ri 
ee libheirn, the eddy of the sea round a 
Ship. 

libhirt, s. Heritage. 


libhrig, past pt. lirt, v. a. Deliver—-Ddin Iain 
Ghobha. L. na bheil agad, stand and deliver 
—your money or your life ! 

libinn, see lipinn. 

lic, gen.sing. of leac. 


| liceag,** eg, s.f. Little slab. 


licheach, see ligheach. 

lid, see lide. 

lide, -an, s.m. Syllable, articulation. 2 Word, 
least part of a word. 3 Jot, tittle, particle, 
bit. 4**Article, '5*Letter. Cha tuit 1l., noth- 
ing shall fall, [** gives s.7.] 

lideach, -eiche, a. Lisping, stammering. 

as, -ais, s.m. Stammering, lisping. 

lideadh, -idh, .idhean, s.m. see lide. 

lidh, po, see li. 

li-dhealbh, v.a. Paint, colour. 

————adh, -aidh, s.m. Painting, art or act 
of painting. 
—adair, -ean, s.m. Painter. 
———-— ta, a. £ past pt. of li-dhealbh. Painted. 
lidhte, past pt. of li. Coloured. 
lidiche, s.m. see lideachas. 
ligeach, -éiche, a Sly, cunning. 
as, -ais, sm. Slyness, cunning. 
tligh, v.a. Lick, pass over with the tongue,’ 
ligh, s.m. see li, 
lighe, pl. -achan & an, s.f. Flood, fulness or 
overflowing of a stream.  2**That part of a 
river where the water stagnates. 

ligheach,** -ich, s.f. Cow. 

ligheach, -eiche, œ. Flooded, inundated. 

—an, n.pl. of lighe. 

lighich, v.g. & n. Doctor, lance, let blood. 

lighiche, -an, s.m. Physician, surgeon, Nach 
leighis aon l. P cannot any physician heal 2 

ligiche, s.m.ind. see ligeachas. 

Tlileadh,** -idh, s.m. Sucking, licking. 

lili, -dhean, s.f. Lily. 

lili bhàn,$ s. White water lily, see duilleag- 
bhàite-bhàn. 

lili-bhuidhe-'n-uisge, *s.f. Yellow water-lily, see 
duilleag-bhàite-bhuidhe. 

lilidheach, o Abounding in lilies. 2 Like a 
lily. 3**Flexible. 

lihgh, see lili. 

lih-ghugaeach,$ s. f. Bluebell, wild hyacinth, 
see fuath-mhuc. 

lili-nan-gleann, see lili-nan-lon. **^ 

lili-nan-lón, s.m. Lily of the valley—convallaria 
majalis. 

tlilleach,** œ. Pliant, flexible. 

lin, gen. sing. of lion. 











lin,** s.f. Thread. 2 Line. 3 Series. 4 Score. 
Tlind, s. Drink. 
Tlind, s.m. Disease. 


lineachadh, -aidh, s. m. Delineating, delinea- 


Original from 
ILI 


m SE | 
IT OF ILL 
li 


UNIVERSI 


| N Ol 5 A, | 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


lineachadh +» 590 


tion. 

linealtas, -ais, sm. Spruceness. | 

Jinean,$ ein, s.m. Sea-moss, see coireall. 

linear,** a. Rectilinear. 

tling, v.n. Skip. 2 Dart. 3 Go away. . 

lingeadh,** -idh, s.m. Skipping. 2 Flying off. 
3 Flinging. 4 Darting. 

linginneach,** a. Somewhat round. 

Hnich,** v.a. Line. 2 Delineate, draw. : 

linig, -ean, s.m. Lining, facing, act of lining 
clothes. 2 Sheathing, as a vessel. Dram mar 
L cléibh, a dram as a lining for the chest. 
[** gives s.f. ] ; 

lìnig, pr. part. a’ lìnig & a’ linigeadh, v. a. 
Line, as clothes. 2 Sheathe asa vessel. 3** 


Ceil. 

—eadh, -eidh, -eidhean, see lìnig. 

linigir, see linig. aes 

linig-taighe,** s.m. Ceiling. 2Wooden lining 
round the walls of a room. 

linigte, past pt. of linig. Lined, supplied with 
lining. 

linn, -ean, te & -tean, s. m. Age. 2 Century. 3 
Generation. 4 Race, offspring, family. 5 
Ministration, incumbency or time in office. 6 
Long, long ago. Ril.do sheanmhar, during 
the life of your grandmother ; anns na linntean 
deireannach, in the latter days ; ril. Mhaigh- 
stir Alasdair, during the incumbency of Mr. 
Alexander ;rim’1., in my day, while I was 
there ; ri d’ l.-sa, during your incumbency ; 
cogadh ol, gu 1., war from generation to gene- 
ration; ri d' là 's rid’ L, during your day 
and generation ; l. Dhiarmaid an tuirc, the 
family of Dermid of the boar (the Campbelis); 
gu l nan linntean, fer many generations to 
come; ril. dhuit dol dhachaidh, when you 
go home; iomlan ’na l., perfect in his gene- 
vation ; “ eadar dà linn," given by * should 
be “eadar dha leann,” see leann. 

linn,(AC) s.f. Brood hen. 2 Brood of twelve— 
over 12is “ linn mhór,” and under 12 '' linn 
bheag." 

linn,** o, Wet. 

linne, pl. -achan, linnteachan, linntichean, linn- 
ichean & linntean, s.f. Pool, pond, lake, linn, 
gulf. 2* Mill-dam, channel. 311 Cataract, 
waterfall  4fiSea. 5** Abyss. 6** Strait, 
sound. 7 **Entrance to a gulf. 8 Pool in 
ariver. 9 Part of the sea near the shore. 10 
Bay.. Linne-lin, a@ lint-dam ; air l. shéimh, 
on a calm sea; a’ dol thar na linne, crossing the 
channel. 

Tlinne, see leinne. 

linneach,(AF) s.m. Wild duck. 

linneachan, pl. of linne. 2(MS) After-ages. 

linnean,t -ein, -an, s.m. Shoemaker’s thread. 
2 Thread. 8 Little line. 

ach,** a. Thready, having threads. 2 
Like a thread or line. 3 Like a shoemaker's 
thread. 4 Abounding in lines. 

linnearach, s. Fucus, see lianach. 

linne-lus,** s.m. Pondweed—potamogeton. ~ 

linngeineach, -eiche, a. Gently moving, or heay- 
ing, as the sea in a calm. 

linngineach,** og, Roundish. 

linnich,* v.a. see linig. 

—-—,s.f. see lìnig. 

,* s.f.ind. Line, note. 2 Card. 3 Layer. 
4 Brood of eggs. L.-phosaidh, mar riage-line; 
cuir l. g’ a ionnsuidh, drop him a card; 1. mu 
seach, alternate layers. 

linnig, see linig. 

—— —te, past pt. of linnig, (for lìnig.) 

linnseach, -ich, s.f. Linen cloth. 2 One clothed 
in linen. 3* Shrouds, canvas. L, thrusaidh, 
packing cloth of linen. 





o~ 








liogar 


linnseag, -eig, an, s.f. Shroud. 2 Covering of 
sopran Lee or canvas E by delinquents 
en doing penanee before a congregation. 
_(DMC) Film, thin coating. Be ere 
linnsgearadh,** -aidh, $.m. Genealogy. 
linnte, pl. of linn. Gu l. céin, to distant ages.. 
linnteachan, n.pl. of linne. 
linntean, n.pl. of linne. 
linntean, ».pl. of linn. 
linteach,** o Lineal. 
linntichean, pl. of linn. 
liob, -a, -an, sf. Lip. 2łłPart of a bagpipe. 
Gee -aiche, œ, Lipped. 2 Having large 
1 * 
liobair, -ean, s.m. Person with thick or hanging 
lips. 2 Slovenly or awkward person.  [** 
gives liobar as nom., and -air as gen.] 
liobard,(AF) s.m. Leopard. [** gives liobart.] 
liobarnach, -aiche, @. Slovenly, awkward.. 
— —— —, -aich, s.m. Slovenly or awkward per- 
son, 2tiSluggard. 
liobasda, -aisde, a. Slovenly, untidy. 2 Awk- 
ward, clumsy. 
——chd, s.f. Slovenliness, untidiness. 2 
Awkwardness, clownishness. 
ir, sm. Blogen, 2 Awkward person, 





liobh, see liomh. 
-——,(AC) s. Love, attachment. 
-——,* s.f. Slimy substance like blood on the 
surface of water. 
liobhach, see liomhach. 
liobhadair,** s.m. Burnisher., 
lobhadh, see lomhadh. 
liobhag,§ s.f. Broad-leaved pondweed, see duil- 
easg-na-h-aibhne. 2 Dutch rushes, shave 
grass, see a’ bhiorag. 
liobhagach, see liobhragach. 
liobhair, see liubhair. 
t, see liubhairt. 
liobhan, -ain, -an, see liomhan. 
liobhan, .see leamhan. 
liobhanach, see liomhanach. 
liobhar, s.m. White of wood or timber. 
liobhar, o Polished, burnished— Sàr-Obair, see 
liomharra. 
liobharachd, see liomharrachd. 
liobharra, see liomharra. 
liobhgach,(AF) s. Cow with calf. 
liobhghruag,** -aig, s.f. Wig. 
liobhradh, -aidh, s.m. & pr. pt. for liubhradh, 
see liubhairt. 
liobhragach,* -aich, s.f. Kind of seaweed or sea- 
lichen of a greenish colour, 2** Weed grow- 
ing in standing water. 
liobhruig, see liubhair. 
liobhta, see liomhta. 
liobhta, see liomhta. 
liobrach,** aq. Thick-lipped. 
liocadan,** -ain, s.m. Chin-cloth, 
liocard, see liobard. 
liod,* s.m. see liot. 
—ach,* -aiche, q. 
—ach, -aidh, s.m. 
liodag, see liotag. 
liodaiche, see liotaiche, 
liodair, see leadair. 
liodairt, see leadairt. 
liodan, Ain, s.m. Dittany, see leadan. 2 Tea» 
zle, see leadan. 
liodan,(MS) s.m. Rogation. 
liodan-an-fhücadair, s. m. Fuller's teazle, see 
liadan-an-fhücadair. 
2 Muddy 


[oder dM s.m. Clumsy fellow. 
place. ; 

liogadh,** -aidh, s. m. Whetting, sharpening. 
yliogar,** -air, s.m. Tongue. 


see liotach. 
see liotaiche. 


` 
M 
H 
' 
t 








Ad 
et 





Tiogh $91 





Riogh,** s.f. see liagh. 

"liogha, o Brave. 2 Strong. ` 

lioghach,** a. Strong. 2 Fair. 

a St s.m. Superiority. d 

lioghais,** s.f. Bravery. 2 Strength. 3 Ability. 

Jioghan,** -ain, s.m. 'lrowel. 

4lioghar, -air, s.m. 

liom, see leam. 

liomaid, s.f. Lemon, see liomain. 

liomain, s. m. Lemon. 

lioman, see liomain. , 

lìomh, -a, s.f. Polish, gloss. 2 Colour, see li. 

homh, v.v. Polish, smooth, furbish. 2 Lubri- 
cate. 3ttSharpen, grind. 

fhiomha, see liamhaidh. 

liomhach,** œ. Smoothing, polishing, filing, bur- 
nishing. 2 Smooth, polished, burnished. 

homhachadh,(MS) s.m. Affriction. 

liomhachas, -ais, s.m. see liomharrachd. 

Jiomhachd, s.f.ind. Polish. 

liomhadair,** s. m. Burnisher, polisher. 2 
Filer, 3 Whetter. À 

lìomhadh, -aidh, s. m. Polishing, act of polish- 
ing, furbishing, burnishing, smoothing. 
Whetting, act of sharpenivg. Clach liomhaidh, 
a grindstone, 

Jiomhaich,(MS) v.a. Burnish. 

lìomhaidh, -e, a. Polished, furbished, burnish- 
ed. 2 Glittering, bright. 8 Beautifully 
smooth and fair. 4 **Sharpened, whetted. 
& Ladylike. Clach 1., a grindstone. 

liomhain, see homhaidh. 

liomhan, -ain, -an, s. m. File. 
Clach liomhain, a grindstone. 

—-——ach, a. Like à file. 2 see lìomharra. 

— —aiche,** s.m. File-maker. 

liomharra, a. Glossy, polished, bright. 2 Filed. 

liomharrachd, s.f.ind. Brightness. 2 State of 
being polished, smoothed, sharpened or 3 
filed. 4 Polish, smoothness, sharpness. 

liomhraidh, s.m. & pr.pt. see lionrath. 

liomhta, past pt. of liomh, Polished. 2 Sharp- 
ened, whetied. 

hon, -in,pl. lontan, [lin-—DMy] s.m. Lint, flax 
—linum usitatissimum. 2 Linen. 3 Net, fish- 
ing net. Att Gin, snare. 5 Line, limit, boun- 
dary. 6 Proportionate quantity or comple- 
meni 7**Nuniber, quantity. 8**Lining. 9** 
Parcel, 10 Fishing-line. 

Là buan an lin, Nevermas ; linne lin, a lint 
dum; à bualadh an lin, beetling the flaw ; 1. 
làn éisg, æ net-ful of fish ; biadh le a 1. de an- 
lainn, food with its complement of condiment ; 
a l. de ’n Fhéinn 'sa bh’ ann, @s many of the 
Féinn as were present ; a l. fear is fear, one by 
one; a l. dithis is dithis, two by two ; al. triùir 
is triùir, three by three ; al. beagan is beag- 
an, mar a db’ ithan cat an sgadan, little by 
little, as the cat ate the herring; lin mhóra, long 
(ishing) lines; lin bheaga, short (fishing) lines. 
A an damhain-alluidh, æ cobweb ; 1. sgadan- 
aich, a herring-net : 1. fuilt, a hair-net. 
].-eisirean, a dredge. 
l.-iadhaidh, sweep-net, drag-net. 
l-iasgaich, a fishing-net. 
l.-obair, network. 

lion, pr.pt. a’ honadh, po & n. Fill, replenish, 
satiate. 2 Become full. 3 Flow, as tide. 4 
*Completely please or satisfy. L. an soith- 


8 Fine. 





2 Burnisher. 


each, fill the vessel ; cha’n "el seo 'gam lìon- 


Tionn-dubh 


lionadh, pastpass. of lion. Was or were filled. 
lionadh, -aidh, s. m. Filling, act of filling, re- 
plenis'ivg. 2 State of being filled, approach» 
ing to fulness. 3 Fulness. 4 Rising, as the 
tide. L, na mara, the flowing of the tide. 
— — —— -deiridh, s.m. Deadwood in stern of a 
boat, see 03, p. 73. 
—— ——— -toisieh, s. m. Deadwood in bow of a 
boat, see N4, p. 73. 
lionan,(MS) s.m. Reticle. 2 Toil. 3(DU)Lady's 
hair-net. 
ach, s. m. Plumosa, a bright green alga 
in pools left on rocks by receding tide. 2 
Seaweed of difierent sizes and different col- 
ours, kind of water fungus that grows on 
other seaweed, wood, &c., that has been long 
floating in the sea. Tha lìonanach mu d’ 
cheann a’ fas, in S.-nan-caol, p. viii. refers to 
a board east ashore among wreckage. ‘The 
fact of the fionanach growing on it showed 
that it had been long afloat since first torn 
away from the ship of which it once formed 
apart—J. MacFadyen. 3 Green weed that 
grows on the boulders in a stream. 4 (MMc 
D) The scum that accumulates on stagnant 
water. 





| Honanach, -aiche, v. Reticular, membraneous, 


lion-anart, -airt, -an, s.m. Sheet (for a bed.) : 

lion-aodach,** -aich, s.m. Sheet. .2 Linen. 3 
(DMy) Shroud. 

lionar, fut. pass. of lion. Shall be filled. 2 g.see 
lionmhor. 

——achd, see lionmhorachd. 

lionaraich,(MS) v.a. see lionmhoirieh. 

lionaraieh,(MS) s. Sea-fennel, samphire, 
lion-bhrat,** at, s. m. Sheet. 2 Winding- 
sheet. Air ’fhilleadh 'san l., wrapped in the 
winding-sheet. 
lioncaise,** s. Spaniel. 2 Tether. 3 Line 
fastened from the head to the fore foot, or 
from the fore to the hind feot of a beast, 
lionchar,** «. Pleasing, delightful, 

lion-cinn, s.m. Hair-net. 

lion-eudach, see;lion-aodacn. 

lon-ghlae, oo, Mnsnare. 
lioamhoire, comp. of Bozixhor. 
plentiful. 

——— —-—aáchd, see lionmhorachd. 

lìonmhor, -oire, a. Numerous,plentiful, copious, 
abounding. 2 Populous. Caimnt L, copious 
language ; |. an lon is dearg, abounding in elks 
and red-deer. 

——achadh, -aidh, s.m. Multiplication, act 
of multiplying, making or becoming numer- 
Go? or abundant. A’ 1l—, pr.pt. of lìonmhor- 
aich. 

lionmhorachd, s. f. ind. Multiplicity, plenty, 
abundance. 2 Multitude. L. dheth, abun- 
dance of it. 

lionmhoraich, v. a. & n. Multiply, increase, 
cause to increase in number, become numer- 
ous. 

—————.——te, past pt. 
in number. 

lionn, see leann. 

lionnach, see leannach. 

lionnachadh, see leannachadh. 

lionnadh, Barra for leannachadh. 

lion-na-h-aibhne,§ s. m. River-flax, pilewort, 
crowfoot, see fleann-uisge. 


More or most 


Multiplied, increased 


adh, this does not entirely please me ; tha e | lionnaich, see leannaich. 


*lionadh, it (the tide) is flowing. 
lion, (cia lion P adv. How many ?) 
lìonach, a. Abounding in lint, flax, nets, &c. 
lionachan, -ain, -an, s.m. Filler, funnel. 
honad,** -aid, s.m, Plenitude,fulness,repletion. 
lionadair, -ean, s.m, Filler, funnel, 2 Syphon. 


Digitized by 


[ ON 
EEINTERNET ARCHIVE 


lion-nam-ban-sith,§ s.m. Fairy flax—linum cath- 
articum, see illust. 428. 

lion-na-mna-sith, see lion-nam-ban-sith. 

lionnan-locraidh,  -ain-locraidh, see leannane 
loeraidh. 

lionn-dubh, -uibhe, see leann-dubh, 


lion-nam-ban-sith 





£28. Lion-nam-ban-sith. 


lionn-dub'iach, see leann-dubhach. 

lionn-luibh, see leann-luibh. 

each, see leann-luibheach. 

lionn-ruadh, see leann-ruadh. 

lionn-ruadhaidh, see leann-ruadhaidh. 

lionnsag,** s.f. Shroud, 

lionnsgail,(Ms) v.n. Lay. 

lionn-tàtha, see leann-tathaidh. 

lion-obair, -oibre, s.f. Net-work. 2**Chequer- 
work, 

lion-oibriche, -an, s.m. Net-worker. 

lionor, seelionmhor. 

lionradh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Gravy, juice. 2 
Sa, ce. 3 Thin, unsubstantial drink. 4 
lusipid drink. +5 Web. 6ftWashy fluid. 7** 
Aleberry. 8* for liomhradh. Clach lionraidh, 
a, grindstone. 

lionraith,a. Sharpened by grinding. 

lonrath, pr.pt. a’ lionrath, oo, Grind, sharp- 
en by grinding. 

lionrath, -aith, s.m. Sharpening, act of sharp- 
ening by grinding. A’ l—, pr.pt. of lionrath, 
Clach honraith, æ grindstone. 

lion-sgriobaidh, s.m. Drag-net. 

lionta, a. & past pt. of lion. Filled, full, 2 Fat, 
plump. 3 Abundant. 

lionta, n.pl. of lion. 

lionta, see lionte. 

liontach, -aiche, a. Filling, replenishing, sa- 
tiating. 2 Full, Sùil 1l., a full eye; tir chruach 
ach, sguabach, liontach, a land with plenty 
of stacks and sheaves— Filidh. 22. 

liontachadh, -aidh, s.m. Filling, act of filling, 
replenishing. A’ 1l—, pr.pt. of liontaich, 

liontachail, -e, a. Fat, plump, sleek. _ 

hontachd, s.f.ind. Fulness, repletion, state of 
being full, satiety. ` 

liontaibh, dat.pl. of lion. 

liontaich, v.a. Fill, replenish. 

liontaichte, past pt. of liontaich. Filled, replen- 
ished. 

liontaidh, -e, æ. Full, satiated, replenished. 2 
2 Plump. 3 Meshy, full of meshes, 

liontaidheachd, s.f. Fulness, plumpness 

liontan, pl. of lion. 

lionte, past pt. of lion. 

lion-uinneag, s.f. Lattice. 

liop, -a, -an, see liob. 

liopach, see liobach. 

liopaire,t} s.m. Person with thick lips, 

liopard, -aird, s.m. Leopard. 

lioragaich, Argyll for lìonanach. 

liore, s. Shrivel, wrinkle. 

liore, v.a. & n. Pucker, shrivel, wrinkle. 

liorcach, -aiche, a. Wrinkled. 

liorcaich, v.a.dé n. see liorc, 


KITTTEPAIETUT NI zm 
l bh d | 
d Ka Kë Anm LL L5 HI KIK 
i LU a 

k IE m RE r i= 


592 


nte 

lios, lise, & -a, pl. an, s.f. Garden. 2 Fuller’s or 
printer’s press. 3 Mangle. 4**Longing in preg- 
nancy. 15 Dispute, debate, strife. t6 House, 
habitation. 17 Palace. +8 Fortified place. 19 
Enciosure or stall for eattle. 10**Court. L. 
Iuibhean, æ garden for herbs; 1. àraich, a nur- 
sery; l. vioghail, a royal court ; 1. ìosal, a low 
court ; l.-olaidh, an olive garden. [** gives s. 
m. for Nos. 4,5 & 9, and f. for the others. WC 
gives s.m.) 

liosach,ff a. Having gardens. 

liosadair, -ean, s.m. Gardener 
pressman. | 

— -——eachd, s.f.ind. Gardening, act of gar- 
dening. 2 Printing. 

liosadan, -ain, s.m. Little garden. 

liosair, -ean, s.m. see liosadair, 2**Garden. 


2 Printer, 


liosair,* v.a. Press, as cloth. 2 Print. 3 Man- 
.gle. 4 Drub most heartily. 
liosairte, past pt. of liosair. Smoothed. 3 


Printed. 3 Pressed. 

lios-araich, ff s.f. Nursery (for plants.) 

liosda, -isde, a. Slow, lingering, tedious, 2 Im- 
portunate. 3 Stiff. Gu L, gu luath, now slow, 
now quick. 

liosdachd, s. f. ind. Slowness, tediousness. 2 
Importunity. 3 Instance. 4**Stiffness. ` bg 
Greed. 

liosdair, -ean, s.m. Wrangler. 2 Barrister. 3 
Pettifogger. 

—— ——eachd,** s.f. Wrangling. 2 Pettifogging. 

lios-mheas, -an, s.f. Orchard. 

liosradh, see liosraigeadh. 

liosraig, v.a. Smooth, dress or iron, as linen. 

liosraigeadh, -idh, s.m. Smoothing or ironing, 
as linen. A'l—, pr.pt. of liosraig. 

liosraigte, past pt. of liosraig. Smoothed,dress- 
ed, ironed. 

liosta, see liosda, 

liostair, see liosdair. 

liot, s.m.ind. Stammer, lisp. 

liotach, -eiche, a. Lisping, stammering. 

liotachd, s.f.ind. Lisping, stammering, impedi- 
ment of speech. 

liotag,** ag, s.f. Girl that lisps. 

liotaiche, s.m. Stammerer, lisper. 2* Impedi- 
ment of speech. 

liotaiche, comp. of liotach. 

liotan,** -ain, s.m. Litany. 

fliothadh, -aidh, s.m. Frightening, dismaying, 
dismay. j 

liothra,** s.m. Hair. 

lip, $.f. -e, -ean, see liob, 

lipinn, -e, -ean, & f. Quarter peck (measure of 
grain) ‘‘lippy.’’ [also lipinn.} Still used in 
Uist for measuring whelks, &c—DC, 

tlir, s. Jaundice. 

lir, s. Litter, as of pigs, whelps, &c. 

lireagach,tt -aich, $. f. Green weed growing 
in stagnant water. 

lirean, ein, s.m. Species of marine fungus—WN. 
Highds. 2(DU) Applied to greenish fresh-wa- 
ter growth. 

lireanach, Suth'd. for lionanach. 

lireanach, -aiche, a, Abounding in marine fun- 
gus. 

lirt, past pt. of libhrig. Delivered—Dain lain 
Ghobha. 

lis,** s.f. Mischief, evil. 2 (DMy) The dark 
crust on the top of heads of young babies til 
it is removed by frequent applications of 
butter. 

lisg,** s.pl. Feelers of a fly. 

iit, s, Activity. 2 Celerity. 

lite, [ven.sing. litinn now in Skye, formerly also 
in Badenoch.—Gael. Soc. Inv. zept, 84.] St 
Porridge, pottage. 2**Posset. 


Origil 


al from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGE 


LIU E EE ME 


Ahi 


ant 





dl 
x 


liteach 


 Yiteach, -eiche, a. Abounding in porridge. 
Like porridze. 
hith,(CR) s.f. Grease for smearing—Skye. y Tha 
"n fheòil anns a’ phoit gun au lith thairis, the 
| esh is in the pot and the water not covering tt 
(the flesh) completely—from one of Campbell’s 
ales, in which, because the water in the pot 
did not cover the fish completely, a blister a- 
rose on the fish: Fingal, then a boy, put his 
wet finger on the blister with the well-known 
result that he ever after, upon sucking this 
finger, obtained any information he wished. 
lith, -e, -ean, s.f. see li. 2**Pool, stagnant wa- 
ter. 3(MS) Greasiness. 4 (WC) Fat on top of 
soup or broth. 
lithe, s.f. see lighe. 
litheach, -eiche, a. Coloured. 
Slimy, greasy. 
litheadh, -idh, -idhean, see lighe. 
litheadh,(AC) s. Bathing. Bi ’gad 1., 
ing thee. [AC gives lithiu.] 
lithear, -eir, s.m. Dyer. 
litheas,** -eis, s.m. Solemnity, 
litir, litreach, -trichean, s. f. 
phabet. 2 Letter, epistle. 3 The literal or 
expressed meaning. Alt Learning, education, 
litir-chomhraig,** s.f. Challenge. 
litir-dhealachaidh, s.f. Bill of divorce. 
litir-fhoghlum, -uim, s.m. Literary knowledge, 
erudition, lore. i 
ħitir-ghaoil, s.f. Love-letter. 
litir-ghrinnich,** s.f. Crallenge. 
litir-leannanachd,** s.f. Love-letter. 
litir-naidheachd, s.f. Newspaper, news-letter. 
litreach,{} a. Lettered. 
litreach, yen.sing. of litir. 
litreachadh, -aith, s.m. Orthography. 
litrich, v.d. & n. Letter, print. 2 (MM)Spell. 
litichean, n.pl. of litir. 
lidbh, sın. Lythe, pollack, 
| linbhag, -aig, s.f. Moppet. 
| liubhair, pr.pt. a’ liubhairt & a’ liubhradh, v. a. 
S Deliver, give up, surrender, resign. 2 Aban- 
don. 3 Rescue. [t gives liubbar, tf liùbhar.] 
liubhairt, s. m. Delivery, act of delivering, re- 


2 Speckled. 38 
be bath- 


pomp. 
Letter of the al- 


see Duch, 


[ signation, addiction, surrender, assignment. 
| 9 Abandonment. 3 Rescue. A’ l—, pr. pt. 
| of liubhair. 


|. liubhairte, past pt. Delivered, addicted, &c. 

| Jiubh-bhiast,(AF) see luibh-bhiast. 

| liübhrach,** a. Flaggy. 

Hübhradh, -aidh, s.m. d pr.pt. see liubhairt. 

liuc, s. Shout, noise. 

liuch-bhlian, North Gairloch for dubh-ehléin, 

liudan, ** -ain, s.m. Lever crow. 2 Gaveloc. 

liudanach,** a. Like a lever. 

liùdh, see liügh. 

liüdhag, -aige, -an, $.f. Doll. 2 see Doch, 

liùg, -iüige, s.f. Lame hand or foot. 2 Bandy- 
leg. 3 Sneaking gait. 4ttSneaking look. 5 
**Üreeping. 6ttTwist in a shoe. [|** gives 
s.m. and gen. litig. ] 

liùg, pr.pt. a’ liugadh, v.a. & n. 

. way. 2 Bend, bow. 3 Sneak. 
liügach, -aiche, a. Sneaking, abject, 2 Having 
a maimed limb. 3 Bandy-legged. 4 Crook- 
ed, as the law. 5 Of a mean personal appear- 
ance. 6**Shabby, sorry. 7**Creeping. 

liügach,** -aiche, s.m. gen. -aich, Sorry fellow. 

— ———,* s.f. Unhandy woman. 2 Drab. 

litgachd, s.f. Deformity of bandy legs. 

liügadh, -aidh, s.m. Creeping, act of creeping, 
stealing away. 2 Bending, bowing. 3 Sneak- 
ing. A’ l—, pr.pt. of liùg. 

2 Drab. [given 


liüzag, s.f. Unhandy woman. 
liugair,(AF) ssm. Newt (lurker.) 


Creep, steal a- 


by * as liügaeh.] 


Digitized by 


RIT EGR ET ARF] D dEZ 
INTERNET ARCHIVE 





593 
oe liùgair, -ean, s. 7n. 


liügh,tt -a, -achan, s.f. 


liughag, (MS) s.f. Poupeton. 
litil,(A@) s. Bath, bathing, 





loban 


Sneaking, abject follow. 2 
Helpless, lame fellow. 3 Cajoler. 4 Flatter- 
er, parasite. 5*Unhandy;fellow. 6*One with 
a lame hand. 

liugaireachd, s.f. Sneaking, abject habit. 2*9 


Cajolery. 
Lythe (fish.) 
tliugh, s.f. Ory, shout. 
liugha, see?liuthad. 


liughad, -aid, see liuthad. 


liùghag, (DMC) s.f. Small lythe. 


washing, lustra- 
ting, purification. 

lium, see leam. 

liumh,** s.m. Cry. 

Hiun, s.f. Sloth, laziness, idleness. 

fliun, a. Slothful, lazy. 

tliunachas, -ais, s.m. Idleness, sloth, laziness. 

liu nan lasa,(AC) s. Water of the flame, lus- 
tral flre. 

Liünasd, s.f. Lammas. 

Liünasdai!, see Liànasd. 

Lidnastainn, see Liünasd. 

liunchlos,** s.m. Rest. 

liunn, see leann. 

liunn-dubh, see leann-dubh, 

liunn-tàth, v. see leann-tàthaidh. 

liunntras, -ais, see leanntras. 

tliur, s.m. Noise, clamour, prating. 

Tliuraeh, a. Noisy, elamorous, prating 

liurc, v. & s. see liore. 

liurcach, see liorcaci. 

D urcaich, see Jiorcaich. 

Hü-b, AH) s.f. Woman's tattered sxirt. 2 Anye 
thing hanving in a loose and slovenly man- 
ner. 3 Slatti.h, untidy woman. 

liùsbach, a. Clumsy, uutidy. 

liùsbaid, (DMC) s.f. Untidy female. 
liùth, see liùgn. 

liuth, see liutnad. 

liutha, see liuthad. 

liuthad, a. & adv. Several, many. 

3* Frequent, 
Gia l. uair ‘sa thàinig e? how often did he 
come ? cia l. uair sa dh’ innis mi sin dhuit ? 
how many times have I told you that ? liuthad 
laoch ’s a thàinig, when so many braves came. 
Frequently used with the poss. pron. masc., 
as, is math a dh’ fhimireadh an dan a dhean- 
adh, ’s a liuthad fear-millidh a th’ aige, the 
poem would need to be well made, since it has 
so many spoilers—bad reciters and carping 
critics—N.G.P. 

liàthag, see liübh & liugh. 

liuthail, see liail. 

liuthair, see liubhair. 

liuthairte, see liubhairte. 

liubharadh, -aidh, see liubhradh, 

lò, s.n. ind, Poetical form of la. 

Ho, s.m. Lock of wool. 2 Water. 

lob, -oib, s.m. Puddle. 

lobach,(AF) s.m. Lobworm. 

lobair,* pr. pt. a’ lobairt, v.q. Draggle in the 
mud, roll in the mire. 2 Paddle. 

lobairt, s.f. Draggling. 2 Paddling. A'l-, pr. 
pt. of lobair. 

lobais,** s.f. Craft, ingenuity. 

loban, -ain, -an, $.m. Creel for drying corn. 2 
Wooden frame put inside corn-stacks to keep 
them dry. 3ttHurdle. 4 Kind of basket same 
shape as the rusgan (see illust. there) but of 
different size. 5 When peats are to be cart 
ed, the ordinary sides and ends of the cart in 
many districts are laid aside, and lighter 
ones (lóban) of spars or rods provided for the 
purpose. These had been evidently preceded 


2 Month of August. 


2 So many. 


i. SSF vm 
i / / K r, fj d i P à Le AT 
v L = I e L' - j Hm 
— la E = i 


| Li EN n M A gm A NEF* gm 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


loban 


by sides and ends of wicker or wattle-work— 
There was an ancient form of cart, call- 
'" earn-loban," which gave origin to the 
name Loban, see MacKenzie’s Guide to In- 


CR. 
ed 


veruess, 1903.—DMK. 


(Also loban. ] 
loban, see lóban. 


lobanach, -aiche, a. Draggling, wallowing,drag- 


gial, wallowed. 


lobanachd, s.f. Draggling, frequent or continu- 
2 Drenching. 3f Diverging, 


ed wallowiug. 

straggling, spreading. 
lobanadh, s.m. see lobanachd. 
lobanaich, s.f. see lobanachd. 


lobanaich, pr. pt. a lobanaich & a’ lobanachd, 


v.d. Bedrench. 2 see làbanaich. 
lobanaichte, past pt. Bedrenched. 
lobar,(DC) s.f. Puddle, mud—Argyil. 


lobarean, -ain, s.m. Person drenched with wet, 
2 Dwarf, diminutive 


or daubed with mire. 
person. 


lobh, pr.pt. a’ lobhadh, v.g. & n. Rot, putrefy. 


2 Become or make putrid. 3**Stink. 
lobh, o see lobhach. 
lobhach,** a. Rotten, stinking, foetid. 
lobhachas, -ais, s.m. Putridness. 
lothbachd,** s.f. Rottenness, foetidness. 
Jobhadas,** as, s.m. Rottenness, foetidness, 


lobhadh, -aidh, s.m. Rotting, putrefying. 2 Act 

or state of putrefying or becoming putrid, pu- 
3 Stinking. 4 Rottenness, foetid- 
A' 1—, pr.pt. of 


trefaction. 
ness. 
lobh. 

lobhaidh, fut.aff.a. of lobh. L. an abhainn, the 
river shall stink. 

lobhair, gen.sing. & n.pl. of lobhar. 

lobhaircean,** -ein, s.m. Dwarf. 

lobhar, -air, s.m. Leper. 2 Disgusting wretch. 
3 Term of much personal contempt. 14Work. 
+5 Day’s work. 

lobharach, -aiche, o Leprous. 

lobharachd, s. f. Hottenness, 2 Leprosy, see 
luibhre. 

lobharan, (MS) -ain, s.m. Leper. 

lobhar-leigheas, -is, s.m. Antiseptic. 

lobhgach, (AF) -aich, s. Cow with calf. 

lobhrach, see lobharach. 

———d, see luibhre. 

lobhradh,** -aidh, s.m. Leprosy, state of becom- 
ing leprous. 

lobhragan, see lobarcan. 

lobhran, s.m.dim. of lobhar. 

lobht, -a, -achan, [lobhtaichean in Gairloch,] 
s.m. Loft, floor, gallery. 2 Highest floor, 3 
Storey of a house or building. 4 Foot-board 
of a spinning-wheel. 5(CR)Any floor of wood, 
upstairs or down—W, of Ross & Uist. 6(DU) 
Deck of a boat. Le lobhtaibh ìochdarach, 
with lower stories ; lobhta lair, æ ground jloor. 

lobhta, a. & past pt. of lobh. Rotten, corrupt, 
putrid, putrifying, ^ Creuchd 1., a putrefying 
sore. 

lobhtach, -aiche, a. Having many lofts, galler- 
ies or stories. 

lobhtachd, s.f. Corruptness. 

lobrachan, -ain, s.m. Draggletail. 

lobrogan,* -ain, sm. Drenched, smeared fellow. 

tloc, v.a. Refuse. 2 Hinder. 

tloc, s.m. Place. 

locadh,** -aidh, s.m. Refusal. 2 Hinderance. 

locair, pr. pt. a’ locradh, v. a. Plane, smooth 
with a plane. 2 Polish. 

locaireachd,ff s.f. Art of planing. 

locar, -air, pl. -an &-locraichean, s. m. Carpen- 
ter's plane, [* and 1 give locair, as nom.& s.f.] 

-——àch, see locrach. 

adh, see locradh. 

locar chraois, -craichean-c-, s.m. Razor. 

locar-dlüthaidh, s.m. Plough-plane, rebate- 


5 Disease of potatoes. 





Digitized E y 


MITITPRITT Amy 
EW E ET 


ERMET ARCHIV 





594 loch-'léin 


plane, 

locar-düirn, s.m. Hand-plane. 

locar-grovaidh, s.m. Plough-plane, rebate-plane. 

locar-sgathaich, s.pl. Shavings, spills of wood, 

locar-:guitsilh, s.m. Jack-plane. ; 

loch, gen. -a, [luich, very seldom used,] pl. -an 
& -aunan, s.m. [generally fem. in Caithness, 
Suth'd and most parts of Ross—DMu] Arm 
of the sea. 2 Lake. A fresh-water lake is ` 

. * loch uisge.” Miann lach—an 1. air nach bi, 
a duck's desire—the lake where she is not. 

tloch,* a. Dark, black. 2 Every, all. 

lochach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to lakes. 9 
Aboundiug in lakes. 

lochadh,** -aidh, s.m. Fleece. 

lochain,** s.  Sea-grass, seaweed, sea-wrack. ` 

lochair,** s. Chaff. 

lochal,3-ail, 8. qm. 
bunga. 










Brooklime—veronica becca- 


Pree 


a 
Pe e a 





m 


Lochal. 


lochan, -ain, -an, s.m.dim. of loch. Little lake, 
poolorpond. 12 Chaff. 


429. 


o 1 
H 
— n 


^ 
3 
e 


S 


lochan, n. pl. of loch 
lochanach, -aiche, o. 


“Abounding in little lakes ` 
` 


or pools. | 3 
lochan-monaidh, (AH) s.m. Mountain-tarn, a 
lochan-nan-damh,$ see lachan-nan-damh. B 
lochan-tàimh,(CR) s. m. Loch having no opt, ` 

flow. i ës 
loch-àrmunn, -uinn, see luch-armunn. 
lochasair,** s.m. Shower of rain. 
loch-bhléin, s. f. The flank, region under the 

short ribs. (dubh-chléin) 
loch-bhléineach, a. Inguinal, pertaining to @ 
groin. ep 
lochd, -a, -an, s.m. Evil, mischief. 2 Fault, ` 
crime, sin. 3 Want, defect. 4 Closing ofthe  - 
eyes in sleep. 5 Moment’s sleep, nap, wink. - 
lochdach,-aiche, o Faulty, having flaws. 2 

Criminal. 3 Mischievous, hurtful. 4 Defect- 

ive. 5 Blamable. 6 Obnoxious. 
lochdachadh, -aidh, s.m. Injuring, act of injur- — 

ing. 2 Censuring or blaming. 3(MS) Annoy- — 

ance, A’l—, pr.pt. of lochdaich. RK 
lochdachas,(MS) s.m. Reprehensibleness. 
lochdachd, st Mischievousness. : 
lochdaich, pr.pt. a lochdachadh, o a. Injure, 

impair. 2 Blame, censure. 4 E" 
lochdaichte, past pt. of lochdaich. Injured. 2 — 

Blamed, censured. 
lochdalachd, s.f.ind. Prejudicialness. 2 Blam- 

ableness. : l 
lochdan, -ain, s. m. Little sleep, nap, wink of 

sleep. ON 
lóchdan,(DC) s.m. Laver, kind of alga, either — — 

the green or purple— Ust. [Also slóchdan.]  . 
lochümnhor, o, Malefic. 
lochduinn,** s. Beggartiness. 
iochlannach,* -aich, s.f. Widgeon. 
loch-'léin, see loch-bhléin. 


MT 4 


bS 


Se, 
Pee 
alll te DT 


LI 

i 
M" 
E 
ET 
M 
1 








-4 


H 
$ 


- 


Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 
URBANA-CHAMPAI 


~ ) 
d 





| Skye. 
lochraidh,(AF) s. Cattle. 


Joch-thaomadh, -aidh, -aidhean, $. m. Sudden 


| loch-thaomaidhean, see loch-thaomadh. 


| ` lodraigeadh, s.m. Sousing. 
flog, -oig, s.m. Pit or ditch of water. 2 Dun- 


"logaiche,** s.m. Fool. 


loch-mhaoim 595 ER SN SOE a er SUDORE SURE KEPNE 
SttAnvlbing unwieldy. 4 (DC) Greedy boy- 
5 (AH) Inordinate supply of liquid, sloppy 
food. Tog do l. ! hurry up! 

logaiseach, -viche, a. Shambliug, walking awk- 
wardly. 2ttWide, unwieldy. 3 (AH)Swashy, 
sloppy, applied to food. 

logaist, see logais. 

logaisteach, see lugaiseaeh. 

logan, see lagan, 2**Hollow of the hand. 3** 
Country. 4**Peace. 

logar,(CR) s.m. Kind of reed, 2 (DMy) Mo- 
tion of the waves after the storm is over. 

logh, pr.pt. a’ loghadh, v.a. Pardon, remit, for- 
give. 

logh,** s. Renown. 72 see lagh. 

loghadair,(MS) s m. Pardoner. 

loghadb, -aidh, s.m. Forgiving, act of forgiving 
or pardoning. 2 Forgiveness, pardon. 3TtIu- 
dulgence. 

log»aich, v. see logh. 

loghaileachd, s.f. Foolishness, foolery. 

loghan,** -ain, $.m. Indulgeuce, remission. 2 
Jubilee. 

loghmhoireachd, s. f. Excellence, celebrity, 
famousness, 2 Grandeur, splendour. 

loghmhor, -oire, a. Exce'lent, famous, 2 State- 
ly, majestic. 3 Bright, valuable. 

log-thir,(AC) s. f. Lake-land. 

loguid, -ean, s.m. & f. Varlet, rascal, 2 Soft, 
effeminate fellow. 3 Lean, starving cow. 
Ghost. Gus ancuireadh mac-talla na h-oidh- 
che mavim fo na loguidean, till the nightly 
echo would frighten the timid fellows away— 
Gaidheal, v, 50. 

loguideach, -eiche, a. Rascally. 2 Effeminate. 
3 Cowardly. 4 Abounding in starved cows. 5 
Like a starved cow. 6tfGhostly. 

loguideachd, s.f. Cowardly habit or disposition. 

loibean, -ein, -an, s.m. Puddler, one who works 
in puddly earth. 2 One who works constant- 
ly in all kinds of weather. 3 One who works 
in marshes, 

loibeanachd, s,f. Puddling. 2 Habit of work- 
ing continually regardless of weather. 

loibheach, -eiche, a. Feetid, somewhat rotten. 
2 Term of contempt. "Tochd 1., a fetid smell. 

loibheachas, -ais, s.m. Foetidness, degree of rot- 
tenness or putridness, 

loic, Lewis for lochd 5. 

loicealach, -aiche, see loiceil. 

loicealachd, s.f. Foolish fondness. 2**Dotags. 

loiceil, -e, a. Foolishly fond, doting. 

4oich, s.f. Slattern, trull, 2 Place. 

loiche, see loichead. 

loichead,** -eid, -an, s.m. Lamp, light, torch. 2 
Lightning. 3 Splendour. 

t| loicheadair,** s.m. Chandler. 

ioigear, -eir, -an, s.m. Untidy or ragged person. 
2 Loiterer. 

loigearach,** a. Awkward. 

loigearachd, s.f. Untidiness of dress, raggede 
ness, 2 Awkwardness. 3 Loitering. 

loigeireachd, see loigearachd. 

loilgeach, see lulgach. 

loiliseag,( AF) s.f. Reed or sedge warbler. 

loime; comp. of lom, for luime, 

loime,** see luime. 

loimic,** s.f. Plaster for taking off hair, 

loin, gen.sing. of lon. 

tloin, s.f. Little stream, rivulet. 

loin,(AF) s.m.. Swan. 

loine, an, s.f. Lock or tuft of wool, flock. 2 
Flake of snow. 3 (DMC) Fine flowing hair. 

ldine, see loinidh. 

lòineag, s.f. dim. of loine. Little tuft of wool. 
2*Pleece of very fine wool. 3**Lock of wool, 
or any such substance. 4(DU) Snowflake. 65 































loch-mhaoim, s.m. see loch-thaomadh. ` 
lóchradh,(CR) pr. pt. Soaking.  Bha sinn al. 
le fallus, we were soaking with perspiration — 


lòchran, -ain, s.m. Light. 2 Lamp, torch, lan- 
Lern. 

lochranach, -aiche, a. Having lamps or torches. 
v**fike a lamp or torch. 3** Lighted with 
lamps. 

țlò-chrann, s.m. The sun, 


bursting of water. 2 Bursting of water from 
a mountain. 


loch-uisge, s.m. Fresh-water lake. 

locrach, -aiche. a. Furnished with planes. 2 
Of, or connected with planes. 3 Like a plane. 

locradh, -aidh, s.m. Planing, act of planing. 
A! 1—, pr.pt. of locair. Crann caol air dheagh 
l., a slender pole well planed. 

locraich, v. see locair. 

egene F) s.m. Locust. 

lod, -uid, -&n, s.m. Puddle, pool, marsh. 

lod, -did, -an, s.m. Cavalcade. 2 Bulk. 3 see 
làl. 4* Broadside. Leig iad1., they fired a vol- 
ley ; |. shluaigh, a cavalcade of people; 1.-luach, 
freightage. 

lodach, -aiche, æ. Abounding in pools or puddles. 

lodach, a. Collective. Cunntas l., collective nu- 
merals. 

lodachadh, -aidh, s.m. Stagnating, state of be- 
coming stagnant, marshy or boggy. A’ l-, 
pr. pt. of lodaich. 

lodachadh, -aidh, s.m. Loading, freighting, act 
of loading. A’ l—, pr.pt. of lódaich. 

lodaich, pr.pt. a’ lodachadh, v.a. Staguate, be- 
come marshy or boggy. 

lodaich, pr. pt. a’ lodachadh, v.a. & n. Lade, 
burden. 2 Become bulky or clumsy. 3 Clog. 

lodaichte, past pt. of lodaich. Eiridneach l., o 
i burdener—i.e. under the torment of 

is disease— Dàin I. Ghobha. 

lòdail, -e, Lë lodala,H] a. Heavy, laden. 2 Bul- 
ky, clumsy, cumbersome. 3 Wealthy. 4 
Proud, haughty. 

lodain,** s. The privy parts. 2 Flank. 

lodair,(DMC) s.m. Lad. 

lódalachd, s.f. Weightiness. 2 Bulkiness, un- 
wieldiness. 3 Wealth. 4 Pride, haughtiness. 

lodan, -ain, -an, s. m. dim. of lod. Little pool. 
2 Water in one’s shoe. 3 Bog, little marsh. 
'S fhéarr sigh ’mhogain na sugh lodain—a 
common proverb, meaning that a leaky boot 
is better than none a£ all. 

lodanach, -aiche, a. Abounding in little pools. 

lodhainn, -e, -ean, s.f. Number, as à pack o 
dogs, “ leash,” see lomhainn. 

lodhainn-chraos,(WC) s.f. Little insect found in 
ponds and pools. 

lódrach, -aich, s.m. Company, crowd, many. 

lodrach, s.f. Baggage, luggage. 

lodragan, -ain, s. m. Plump, robust boy. 2 
Clumsy, little old man. 

lodraganach, -aiche, a. Bluff, clumsy. 

lódraich, see lodrach, s.f. 


log, see lag. 
geon. 3 Place. 


logaidh,(CR) s. m. Long hair on forehead of 
cattle. 2 Mane ofa horse.— Skye. 

logairt,** s.f. Bad treatment, abuse. 2 Wallow- 
ing. 

logais, -ean, $.7n. Awkward, unwieldy person. 
2*Slipper, patohed shoe, ** bàuchle ”—A rgyll. 


loineag 


cloth. L. bhreagh air taob caoin an aodaich, 
a nice nap on the right side of the cloth. 
loineagach, -aiche, a. Abounding in tufts of 
wool, or in 2 Flakesof snow. 
lóinean, ein, -an, see lonan. 2(DMK) The fat 
covering of the kidneys of beef or mutton— 
Caithness. 
lóinean, An. -an, s.m. see lonan. 2 (CR) Easy, 
careless, fat, untidy fellow—Arran. 
loineanach,** a, Abounding in little meadows. 
loinear,** -eir, s.m. see loiunear. 
loinearach, see loinnreach. 
loinearachd, see loinnearachd. 
loimeid, see loinid. 
loineis, see loinneas. 
longbühriseach,** œ. Causing shipwreck, 
loingbhriseadh, s.m. Shipwreck. 
loingeach, -eiche, o Nautical. 
loingear, -ir, s.m. Marine, sailor, pilot. 
loingeas, -is, s.m. (tum Badenoch] Ship. 2 
Ships, shipping, navy, fleet. 3 Barge. 4 Ex- 
ile. L. erannacn, @ huh masted ship ; 1. cog- 
aidh, @ warship; 1. marsantachd, œ mer- 
chant-ship ; l, spuinnidh, æ privateer. 
loingeasach, -a1che, a. Of or belonging to, or 
abounding in ships or fleets, naval. 
loingseach, -1ch, s.m. Mariner. 
loing-shaor, -shaoir, s.m. see long-shaor. 
loingsich, v.n. Sail, set sail. 
loinid, e, Gan, s. f. Churn-staff. 2 Whisk. 3 
Instrument like à churn-staff but of smaller 
size, and with a twisted rope of hair round 
the horizontal part of it, with which milk or 
whey is frothed, called also ** loinid-omhain.”’ 
loinideach, -eiche, a. Of, or belonging to, or 
like, a churu-staff or frothing-stick. 
loinidh, s.m.ind. Rheumatism, sciatica. [With 
art. an.) Greim lòinidh, a rheumatic twinge; 
gu h-olc leis an lòinidh, ill with the rheuma- 
tism. 
loinidheach, -eiche, a. Rheumatic, 
loinid-omhain, see loinid, 
loinig, -ean, see loininn. 
loinino, -ean, s. Lane for cattle. Scots, loan- 
ing. 
loinn,-e, s.f. Good condition, fatness. 
gladness. 3 Beauty, elegance, comeliness, or- 
der. 4 Esteem, regard. 5 Choice. 6 Badge 
of distinction, crest, arms, 7* Propriety, or- 
nament. 8 (CR) Stack-yard—Perthshire. 9 
(CR) Garden—sStrathbraan. +10 Corn-field. 
t11 Corn-pen. 712 Barn-yard. +13 Court, en- 
closed ground, area. 14*Decorum. 15 Glade. 
16**Fun, cheerfulness. Dean le Le do it 
gracefully ; cha bhi l. ach far am bi thu, 
there is no decorum but where you are ; is 
beag l. a bhitheas air do ghnothach, your 
errand will scarcely be a graceful one ; chuir 
thu bho l. e, you have spoiled i£ ; dh’ fhalbh 
l. an taighe leis, the elegance of the house went 
with him ; cha mhór a l., its consequence is 
not very promising ` brògan a chur ou ar cinn 
cha dean L d ar casan, to put shoes on our 
heads will not make our feet elegant. 
loinn, -ean, s.m. The locative case of lann, used 
in place-names—f, 
loinneach, -eiche, a. see loinnear. 
loinneach, -eiche, œ. Abounding in tufts of wool 
or flakes of snow. 
lòinneag, see lòineag. 
lòinneagach, -aiche, a. see lòinneach. 
loinnear, -cire, a. Beautiful, elegant, becoming. 
2 Cheerful, joyful, bright, pleasant. 3 Shin- 
ing. 4 Splendid, fine.  9** Proper, neat. 
Duine L, æ splendid, proper fellow; ceòl ki 
Jine music ; taigh 1., an elegant house, 


2 Joy, 


Lé 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


595 
(DMy) Nap on the ''nght" or out-side of 





loise ` 

loinnear,** -eir, s.m. Light, gleam of light, — 
flash of light. ^E 

loinuearacu, -aiche, œ. see loinnreach. à 

loinnearacad, s f. Beauty. 2 Brightness, effut, ` 
gence, gleaming, ciarity. 3 Loudness 
ousuess. Í 

loinneas, -eis, s.f, Wavering, act or habit of 
wavering, rambling. 2 Eagerness of desire. 
9 Elegauce, comeliness. 












e 
Së 


a d 
» SODnOr-  — 


=, 


s VN 


A 
He 


e a 


4 Uneerfulness. 5 1 

Fast speaking.  OffArt, skill, dexterity, 7  . 
Sprightliness. 8**Neatness, seemliness, Y 

loinneil, -e,@. see loinnear. 

loiunir, see laiunir. 

loinnireachd, see loinnearachd. 

loiunreach,** -eich, s.m. Blaze, gleam. = 

loinnreach, eich, q. Bright clear, shining, Ae 
glittering. 2 Loud, soundiog, sonorous. 3 
Changeaple, variable, changing. 3 Burnished, ` 


4°*splendid. 5**Brave. Claidheamh l, @  - 
gleaming sword. q 
loinnreachadh, -aidh, s. m. Shinin 
causing to shine. A’l—, pr.pt. of loinnrich. — 
loinnreachair,** s,m. Burnisher. 
loinnreachas, -ais, s.m. Burnish. 
loinnrich, v. y. Shine, brighten, cause to shine, 
bespangle, glitter, sparkle. 
loinseach,** -ich, s.m. Bxile. 
lòintean, n.pl. of lon. 
loir,** pr.pt. a’ loireadh, v. see loirc. 
loire, v.a. Wallow, roll in the mud. 2*Drub. 
loire, -e, -ean, s.f. Deformed leg, foot or shank. - 
+2tfGammon of bacon, thigh of a hog. 3(AQ) ` 
Footmark. 1 
loirceach,* æ. Short-legged. 
- = S. f. Very short-legged woman. 
loirceadh, -idh, s.m. Wallowing, act of wallow- 
ing in mud. A’ l—, pr.pt. of loire. "3 
loirceag, -eig, -an, s.f. Woman having deform- __ 
ed legs. 2,Tawdry, diminutive girl. 3 (AC) — 
. Active female child. Y 
loircean, -1n, -an, s.m. Man with deformed legs. | 
2 Dwarfish boy. 3 Uncouth boy. 4 see laoigh- í 
cionn. 5(AC) Active male child. 6* Short- — t 
legged man whose body is almost on the 
ground. 
loirceineach, -ich, see loircean. 
loircire,* see loircean. 
loireach,(DMy) a. Soiled, as when 
wool is bedaubed with mud. 2 St 
being dyed or barked brightly. Da 
ain air an aodach 
colour on the cloth (or sail.) 
loireachan, s.m. Boggy or wet place. 
loireadh, see laoireaun. 
loireag, -eig, -an, s,f. Handsome, 
Sy cow. 2 Fat little giri. 
(AF) Petrel. 5 (AU) Water-nymph, water- — 
Sprite, water-fairy. ‘Ihe loireag presided over 
the warping, weaving, waulking and washing ` 
_ of the web—AC. A 
Loiream, s.m. Trifler. Nuair a bhitheas 
air an eathar, bithidh siubhal nan 
alg Loiream, when the others are afloat, and 
working hard at the fishing, ler goes Jrom . 
house to house. H 
loirean,(AF) s.m. Lamb late of weaning. 
loireanach, -ich, s.m. Male child just able to 
walk. 2*Bespattered, dirty little fellow, 
loireanachd, s.f.ind. The first walking of an in- ` 
fant, first attempts at walking, 2 Piashing 
through mud, 
loirgneadb, -idh, s.m. Stalk, 
lois, see loch-bhléin. 
lois, (Abies Fox. 
loisceanta, see loisgeanta. 
loisdean, s.m Primrose— A rran, - 
floise, a. 1niamed. 


Z, actof, or — 





WEE 


La 


a sheep's - 
ate of nob 
th loireach- 
(no air an t-seòl), o dull 





D 


.4 


X 
Lë Ke 2947 
ES ADU mE" PPS. 


7 


iA 
rough or shag- 
3 Pan-cake. 4 


ee: 


— a 


a e al 








càch — 
taighean 


Ht 
fe, 


Original from | 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 
, URBANA-CHAMPAIGE 


we t 


ei 
Ki 


re loise 


4loise, s.f. Flame. 2 Clearness. 

dloiseadh, s.m. Flame. 2 Clearness. 

loisdin, s. **Home, (lodging.) 2(AF) Small kind 

.. of fish. 

‘loisdineach, s. Guest, 

Toiseann, see loch-bhléin. 

loiseam, -eim, s.m. Show, pomp of appearance. 

- 2 Showy assemblage of persons. 3** Com: 

` pany of gentry. B' uallach do L, noble was 

| thy company. . 

lóiseamach, -aiche, œ. Showy, of pompous ap- 

| pearance. 

oisg, pr.pt. a’ losgadh, v.a. & n Burn, inflame, 

— cause to burn. 2 Consume, be wasted by 
fire. 3 Parch, singe, scorch, scald. 4 Fire, 

|J 8s 3 gun. L, iad e, they burnt him in effigy. 

loisgeach, -eiche, a. Burning, flaming. 2 ‘hat 

_ burns or produces burning. 3 That can be 

burnt, inflammable. 4 Fiery. 5 Eager, keen. 
6 Caustic, corroding. 

ail,(MS) a. Combustible, 

loisgeadair, -ean, s.m. Incendiary. 2 Burner. 

loisgean, -ein, -an, s.m. Pimpernel, poor man's 

. weather-glass, burnet. | 2 see falcair. 8 

~ **Salamander. 

‘loisgeann, see losgann. 

-—— ————ach, see losgannach. 

loisgeanta,* a. Very keen. 2 Fiery. 3 Inflam- 

— matory, inflammable, parching, scorching. 4 
Blasting. 5**Keen. 

— —chd,* s.f.ind. Fieriness. 

loisgearnach, -aiche, æ. Swift, nimble. 

-loisgionn,** s.m. Locust. 

loisgrean,** -ein, s.m. Burnt corn,corn burnt out 

` ofthe ear instead of being threshed. 


Lë 


















ed, parched, inflamed. Leann l., dregs from 
` which ale is brewed. ` 

Joisid, e, -ean, s.f. see losaid. 

à each, -eiche, see losaideach. 
oisidh, s.f. (AF) Fox. 2 **Flame. 
-loisneach, -eiche, a. Cunning, crafty. 
constant. 3 Unquiet, disturbed. 
loist,** s.f. Pillion, pannel. 2 Sloven. 
EU s.m. Trough, 

| loistean, -ein, -an, s. m. Lodging, tent, booth, 
.. dwelling-place. 

| Tloisteil,** a. Slothful, inactive. 
-loistich-fuinidh,** s.f. Kneading-trough. 

ut, v. see lot. 

loit, s.f. **Whore. 2 see lot. 

loite,** past part. Stung, bitten. 
loiteach,(MS) a. see loibheach. 

loiteachd, s..ind. for loibheachd, see loibh- 
 loiteadh,( MS) s.m. eachas. 

loiteag,** -an, s.f. Nettle. 2 Whore. 
loitheach, a, see loibheach. 

E see loibheachas. 

loithreach, a. Tattered, ragged — Don I.Ghobha. 
-oit-shealgair,** s.m. Debauchee. 

. loithte,(MS) a. see lobhta. 

_ achd,(MS) s.f. see Joibheachas. 

lom,luim & luime, a. Bare, naked, without 
. covering. 2 Threadbare. 3 Bleak, without 
~ verdure, open, exposed. 4 Lean. 5 Defence- 
= less. 6 Stinted, miserly. 7 Cutting, satiri- 
eal. 8 Smooth. Cho l.ri óigh, as smooth as 
|. Q& virgin ; isl. an leac air nach buaineadh tu 
bàirneach, itis a bare rock on which you will 
— hot be able to find a limpet—said of a mean ex- 
= acting person ; lannan lom, naked swords ; cha 
— bhi sonas air bus lom, æ bare mouth will not 
~~ be lucky —i.e. politeness is better than blunt- 
| . mess; lain L., cutting John. 

lom, pr.pt. & lomadh, v.a. Shear, clip, shave. 
make bare. 2 Pillage, plunder. 3**Strip, 4 
ee rok. 5ttUnhusk, 









2 In- 




















Digitized by 


SINTERNET ARCHIVE 


597 
lom, luim & luime, s.m. Bare surface or plain, 


loisgte, past pt. of loisg. Burnt, scorched,scald- | T 


lomhar 


field. 


lomadair, -ean, s. m. Shearer, shaver, barber, 


parer, one who shears, shaves, or makes 
bare. 2 Sheep-shearer. 3 Spoiler, plunderer. 

eachd,** sr ind. Sheep-shearing. 2 
Shaving. 3 Plundering. 


lomadh, -aidh, s. m. Shearing, act of shearing, 


shaving, or making bare. 2 Plundering, act 
of plundering, pillaging. 3 Desolation. 4* 
Utter devastation, ruination. 5(MS) Rasure. 
A’ 1—, pr. pt. ot lom. 6 When the grain 
was hardened by the fire previous to being 
put into the quern to grind, it was placed in 
a tub and stamped with the bare feet to se- 
parate the hard inner shells of the corn ; this 
operation was called *'lomadh."—MMocD. 
DMK says lomadh was performed with the 
flail, and consisted in breaking the spikes of 
the barley after it was threshed. Also per- 
formed by driving a spade into a tub contain- 
ing the grain, the clippings being afterwards 
removed by wiunowing—DU. 

lomag agus tiorlaman, s. Whisky and oatmeal— 
Arran. 

lomaidh,(AF) s,f. Shorn sheep. 

lomain,** s.f. Snield. 

lomair, -ean, s.m. see lomadair. 2 Fleece. 

lomair, pr. pt. a’ lomairt & a’ lomradh, po 
Fleece, shear, as sheep. 2 (MS) Denude. 

lomairt, -ean, s.m. Fleecing, act of fleecing or 


shearing of sheep. 2ttfleece. 3 Peeling, 
4 SE A’ 1—, pr.pt. of lomair. [** gives 
Site 


Homairteach, -eiche, a. Bare, shorn, bald. 

— — — —— ,** -eich, s.m. Bald man. 
loma-luath, adv. Assoon as. Cho loma-luath 
's a chi thu e, the very instant you see him. 
loman, -ain, s.m. Bald man. 2 Poor naked 
4**Knot in timber. 


man. 3 Miser, niggard. 
5** Piece of timber stripped of its bark. 6** 
Knot in timber stripped of its bark. 7 En- 


sign, standard. 8** Shield. Gheibh an Le 

an lom-dhonas, the niggard will receive his full 

share of misery. 

ach, -aich, s.m. see loman, 2**Person oí 
meagre form. 

lomar, -air, s.m. Fleece. 

lomar, fut.pass. of lom. 

——ach,** a. Fleecy, woolly. 
fleecy sheep. 

lomardach, see lomartach. 

tlomargain,** s.f. Devastation, ravaging, plun- 
dering. 2 Fleecing. 

lomarta, past pt. of lomair. Shorn, fleeced. An 
treud l., the shorn flock. 

lomartach, -aiche, a. Bare, naked, shaven, bald, 
uncovered. z 

— —————4,** s.f. Nakedness, bareness. 

lomartair, -ean, s.m. see lomadair. 

lombair,-e, see lompair. 

lombar, see lompair. 

lomchar, -air, -airean, s.m. Bare place. L. nam 
màlaidhean, the space between the eyebrows. 

lom-chasach, -aiche, «. Bare-footed. 

lom-chnaimheach, -eiche, a. Bare-boned. 

lom-dhouas,** -ais, s.m. Misery, poverty. 

lom-éiginn, -e, -ean, s.f. Absolute necessity. 

lom-fhulangas, -ais, -an, s.m. Bare permission. 

lomhainn, -e, -ean, $.f. Cord or thong to lead a 
dog, leash. 2*Pack of hounds. L. chon, o 
leash of hounds. 

lomhair,** s.f. see lomhainn. 

lombair, -e, œ. Brilliant, shining, gleaming, 
glittering, bright, effulgent, 2 ‘Lransparent. 
3 Stately. 

lomhar, see lomhair. 





Caoraich 1., 


Original from 


NA-CHAMPAIGN 


lom-làn 





lom-là», @ Quite full, brim-full. 

lom-luath, see loma-luath. 

Jomna,** -aidh, s.m. Rope. 

lomnachas, -ais, see lomnochdaidh. 

Tloanair,** s.m. Harper. 

lomnoch, og see lomnochd., 

lomnochd, &. Naked, uncovered, bare. 

—, sf. Nakedness, 

—achd,** s. f. Nakeduess, bareness, 

state of being uncovered, L. na tire, the na- 

kedness (bareness) of the land. 

—adh, san, Denudation. 

aich, v.a. Denude. 

—aiche, $.f. see lomnochdaidh. 

—aidh, s. f. ind. Nakedness, bareness, 

baldness, state of being uncovered. 

——nuiche,** s.f. see iomnochdaidh. 

——— —uidh, see lomnochdaidh. 

lompair, a. Dare, 2 Uufertile. 

——————,-e,-ean, S$. f. Bare plain. 2 Unfer- 
tile, sterile plain. 3**Field haviug a meagre 
crop of grass. 4* Common, 5**Bare surface. 

loinpais, s.m.ind. Niggardliness. 2 Straitened 
circulstauces, poverty. [** gives s.f.] 

lompas, -aise, a. Sparing, niggardly. 

lompas,tf s.m. see lompais. 

lomrach,* -aiche, a. Fleecy, woolly. 2 Fleecing, 
shearing. Caorach 1l., æ fleecy sheep. 

lomradh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Fleecing, act of 
fleecing, shearing of sheep. 2 Fleece. 3** Ef- 
fulgence. 4 Gorgeousness, 

lomraisteach,** a. Naked. 

lom-sgriob, -an, s.f.Bare sweep,complete devas- 
tation, laying entirely waste. 2**Sweepstake. 
3 Complete erasure. 

—, pr.pt. a’ lom-sgriobadh, v.a. Erase. 

2 Destroy utterly. 3 Lay waste. 

—adh, -aidh, s. m. Destroying, act of 

destroying utterly. A’ l—, pr. pt. of lom- 

sgriob. 

—ta, past pt. Utterly erased, destroyed, 
laid waste. 

lomta, past pt. of lom. Shorn, made bare, 
peeled, clipped, fleeced, stripped, shaven, 
wade naked. 

lon, -din, s.m. Food, provision, diet, dinner, 
store. The Gael of old, like other ancient na- 
tions, had but one meal or «iet daily—th° 
lon. The terms dinneir, biadh-noin, &c. ar. 
modern introductions. Air bheag loin, on a 
scanty diet ; 1. de luibhibh, a dinner of herbs. 

lón, din, -óintean, s.m. Meadow, lawn. 2(CR 
Small brook, especially with mirshy banks-- 
Skye, 13 Marsh, morass. t4 Pond, lakelet, 


water, mud. 

lon, -oin, s.m. Elk. 2 (AEF) Moose deer. 3 (AF) 
Bison, buffalo. 4 Blackbird, ouzel, see lon- 
dubh. Is binn guth loin, sweet is the bleck- 
bird’ s note. 

on, -oin, -an, s.m. Rope of raw hides, used by 
the inhabitants of St. Kilda, by which a man 
is lowered down a precipice in search of wild- 
fowl or their eggs. Lon làidir na feuma, the 
strong rope of need. 

lon, -oin, s. m. Greed, voracity, hunger. 2 
Prattle. 

lonach, s.m. Avenue. 

lonach,** -aich, s.m. Larder, Dan rg, 

lonach, -aiche, a. Greedy, voracious, hungry. 
2** Bewraying, prone to tell secrets. 3 Fu- 
tile. 4 Talkative, forward, prattling. 5 Alert. 
6 Abounding ia elks, or 7 in blac«birds. 

* s.f. Garrulous, voracious female. 





e~ ——- 























U 


598 


E E AE 

lonach !, s.f inl. Greediness, voracity, 9 Talks 
a 1veness, habit of prattling or tale-telling. 

BE Seene ich, -achau, s. m., Croco- | 

ile. 

lonach-shlionach, (AF) see lonach-shligneach. 

lonadh, -aidh, sm. Greed, voracity, see lon. 

lonaz. -aige, -an, s.f. Prattling female, tala-tell- 
ing female. 2 Blackbird, see lon-dubh. ` 

ach, -aiche, a. “Vactling, prattling like a 
female, 

louaiche, s.f. see lonachd. 

——, comp. of lonach. More or most greedy. 

lonail, see loiuid. 

lónaid, (MS) s.f. Lane, 

lonaig, s.f. Alley, lane for cattle. 

lonail, o. Alimental, 

lonailt,** s, f. Repository, storehouse, pantry. 

lonainn,** 8.f. Cord. 2 Lane or passage for 
eattle. 

lonair,* -ean, s.m. Voracious man. 

lonais, s. f. ind, Prattling, disposition to tell 
tales, prating. 2 Futili.y. 

lonaiseach,ft -eiche, a. Prating. 

lonan, -ain, -an, 8.m. Greedy person. 2 Forward > 
prattler, tale-teller. 3 Prattling, vain talk, 
tale-telling. 4 Blackbird, see lon-dubh. 5 
Nightingale. Nach sguir thu de d' lonan? 
will you not cease your prattiing 3 | 

lonas, see lonachd. 

lon-cheannachd, s.f. Grocery, groceries. 

lon-cheannaiche, s. m. Grocer. 

lon-chcilearach,(AF) s.f. Ring-ouzel. 

lon-chraois, s.m. Bull-head, 24 Bulimia. 3 ` 
(AF) May-fly. 4(AF) Water-spider, water- ` 
beetle, water-demon, water-glutton. 5 (AF) ` 
Angler-fish. 6 Canine appetite. 7(DMK) In- 
ordinate desire or appetite. 

lon-dubh, loin-duibh, s.m. Blackbird, ouzel— 

turdus merula, % Nightingale. 








lónach, -aiche, a. Full of marshes or meadows. | lone, gen. luing & luinge, pl. -an, s.f. Any kind : 


2 Abounding in food, alimental. An coire 1., 


the meadowy dell. j 
tonachan,(AC) s.m. Rope in uprights of loom. 


D HILGER 1 


NIE dir A 


ITI 
Li 


of ship. 2 Three- or four-masted barge. For 
the names of parts of a ship, see under bata. 
Tha iomadh tonn eadar anl, 's an tir, there 


Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF II 


LIDD A M n [D H Af A T NSS 
PIRSA T kt TA mAT a N 





long 













said of what children will do, &c. 


|J. grow up. 

Hong, -oing, s.m. Ling (fish.) 2 Cup. 3 Bed, 
hammock (this for langa.) 4 House, place. 
5 Breast. 6 Enclosure. 7 Encampment. 
long, v.a. Destroy, devour. 2 Worry. 

— longach, -aiche, a. Naval, nautical. 
longadan,** -ain, s.m. Swing-swong. 
longadh,** -aidh, s.m. Casting, throwing. 2 De- 
. youring. 3 Rocking. t4 Supper, meal, diet. 
— longair,** s.f. Ship's crew. 

 long-aisig, luinge-, longan-, s.f. Transport. 

— Jong-amar, -amrach, -amraichean, s.m. Dock. 
. longart, s.m. see long-phort. 

- longas, -ais, s.m. Shipping. 2 Banishment, 

- long-athair, s.f. Air-ship. 

dd -— -teine, s.f. Fire-balloon. 

- long-bhathadh, -aidh, s.m. Shipwreck. 

- 4long-bhraine, s.f. Prow of a ship. 

` long-bhriseach, -eiche, a. Causing shipwreck. 
-idh, -idhean, s.m. Shipwreck. 
s. f. see long-mhar- 


mm. 
I 





— long-bhriseadh, 


` Jong-cheannaiche, -an-, 
i santachd. 

- long-chogaidh, luinge-,longan-, s.f. Man-of-war. 
|. 2 Privateer. 

— Jong-chreachaidh,(AH) s.f. Privateer. 







` long-dhiona, luinge-, longan-, s. f. Convoy, 

|. guardship. 

— long-dhidein, s.f. Guardship. 

— long-Eireannach, s.m. Well-known Gaelic 

— waulking-song, sung by the women when 

` waulking cloth. The sweetheart of each girl 
|. present is named in turn by the singers as 

b the song proceeds, the whole of the workers 

| taking up the chorus, (Jit. ‘‘ the Irish ship.") 
" long-fhada,1fluing-, s.f. Galley. 2 Yacht. 3 
.. Lymphad, (as in the arms of Clanranald.) 

Jong Jann, tt s.f. Dock-yard. 

«. long-lódaidh, s.7. Ketch. 

| long.ódail, see long-lodaidh, 

is long-mharsantachd, s.f. Merchant-ship. 

€ long-phort, -phuirt, -an, s.m. Harbour, haven. 

= 2Camp, garrison. 4 Palace, royal residence. 

— PB Tent, 6 Sheiling-hut. 

` long-phortach, -aiche, œ. Abounding in har- 

bours or camps. 2 Of, or belonging to, camps, 

harbours, or garrisons. | 

- Jong-ràmhach, luing-, -an-, s.f. Galley, pinnace. 

Wé. pone Sear, -air, -airean, s,m. Leak or chink ina 

= ship. 













ach, -aiche, a. Causing rifts in a ship. 
e adh, -aidh, -aidhean, see long-sgar. 

- long-shaor, -aoir, s.m. Ship-builder, ship's car- 
penter. 

 long-shuaicheantas,** -ais, s.m. Aplustre. 

- Jong-spuille, s.f. see long-spüinneadh. 

— Jong-spüilleadh, -idh, see long-spüinneadh. 

` long-spüiuneadair, -ean, s.m. Pirate, sea-robber. 
ji long-spùìnneadh, -idh, -idhean, s.m. Piracy, act 
tae, of plundering ships, ! 
— Jong-spüinnidh,ff s.f. Privateer, pirate-ship. 

` long-thogail, s.f. Shipbuilding. 2 Art or trade 
—— of shipbuilding. 

- lonloingean,** .ein, s.m. Gullet, throat. 2 Any 
A A 

















b 


- pipe. - 

lon-mhonaidh,(AF) s.f. Ring-ouzel. 

— lonn, -oinn, -an, s.m. [s.f. **] see lunn & lann. 
Jonn -a &luinn, s.m. Anger, choler. 2 High 
swelling of the sea, surge. Air lonn a dhol 
A dhachaidh, on the point of going home. 

A lonn, luinn & luinne, a. Strong, powerful. 
— Fierce. 

— Jonnach, -aiche, a. High-swelling. 

| adh,** -aidh, s. m. Abiding, dwelling, 
= sojourning. 2 Continuance. 

Flo sagan, -ain, s. m. 


dy 
Un 


2] 





Di g itized b y 


KITEDBMET ARCUINILC 
IN LE ni WE I i AN ^ H p V E 


| 599 
b BEEN A A LE nee E E E a T Ta 
- Ge manya wave between the ship and land—|lennair,** a. Gorgeous. 

when they | tlonnrach, 


lorg-bheart 


-aich, $. see loinnreach. 

-- , -aiche, a. see loinnreach, 

lonnrachadh, -aidh, s.m. j£ pr. pt. 
reachadh. 

lonnrachd, s. see loinnearachd. 

lopnradh, -aidh, see loinnreachadh. 

lonnraich, pr.pt. a’ lonnrachadh, see loinnrich. 

lonnraichead,** s. Brightness. 

lonrach, a.  Well-fed, satisfied—Dain Iain 
Ghobha. 

lónuinn,** s. Alley. 

lon-uisge,4 s. Common dipper, see gobha-uisge. 
2 (AF) Water-craw. 

lopan,* -ain, s.m. Wain, see loban. 

lopan, -ain, Suth’d for laban. 

ach, -aiche, see làbanach. 

lorachadh,(DMK) s.m. Reviling, traducing. 

loramach, -aiche, æ. Suth’d for lomartach. 

d, Suth’d for lomnochd. 

loramadh, Suth’d for lomradh, (fleece, fleecing.) 

tlorc, a. Fierce, cruel. 

flore, luirc, s.f. Foot. 

lore,* loire, s.m. see liorc, 2 Cramp —Arran. t3 
Murder, parricide. 

lorcach, -aiche, a. Lame, crawling. 

lorc-chosgach,** a. Anti-spasmodic. 

lorchair,(AF) s.m. Foal. 

lor-daothain,** s. Sufficiency, enough. [leóir- 
doithinn—4rish.] 

lorg, luirge, An, s.f. Staff. 2 Crutch. 3 Haft 
of a spear. 4 Staff of a flail. 5 Straight stick 
with the bark on. 6 Shaft or tram of a cart. 
7**Stalk of a plant. 8**Nhaftof a banner, 9 
Footstep, track, path, print. 10 Mark. 11 
Sign. 12 Consequence, 13 Vestige. 14 Troop, 
band. 15 Progeny, offspring. 16 Leg, shank. 
shin. 17 Thigh. 18 Woman. Lean ini air an 
luirg aige, I followed his track; an l. a’ ghnoth- 
aich seo,as the consequence of this thing; cu 
luirge, not necessarily œ terrier, as given by 
** but any dog that tracks ; La dha shùla, 
guiding himself by landmarks, or following the 
tracks with both his eyes. 

florg, a. Blind. 

lorg, pr.pt. a’ lorg & a’ lorgadh, v.a. see lorg- 

aich. A7 LL loin, foraging provision. 

lorgach, -aiche, a. Having a staff or crutch. 2 
Tracing, that tracks by scent or footprints. 3 
Having many marks, abounding in marks or 
footprints. 4 Pursuing. 5 Searching. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Tracing, act of tracing 

or tracking. 2 Pursuing. 3 Walking on 
crutches. <A’ 1—, pr.pt. of lorgaich. A’ l. 
lòin, foraging provision. 

lorgadair, see lorgair. | 

lorgadh, -aidh, s. m. & pr. pt. of lorg. Same 
meanings as lorgachadh. Cu lorgaidh, @ 
dog that tracks, as a terrier, or pointer. 

lorgaich, pr.pt. a’ lorgachadh, v.a. Trace, track, 
search, pursue, follow by scent or footprints. 
9 Search for information. 3 Forage. 4 In- 
vestigate. 5**Walk on crutches. 

lorgaichte, past pt. of lorgaich. Traced, tracked, 
found out by tracing, pursued. 2 Searched. 

lorgair, -ean, s.m. One that traces or tracks. 2 
Searcher, 3ifLlmitator. 4 Dog that follows 
by scent, as a foxhound. 5 Slow-hound. 6 
**Bloodhound. 7 (AF) Pointer. 8**Spy. 9 
**Terrier. 

eachd, s.f.ind. Tracing, act or habit of 
tracing. 2**Inquisitiveness. 3**Espionage. 

lorgan, see lorgair. 

ach,** -aich, s.m. Sluggard. 

lorganach-shneachda, (CR) s.m. Sufficient snow 
to show à track d 


see loinn- 











Passionate young man.|lerg-bheart,** s.f. Foot harness, coyering for 


Soo fe 

= e 

LES | k 

D [^i 
UR 
LE. H 
= d 


BANA-CHAMPAIGN 


Torg- thy art 








the legs and feet. 2 Armour for the legs. 


lorg-iomain, luirg-, s.f. Goad or stick for driv- i lotadh, 3rd. per. sing. & pl. imp. of lot. 


ing cattle, rod. [McL & D gives s.m.] 

lorg-slighe, luirg-sh-, s.m. Genealogy. 2% Reci- 
tal of one's genealogy or descent, formerly 
done on the death of a chieftain, 

lormachd, Suth’d for lomnochd. 

tos,tt adv. & prep. About to. 2 In-order-to. 

los, s.m. ind. Purpose, intention, 2 Sake, ac- 
count. 3 Design. 4Strength. 5 Virtue. 6 
Control. 7**Etfect, consequences. Tha làn 
an t-saoghail fol. a’ bhàis, everyone is under 
the control of death : tha mi a’ dolaira 1, I 
am going in search (lit.on account) of it ; tha 
mi i. dui dbachaidh, J have a mind to go home; 
tha mi a’ lieth los, 4 hav? half a mind ; air 
l., for ; siod na bh’ agam air l. mo thuruis, 
that is all I got for my journey. 

tlos, lois, s.m. Point, end of a thing. 2 Tail. 

losaid, -e, -ean, s.f. Kneading-trough. 2 Sir- 
loin of beef— Lewis. 3 Hip. Chaidh a’ bio 
as a losaid,the hip of the cow went out of joint. 

——-— each, -ziche, a Abounding ia kneading- 
troughs. 

tlose, | Sam, Lame person. 

losg,(AC) s. Leprosy. 

2 Blind. 3 Dumb. 


tlosg,** a. Cripple. 
,** s.m. Lame person. 2 Bliud person. 


losgach, -aiche, a. see loisgeach. 
losgadair, -ean, s.m. see loisgeadair. 
losgadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s. m. Burning, act or 
state of burning, combustion. 2 Firing, as 
soldiers at a target, or an enemy, 3 Kin- 
dling, inflaming, singeing, scorching. 4 Scald- 
ing. 5 Parching. 6 Burr, scald. A’ l—, pr. 
pt. of loisg. L. na gréine, the scorching of the 
sun, especially on à person’s-skin ; 1. dealan- 
aich, blasting by lightning ; 1.-an-leanna, 
what the Highland smugyzlers call the process 
of distilling worts or beer, the produc. being 
low-wiues or ceud-tharruing. 
-braghaid,|| s.m. Heart-burn, [Preceded 
by the art. an. | 
-daighi,!| Heart-burn. 
losgan,** -ain, s.m. Childhood. 
losgann, -ainn,-an, s. m. Toad. 2 Frog. 3 
Wretch, contumel:ous appellation. 4**rare- 
ly Childhood. 5(DU) Frog- ortoad-spawn. 9 
(DU) Jellyfish. 
, S.f. Sort of drag or sledge. [tf gives 
Abounding iu toads, 


s.m.] 
frogs or sledges. 2 Like a toad, frog or sledge. 








ach, -aiche, o 





-buidhe, (AF) Toad. 2 Frog. 
-dubh, L** gives l.-buidhe for frog, 
-nimhe, and ].-dubh for toad. ` 


losz-bhra-teine,** s. Ducking or throwing of 
stones obliquely against the water, so that 
they rebouud several times from the surface. 

losg-lann,** $.m. Fire-receptacle. 

losgunn, see losgann. 

lot, gen. -a & loit, pl. -an, s.m. Wound, hurt, 
stab, bruise. 2**Whore. 3"*Wool. 4**Leg. 
5** Washing. A'l—, pr.pt. of lot. L. urchair, 
a gum-shot wound ; l.-claidheimh, a sword- 
wound ; lan lot, full of wounds. 

lot, pr.pt. a’ lot & a’ lotadh, v.a. Wound, pierce, 
hurt, stab, bruise. 2 Disease. 3 Take out a 
piece with the teeth. **rarely Commit forni- 
cation, L. imóran, she has wounded many. 

lotach, -aiche, a, Wounding, piercing, stabbing, 
hurtirg, bruising, maiming. 2 Apt to wound 
or pierce. 3 Destructive. Lannan i, destruc- 
tive swords. 

lotadh, -aidh, s.. Wounding, act of wouuding 
stabbing, hurting,maiming. 2 Wound,bruise, 
stab. 3**rarely Fornication, Æ’ l—, pr. pt. 


Dit 


NTERNET 


NW 


ADUE 
el D S H M — 


600 


Iuachair-bhog . 

of lot. 

t l L. e 
iad, let him wound them. 

lotag,$ s.f. Nettle, see deanntag. 

lotar,**-air, s.m, Ruining. 2 Mangling. 

lotar, a. Sharp. 

-——, fut. pass. of lot. Shall he wounded. ` 

lot-ghearradh, -aidh, -aidh.an, s.m. Incision 

tloth,** s.m. Beard. 2 Sweat. 

loth, -a, -an, s. f. & m. Filly, foal, colt, 2 (DU) 
Colt up to a year old— iist. z**Meal, diet. 4 
Marsh—‘uth’d. L. asail, an ass's colt, 

lothach, -aiche, a. Having many fillies, abound- 
ing in fillies. 2 see làthach, 

lothad, see lod. 

lothag, -aig, -an, $.f., dim. of loth, Little filly, 
foal or coit. £ Young filly, foal or colt. 

lothagach, -aiche, a. Having many young fil- 
lies, ab undiug in little or young fillies. 

lothail, -9, -can, s, f. Brooklime—veronica bec- 
cabvn,a. 2 Lavender, see lus-na-tüise. 

lothainn, see lomhainn. 

lothair,'* s. m. Lavender, see lus-na-ttise. 
Uisge an lothair, /avend»r-water. 

——-—, s.m, see lothar, 

lothal,** -ail, -an, see lothail. 

tlothar, -air, s.m. Assembly. 2 Cauldron. S$ 
Trough. 4 Hound. 5 Cloth, raiment. 

lothta,(MS) a. see lobhta. 


tlu, a. Little. 
2 Heap. 3 Oath. 4 Foot. 


tlua, s.m. Water. 
5 Kick. 6**Hand. 

luach, s.m.ind. Value, worth. 2 Amends, 3S 
Wages. L. ciatach, œ good price; L saoith- 
reach, price of labour, wages ; cha deanainn 
air mhór Inach e, I world not do it on any con- 
sideration ; l.-pe:ghinn, æ (Scots) pennyworth; 
l.-saoraidh, a ransom ; lan laach, rull price. 

luach, pr.pt, a’ luachadh, v.a. Value, fix as the 
value. 2 Comprehend, understand, 

- ——ach, -Aiche. æ. see luachmhor. 

luachadair,** s.m. Appraiser, 

luachaid,** s.f, Frost. í 

luachail, -ala, a. Rateable. { 

luachair, luachrach, s.f. Common rush—junce : 
conglomeratus. A single rush is called luaich- 
irean. Leabaidh luachrach, a bed of rushes. | 

luachair,** a. Bright, resplendent. 

,** s. f. Splendour, brightness, 2 

Tempest. 

-bhog, s.f.co’l. Bulrushes, the soft rush `, 
—juneus effusus, 


sn B 








à AM 
432, Luachair-bhog. € í 


Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOISA 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGNME 
l 





e 


SEV a 


T F ` E 
PLI - 
"da c 


e" 2 
T s 


FE 


es 


Tep 


E 





Iuachair-bhogain 


]Iuacnair-bhogain, s.f. Lake-scirpus—Colonsay. 
. Juachair-choille, s.f. Wood-rush—luzula sylva- 
| tica. 
— luachaireach, -aiche, a. 
 ——--——1,(MS) see luachmhorachd. 
- uachair-ghobhlach,§ s.f. Bulrush, lake-scirpus 
 —seirpus lacusiris. 
luachairneach, -eich, $.f. Place where rushes 
ow. 
- Juach-aisig,"* s.m, Ferriage, water fare. 
achar, -air & -luachrach, st, Bulrush, rusb, 
rushes, 
luach-armunn, -uinn, see luch-armunn, 


see luachrach. 


— luacharn, see Jochran. 


- luach giulain, s.m. Fare. 2 Freightage. 

= luachmhoire, comp. of luachmhor. 

— Juachmboireachd, s. f, ind, Valuableness, pre- 
— A €ijausness,meritoriousness, excellence, worthi- 


|. mess. i 
— lu&chmhor, -oire, a. Valuable, precious, excel- 


lent. 
E acbd, seeluachmhoireachd. 
— luach-pelgbinn, -e, s.m. Pennyworth, good bar- 


Y, ain. 

P Reie, a. Full of rushes, rushy. 2 Likea 
= rush, 3 Made of rushes. An glacag 1., the 
rushy deit, $ 





luachrach, ”™-aich,s.m. Place whera rushes grow. 
2 Grop of rushes. [** gives sti 


luach-saoitbreacb, -ich, s.m. Reward. 2 Hire, 


wages. 
Iuach-saoraldh, s.m. Ransom. 2 Payment. 
fluad, -uaid, am, Joint. 2 Little finger. 


|. luadair,** s.m. Flax-wheel, 2 Fiyer of a jack, 


 Iuadar 233 .air, 3.m. Motion. 2 Haste. 

luadh, luaidh, sm. Mention, conversation, ru- 
mour, talk. 2 Praise, 3 Hope. 4 Desire, 6 
Panegyric. 6 rarely Motion. 7 see luadh- 
adh.  9* Beloved object, Mo luaidh! my 
dear ! gun l-air éirigh, without word of rising; 
mac mo luaidh, the son of my praise ; al, air 
sgeul mo ghraidh, his talk concerning the tal» 
of my love A’ l—, pr.pt. of luaidh in Gairloch 

= dt Lochbroom. 

|. luadh, v.a. see luaidh. 


- ]uadha, see luadhadh. 


. luadhach,** a. Fulling, milling, as of cloth. 
—  Muileann l., a fu/lina-mi. 


|. luadhadair, -ean, s.m. "Fuller of cloth. 
. luadhadaireachd, sr ind. Business or art of 


|. fulling. 
luadhadh, -aidh, s. m. Fulling, act of fulling, 
|». process of Jee 2 Charging, laying to one sg 
charge. 3**Merntioning. 4**Praising. A’ l—, 
pr.pt. of luaidh. 

Where fulling-mills are at a distance, the 
waulking or SE 3 of cloth is performed by 
females in the following manner. Six or 
eight,or sometimes as many as fourteen, take 
their stations, at equal distances, on each 
side of a long frame of wattle work, or some- 
times of à board ribbed longitudinally, and 
placed on the ground. Thereon is laid the 
wetted blanket or cloth which is to undergo 
the process of wanlking. The women then 
kneel, and with their hands rub it firmly 
against the frame with all their strength, 
at the same time sin sing loudly soine spirited 
melody. When their arms grow tired, they 
uaturally have recourse tv their legs ; then 
sitting upon the gronnd, and tucking their 
len up to their knees, the cloth is forth- 
wi 


friction than before. 
warm the song grows louder and louder, 


601 


put under a course of more vigorous 
As the work grows 


Inavirean 
house or shed in which the work is performed, 
an taigh wadhaidh. 

luadhairle,** s.f. Motion, exercise. 

Iua/lhar, fut. pass. of luadh, Shall ba praised. 

lIuadh-ghair, see luath-ghair. 

luadbmhoire, comp, of luadhmhor. 

——achd, s.fiind. Keuown,state of being 

renowned, 

luadhmor, -oire, a. Famous, renowned. Gu 
1., in a notable manner. 

luadhradh,** -aidh, em. Fame, report. 

luadhraich,** v.g. Report. 2 Make renowned 
or notabie. 

luag,**-aig, st Child's doll. 

luagh, see luadh. 

luaghainn, 8 Wobbling. 2 (DMy) Paunch, 
stomach. Cha b'e rud beag a lionadh at, a 
little woud not fill his stomach. 

luaghair, seo luath-ghair. 

— —— each, see luath-ghaireach. 

—eaechd, see luath-ghaireachd, 

eieiei soe Inathsachadh, 

u3Eh-ghair, see luath-ghair. 

each, soe luath-ghaireach. 

——eachd, see luath-ghaireaend, 

luaghias,?* -ais, s.m. Manacle, handcutt, fetter. 

luaghsachd, see luathsachd. 

luaghsaich, see lnatüsaich, 

te, see luathsaichto. 

luaghuta,"* s.m. Gout, gout in the fingers. 





—— M MÀ 











luaichirean, s.f. A single rush—co/?ect. luachair, 


luaidh, pr.pt. a’ luaidh, v.a. & n. Mentjon.ma«e 
mention, 2 Liken to. 8 Praise, celebrate, 
make noted. Na, a lèithid sin rium-sa, do 
not lay such a thing to my charge ; na l. dés 
eile, do not m^ntion other gods. 

luaidh, pr.pt.a’ luadhadh,v.a. Full, mii, or thick- 
en cloth. L. an t-aodach, full the cloth. [Bor 
description of the process, see luadhadh. } 

luaidh, s.m. Mentioning. aet of mentioning, 
speaking. 2 Praising, act of praising. 3 
Praise. Dean L, mak- mention ; gun fhilidh 
gun luaidh, without bard without praise. A’ 
1—, pr.pt. of luaidh. 

luaidh, -e, -ean, s.m. & f. Beloved person, ob- 
ject or subject of praise. 2**Song or poom 
in praise of one, 3 Respect, esteem —Dà;/n 
I. Ghobha. A paidh ! my dearest ! is glas mo 
l pale is my beloved. 

luaidh, -e, s.m. & f. Lead, 2 Plummet or lead 
of a sounding-line, 3 Any kind of shot made 
of lead. L. is stailinn, lead and steel; }. dhubn, 
black lead ; 1. gheal, white lead ; cothrom 
luaidhe, a weight of lead ; 1. ghorim. blue leal; 
1. chaol, lead drops, small shot; eitean luaidhe, 
a lead drop. 

lIuaidh, a. Of lead, leaden. 

luaidh air, (CR) Nearly—erthshire. Cha’n 
'eil e luaidh air bhi deas, it ts not nearly 
ready, 


‘luaidh-cheard, -chéird, s.m. Plumber. 


luaidhe, a. see luailh, a. 

—, gen.sing. of luaidh. 

—,** s.f. Coition, copulation. 

luaidheach, -iche, a. Abounding in lead. 2 
dr un 3 Praising, giving much praise, laul- 
able, 

—————4, $.f. ind. Praising frequent praisin‘, 
habit of praising. 2 Mention, frequent men- 
tion. 3 Reward, recompense, requ'tal. 4 
Love. 5**Rcnown. 

luaidhreal, see laiohreal. 

luaidh-shreang, -eing, -an, 3.7. Plummet. 

luaidate (AH) past pt. of luaidb. Fulled. 2 
Mixed, combined, bemingled, intermingled, 
impregnated with, suffused, transfused. 








—— ‘Bhe song is imown as órgn juadhaidh, aud the | huaidceaa, -eia, 8.15. Vagabond. jq 


luaigh 


luaigh, see luaidh, 

,** a. Cheerful, pleasant, 

** &./. Buying. 2 Price. 

— —eaclid, see luaidheachd. 

Ynailleach,** -ich, s.m. Mimic. 2 Buffoon. 

— — -— , *&iche, &. Mimicking, full of gestures. 

, see luathailteach. 

luailte, see luathailt. 

Ah, à. see luathailteach. 

achd, see Iuathailteachd. 

luailtieh, see luathailtich. 

luaim," sr Restlessness. 2 Giddiness. 

Juaimear, -ir, -irean, s.m. One who speaks too 
much, prattler, prater. 2 Tell-tale. 

-——————achd, s.f.ind. Prating, habit of prating, 
yolubility. 2 Tale-telling. 

huaimh,** s.m. Abbot. 

————neach, see luaineach. 

TInaimh-nighe,** et Wave-offering. 

luaimneach, see luaineach. 

——d, see luaineachd. 

luain,* s. f. see luaineachd. 
Kidneys. 
Monday. 

Juaineach, -eiche, a. Restless, changeable, in- 
constant, fickle. fleeting. 2 Ambulatory. 3 
Uncertain, by fits and starts. 4 Frisking, hop- 
ping, jumping. 
stream. 6**Mercurial, 711 Restless, vola- 
tile. Gu L, restlessly ; leabaibh nan neul 1., 
& bed of restless clouds; ceò l., unsteady mist; 
uisge l. an loin, the running stream of the mea- 
dow. " 














——— 





2** Loins, 3** 
4 gen. sing. of luan, as, Di-luain, 





, Ach, s.m. Traveller, wanderer. 
Volatile or fickle man. 

luaineachas, ais, see luaineachd. 

Àuaineachd, a od Changeableness, fickleness, 
inconstancy. 2*Giddiness. 3 Ambulatoriness., 
4 Constaney of motion. 5 Motion as of a 
stream. 6 Restlessness, volatility, unsteadi- 
ness. 7 Propensity to frisk or skip, continued 
frisking orskipping, habit of frisking or skip- 
ping. 8 Humorousness. 9(MS) Vagrancy. 

Iuaineas, eis, s.f. see luaineachd. 

Juain-ghalar,** s.m. Lunacy. 2 Nephritic pains. 

-— — — ——8«h,** a. Lunatic. 2 Causing ne- 
phritie pains, 3 Affected with nephritic 
pains. 

Iuaintean,** a. Nephritic. 

luaireag, f ein, -an, s.f. Storm petrel—thalassi- 
droma procelluria. (‘‘ Mother Cary's chick- 
ens.” } 





433. Luaireag. 
funfreagan, -ain, -an, s. m. Grovelling person. 
reba iis 3 Child that delights to sit at 
the fire. 





-—ach, -aiche, a. Grovelling, wallowing. 

Amadan 1., agrovelling idiot. 

—achd, s.f.ind. Habit of grovelling or 
wallowing. 

inairean, s.m. Senseless lump. 2 (DMy) Giddi- 
mess Thal, "oam cheann, my head ts giddy. 





602 


5 Moving, in motion, as al 


luarach 


luaireanta, see luaithreanta, 

luaisd,** see sluaisd. 

luaiseagan,T -ain, -an, s.m. 
luaireag. 

luaisg, pr. pt. a’ luasgadh, v.a. & n. Shake, 
cause to shake, toss, wave, bob, swing, shake, 
rock, jolt, brandish.  2** Drive away.  3** 
Float. 

— —-e&ch, -eiche, o Shaking, rocking, swing- 

ing, floating, tossing. 

eachd,** s.f. Rocking motion, continued 
rocking, swinging, or tossing. 

luaisgean, s.m. Giddiness. 

— — — —Va, -einte, a. Movable. 

luaisgte, past pt. of luaisg. Shaken, tossed, 
rocked, swung, à 

luaith, gen ging, of luath. 

Iuaithe, comp. of luath. 

, adv. Sooner, soonest. 

———ad, -eid, s.m. Swiftness, celerity, degree 
of swiftness, quickness or despatch. Air l. re 
gu’m bheil e, however swift he be. 

—ad-phonc, s.m. Minim in musie. 

luaithir,* v.&. Toss in the ashes. 

luaithneachas, 8.m. Fiddle-faddle. 

luaithre, s.f. Ashes, dust. Annan L, in ashes. 

ach, -eiche, æ. Ashy, dusty, covered 
with ashes, full of ashes, 2 Like ashes. $ 
Early, as seed —Islay. Sìol L, early seed ; fogh- 
aradh l., an early harvest. 

— ——Aàch, s.m. Ashes, quantity of ashes,dust. 

luaithreach,** a. Expeditions, active. 

luaithreachadh, 3.m. Caleination. 
luaithreachd,* s.f. Earliness. 

luaithreadh, -idh, s.m. Dust, quantity of dust. 
2 Pulverisation, state of beeoming dust or 
ashes. L. a chois, the dust of his feet. 

luaithreadh,* pr. pt. of luaithir. Tossing in 
ashes. 

luaithreagan, see luaireagan. 

luaithr2an, see luairean. 

luaithreanta, -einte, @. Dusty, covered with 
dust or ashes, 2**Pulverized. 

luaithrich, oe, Caleine. 2* Hasten. 

luaithsgean,(MS) s.m. Levity.. 

tluam,** -aim, s.m.: Abbot. 2 Pilot. 

luamaich, s.f. Lesser paunch. 

Kc sl -ean, sem. Astronomer. 2 Navigator, 
pilot. 

fluaman,** -ain, s.m. Little band, 2 Veil. 

luamh,* 8.f. ‘The lesser paunch, 

tluamh,** -aimh, 8. m. Abbot. 
Sneaking person. 4 Corpse. 

| tluamhair,** -ean, 8.7». Pilot. 

tluamhnachd,** s.f.ind. Abbacy, abbotship. 2 
Priory, priorship. P 

Tluan, -ain, s.m. Greyhound. 2 Woman's breast. 

Luan, -aiu,s./.l'he Moon, 2 Monday. 3*Paunch. . 
Là luain, a Monday ; 2 a day lightened by the | 
moon, i. e. @ day that shall never come, Never- 
mas ; gu là luain, never ( future time only); 
an luan mu dheireadh de'n ràidh, the íast 
Monday of the quarter. f 

fluan, -ain, s. m. **Loin. 2 **Kidney. 3** 
Champion,warrior. 4 (AF) Lamb. 

tluanaisg,** s.f. Chains forthelegs. ` 

fluanasgach,** a. Chaining, fettering, binding. 
2 Chained. eu à 

luan-ghalar,** s. Nephritic pains. ` 

luan-ius,§ -luis, s. m. Moonwort—botrychium 
lunaria. Found but sparingly in Scottish 
Gaeldom. It is a small plant of the ferm 
trib», but very unlike the ordinary fern, & few 
inches in height with a frond of small fan- 
like leaves and a spike of dusty-coloured 


luarach,** aich, &f. Chain. 2 Milking fotter; 


Storm petrel, see 














2 Prior. $8 





tuarach 


fetters, (buarach.) 

-duarach, -aiche, a. Vulgar, common. 

| juaian,t -ain, -an, s.m. Dizziness, faint. (luair- 
enu — DM y.) 

Juargan,** s.m. Grovelling person. 

C ——— ———üàch,** a Groveiliog. 

——— —AÀich,** Pace e 

| —— achd, S.T ind, ; 

a as, -ai e } Grovelling. 

| luas, -ais, s.m. see luathas. 

_—achadh, -aidh, s.m. £ pr.pt. of luasaich, see 

-—.— Juathasachadh. 

| Juasaci..il, see luathasachail. 

| luasaicn, see luathsaich. 

d te, see Iuathsaichte. 

| luas-analach, -aich, see luathas-analach. 

_luasgach, -aiche, a. see luaisgeach. 

d -d, see luaisgeachd. 

TInasgadair, -ean, s.m. Swinger, rocker, tosser. 

| luasgadh, -aidh, s.m. Tossing, act of tossing or 

shaking. 2 State of being tossed, rocked or 
= rolled. 3 Rolling, trembling, 

**Hloating. 5* Oscillation. A’ 1—, pr. pt. of 
|. luaisg. 

- ]uasgain,11 v.a. Shake, vibrate. 

 luasgan, -ain,-an, $.5., Tottering. 2 Jolting 
or rocking à cradle. 3ttHeaving, tossing. 4 
Fear, dread. 5 Giddiness. 6 The spring of a 

^ cycle. "7 going, 8 Fidgeting. 9**Cradle. 10 
**Childhood. Gaoth a chuireas L air meoir 

a’ phris, @ wind that shall make the branch- 

es of the bush to shake. 

_ luasganach, -aiche, a. Swinging, tossing, rock- 

ing. 2 Fickle, inconstant. 3 Restless, fid- 

ety, unsteady. Tonn l., æ tossing wave ; am 
reac l., the restless trout, 

| -~—d, s.f.ind. Rocking, tossing. 2 Incon- 

| stancy, fickleness. 3** Unsteadiness, 4 ** 

_ Amusement of swinging. 

_luasganaich, s.f. Tossing, rocking, jolting. 

———é, -an, s.m., One who tosses, swings 

|». orrocks, 

———2, $.f. ind. Rocking, jolting, tossing. 

.. **swinging, tossing in a swiug, 

| luath, gen. luaith, luatha & luathainn, 8. f. 

__ Ashes, see luaithre. 2 see luadh, 

_luath, luaithe, a. Swift, fleet, nimble. 2 Quick, 
speedy. 3**Iransient. Each l., a swift horse; 
Boe a's luaithe fas, an oak of the quickest 

(e growth. 

E" adv. Soon, quickly. 2 Early. Is fhad' 

— & bha thu, 's l. athainig thu ! you are long of 

b coming, and have come full soon; cho 1., sv 

` soon, so quickly. 

—-,v.a. see luathaich. 2 see luaidh. 

uatha, gen. sing. of luath. 

luathach, -aiche, @. Ashy, abounding in ashes, 

like ashes. 2 see luadhach. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Hastening, act of hast- 

ening, accelerating, act of accelerating. 2 see 

luadhadh. A’ l—, pr.pt. of luathaich. 

| dh, s.m. & pr. pl. of luath., 2 see luadh- 








|. adh. 
luathaich, pr.pt. a’ luathachadh, v.a.& n. Hast- 
en, hurry, make haste, accelerate,speed,more. 
L. ort, make haste. 
-——— ———te, past pt. of luathaich. Hastened, 
accelerated. 
luatbailt, e, s. f. Swiftness, speed, despatch, 
- rapidity, hastiness. 


expeditious, 
— **Volatile. 
s= —d, 5. f. ind. Swiftness, 
. 2 Rapidity. 3 Volatility. 
luathailtich, v. a. Accelerate, 
despatch, 





hasten, forward, 


Aii A 
EN D 


Pv 
E 
= 


603 
| luath-air-a’-bheul,(AH) s. Indiscract sneaking, 


rocking, 4| 


eee ieee ee 





luatuailteach, -eiche, a. Swift, quick, rapid, | 
2 Nimbie, 2 Full of gestures, Zi 


hastiness,; terity. 2 Thievishness. 


| 
i Iuath-long, -luinge, 


luath-long 


garrulity. Ged is luath-air-a’-bheul dhoma a 
ràdh, alihowh I say it who should mot. 
luath-air-a’-theangaidh, see luath-air-a’-bheul 
luathaire,(MS) s. Expedition, haste. 
luath-aireach, -eiche, a. Precocious, immature, 
2 Appreheusive, 3 Quick-witted. 
ail, a, see luath-aireach, 
- d, s.f. Precociousness, immature- 
ness. 2 (MS) Acceleration. 
luath-araich, see luath-ailtich. 














luatharan," -ain, -an, 8.7.(**m.) Se.-lark, sande 
lark, saudpiper —tofanus hypoleuca. 

luactharan-glas.9 s.m. Sauderling—calitris aren- 
area. 2 (AF) Common sandpiper., 





= by or ate e 
MC ik e 
— Se E Y d -- uui 
— á-— T dani " ZK a i mg nd 
= eng > 
OD 
E, a c 
Pd 
— Ee 


434. Luatharan-glas, 

luathas, -ais, 8. 7n. Speed, quickness, expedi. 
tion, swiftness. 2 Agility. 3 Earliness. L. 
an fhoghair, the earliness of the harvest ; L 
analach, asthma; cha bhi l. agus grinneas, 
there cannot be expedition and neatness. 

luathas-analach, sm. Asthma, 2 Palpitation. 

luath-bhar,** æ. see luathmhor. Each liath L, 
a swift grey horse, 

luath-bhas, ** -bhàis, Sudden death, 2 
Untimely death. 

luath-bhata, am. Cutter, 2 Fly-boat, see p. 78. 

luath-bheulach, -aiche, a. Talkative, prating, 
fond of gossiping stories, gabbling, talkative. 

- —d, 8.f. Babble. 

luath-bhileach, -eiche, a. Talkative, prating, 
gabbliug. 

luath-chainnt,** s.f. Babble, 

luath-ch iinnteach, -eiche, a. Talkative,prating. 

luath-cheumna.ch, -aiche, a. Swift, that walks 
swiftly, nimble. 

KREE 8 Nimble-fingered, pilfering, 

tluath-chridhe, s. Cardiacus. 

luath-dhearg, s.f. Red ashes. 

luath-ghàir, -ean, s.m. Joy. 2 Shout of joy. 3 
Shout of triumph, 4 Loud rejoicing. 6**,are 
ly Reward. (** gives s.f.] 

-—each, -eiche, a. Glad, joyful, exult- 


8. mM., 








ant. 
——.—--eachd,**s. f, Continued joy, rejoicing, 
luath-ghinteach, -eiche, a. Primogenia}, first 
begotten. 
luath-laimh, s.f. Combat. 
luath-lànhach, -aiche, æ. Clever, active, ex: 
pert. 2 Thievish, pilfering. 3 Covetous. 4 
Apt to strike. 5 Ready-handed,quick-handed, 
d, s.f.ind. Ready-handedness,dex- 
8 Covetousness, 4 








5** Legerdemain. 
sf. Cutter, sea p. 73. 2 
Any fast-sailing ship. 

2Q2 


Knack. 


luath-mhare 


604 


lùchairt 


tuath-mhare,** s.m. Racehorse. 2 Swift horse. | lùbachas, (MS) s.m. Artifice. 


geg EEN 


press, 


—air, -ean, Em. Rapid rider, 2 Ex- 





ress. 

inath-mbire.#* s.f. Gasconacing, vaunting. 

juathrachadh, -aidh, 8.m. d pr. pt. see luath- 
achadh, 

Juathracnd,** s.f. Forwardness. 2 Quickness, 

luatbraich, v.a. see luathaich. 

-——te, see luathaichte. 

Auaths, luaiths,tt s.m. Swiftness, speed. 





Inathsach,** -a:che, a. Allowing, permitting, al- | 


lowable, admissible. 

—— — —— , Aich, sm Allowance. 

luathsachah, -aidh, s.m. Allowing, permitting, 
act of allowing, permission. Na tha Dia a’ 
L dhomh, what God allows me; am bheil thu 
aLL dhomhsa seo a dheanamh ? do you allow, 
or a/!vis^, me to do this? <A’ l—, pr. pt. of 
Iuathsaich. 

luathsachail,** a. That may be permitted, 

iuathsachd, -an, s&s. f. Permission, leave. 2 
Admission. 3 Allowance. 

luathsaich, pr.pt. a’ luathsachadh, v.a. Permit, 
allow, give leave. 2 Confer. An l. thusa 
dhomhsa ? do you permit me ? 1. Dia clann da, 
God ordained that he should have offspring. 

huathsaichte, past pt. of luathsaich. 

laath-shiubhlach, -aiche, a. That goeth fast, 
swift, fleeting. 

-—d, s.f.ind. Swiftness, fleetness. 

lab, lùib, -an, s.f. Bend, curvature. 2 Bend- 
ing of the shore, creek. 3 Loop, noose, 4** 








Tache. 5 Eddying, as of wind. 6 Winding, 
meandering. 7 Maze. 8 Snare. 9 Deceit, 
guile. 10 Young man or woman.  fll(AF) 


Wolf, 1?(AC)Beam. 18łłțPlait, fold. 14t{Cun- 
ning craft, 15**Flexibleness. 16**Inclination, 
‘tendency.  17**Bow.  18**Thong. 19 Iron 
loop at mid:lle or end of swingle-tree, (No. 18, 
p.263.) A lùb eibhinn ! thou beauteous beam ! 
sop an lüib gach làimh, @ wisp grasped in every 
Rand ; is cruaidh fhortan gun fhios a chuir 
mis’ an lùib do ghaoil, it was bad luck unre- 
cogmized that involv d me in the toils of your 
love—Carmina Gadelica ; 'na itch, in its fold ; 
an lùib an Domhnuich, in contact with the Sab- 
bath —Dàin I. Ghobha; an lùib, under the in- 
Ruence of ; Caothan nan lùban uaine, green- 
windinj Caothan ; tre lùbaibh cam, through 
erooked windings. 

hub, pr.pt. a’ lùbadh, v.a. f n. Bend, incline. 
2 Humble, subdue. 3 Yield, consent. 4 
Stoop, bow. 5 Meander. 6**Assert. 7 Be đe- 
eeived by. 8 Submit. L. an t-slat, bend the 
switch; lùb i leis, she yielded to him ; darag 
mach lab, an ogk that will not bend ; lub Fil- 
lean a bhogha, F. bent his bow. 

iub, uib, -an, s. Pudding. Luba dudha, black 
puddings. 

Pub, $. Roe—Sar-Obair. 

lub,tt -uib, s.m. Pool, dub. 

luba,* s.f. Dub, marsh, pool. 

Iubach, s. see lobach. 

Ikbach, -aiche, -aichean, s.f. Loop, noose, 2 
Hinge. 3**Loop-hole. 4 Loop of iron on a 
swingle-tree, see No. 18, p. 263. 

, -ai 'he, a. Deceitful, 2*Meanderins. 3 

Eddy? g. 4ttlwisted, tortuous. 5**Bending, 

bowing. 6*7 Flexible, pliant. 7 Crooked, 

win ing. 8 Crinzing. 9 Crafty. 10 Perverse, 

11 Angular. 

his tongue ; slatag 1., o pliant switch ; gu L, 

pliantly, eraflily ; l., carach mar bu dual, de- 

ceitj and shifty as his nature was. 


——— OG, Marshy, full of pools 





| 
| | 
I 
P 

l 
[ 
T 


d,** s.f. Swift riding, riding ex-|lubachd, s.f.ind. Anfractipusnes$. 


lubadair,** g. see lübair. 

lùbadh, -aidh, 8.m. Act or state of bending howe 
ing orincliiug. 2 Winding, meandering. 3 
Yielding, act of yielding, consenting. 4 Piait- 
ing, folding. A’ 1—, pr. pt. of lùb. Tha’n 
abhuinn a’ L, the river meanders ; cha d' rinn 
mi leat 1., I did not yield to thee, 

lubag, -aiz, -an, $. f. dim. of lùb. Little bend, 
bow or curvature. 
stake used in constructing booths. 4 Hank of 
arn, 5 Little twist or meander. 6 Eyelet, 
ittle loop-hole.  7** Tenter. 8 (DU) Iron 
staple. Lübag cas-laoigh, a half-hitch knot. 

ach, -aiche, œ. Abounding in small bends, 
curvatures or windings. 

lùbaidh, fut.aff.a. of lùb. 

lübair, -ean, 8.m. One who bends to every pur- 
pose, cunning, crafty fellow. 2**Bender. 3 
**Cringer. 

lubair, pr.pt. a’ lubairt, see lobair. 

lubairneach, Ach, e an. Clumsy, ill-formed man. 

lubairt, s.f. & pr.pt. of lubair, see lobairt. 

lùban, -ain, -aa, s.m. dim, of lub. Same mean- 
ings as lübag. 

lùban, aal of iüb. 

lübarsaich,* s.f.ind. Contortion, serpentine mo-* 
tion, as of eels. 

lub-charach,(MS) a. Amusing, 

lüb-cheangail, lüib-, -an-ceaugail, 8. m. Hinge. 
2 Snare, trap. 

lub-chleasachd, s.f.ind. Legerdemain. 

lub-dhubh, s.f. Black pudding. 

lubh,** s. Archangel. 

flubha,** s.m. Body, corpse, 

1lubhan, -ain, s.m. Lamb. 

tlubh-ghor5, -ghoirt, s.m. Garden. 

lubhra, s.f.ind. see luibhre. 

—— —ch, -aiche, a. see lobhrach. 

lub-lin,** s.f. Curved line. 

— ——each,** a. Curvilinear. 

lüb-mhurain, s. f. Rope of grass, plaited 
or woven in horse-collar. 

lùb-ruith, -üib-ruith, -an-ruith, &.f. Running 
noose or knot. 

lub-shruth, -a, -an, $. m. Winding or meander- 
iug stream. 

————-ach, -aiche, @. Abounding in mean- 
dering streams. 





2 Praise, fame. 


lübta, past. pt. of lùb. Bent, made crooked,made ` 


to yield. 

lucas,(CR) -ais, s.m. Lugworm, worm found in 
sand and used as bait for small lines— W. of 
Ross-shire. 

luch, -a &-ainn, pl. -an & -aidh, s. f. 
rarely Prisoner. Peasair-nan-luch or peasair- 
luch, vetches. (** gives $.m.] 

——Aach, -aiche, a. see luchagach. 

lucha fairge, s.f. Storm petrel, see luaireag. 

luchag, -aig, -an, s.f.dim. of luch. Mouse, lit- 
tle mouse. e 

ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in mice. 

——— -fhedir, s.f. Field mouse, harvest mouse. 

luchaidh, n. pi. ofluch. 2 (MM)sJ. dim. of 


]uch. kc 

— — — -fhairge,** s.coll. Stormy petrels, pl. of 
luch-fairge. 

luchainn, n. pl. of luch. N 

luchair, ** at Glittering colour. 2 Brightness, 
3 Gleaming, glistering. 

luchaire,** s.m. Mouser. 


Mouse, 2 





L. ‘na theangaidh, perverse in | lüehairt,-e, -ean, @ f. Palace. 2 Castle. ge^ 


Court, 4**Fort. 5** Retinue,  Ionad-lüch- 
airte am measg nan Gàidheal, the place of re: 
tinue among the Gael ; mar chrannaibh loci» 
airte, like the bars of a castle; 


2 Little loop. 3 Curved 


’ 
H 
: 








lachairteach 


forts, or castles. 


luchar,** .air, s.m. Light. 


lucharan,(MS) em. Piginy. 
———-anach, see luch-àrmunnach. 
éuch-armunn, -uinn, -an, 3.m. Pigmy, dwarf. 


———— ——-——üch, a. Like, or pertaining to, A 


= luchd, as. 


dwarf or pigmy. 
luchbrac, s.m. White head of hair, 
uchd, -a, -an, s.m. [f. in Badenoch.) Burden, 
load, 2 Cargo, ship’s cargo. 3**rarely Ket- 
tle, cauldron. L. an t-soithich, the cargo of the 
cargo-boat ; l-luing, @ ship-load, cargo; l- 
cartach, @ cart-Load. d 
People, folks, company. Used in- 
stead of jir, when the reference may be to 
women as wellas men. 
l.-a'-ehridhe-cheirt, the just. 
l.-ainneirt, see l.-foirneirt. 
l-airde, attendants, retinue, 
l.-aideachaidh, professors, those that profess re- 
ligion or devotion. 
l-àiteachaidh, inhabitants ; 2 husbandmen. 
-aithris, talebearers. 
.aithris-sgeoil, see l.-aithris, 
."Aitich, see 1.-àiteachaidh. 
„amhare, spectators, lookers-on. 
.amharce-thairis, superintendents, overseers. 
L.-anacainnt, evil speakers ; 2 backbiters ; 3 
reproachful persons. 
1,-an-fhuar-chrabhaidh, hypocrites ; 2 super- 
stiiioug persons. 
].-bleith, grinders. 
L-brath, betrayers, spies, traitors. 
1.-brathaidh, see 1.-brath. 
].-buain, reapers. 
l.-buainidh, see 1.-buain. 
l..buanaidh, see 1.-buain. 
l.-cagarsaieh, whisperers. 
l.-càineadh, see 1.-càinidh. 
‘L.-cainidh, slanderers. 
l.ea!eaidh, caulkers. 
l.-casaid, accusers, complainers. 
l.-ceannaire, traitors, rebels. 
l.-ceart-dheuchainn, jury. 
l.-ceirde, artificers, craftsmen, mechanics. 
l.-coimheadachd, see 1--coimhideachd. 
l.-coimhid, ke-pers, watchmen, guard ; 2 obser- 
vers. 9$ attendants. 
L.-coimhideachd, attendants, servants-in-wait- 
ing, retinue ; 2 overseers. 
l.-comhairle, advisers, counsellors. 
l.-comh-pàirt, partakers, sharers. 
L-comh-thuruis, fellow-travellers, 
L-creachainn, abactors. 
l,-creich, abactors. 
L-cumaidh, formers, contrivers, devisers, pro- 
Jectors. 
l.-cumhaidh, mourners, 
l.-cur-3pioradan-fo-gheasaibh, exorcista, 
l.-dàimh, kindred, 
L-déanamh, workers. 
l.-deuchaiun, jury. 
l.-dion, watchmen. 
L-droch-bheart, evil doers. 
}.-droch-bneus, evil doers. 
L-eagail, timid or fearful persons, 
l.-ealadhain, see l.-ealain. 
L-ealaidh, skilful persons ; 2 musicians ; 3 gay 
or merry persons. 
L-éalaidh, hunters, deerstalkers, sportsmen. 
l.-ealain, carpenters ; 2 artisans ; 3 skilled per- 
sons of all kinds, 
l.-éisdeachd, hearers. 
L-eithich, perjurers. 
1.-eólais, uaintances. 
L-eucoir, unjust people; oppressors. 


l 
l 
i 
1 
l 


605 
lücbairteach, -eiche, a. Having palaces, courts, 








luchdaichte 


l,.easaontais, transgressors. 

l.-faire, watchmen, the watch. 

l.-fairge, seafaring men, mariners. 

l.-fàisneach, soothsayers, augure. 

L-feall-fnolach, ambuscade, liers in ambush or 
in wait. 

].-fiach, debtors. 

l.-fianuis, witnesses. 

l.-fiosachd, auyurs, soothsayers, wizards. 

l.-foireigin, extortioners, oppressors, 

l.-foireignidh, see l.-foireigin. 

l.-fóirneirt, oppressors. 

1.-freachd,(AC) breakers. 

l.-frithealaidh, attendants. 

l.-gaoil, lovers ; ? beloved persons ; 3 relations. 

l.-gearraidh, hewers, cuttera. fiodha, hew- 
ers of wood. 

l.-glei hidh, keepers, 

l.-iodhal-aoraidh, idolaters. 

l.-iomain, drivers, as of herds or flocks. 

l.-jomchair, bearers. 

),-lamhachais, artillery ; 2 bowmen ; 3 slingera. 

aca EE petulant, proud or haugh- 
ty people. 

].-leanmhuinn, followers ; 2 imitators, devotees; 
3 secutors ; 4 pursuers, 

1.-loingeas, sea-faring men, sailors, 

l,-malairt, traders, merchants, exchangers, 
barterers. L. an airgid, money-changers. 

l.:millidh, spoilers, destroyers, plunderers. 

l.-mi-ruin, malicious persons, haters. 

L-muiuntir, servants, the servants of an estab- 
lishment or family. 

l-munaidh, teachers, instructors. 

l.-na-comh-fhéisde, fellow guests, (combh-luehd- 
na-féisde is better.) 

}.-na-h-aingidheachd, the wicked, 

}.-na-h-ainneirt, violent persons. 

].-raiteachais, boasters. 

|-reubainn, robbers. 

l.-riaghlaidh, rulers, officers, overseers. 

l-sanais, scouts, spies, informers, watchers. 

].-saobh-chreidimh, sect, superstitious persons ; 
2 heretics. 

l.-seinn, singers. j 

l.sgooil, ta/e-tellers, raisers of false reports. 

l.-suleo, tat!lera. 

].-shaighead, archers. 

l.-snaidhidh, kewers of stone. 

].-snathaidh, see L-snaidhidh. 

].-stiàraidh, leaders, directors. 1 

].-tagraidh, plvaders ; 2 accusers; 9 ereditore. 

]l.-tà'r, reproachers. 

l.-taigheadais, hovsekeepers. 

l.-taimhlis, mockers. : 

l.-tarcuis, despiteful persons; 2 despisers. 

].-tiolpaidh, cavillers ; 2 purloiners, pilfvrers. 

1.-togail, builders; thieves, robbers ; ? colieciors, 

gatherers. Luchd-togail na cise, taz-;ather- 

ers; luchd-togail-sgedil, ratsers of false rg- 

pores. 

-tria!l, travellers. E 

-triallaidh, see luchd-triall. 

-tuaileis, slanderers, quarrelsome persons. 

-tuairgnidh, faction. 

l,-turuis, travellers. 

]. -urrais, sureties. 


l. 
l. 
L 
L 


luchdach, -aiche, @. Heavy, ponderous, weighty. 


2 Heavy laden, 3 Loading, that loaüs or 
makes heavy, burdening, freigliting. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Loading, la ling, freight- 
ing, act of loading or burdening. A’ l—, pr. 
pt. of luchdaich. 


luchdaich, pr. pt. a’ luchdachadh, v. a. Load, 


lade, burden. Di-luchdaich, discharge, as a 
cargo. | 
ju PNE past pt. Laden, burdened, filled. 


luchdaichte 


606 


lughasachadh 


Luchdaichte le h-aiugidheachd, laden with | liudnan, see làdan. 


iniquity. 

luchdail. -e, æ. see luchdmhor. 

luchdair,** s.m. Freighter. 

luchdmbhoire, comp. of luchdmhor. 

-————-—-—&achd, s&f.imi Capaciousness, 

luchdmhor, -oire, a. Capacious, capable of con- 
taining much. 2 Laden, heavily laden. 3 
Full, bulky 4 Burdening, burdensome. 

luch-fhairge,tt s.f. Storm petrel, see luaireag. 

Juch-fheoir,ff ar, Grass-mouse. commou shrew. 

fuch-Fhrangach AF) sf. Rat. 

lucn-Ghallda,(AF) s.f. Mole. 

tucn-lann, Jann. aan Prison. 

là-chleas, -ais, s.m. see lùth-chleas. 

— achi, see lüth-cnleasacud. 

luch-léin, see locn-bhiéin 

luch-mnór, (AF) s.f Seal. (AF gives luch-mór.) 

duch-shith, ¢AC) s.f Fairy mouse, lesser shrew 

juenuirt, ean, see lùchairt. 

tiud, sm. Pond. 

Jüdach, -aich, pl, -aich & -2ichean, s.m. Hinge. 

lùdag, -aig, -an, $.f. The little finger, 2 Hinge. 
3 Little hinge. 4 Joint. Màthair na lùdaig, 
the ring-finger. 

~——ach, -aiche, a. Supplied with little fingers or 
hinges. 

———àan, -aiD, -an, s.m. Hine», little binge. 2 
Pivot of a hinge. 3**The little finger. 4(MS) 
The little-finyer joint. 

iüdaichean, m. pl. of ludach. 

ludair, pr.pt. a' lud»irt, v. a. see hvdir. 

ludair, -ean, s.m. Slovenly person, trull. 
of an awkward gait. 3 Boor. 

———eachd, s.f see luidearacnd 

ludairt, s. f. Wallowing, &e. 2 Waddling in 
mire, as ducks. A l1—, pr.pt ot ludair. 

ludalann, see lüdan. 

ludan, -ain, -an, san. Pool. 

ludan, -ain, -an, s.m. Hinge, 2** The little fin- 
ger. 





? One 
4** Fawning. 





ach, a. Having binges. 2 Like a hinge. 3 
Jointed. 

ludar, s. see ludair. 

ludar, (MS) s.m. Hind. 2 Lob. 

ach, a. see lutdearaen. 

——-— achd, see luidearachd. 

ludarnachd, s.f. see lnidearachd, 

ludarra,* a. see luidearra. 211Unwieldy, 

ludarsaich,( MS) s.f. Clumsiness. 

Tludasach,** æ. Strong, powerful. 

luah, s.m. Way, manner, 2 Appearance. 3** 
Likeness, L. an spioraid, 'dol timehioll na 
drochaid, the way of the ghost, going round the 
bridge. MaeIntosh's translation of this, given 
by Armstrong, is“ go about the bridge as 
the ghost did.’’ The superstition here re;erred 
to ıs illustrated in Tam o Shanter, where 
the infernal pursuers have no power to 20 be- 
yond the keystone of the bridge; thachair 
ludh an uinnsinn fhiadhaich dha, cinnidh e 
gu math, ach milhdh ear chraobh a bhios 
an taice ris, the way of the wild ash befel him. 
at grows well but kills the tree that’s near it— 
UN 





làdhaig, pr.pt. a’ lidhaig & ai lüdhaigeadh, v. 
Gaelic e EN of allow. 2ttAppoint. 3 Loch 


Tay for luig. 

———, pr.pt. of lüdhaig see ludhaigeadh. 

làdhaigeadh, s. m. Allowing, permitting 2tt 
Appointing. A'l—, pr.pt. of lüdhaig 

lidhaigte, »ast pt. of ludhaig. Allowed, permit- 
ted. 2 Appointed. 

lüdhainn, prov. for lüdhaig. 

lüdhainneaehadh,-aidh, see lüdhaigeadh. 


ludhainnich, v à. prov. for lüdhaig. 
‘udhar,** o, Awkward, clownish, slovenly. 


| 


i i 

LITARI T Nom i d P 
i — ai Là. ni | Lë 

L — i L- i 1 r EI 


là 1nanach, a, 
Indradh, -aidh, s.m. d pr.pf. see ludraiceadh. 
ludragan, -ain, an, $. m. Slattern. 2 Shamb- 
ling fellow, one who moves awkwardly. 3 
Untidy person, sloven, 4 Heavy, dull per- 


see lidanach. 


son. 5 Groveller. 
—— —^eh, -aiche, æ. Shambling, moving awk- 
wardly. 2 Untidy, slovenly. 3 Grovelling, 


ludraig, pr.pt. a’ ludraigeadh, v. a. Bespatter 
with, dip or roll in foul water. 

iudraigeadh, -eidh, s. m. Bespattering, act of 
bespattering with foul water. A’ l—, pr. vt, 
of ludraig, ) 

lug, s.m: See liùg. 

ing1,* s.f.ind, Sea sandworm. 

'ugach, -aiche, see liüzach. 

lügiehd, s. see liàzachd. 

lugadth, -aidh, s.m. Thirst. 

luyailh, s.f. (DC)Lugworm—Uist. 2**Little 
ansated wooden dish. (“ Luggie,”’ so called 
from its ears or rr lugs.’’) 

lugan, -ain, -an, s.m. Short, crooked, deformed 
imbecile person, 2 Sorry looking fellow. 3 
Bow-legged man. 

luganach, -aiche, see liüzach. 

'üganach4, st see liügachd. 


lugas, -ais, s.m. Sandworm. lobworm—Gairloch, 


Lochbroom, e, see lucas. 

lug-chas, -ois, -an, s.f. Bandy leg. 

————ach,(Ms) -aiche, a. Bandy-legged. 

lùgh, luigh, s.m. see lùth. 

lùgh, pr.pt. a’ lughadh, v. Swear, blaspheme, 

lugha, see lüghadh, l 

lugha, comp. of beag. Less, least. 2 More or 
most disagreeable. 3 (DC) Used as the posi- 
tive degree in Uist, as, tha e cho lugha-miobh- 
aidh, he it so well-behaved, Is l orm thu na 
sneachd, you are more distasteful to me than 
snow ;cha l. na amadan a ni sin, no less than 
a fool will do that ; bithidh fodar gann na "a 
] na thig frasan matha, fodder wil be scarce, 
unless goo showers come ` chan urrainn da a 
faicinn, agus móran na's |. na sin, cha'n urr- 
ainn da à cluinntinn, he cannot see her, much 
less can he hear her ; air a’ chuid a's L. at the 
(east ; am fear a's l. de ’n triùir, the least of the 
three. 

lugnach, @ see laghach. 

lughachadh, -aidh, s.m. Swearing, 

lughachan, n. pl. of lughadh. 

lughad, -aid, s.f. Littleness, degree of littleness. 
Air a l., however little it may be. [** gives m.] 

lughadachd, s.f. Inferiority. 

lughadaich, see lugndaich. 

lugnadn, -aidh, pl. lüghachan,s.m. Swearing, 
blasphemy, act of swearing. Oath. 3**Want. 
4**lhirst. A’ l—, pr. pt. of lùgh. A’ l. na 
Trianaid, blaspheming the Trinity. 

lughadh, see lùth. 

lughadachadh, -aidh, s.m. Lessening, diminish- 
ing, act of lessening, assuaging. A’ 1—, pr pt. 
of lughdaich. 

lüghadair,* s.m. Blasphemer. 

*— ————eachd. s.f.ind. Blasphemy. especially 
taking the name of the Deity iu vaiu. Ri L, 
blaspheming. | 

luehadrach,* aiche, o Blasphemous. 

lughaich, see ludhaig. . 

lughaide,* comp. of beag. Chal. e sin, it iz net 
the less for that ; cha lughaide, perhaps. 

lughaig, v.a. see ludhaiev. 

Jughaigeadh, see ludhaigeadh. 

lùghar, see lùthmhor. 

lugharr, see lùthmhor. 

——achd, see luthmhoireachd. 

lughasachadh, see luathsachadh. 








X 


lughasaich 607 luidearachd 


lughasaich, see luathsaich. luibheannach, see ]uibheanach. 
lughchleas, see lùth-chleas. luibh-edlach, -aiche, a. Skilled in botany. 2 
-—achd, see lùth-chleasachd: Skilled in the virtues of herbs, 
lughdachadh,** -aidh, s.m. Diminishing, abat- | luibh-eolas, -eólais, s.m. Botany, knowledge of 
ing, dimution, subtraction, decrease, abate-| plants and herbs. 
ment, decreasing. A'l—, pr.pt. of lughdaich, |luibh-ghort,** e m. Garden, 2 Green-garden, 
lughdachail, -e, a. Diminishing. kitchen-garden 
lughdachd, s.f.ind. Minority. luibh-leighis, gm Camomile, —anthemis nobi- 
lughdag, see lùdag. us. 
—— —— an, see ludagan. 


























lughdaich, pr. pt. a’ lughdachadh, v. a. d n. ( RSS 
essen, diminish, abate, decrease, assuage, of 


mitigate. 2 Allay. 3(M3) Abstract. 4*sub- 

tract. 5*Undervalue. 

—e, -an, s.m. Abater, one who lessens 
or diminishes. 

-————— te, past pt. of lughdaich. Lessened, 
diminished, abated, assuaged. 

lughdaireachd, s.f.ind. Diminishing, lessening, 
abatement. 2 Disparagement. 

lughdalan,* see lidagan. 

lughdarna, ? a. Heavy, clumsy, unwieldy. 2 

lughdarra, Stupid. 

lughdarnachd,* s.f. Clumsiness, 2 Drawling, 
unseemly gait. 3 Untidiness. 

Jügninhoire, comp. of lùghmhor. 

Itzhmhoireaehd, $.f. see lüthmhoireach.L. 

lùghmhor, -oire, see lùthmhor, 

lügnor, see lùthmhor. 

lùib, -e, -ean, s.f. Fold, corner, angle, angular 
turning, winding or bend, as of a stream. 2 
Eddy, as of wind, 3 Little glen. 4 Creek, 
bay, bending of the shore. 4 see lùb. 

WW beach, -eiche, a. Abouuding in folds, angles, 
or turns, flexuous. 2 Full of little glens, or 
3 of creeks, 4 see lubach. 

lċibean, ein, -an, s.m. Crafty fellow, one who 
will bend to any purpose. 

Wobeanachd,ff s.f.«nd. Craftiness, cunning, 

vith, -ean, s.m. & f. Herb, plant. 2 Weed. 3 
Grass 

Inibh-a’-chait,§ s. m. Cudweed, everlasting,— 
gnaphahum dioicum d g. sylvaticum. 

luibh-a"chneas, s. Queen-of-the-meadow— 
Colonsay. 

luibh-an-ithe, s. Lettuce, see liatas, 

luibh-an-ladhair, s.f. Cleaver, 

luibh an-liügair, -ean-, s.m. Common loveage — 
ligusticum officinale. à; 

luibi-bheana,$s. The hill plant, see machall- 
monai lh. 

luibn-bhiast, -bhéist,-bhéistean,s.m.Caterpillar. 

luinn-bhiastach, -aiche, @. Abounding in cater- 
pillars, 

luibh-Chaluim-Chille, s.m. Bog asphodel— Col- 





d 
S. Y 
ma a 
NV. 
Kë EI 


E Aen 
Sege 


en 


435. Luibh-leighis. 


luibh-na-cabhruich, s.m. Cleavers—Colonsay. 

luibh-loibheach, -ich, see lus-loibheach. 

luibh-na-luaithre,** $,m. Ash-weed. 

luibh-na-maclan, s.m. Herb Robert— Colonsay: 

luibh-na-macraidh,* s.m. Wild thyme, 

luibh-nan-tri-bheann, 8.m, Bog-bean—Colonsay. 
2**Trefoil. 

luibh-nan-tri-bhilean, s.m. Trefoil. 

luibhne,** s.f. Dart, spear, 2 Shield. 3 The 
fingers. 4 The toes. 

luibhneach, -eiche, a. see luibheach & luibh* 
eanach, 

-—-,** -ich, s.m. Weed. 

luibhre,|l s.f.dad. Leprosy. 

luibhreachd, s.f.ind. Leprousness, 

luibh reicear, Ar, -an, s.m. Seller of herbs, 

luibh-seaile, -ean-sgàile, s.f. Gourd. 

luibte, see lubta. 

luich, (rarely) gen. of loch. 

luid, gen.simg. & n.pl. of lod. 

luid,-e, -ean, s.f. Rag. 2 Drudea 3 Slovenly 
or filthy person. 

luideach, -eiche, o, Ragged. 2 Slovenly, um 
tidy. 3 Filthy. 4 Having long shaggy hair 
(of animals.) 5 Bumpkinly. 

luideag, -eig, -an, s.f, dim. of luid. Rag, little 

rag. 2 Slovenly woman, little slut, little 

slattern. 3 ** in ridicule, Bank-note. 

luideagach, -aiche, a. Ragged, tattered. 2 Slo- 
venly. Is mairg a bheireadh droch mheas air 
gille l. is air loth pheallagaich, a ragged boy 
and a shaggy filly should never be despised—the 
latter part of this proverb is often applied te 
a shabbily dressed young girl, 

luideagan, s.m. Tailor's cabbage (aot a plant,) 
refuse, 

luidealach, -aich, s.m. Lazy fellow. 2 Slovenly 

lounger 3 Bumpkin. 4 Dabbier. 5 Plouzüae 

man. 6 Ragged person. 7 Shaggy beast. 

lüidean,** ein, s.m. The little finger. 

luidearach, -aiche, a. Slovenly. 2 sluggish. 3 
Wallowing, grovelling. 

luilearachd, s.f.ind. Laziness, indolence. = 
Slovenliness. 3 Slovenly mode of walking. 





onsay. 

luibhi-chridhe, s.f. Heart’s ease. Isl. leam fhéin 
e, it's heart’s-ease to myself. 

luibh-chrudh-an-eich, s.f. Aurora, 

luibl)-do-labhairt,3 s. Bitter-sweet,—solanum 
leama. 

Inibhe,: MS) s. Bosvel. 

luibheach, -eiche, a. Abounding in herbs, weeds 
or plants, herbal, botanical Garaidh luibn- 
each, 4 bota ical garden ; a garden full of 
weeds. 

luioneadair,* s m. Herbalist, botanist, 

luibiean. -ein, -an, s.m.dim of luibb. Little 
berb or plant. 2 Blade of grass. 

luibasanach, aiche, a Full of little herbs or 
planta, herbal, botanic, vegetable. 

lu bheanach, -aich, aichean, s. m. Herbalist, 
botanist. 2 Weeder. 3 Weeds, noxious weeds. 
A Herbage. 

luibh :àn ich 1. s.f dal. Botany, study of botany. 
2 Herbage. 

luibuean diolan, s.m, Queen-of-the-meadow. 


luidearra 


luilearra, -eire, OG Sluggish, indolent. 2 
Heavy. 3 Clumsy. 4 Boorish, 

Inidh, see luigh. 

tinidh, ** s.m. Word of endearment. (luaidh.) 

budh, zë, -ean, am. & f. see luibh. 

luidhean, -ein, eum. Fetlock. A 

huidhear, -eir & e pl. -eirean, s. m. Chimney- 
vent, flue. 

]nidhearach, o, Chimneyed. 

lujdh-leabaidh, s.m. Lullaby. (for laoidh-leab- 
aidn.) 

Inidich,(MS) v.a. Bemoil. 

In dir, see luidreagan. 

luilir, pr.pt. a’ luidreadh, v. a. & n. Wallow, 
roll in mud or mire. 2 Paddle or wade 
through water or mud, dabble 3** flounder. 
wallop. 4 Besmear. 51[Lumber more heay- 
itv. 6 Bedraggle. 

Iusdireach, see Tuidreach. 

Inidireachd,** 3.7. Awkwardness. 

luidneach, -eiche, a. Drenched, drooping or 
heavy, as flowers or herbage after rain. 

Juitreach,** o Wallowing. 2 Walloping. 3 
Paddling. 4 Guddling. 

Juidreach,* s f. Ragged garment. 2 Ragged 
clumsy person. 

luidreadh, -eidh, s.m. Wallowing, act of wal- 
Jowing. 2 Paddling, wading or walking 
clumsily through water or mud. 3 Flounder- 
ing. 4 Guddling. 5*Besmearing. A’ l—, pr. 
pt. of luidir. 

luidrea gan, -ain, s.m, Ragged fellow. 

luidrich, v. see luidir, 

Inidrig, v. see luidir. 

huidse, -an, s.m. Clumsy 
Churl. 4 Coward. 5*Dull, stupid person. 

luidseach, -eiche, a. Clumsy, awkward. 2 
Boobyish, like a booby. 3 ttCowardly. 4 

. Heavy-heeled. 

Juidseachd, s. f. oi Clumsiness, awkward. 
ness. 2 Silliness, sheepishness. 

luidsear, -ir, -an, see luicse, 

luidsearachd,tt eg, Cowardliness. 

laig*(CR) v.n. Desire, long, wish— Perthshire, 
At Loch Tay “ ludhaig air” is used in the 
sense of to wish to or on one. 

luig, gem.sing. oflag. Chun an luig, towards the 
hollow. 

luigean, -ein, -an, s.m. Weakling. 2 Inactive 
fellow, 3**Untidy fellow 4 Silly person. 

luigeanach, -aiche, o Weakly, silly. 2 In- 
active. 3 Untidy. 

liigeanachd, s.f.ind. Weakness, silliness. 2** 
Untidiness. 2**Inactivity. 

luigh, -e, -ean, s. see luibh. 

Inigh, pr. pt. a’ luighe, v. n. Lie, lie down, re- 
cline, couch. 2 Light, perch, settle, as a bird. 
3 Subside, as the wind, 4 Set, as the sun, 
5 Settle, lie upon, press upon, affect. 6 Urge, 


fellow. 2Booby. 3 


importune, Luigh chuige, heave to or lie to, as 


a boat ; l. mi teann air, 4 lay near him; L an 
lair air barr an teach, the eagle perched on the 
top of the dwelling : chaidhe a l., he went to 
bed ; |. an cu, the dog couched ; |. e air an lar, 
he stretched himself on the ground ; |. i leis 
oirnn, she (ihe boat) stretched to leeward of us; 
l. e orm gus an d' thug e orma dheanamh, he 
imoortuned me till he made w do it; l. a’ 
ghnan, the sun set; l. & ghaoth, the wind 
subsided. 

uighe, $.m.& f. Lying, act of lying, reclining. 2 
Subsi ling, as of wind. 3 Act of setLing, as of 
the sun, 4 Actor state of settling upon. 6 
**Situation. 6**Incubation. 7**Death. 8 
Tack or stretch, as of a ship. 9 Perching, as 
a bird. A’ l—, pr. pt. of luighe. A’ ghrian 
gir i., the sunset (iuighe na grèine) ; tha e "na 


~ 


608 


luing-bhriseadh ` 


l., he i$ in bed. 

luigheach, -eiche, &. Lazy, indolent. 

luigheachd, s.f. Gratification. 2 Gratuity. 

luigheachan, -ain, pl. -an,[**-ain,] 8. m. 
bush, ambuscade, snare. 

NH Oe -aich, s.m., One who lies ir 
wait, 

luigheag, see fuigheag. 

luigheagan, -ain, -an, s.m. Lying down, reclin- 
ing. 2 Couch, 

luigheaganach, -aiche, a. Inclined to lie down, 


Am 


luighe-siübhladh, -aidh, s.m. Child-bed, partu 


rition, 
»i hi Ist. sing. past subj. of luidh, I would 
10. 


luighse, (for luigh thusa) Lie thou. 

luigh,** v.a. Tear. 2 Encourage, abet. 

luighe, ** s.f. Proof. 2 Cauldron, kettle. 

luigheachd, -an, s.f. Reward, recompense, re- 
quital. Thoir l reward, requite. 

luigheachdaich,** eo Requite, recompense. 

luigheadair, see luibh»adair. 

luighean,** -ein, s.m. Nave, 

luighean,t s. m. Tendon. 
4 Leg, as of a deer. 

———"1ch, see luibheanach. 

luighearnach, see luibheauach, ; 

luigheasach, -aich, s.m. see luathsachadh, * 
Allowaues, perniission, 

luigheasach, -aicie, o see luathsach 2 Al 
lowing, permitting, that permits. 

Inigheasachd, see luathsach i. 

luigaeasaich, pa see luathsaich. 2 Reward. 

luighich,(MS) v.a. Defray. 

luizhig, v. see lnathsaicn, 

lr Tub -eidh, s.m. & pr.pt. see luathsach 
adh. 

luighne,** ent Javelins, spears, 

luilgeach, $.f. Milch-cow. 

luim, gen sing. of lom 

luim, ean, s.m. Shift, means, art, invention. 
2 Remedy. Leig 'ga l. fóu e, bave hiim te 
his own resources. 

luim,(AT) -e, s.f. Milk. 

tluim-dheirg,** & Deep. 
Deep channel of a river. 
na L, the verge of ih» deep. 

luime, s.f.ind, Barreansss, bleakness,bareness, 
vakeducss. 2 Poverty, 3 Smoothness. 4** 
Bare or sinooth pari. Is ian lumme a thug 
air a dheanamh, sheer poverty forced him t3 
do it; l.a whuineil, the smsoth part of his neck. 

luime, comp. of lom. More or most bare, 

luimead, -eid, s.m. Bareness, baldness, naked. 
ness, degree of nakedness or barrenness. Air 
a l. 's gu’m bheil e, however hare wt be. 

luimean, -ein, -an, s.m. Barren hillock. 2 Poor 

. man, 3 Miser. 4 Leau man. 6 Targei, 
shield, 

luimeanach, -aiche, a. Bleak, bare, 2 Abound- 
in bleak parts or hillocks. 

luimeil,tt o Shifty, artful. 

luimlinn, sf. Stream of milk. 


2 Centre. 


2 Ankle, 3 Foot 


2 Deep water. £ 
4 Abyss, Bruact 


luimneach, -eiche, a. Active. 2 Brava. 8 
Swift, rapid. 4 Bare. 5{fBarren. 6 Torn. 


luimneach,** s. m. Busiga, ssandard-bearer. 
luimneachd, $.f.(nd. Bareness. 2 Bravery. 3 
Activity, swiituess. 4 Kxe.tation, Stt Suift. 
6**IZnsign-boarer. 
luimrig.(MS) er beach. 
Tluin, see luinn. 
luing, gem. zt, of long. 
luing-baris,** va. & n. 
Surfer shipwreck, 
luiug-bhriseach, a, Causing shiowroek. 
luing-bhriseaih, s.m. Shipwreck, act of suffer 
ing shipwreux. 


Cause shipwreck. 3 








| 1uingeanachd 


luingeanachd,(MS) see luingearachd. í 

luingearachd, 8.f.ind. Seamanship, navigation. 
'4 Sailing, yachting, cruising. 

luingeas, -eis, s.f. see loingeas. 

—_——ach, see loingeasach. 

luingis, sce loingeas. 

luin-iasg, (AF) see luinn-iasg. 

]uin«sasach,ff -aiche, a. 
Abounding in ships. 

Iniavios, see luingeas, 

luinn, gen. sing. & n. pl. of lonn. 

tiuinn, -e, s.f. Sword, spear. 2 Blade of a wea- 

on. 3 Fingal's sword. 

luinne, comp. of lonn, 

¢iuinne, s.f. Anger, passion. 
Mirth. 4 Melody. 

luinneach, -aiche, 


2 Impetuosity. 3 


a. Armed with sword or 
spear, 2 Braye, warlike. 3** Angry. 4 
Mirthful, jovial. 5 Melodious. Leomhann 
guineach, calma, luinneach, a keen lion, stout 
and brave. 

luinneag, -eig, -an, &.f. Song, ditty. 2 Chorus. 
3 Burden of a song. 4 Gaelic song or catch. 
5 Bob. 6*Mournful voice or sound. L. luaidh, 
a poetical panegyric. 

luinneagach, -aiche, a. Having many songs or 
ditties. 2 Musical. 3 Like aditty. Merrily 
inclined, jovial, cheerful. 5 Having Gaelic 
songs or ditties. 

luinneanach, -aiche, a. Tossing, floundering. 2 
Paddling. 3 Frisking. 4 Skipping. 

luinneanacha4h, -aidh, æ. Tossing, floundering 
2 Paddling. 

luinneanachd,* s. f. ind. Paddling. 
for pleasure about quays. 

luinneanaich, v.a. Flounder, paddle. 2 Wallop 

luinneanaiche, s.f.ind. Continued tossing, pad- 
 diing, walloping or founderiag. 2 Habit of 
skipving or frisking. 

luinnearaich, see luinneanaich, 

luinneas, -eis, sun. see loingeas. 

Juinn-iasg,** 8.m. Sword-fish. 

luinnirich, see l tinneanaich. 

luinnireachd, see luinneanachd. 

luinnse, em. & f. see luinnsear. 

luinnseach, -eiche, c. Sluggish, lazy. 

luinnseach, -eich, -idhean, s. m. Watch-coat, 
heavy great-coat. 2 Heavy, clumsy article. 
$* Very tall, slim, bowed-down fellow. 4 tt 
Lazy man, slugzard. 

luinnsear, -eir, -an, s.m. Lounger, sluggard. 2 
Lazy vagraut. 3 Watchman. 

lùir,* pr.pt. a’ luireadh, v.a. Torment, torture, 
give most acute pain. 2 Drub most lustily. 

luirceach,(MS) a. Lame. 

luircneach,** a, Lame. 

luircneach:,** s.f. Lameness, limping. 

hureach, æ. Pretty—Arran. (lurach.) 

lùireach, -ich, -ichean, s.f. Large cloak, cover- 
ing, z**Coat or covering of mail, harness. 3 
Tattered or patched garment or covering. 4 
Cast garment, 5 ** Apron, 6 figuratively 
Beene: mean-spirited person. 7ttUutidy 
emare, 


2 Sailing. 


tween the joints of the harness ; |. mhailleach, 


a coat of nail, habergeon ; l. leathair, a lea- 


ther apron. 

Wireadh, pr.pt. of lùir. Torturing, tormenting. 
Fam l., tormenting me. 

. luireag, se? loireag. 
luirg. gen.sing. of lorg. 


luirg, -e, p}. -gne, -gean & -gnean, St Shaft or | — (CR) 
3 see 


tram of a cart. 2 Stalk of a plant. 


Naval, of ships. 2 





luirg-rüisgte, a. 
lüiriste, -an, s.m. Tall, slender, slovenly, un- 


Càireadh gach fear a L, let each pre- 
pare his mai ; eadar altaibh na lùirich, be- 


luisd 


Covering for the legs. 

luirgeann, -inn, $.f. see lurgann, 

Luirgeann luath, s. m. Certain character in 
Highland romance. 

luirgue, pl. of luirg. 

luirgneach, -eiche, a, Long-legged. 2 Having 
a long handle or stalk, 3 Nimble, swift. 4 
Sheep-shanked. Lus l., @ long-s:alked weed. 

luirgneach,§ sich, s. Black-winged stilt—him- 

ntopus melanopterus. Now very rare in 

Scottish Gaeldom, though it was to be found 
in many districts not so long ago, e. g. Glen 
Clova, in Forfarshire, and Ben Lawers in 
vu o s It was a rare bird in Glensheil 
in e 





1 426. Luirgneach. 
luirgnean, n.pl. of luirg. 
luirg-ruisgeach, -aiche, see luirg-rüisgte. 


Bare-legzed. 


tidy person. 
lüiristeach, -eiche, «. Slovenly, untidy. 2 
Shabby. 3 Paltry. 4 Lazy. 


luiristeachd, s.f.ind. Slovenliness, untidiness. 
luis, gen.sing. & n.pl. of lus. 


——, CR) s.coll. Multitude of small objects, es- 
pecially crawling insects— W, of Ross. 

——,$ s. f. Mountain-ash or rewan-tree—py- 
rus aucuparia, (Badge of the MacLachlans.] 
2**Quicken-tree, letter / of the Gaelic alpha- 
bet. 3** rarely Hand. 4 Drink, 





€ S Eu S 
= Nt 
A437. Lw's. 


s.m, Outrosh of water —Perthshtres 
t—, v.n. Dare. 2 Adventure. 


lurgann. L, an fheòir, stalk of the grass ; luirg- | luis-bhalgair,S s. pl. Lycopodium clavatum, Gate 


ne cath, spurs, 
fuirg-bheairt; 8. f. Armour for the legs. 


notinum, and the rest of that family of pla ats 


2 | luisd,** sf. Slouch. 


luisean 


luisean, -ein, -an, s.m. see lusan, dim. 
ach, -aiche, a. soe lusanach. 
achd,"* s.f. Vegetable. 
dnisgich,** v.a. & n. Soak. 








luis-meiligeagach,$ s. coli, The order of plants 


called /eguminiferoe or pod-bearers. 
fluisne,** sr Flame, flash. 
of beaten flax. 


luisreadh, -eidh, s.m. Plain abounding in herbs 


or plants. 2 Superabundance, exuberance, as 
of herbs. 


luisreag, -eig, -an, s.f. Plant. 2 Little plant or 
3 Female skilled in herbs, who knows 


herb. | 
the virtues of plants, or works cures with 
them, female botanist. 





8** Botanical. 


Dealing in herbs. 
see luisreadh. 


luisrigeadh, -eidh 


tuiste, s. m. Slouch. 2Sluggard, 3 Clown. 4 


Straw pannel, 
luithe,** s.f. see luaithead. 
ach,** a. Joyous. 
lüitheach,** s.pl. Veins, sinews. 
lü:threach, Ach, -richean, s.m [ f.] see lùireach. 
luitig, s. € Bilge-water in a boat—Lewis. 
tulagan, see laoighcionn, 
fulaic,(AF) s. f. Milk of newly-calved cow. 
lulgach,(A F) -aich, Newly-calved cow. 





(um, s.m. The part of an oar between the han- 


dle and blade. 


lumadheirg,** s.f. The deep. 2 Deep water. 3 


Deep channel of a river. 


luman, .ain, -an, s. m. Covering, coarse cover- 


ing. 2 Plaid. 3 Veil. 4 Sackcloth. 5 Large 
great-coat. 6 Beating, dressing. |** gives 
pl. -ain.] 


fumanach, -aiche, 
ing & coarse covering, like sackcloth. 

lumar, see lomar. 

fumhair,(AF) s.m. Diver (bird.) 

lumha-làn, see lom-làn. 

lumhan, see lubhan. 2 Lamb, 

lumpat, see lupaid. 

lun, see lon. 

Lùnasd, -aisd, see Lùnasdal. 

Lùnasdal, -ail, s.f. Month of August. 2 First 
day of August, 3 MM says ‘‘a certain epoch 
only—not the month of August.'' 

Lünasdainn, -e, see Lùnasdal. 

Lunasdain, Arran for Lùnasdal. 

Iuuasz,(AF)Sword-fish, see 1asg-a’-chlaidheimh. 

tund, see lunn. 

lundach, -aiche, æ. see lunndach. 

lundair, -ean, $.m. see lunndair. 

lundrainn,** s. Thrashiug, see lunndraigeadh. 

lung. see long. 

lungach,(AF) s.m. Sandworm. 

lunn, v. Penetrate—Sar-Ubair. 

lunn, -uinn & -a, pl. an, s.m. Middle part of 
an oar-handle. 2 Staff, 3 Churn-staff, 4 
Wave, roller, heaving billow, heaver that does 
not break. 5 Bier. 6 Spoke. 7 Lever. 8** 
Bar. 9ttLauuching roller. 16t{ Staff, bar, 
bearer or pole of a bier or litter. 11**Bond. 
12(AH) il part of a boat. 13 (AH) Rolling 
oi the sev in à calm. 14 Vessel. 

lunnach, -aiche, a. Having handles, as oars. 2 
Furnished with staves, poles, bearers, launch- 
ing ro lcrs,levers, &c. 3 Like a bar, staff, &c. 
Raranan min 1., smoo/h-handled oars, 

lunnach,** sm. Active youth. 


lunnadh,** -aidh, sm. Invading, invasion. 2 


Pressing on, or forwaril. 
lunnaid,(CR) s. f. 

Ross. 
luunair,(MS) s.m. Idler, lazy fellow, 
lunn-enaraeb, a Heaving, rolling, applied to 


T UR PME el : 
T j l 
d d a AB | H Li 

1 m i 1 ia 1 


BR 


610 


2 Blush. 3 Kind 


ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in herbs. 2 


a. Having a covering, hay- 


Fin of a cow-fetter—W. of 


turg 

waves of the sea, 

lunn-chas, s.m. Stretcher, footwaling of a boat, 
see bàta, G9, p. 73. 

lunndach, -aiche, a. Idle, lazy. 2 Sauntering, 
loitering. lounging, 3**Sluggish. 4 Musty. 

-———_—-d,* s.f.ind. Extreme indolence or lazi- 
ness, lounging. 

lunndair, -ean, s.m. Lazy, indolent person, slug- 
gard, idler, droue. 

each,** a. Dilatory, indiligent. 

eachd, s.f. Laziness, idleness, sluggish- 
ness, resupination. 

lunndan, (CR) s. m. Green, meadow, marshy 
ground— Perthshire, 

lunndrachadh, -aidh,s.?h.& pr.pt. of lunndraich, 
see lunndraigea:th. 

lunndraich, see lunndraig. 

lunndraig, pr.pt. a’ lunndraigeadh, v.a. Thump, 
a strike, punish by striking. 2 Box. 8 

IC . 

lunndraigeadh, -eidh, s.m. Beating, act of beat- 

ing, striking, punishing with blows, 2 Box- 

i 3 kicking. A’1l—, pr.pt. of lunndraig. 





ing. 

lunndrainn, -ean, 8.m. prov. for lunnáraigeadh. 
(** gives s.f.] 

lunntair, pr.pt. a’ lunntairt, v.a. see luondraig. 

lunntairt, pr.pt. of lunntair, see lunndraizeadh.. 

lupach, see lopach. 

lupaid, s.f. Pig, swine. 

lupat, see lupaid. 

lur, -a & -uir, pl.-uir, s.m. Delight, pleasure, 
2*Gem, jewel, treasure, 38** Lovely object. 
Tha a luir ! yes, my treasure, my dear ! 

lur,** a. Beloved, lively, pretty. 

lurach, -aiche, a. Lovely, pretty. 2 Neat. 3 
Airy, nimble, lively. 4**Beloved. 5* Gem- 
like, jewel-like. 6(DU) Loving, lovable. T°’ 
fhalt 1., thy lovely brown locks. 

lurachan, -ain, -an, $. m. The flower of ramps 
(garlic,) see gairgean. 

lurachas, ais, s.f. Loveliness, prettiness, neat- 
ness. 2 Airiness, nimbleness, liveliness. 

luradair, -ean, s.m. Jeweller. 

lurag, -aig, -an, $.f. Pretty female. 2 Beloved 
female, term of endearment. 

luragach, ff -aiche, a. Pretty, 2 Engaging, likea 
female, 

luraichead, -eid, s.f. Loveliness, degree of love- 
liness, prettiness, degree of prettiness, neat- 
ness. 2 Airiness, degree of airiness. 3 Nim- 
bleness, liveliness, 

luraicheas, see luraichead. 

luramachd, W. Ross & Suth’d for lomnochd. 

luramadh, Badenoch for lomradh. 

luran, -ain, -an, s.m. Pretty youth or boy. 2 
Beloved youth or boy, term of endearment. 
[** gives n.pl. lurain.] 

ach, -aivhe, a. Comely, as a smart youth 

or boy. 2 Gallant. 3 Fond. 

ach, -aich, s.m. Gay, sprightly youth. 2 

Lover, gallant, ; 

lure, -uirc, -an, s.m. Crease in cloth. 2t+Lame 
foot. 

lurcach, -aiche, a. Lame in the feet. 

lurcach, -aich, s m. Lameness, unsteadiness. 
'S móran lureaich ’n ad’ ghlüinibh, and much 
lameness in thy knees—Donn. ban, 

lureaiche, s.f.ind. Lameness in the feet, limping. 

lureaire, see lurch ire. 

lurechaire,; AF) s.m. Foal, colt. 

lürdan, -ain, -an, 8. m. Cunning, sly fellow, 
knave, worthless person, 

ach, -aiche, a. Cunning, crafty, sly. 

ach, s.f.ind. Slyuess, cunning, craftiness. 
2 Prac ice of cuuving or slyness. 

lürdanta, -ainte, a. Cunning, crafty. L 

lurg, see lurgann, 2¢¢Ridge ofa hill extending 




















lurg 611 lus-a’-chrom-chinn 


gradually intoa plain, L. an fhedir, the stem 
of the grass. 

turgadh, see lurgann. 

lurgag. -aig. -an, s.f. Small leg. 

lurgaiuneach, see luirgneach. 

lurgann, -ainn, $. f. Shaft, shin, leg. 2 Con- 
temptuous term for an unshapely or slender 
leg. 3 Hind-leg of a horse. 4 Shaft. 6 Haft, 
handle, 6 see lurg. "Ft Ascent. 8 Stalk of 
a plant. 

ach, -aiche, a. see luirgneach. 

——ach, s.m. Shaft. 

lurg-bheairt,** s.f. see luirg-bheairt. 

lurz-iomain, luirg-, -an-, 8.f. see lorg. 

lüs, v.n. Teem, abound. 

lùs, -üis, s.m. see lùths. 

lus, -uis &-a, pl. an, 8. m. Herb, plant, weed, 
flower, 








1 4M. Lus-a’-chalmain. 
^ M lus-a’-choire, 8&.m. Coriander—coriandrum sati- 
d : VUM. , 
dy TA (f S. E: lus-a'-chomain,** sm. Welcome-to-our-house. 
NS säi Wee e lus-a’-chorrain,s.m. Black spleenwort, see dubh- 
Le LE chasach. 2§Sneezewort, see cruaidh-lus. 


N 


SSA 


= 


Wës, 
Leg Lus-a’-bhainne, 439. Lus-a’-bhalla. 
lus-a’-bhainne,$ s.m. Milkwort, procession flow- 
er, ro:ation flower—polygala vulgaris. 
—_——.,§(2) s.m. Bog-violet, see mothan. 
lus-a’-bhalgair,$ s. m. Foxglove. see lus-nam- 
ban-sith. 2§ Club-moss, see crotal-nam-mad- 
adh-ruadh. 
lus-a'-bhalla, s.m. Wall pellitory, bartram— 
parictaria ojicinalis. 











LES Lus-a’-choire. 443. Lus-a’-chraois. 
lus-a’-chraois,§ s.m. Dwarf cornel—cornus Ewe- 
cica. [$ says, improperly used for honeysuckle 
which is uilleann.] 
lus-a’-chridhe, s.m. Self-heal, see dubhan-ceann- 





Lë 


p Gre 
EN Lo. Lus-a' -chaitheimh. 
— Jus-a-chaitheimh,$ s. m. Sweet Woodruff—as- 
perula odorata. 
]usaeh, -aiche, a. Herby, abounding in plants, 
| 2. Weedy. 3 Botanical. 4 Herbaceous. 5 D UT | 
(MS) Herbescent. Pase Ki 
lus-a’-chadail, s.m. Poppy. [vulgares. WU NH O, 
lus-a’-chalmain,$ s. m. Columbine—aquilegia LA Lust -chrom-chinn. 








GR ae s 


| lus-a’-chridhe 
cbosach. 


612 


Jus-an-liügair 
eal cuil, 


tus-a’-chrom-chinn, e m.  Daffodil—marcissus |lus-an-eàrnaich,? s. m. Round-leaved sundew, 


peeudo-narcissus and narcissus jonguilia,  [ill. 
on page 611.) 





LS Lus-a’-chréibain. 447. Lus-an-fhogair. 

lus-a'-chrübain, s.m. Field gentian—gentiana 
campestris. 

fusadair, -ean, s.m. Botanist, herbalist. 

eachd,* s.f. Botany. 2 Study of botany. 

lüsadh, s.m. Abounding, teeming, as with fish. 
A’ 1—, pr.pt. of lus. 

fus-a’-ghraidh, s.m. Amaranthe, love-lies-bleed- 
ing—amaranthus caudatus. 

usairneach, eich, $.f. Place where weeds grow. 

lusan, n.pl. of lus. 

lusan, -ain, -an, s.m., dim, of lus. Little herb, 
weed, or flower. 2 Young herb, 

-——ach, -aiche, a Of, or belonging to, herbs, 
plants or weeds. 2 Abounding in the same. 
3 Producing the same. 4**Herbaceous, flow- 
ery. 

lus-an-airneig,3 s. m.  Liverwort—marchantia 
polymorpha. 

dusan-Albannach,$ s. m. Trailing azalea—aza- 
lea procumbens. 

iusan-bileach,$? s.coll. The class of plants known 
as labiate. 

kus:in-ceann-oir-a’-sgadain,(DMu) ¢.m. Betony— 
Suth'd. [Sometimes used there as a substi- 
tute for tea. ] 

lus-an-eallain,$ s.m. The herb Robert, see righ- 








£48. Lus-an-easbuig, 


see ros-an-t-soluis. 

lus an-easbuig,$ s. m. Bishop's weed, goat- 
weed, gout-weed—cegopodium podagraria. 9i 
Ox-eye—chrysanthemum leucanthemum, ses. 
an neòinean mor. 

lus-an-fhogair,§ s.m. Water-pepper—polygonum 
hydropiper. 


Wo 


‘ 
j 


B 


* 


^ 


ay D 


Te F 
EZ 


4 


T NEN 


© 
GAL 


i 


> 


[37 


448. Lus-an fhógraidh, 
lus-an-fhógraidh,$ s.m. Chase-the-devil, love-in- 
a-mist, devil-in-the-bush, fennel-flower—nigel- 
la damascena. 2$ St. John’s wort, see eala- 
bhuidhe. 
lus-an-fhucadair, ëm. Teazle, fuller's teazle. ` 
lusan-gliineach,§ s.coll. The class of plants poly- 
gonacea. 






E / 
e S 
SW 


5 Ce 








LL9. Lusan-grolla. c 
lusan-grolla,$ s.m. Dwarf red-rattle- -pendicw 
laris sylvatica. 


-A ^N 
7 t^ 






CE 
2p». 
P 


Er Ge 
i Va 
5o rs 
> d 


C. 


A , 
4T 
4 





€ 
t. 
zl 
de 
ae Së 
f 


"n 
~ - 
Kai d ` ' 
aw j 
: à 
d 










450. Lus-an-leanna. 
lus-an-leanna.$ s.m, Hop—humudlus lupulus.. 
jus-an-leasaich,$s.m. Yellow bedstraw, see ruta, 
lus-an-leusaidh, s.m, (DM) Spurge—euphorbia. 
lusan-lipeach, see lusan-bileach. ; 
lus-an-lidgair, s.m. Lovage, see luibh.an-liüg- 











lus-an-lidigair 
(McL & D gives lus-an-liagaire.] 
Wood-angelica, see lus- 


air. 


lus-an-lonaid,§ 8. m. 
nam-buadha. 

lus-an-righ,§ s.m. Basil thyme calamint. wild 

Z 


basil—calamintha clinopodium, Common 


tansy, see lus-na-Fraing. 





451. Lus-an-righ. 452. Lus-aa-sith'chainnt. 

lus-an-rócais, s.m. Ranunculus. 

lus-an-rois, s.m. The herb Robert, so called on 
account of its being used as a charm to cure 
the disease, the rose.—DU, 2 Red,campion 
—Colonsay. 

lus-an-sith-chainnt,§ s.m. Spiked lythrum, loose- 
strife—lythrum sa/icaria. 

Jus-an-torranain,(AC) 8. m. 
nan-cnapan. 

lus-an-t-samhraidh,® s. m. Gilliflower, see lus- 
leth-an-t-samhraidh, 


Figwort, see lus- 





. 453. Lus-an-t-saoidh. 
lus-an-t-saoidh, a m. Fennel, (lit. hay-weed.)— 
Jeniculum vulgare. 
lus-an-t-seann-duine,§ s.m. Southernwood, see 
meath-challtainn, 
lus-an-t-siabainn,§ s.m. Soapwort, bruisewort, 
bouncing bet—saponaria officinalis. 


us-an-t-sicnich,§ e m. 
wort—herniaria glabra. | 
lus-an-t-siüeair, s. m. Suecory, chicory—cichor- 
ium Mie Ago 
Za 


Rupture-wort, burst- 


ts 


l 
tam Bibwort, sao die | lus-Beathaig, 


456. Lus-an-t-sitcair. 


lus-an-t-sleisneach,§ s.m. Yarrow, see lus-chosg- 
adh-na-fola. 

lus-a’-pheubair, s.m. Dittany, pepper-wort—eri- 
ganum dictamnus. 

lus-a’-phiobair, see lus-a'-pheubair. 

lus-a’-phione,§ Peony—peenia oficinalis, see 
meacan easa. 

lusarnach,* s.f. Weeds. 

lus-bachair, s. m. Lady's glove. 

lusbardan, see luspardan, 





L57. Lus-Beathaty. 
sm, Woad-betomy, bishop’s wort, 





ye ae 


- 


lus-Beathaig 


—stachys betonica. 
lus-bhaigair, see luis-bhalgair. 





L58. Lus-Bheinn-Labhatr. 459. Lus-buidhe-mór. 

lus-Bheinn-Labhair,$ s.m. Ben Lawers' plant— 
saxifraga cernua. 

tus-buidhe-Bealltainn, s. m. Marsh-marigold, 
see a’ chorrach shod. 

lus-buidhe-mór,? s.m. Dyer's yellow weed,dyer's 

weed, dyer's rocket, weld—reseda luteola. 

tus-caolach,} s.m. Fairy-flax, see lion-nam-ban- 


sith. 

lus-Chaluim-Chille, s.m. St. John's wort, see 
eala-bhuidhe, 2 Wood-loosestrife, yellow pim- 
pernel, see seamrag-Muire, 

lus-chloimh, s.m. Gossamer. 

tus-chneas-Chuchulainn, s. m. Meadow-sweet, 
see crios Chuchulainn. 

lus-chnuimh, -e, -can, s.f. Caterpillar. 





L60. Lus-chosgadh-na-fola. 
tus-chosgaih-na-fola, s. m. Yarrow—achillea 
millefolium. McL & D gives Milfoil. 
‘lus-chrann-ceusaidh,§ s.m. Spotted persicaria, 
see g'üineach-mór. 
lus-chrüin, -ùin & -a, -üintean, s.m. Garland of 
flowers. 
Jus-chuach, -aich, an, $, €, Caterpillar. 
lus-Chuchulainn, & m. Yellow bedstraw, 
ruin. 2 see crios-Chuchulainn, 
Aus-cré, s.m. Common speedwell, medicinal tea, 


seo 


& D gives Male speedwell.] 
lus-curaidh, s.m. Jessamine. 
lusdadh, -aidh, s.m. Flattery. 


614 


lus-ghionaich 





L69. Lus-deathach-thalmhuinn. 
marta officinalis. 
lus-edlas,** g.m. Botany. 
lus-eun,(AF) sm. Mountain finch. 
lus-feidhleagach, see luis-feidhleagach. 
Tlusga,** -ai, s.m. Space of five years. 
trum. 3 Infancy. 4 Cave. 
flusgadh, -aidh, s.m. Lurking, skulking. 
lusgair,** -ean, s.m. Troglodyte, hermit. 
each,** o Like a troglodyte or hermit, 
2 Lurking. 
eachd,** s.f. 
Solitariness. 
lus-garbh, s.m. Goose-grass—ftgallium aparine. 
lus-ghàraidh, s.m. House-leek,see lus-nan-cluas. 


2 Luss 








Living retired in caves. 2 


«cm os 





L468. Lus-ghlinn,. A3 
fiuellen,ground hele— veronica officinale. [MeL | lus-ghlinne, s. m. Wood mercury—mercurialie 


perennis, (McL & D gives Dog's mercury.] 
lus-Ghlinne bhracadail, (bracadh, suppuration) 
see lus-ehlinne, 


lus-deathach-thalmhuinn,ó s.m. Fumitory—fu- ' lus-ghioaaich,}s.m. Dog-lichen—peltidea caning, 





tus-gnath-chorm 615 
lus-gnath-ghorm,§ s, m, Cranebill, see crobh- 
priachain. ; 
lus-gràidh, see lus-a’-ghraidh. 


lus-gun-mhathair-gun-athair, 8. m. Duckweed, 
see mac-gun-athair. 





464. Lus-leighis. 465. Lus-leth-an-t-samhraidh. 
lus-leighis,§ s.m. Petty spurge,—euphorbia pep- 


lus. 
lus-leth-an-t-samhraidh, s.m. Wallflower, gilly- 
flower, July flower (lit. Midsummer plant)— 
chewranthus cher, [MeL & D gives this for 
Sweet-william in Eng.-Gael. part. ] 
lus leusaidh, s.m. Spurge, see lus-leighis, 
- fus-liath, s.m. Lavender, see lus-na tùise. 


~ 


yaw A 
; e A 





M 
S 
T A 
3 
M 
IM Y 
s JAN ‘ j 
Wäi m 
A ^ AN, 
7 Rio OH 
| Ara WAS, WH) 
po (Wi D 
| d Ni SEQ. NOH 
j Rrra d 
SE ere 


Lee, Lus-loibheach. 
[us-Ioibheach, s.m. Corn-cockle. 
ius-maireannach, s$. m. Amaranth, see lus-a’- 
ghràidh. 
tus-Mairi, s.m. Marigold, see lus-buidhe-Beall- 
tuinn, 
ms-Marsalaidh,§ s.m. Marjoram, see oragan. 
]us-MhicBeathaig, see lus-Beathaig. 
lus-mhic-Cuimein, san. Cumin —cuminum cym- 
inum. Badge ofthe Cumins. 2} Caraway, 
see carbhaidh. 
_ tus- Mhic-Raonuill, s. m. Chase-the-devil, see 
lus-an-fhograidh. 
— fus-mhic-righ-Bhreatuinn, 8. m. Wild-thyme, 
brother-wort—thymus serpyllum. 
lus-midhe,$ ssm. Marsh scorpion-grass, forget- 
me-not, see cotharach. 
Ins-midi, AF) s. Scorpion, 
lus-mór, s.m. Spearwort. 2 Asparagus. 3 Fox- 
= glove. 4 Great white mullen. 
lus-nolach, s.m. Woodruff, see lus-a'-chaith- 
eamh. 
lus-Muire, s.m. Marsh mari old, 


lus va banrighian,§ s. tn. icula, —primulo | 





lus-na-fionnaig, $.m. 


[us-nà-fionnaig, 
auricula. 


lus-na-feannaig, see lus-na-fionnaig. 


lus-na-fearna-guirme, see lus-na-fearnaich. 
lus-na-fearnaich, s.m. Sundew—drosera rotundi- 
folia. Very common in Scottish Gaeldom, 


has little red, spoon-like leaves with red bairs 
and always covered with dew-drops, see ròs 
an-t-soluis. 





467 .Lus-mhic-righ-Bhreatuinn. 468. Lus-na-fionw 


[aig 
Crowberry, crakeberry— 
empetrum nigrum, §Badge of the Macleans, 
some say of the Camerons, 





ie S 
^ M4 
bs v 
x Y ' f? 
os MN : 
= pe [d$ 
» | J 
i M Ad d } 
Lë U i j ) 
Z SS ? 
LSI, at tae 


469.Lus-na-fola (2) 470. Lus-na-Fraing. 


—— Án 





674. Laou-na-A-oidh ae 


lus-na-fola 616 lus-nan-deare 


lus-na-fola,* s.m. Yarrow, milfoil, see lus-chosg-| vulgare, 
adh-na-fola. 2 Shepherd's purse — capsella 
bursa pastoris. [ill. on p. 615.] 
lus-na-Fraing, s.m. Common tansy, buttons, — 
tanacetum vulgare. (ill, on p. 615.) 
lus-na-gaoithe, sm — Windflower. 
us-na-géire-boireannach, see grainnseag. 
us-na-gineil-goraiche,$ s,m. Bluebell, wild hya- 
cinth, see fuath-mhuic. 
lus-na-h-oidhche,$ s.m. Deadly nightshade, bel. 
ladonna, dwale, banewort,—atropa belladona. 
(1H. on p oun 
lus-na-h-oighe,} em, Enchantress’ nightshade, 
see fuinnseach 
Ins-na-macraidh,*see lus-mhic-righ-Bhreatuinn. 
lus-na-maighdinn,* s.m, Tassel, 





475. Lus-na-nathrach. 476. Lus-nan-cluas. 

lus-na-nathrach,} (2) s,m. Adder's-tongue fern, 
see teanga-na-nathrach. 

lus-nan-cam-bile,§ sam, Common chamomile, see 
camomhail. 

lus-nan-clnas,$ s.m. House-leek—sempervivum 
tectorum. 2 Saxifrage. 

lus-nan-clugan,(AC) s.m. Figwort. see lus-nan- 
cnapan. 

lus-nan-enàmh, s. m. Samphire — crithinurm 
maritimum, see saimbhir, 





472. Lus-nam-ban-sith. 
lus-nam-ban-sith, s.m. Foxglove—digitalis pur- 
purea. 
lus-nam-biast,* s.m. Absinthium. 





477. Lus-nan-cnapan. 
lus-nan-enapan, s$. m. Fig-worl —sjrophularia 
nodosa. [Great Figwort—McL & D. 


) 
m 
Sei 
i 


h \ 





A ST Lk 
£73, Lus-nam-braoileag. 474. Lus-nam-buadha. \ ( wir 7 
lus-nam-braoileag,$ s. m. Red whortleberry i Za En 

brawlins, cowberry, floweriug box—vaccinium M Gan a 
vitis idea. Badge of some of the septs of |] v 
Clan Chattan. V NV 
lus-nam-buadha,§ s.m, Wood angelica —angelica £2 Kem 
sylvestris. Av ow 
lus-na-meala,} s.m. Honeysuckle, see uilleann. | ds Al 
2 Lousewort —Colonsay. A Y 
-Ius-nam-meall-móra, 3.21. Common mallow. WC i 
lus-nam-mial,** s.m. Mouse-ear, scorpion-grass, È 
lousewort, red-rattle, see lus-riabhach. 2 N JH. 
Marsh scorpion-grass, forget-me-not, see coth- KA 
arach. LOE 
Ius-nam-mios,$ s.m. Moonwort. 
lus-nam-muisean,$ s.m. Cowslip. 2 Primrose—| 478. Diss nan-deare. 480. Lus-nan-/aoch. 
McL & D. lus-nan-dearc,$ s. m. Whortleberry plant, bil- 
ius-na-nathrach, s.m. Viper's bugloss—echium | berry, blaeberry, blueberry—vaccinium myt- 








lus-nan-deare d7 ` ]us- Dna-pejgninn ‘ 





tillus. 
fus-nan-eidhreag, see lus-nan-oighreag. 
tus-nan-gillean-dga,§ s. m. Meadow-sweet —Ar- 
gyll. see crios-Chuchulainn. 
lus-nan-gnàithseag,* s.m. Whortleberry-plant. 
lus-nan-gorm-dheare, s.m. Black- or blueberry 
plant, 





479, Lus-nan-:gràn-dubh. 
jus-nan-gran dubh, s.m. Alexanders—smyrnium 
olusatrum. Not found north of Stirling in 
Scotland. 
Jas-nan-laoch, s.m. Roseroot—sedum rhodiola. 
Badge of the Gunns. (Not rose-wort, as given 
by MoL & D.—ill. on p. 616. } 


dis Br ; 





485. Lus-na-peighinn. 
lus-na-peighiun;$ s.m. Marsh penny wort—hydro- 
cotyle vulgaria. 





482, Lus-nan-laogh (2.) 
lus-nan-laogh, s.m. Golden saxifrage—chrysos- 
plenium oppositifolium. 2% Orpine—sedum 


telephium. 

alkane sm. Eyebright—euphrasia ofici- 
na is. 

lus-nan-oighreag, s.m. Cloudberry-bush—rubus 
chamemoris. 


lus-nan-saighdearan,§ s.m. Children's name for 
ribwort in Perthshire and Argyllshire, see 
slàn-lus. 

lus-nan-sgor, s. m. Clown’s all-heal, hedge- 
woundy ort—stachys sylvatica. 

ee et ielean,§ $,m. Valerian, see lus-bil- 
ESCH, 





S l 


486. Lus-na-purgaid. 487. Lus- aa ubl 





lus-na-purgaid 


lus-na-purgaid,§ s.m. Monk's rhubarb—rumex 
alpinus. 2} Rue, DU on p. 617.| 

lus-na-seabhaig,§ s.m. Hawkweed—hi»racium. 
[ill. on p. 617 represents Mouse-ear hawkweed 
—hieracium pilosella. 

jas-na-seilge, s.m. Black spleenwort, see dubh- 
chasach. 

hus-na-siochainnt,} see lus-na-siothaimh, 





L488. Lus-na-siothaimh. 


lus-na-sjothaimh, s.m. Common or yellow loose- 


strife—lysimachia vulgaris. 





7 £89. Lus-na-smaàil-a4. 
lus-na-smaileag, [-smaileagff, -smalaie**,] s.m. 
Smallage. garden celery—apiwm graveolens. 
lus-na-Spainnd, s.m. Pelhtory ot Spain—anthe- 
mis pyrethrum. 

lus-na-staoine, s.m, Gill. 

lus-na-staolalz,$ s. m. Crowberry, 
fionnaig. 

lus-na-tüise,$ s.m. Common layvender—lavendu- 
la sptca. 

luspaid,(DMC) st Clumsy person. 

luspardan, ain, -an, s. m. Pigmy, dwarf. 2 
Sprite. 3 Term applied to a dwarfish child 
or boy. 4 Contemptuous term for a puny man. 

—ach, a. Dwarfed, dwarfisn. 

lus-Phara-iéith,$ s.m. Groundsel, see bualan. 

lusrach, -aiche, æ. see lusacn 

,-alich, &m Herbage. 2* Place well 
supplied with nerbs. [s maoth |. an t-s!éibhe 
a’ seargadh, and thetender herbage of the hill 
withering. 

lasradh, -aidh, 
cession. 

lusrag, -aig, -an, s.f. Charm made of herbs. 2 
see luisreag. 

ach, -aiche, a. see lusach, 

an, ain, -an,s.m. Florist. 2 Botanist, 

one skilled in herbs. 3 Apothecary. 4 Per- 

fumer, Sedltachd an lusragaiu, the art of the 

kervælist or apothecary. 


see lus-na- 








8.m. see lusrach, $. T2 Pro- 








618 


UN lutnaigte 


~~—_-- -— 





490. Lus-riabhach. 
lus-riabhach, s.m. Lousewort, marsh red-rattle 
—npedicularis palustris. 
lus-righ,* see lus-mhic-righ-Bhreatuinn. 


lus-rds,§ s.m. The herb Robert, see righeal-cuiL — 


a 





491. Lus-tajhta. 492. Lus-teang’-an-daimh. 
lus-taghte,$ s. m. Fragrant orchis—gymnade- 
nia conopsea. 


lustair,** -ean, $.m. Flatterer. 2 Low cunning 
fellow. 





- each,** a. Flattering, cajoling, fawning. 

lustradh,** -aidh, s.m. Flattering, flattery, ca- 
joling, fawning, 

]us-teang'-an-daimh,$ 
lycopsis arvensis. 

lùth, -a [& luith, s.m. Strength, power, vigour, 
activity 2** Power of motion. 3*Joint. 4**Pith, 
5t Loneine, desire. Os cionn an lüith, above 
the jownt , sgian lùth, a clasp-kn f^ : tha a chas 
gun L, Ais foot i$ powerless; chàill e La 
(äu ube, he lost the use of his hand ; chaill e a 
l., he Lost his power of locomotion. 

lùth, v. seelügh. 2 see luadh. 

——ach, -aicne, a. see lùthmhor. 
ach. 3fIWeakly. 

t——ach, aich, s The sinews, veins, 

luthachadh, ff -aidh, s.m. Invigoration. A'l—, 
pr pt. of làthaich. 

fluthadh, -aidh, s.m. & pr. pt. see lighadh. 2 
(MS) Conflexure. 3 see luadhach. 

lüthaich,ff v.a. Invigorate. 

luthaig, v.a. see luathsaich. 

vadh, -eidh, s. m. see luathsachadh. 2 
(MS) Receivedness. 3 Fatality. 

luthaigte, see ludhaigte. 


s. m. Small bugloss— 


2 see luadh- 








(MEA E 
ae Tes ci di 








LY A 


Se Ze: 


A E " 
D T» u^ ME 
e ade a m Sm 


i Bet A 
eS ME aA 


^ ` ! 1 "5 
E = 





| lüthair 


| tùthair, -e, a. see lùthmhor. 
| ———eachd,(MS) s.f. Agility. 
| Iàthar, a. see lùthmhor. 
lithas, -ais, s.m. see lùth. | 
luthasachadh,tt -aidh, s. m. see luathsachadh. 
luthasaich,tt pr.pt. a’ luathasachadü, v. æ. see 
-. luathsaich. : 
 dàth-chleas, -a, an, s. m. Agility, activity. 2 
_ Manly feat, brave deed. 3 Athletic exercis- 
. +s. 4 Gaubolling, frisking about. 5 Sleight 
|. Of hand, jugglery, activity ot the hand, leger- 
. demain. Grt Valour, bravery. L. nan van, 


the frisking of lambs; lùth-chleasan, agile move- 
.. ments, feats in legerdemain. j 
("— —————àch,-aiche, a. Agile, active, nimble. 


I 


2 Manly, stout. 3 Friskiag. 
Skilled in Jugg'ery, dexterous. 
rous, 


4 Merry 6 
6** Chival- 
















—achd, s.f. Bravery, chivalry. 2 Leger- 

demain, activity of the hand. 3 Activity, 

nimbleness, agility, airoitness, dexterity. 

—aiche,** s,m. Juggler, conjurer, adept 
inlegerdemaia. 2 Chiyalrous person, 

làth-chüirt, -e, -ean, see lùchairt. 

làüthdag, -aig, -an, see lùdag. 

ach, see lüdagach. 











eaorainn. 
lüth-fhalbhach, a. Giddy-paced. 
thmhoire, comp. of lùthmhor. 


| 


ERE 





























gility. 
fathmhor, -oire, o Strong, able. 
vegete, agile, supple, bending, 
|. muscular. 4 Swift. 
Gu L, vigorously. 
wo gwifimuscular man. 
uthor, -oire d. see lùthmhor. 
üths, -üiths, s.m. see lùth. 
iutraig,(DU) s.f. Spaces between the ribs in the 
. bottom of a boat. 
| from being washed about, formed by making 
a shallow dyke round the bed. 


M 


, muin, the vine. The eleventh letter of the 
Gaelic alphabet now in use. When m has its 
simple sound, it is articulated much the same 
as in other languages, as, mór, great ` caman, 
& club ; lom, bare. When m is aspirated, that 
is, when it is immediately followed by A, a 
new combiuation or letter is formed, some- 
whatlike v in English, as, a mhuineal, Ais 
meck ; tamh, rest, Dialectally, though never 
at the beginning of words, mh is often pro- 
nounced like a nasal oo, as, ràmh, an oar ; 
and sometimes mA is entirely mute in the 
middle and at the end of words,as, còmhnard, 
level ; domh, to me ; but nasality generally at- 
taches to the vowel preceding the elision. 

a cont. for am, art., used after words ending 
WK a vowel. Is tu 'm balach ! you're the 
boy ! 

1, cont. for am, in the, Taobh. na creige 'm 
blathas na gréine, beside the rock in the warmth 
of the sun. 

1, cont. for am (ann mo,) in my. 

|, cont. for am, Whom. Mu 'm bi iad ag ràdh, 
‘about whom they assert. 

P cont. tor am ? interr. conj. ^M faigh thu 
sia ? will you get that ? 

i, Got, for am, ps. pron. Their. (before labi- 
Ali.) Le 'm beul ’s le ’m bilibh, with (heir 


2 Nimble, 
3 Sinewy, 
5 Jointed, 6 Voluble, 
Fear luath, lüthmhor, a 





Lea 


t 
| 
I 
| 


619 














ùth-eun, T s. m. Mountain-finch, see bricein- 


suthmboireachd, s.f.ind. Strength, activity, a- 


fmaca, s.m. 
macabh, sam (nd. 


tmacadh, -aidh, s.m. Beariug, 
macadhamnaich, v.a. 
macadhamhachadü, s.m, Macidamizing. 
macaibh, dat.pl, of mac. 2 see maca»h. 


Macaibh mór 


mouth and with their lips, 
m’, cont. for mo, poss.pren. My. 
Sather ; w anam, my sonl. 
m’, for mu, prep. About. 
m'a, formu a. About his, about her (before 
vowels.) M’ a cheanp, about hi$ head ; wt & 
casan, about her feet, 
ma, conj. If. Ma’s àill la neach sam bith tigh- 
Jun ‘nam d5éidn-sa, of any man will come after 
me; ma ’s e gu'm bi, if en be that it be ; ma’s 
urrainn mi, vu I can.  (Aspiraves the initial 
consonant of verb following, and is used with 
bi past af., fut. subj., aad pres. and past of 
i. 


AU athair, my 


tma, s.m Breach. 

Tina, prep. for mu. 

mab, -aib & -a, pl. -an, s.m. Stutter, lisp, stam- 

er. 2 Tassel, fringe, (babaz.) 

mao, pr.pt. A wabadb, v. e. Abuse,vilify, re- 
proach in angry terms, 2 Affront, disgrace. 

mabach, -aiche, a. Entaugled, confused, ravel- 
led. 2 Stammzring, stuttering or iasping in 

. Speech. 3 lurnished with tassels or friug-: 
(babagach.) An ciaran mabach, the (a: 
slammerer 

— —7,* -aiche, $&f. Stuttering, stammering 
female. 

d,* s&.f.ind Stammering. 

mabadh, -aidb, -aidhean, s. m. [1np-diment or 
lisping in speech, stammering 9 Matanglior, 
perplexing, ravelling Cha’n fhaigh fear ma b- 
aidh modn, @ stutterer ig never respected. 

màbadh, -aidh, 8. am Abusiag, act of abusiny, 
vilifying, reproaching in angry terms. 2 Aí- 
fronting, act of affrouting. A” m—, pr. pt. of 
mab, 

mabag, -aiz, -an, see babag. 

ach, -aiche, see babagach. 

mahbaiche,tt s.f.ind. Lnarticulaceness, lisp. 

mabaid,(DMC) s.f. Gossiping female. 

mabail,(Ms) v.a. Hack. 2 Maim 








Mabair, -ean, s.m Stammerer, stutterer, 


mabair, -ean, 8.71. Abusive person, one who uses 
abusive language. 2 One who affronts o» 
causes disgrace. 

eachd, s.f.ind. Habit of using bad lan- 

guage. 

mabaireachd, s.f.ind, Stammering, act of stam- 
mering or stuttering, 

maban, see moibeal, 

mabladh, (MS) s.m. Hacking. 2 Maiming. 

DAMNA OU s. f. Indistinct or unintelligible 
talk. 





tmac, a. Clear, pure, clean. 

Tag, v.a. Bear, carry. 

mac, g^n. d pl. mic, dat. pl. macaibh. s.m. Sov. 
2 The young of any animal. 3 poetically The 
male of any animal.  [Aspirates a proper 
name following it, except when it commences 
with c or g, as MacPhàrlain, ` MacCriomain, 
MacGriogair, but when signifying the son of 
an individual, a name beginning with c or y is 
also aspirated after mac Thus, lain MaeCoin- 
nich means John MacKenzie, but lain iac- 
Choinnich, means John, the son of an indivr- 
dual called Kenneth.] **gives mac-’san-lagh for 
son-in-law (which is cliamhuinn) ; bub à son. 
in-law is not a son in daw. 

Like, equal, emblem, 

Liberal, generous, accom» 

piished man. 2 Fair youth. 3 Young nero. 

pl, Heroes, renowned persons, 

carrying. 

Macadlamize. 


Macaibh mor, s.m. Favourite ciaractec EL 
2R” 


Wo aN EE EEN E T 
in Gaelic tales, probib!y she macaobh (youth) 
Of the older language 
macail, -e, æ. Like a son. filial. 2**Affectionate. 
+macail, v.a. Nurse, foster, rear. 
maoaimh. $22 matab. 
macaineach4, s.f.ind. Boyish play or games 2 
Heroism. 3 Ordering, directing. 4(MS) 


alety. 

macaladh, -aidh, s.m. Fostering, rearing a éhild 
after weaning. 

mac-alla, see mac-talla. 

macamh, see macabh. 

maca-mna, $.f. Young or fair woman. 2**Hand- 
some young female. 

macan, Ain, -an, s.m.dim. of mac. Little son. 
2 Term of approbation or encouragement ad- 
dressed to a boy or youth. 3 Hero. 4** 
Young son. 'S math thu,'mnacain ! well done, 
my boy ! 

mac-an-aba, s.m. Ring-finger. 

mac-an-abair, see mac-an-aba, 

macanachd,** see macaineachd. 

macanadh,(CR) s.m. Sobbing—4A rran. 

macanas,** -ais, s.m. Bravery, heroism. 
mac-an-dogha.$ s. Burdock, for meacan-dogha, 
see suirichean-suirich. 

mac-an-luinn, s.m. Name of Fingal's sword. 

mac-an-og,( MMcD) s.m. see meacan-og. 

macanta, -ainte, a. Meek, gentle, mild. 29+ 
Submissive. 3**Kind, filial. 4** Honest, 
Modest. Na daoine m., the meek. 

chd, s.f. see macantas. Spiorad na m., 

the spirit of meekness. 
s, -ais, s.m. Meekness, mildness, urban- 
ity. 2**Submissiveness. 3 Puerility. 4** 
Honesty. 5**Affectionateness. 
mac-an-Toisich,(CR) s.m. Whisky—W. of Rose. 
(From association with Ferintosh.) 
mac-balaich, s.m. Clown, rustic, rude fellow. 
mac-brathair-athar, s.m. First cousin, father’s 
brother’s son. 

mac-brathair-mathar, s.m. First cousin, moth- 
er’s brother’s son. 

mac-brathair-seanamhar, s.m. Maternal grand 
uricle's son, second cousin. 

mac-bràthair-seanar, s. m. Paternal grand un- 
cle's son, second cousin. 

mac-bràthar, s.m. Nephew, brother's son. 

mac-ceile, mic-ch-, s.m. Step-son, husband's or 
wife's son. 

MacCruslaig 's na mucan, 8. m, MacCruslaig 
and thepigs. A favourite game among Uist 
children. Described in No. 16, Celtic Review. 

mac-fraoir,( AF) s. m. Gannet. 2 Solan goose. 
3 Voracious fowl or person— Sàr-Obair. 

mac-fuirme,** s.m. Poet of the 2nd. order. 








498. Mac-gun-athair. 
mac-gun-athair,t s.m. Lesser duckweed—lemra 


minor. 

mach, adv. (a.mach) Out, without. Thugaibh 
a mach, take (ye) out: a mach 's a mach, 
wholly, thoroughly, altogether ` bithibh cinnt- 
each gu *m faigh bhur peacadh a mach sibh, be 
sure that your sing will find you out; thug an 
Tighearn a mach Clann Isracil á taigh na 
daorsa, the Lord brought the children of Jaraei 


620 
out of the house of bondage ; m air a chéi'e, at 


5** | 


mach-bhaile 


variance ? cuir a m. e, put him out; thoir a 
imach ort ; get out / | 

maeh,(a)?n'. Out 1 Get out ! 

mach,* conj. Except, but, Mach o h-aon, bué 
one, ezcept one. 

macha, (AF) s. Royston crow. 

macha-dhubh,( MMcD) s.f. Otter— Lewis. 

machair, gen.-charach & -chrach, pl. machraich- 
ean, £f. Exteusive low-lying fertile plain. 2 
Level country; 3 Name given by the Scottish 
Gael to the southern or low-lying parts of 
Scotland. 4 Extensive beach. 5(UR) Low and 
level part of a farm. 6(AC) pl. Long ranges of 
sandy plains fringing the Atlautic side of the 
Outer Hebrides.. they are closely covered 
with short green grass, thickly studded with 
herbs of fragrant odours and plants of lovely 
hues. Luibh na macharach, the herb of the 
fell; air mh.,7n the Lowlands ; air feadh na 
macharach, among the lowlands,  |* says 
seldom used in common speech for anything 
but beach, ] 

machaireach, -eich, s.m. Inhabitant or native 
of a low-lying country, especially the south 


of Scotland. 
Abounding in fields, 


ory ` -eiche, dq. 





494. Machall-coille. 

machall-coille,§ s.m. Common avens, the herb 
burnet—geum urbanum. 

machall-monaidh,$ s. m. White dryas, moun- 
tain avens—dryas octopetala. ^ Little shrub- 


like plant with leaves somewhat like the oak, — 
and eight large white petals on flower. Badge < 


of the MacNeils, and monts. 





596. Machall-risge. 
machall-uisge,? s.m. Water-avens—geum rivale, 
macharach, gen. sing. of machair. 
mach-bhaile, -bhailtean, sm- Village im the 


Ty 


AR 
E. n d 


EN 
b 


495. Machall-monaidh. € 






| 


(23 
1 


WK Saile 
e 


mach-bhaile 


suburbs of a great town. 
finachd, s.n. Wave. 
t- nach, -aich, ëm. Observer. 
¢machiual, -uail, gn, Sponge. 
machiach,* see machlag 
machlag, -aiz, -an, s.f. Matrix, womb. 2 Belly. 
3 Mating. 
ach, a. Uterine. 2 Bellying. 
machrach, gen.sing. of machair. 
machraichean, pl. of machair. 
mach-sheomar,** s, Antechamber. 
machtra ! int. 
machuil, s.f. Spot, blemish. 
mac-lamhaich, s.m. Sea-deyil, cat-fish, angler, 
fishing-frog. 2 Wolf-fish. 
mac-lathaich, see mac-làmhaich. 
wac-leabhar,** mic-, s.m. Copy ot a book, vol- 
; ume of à book. 
mac-leisg, s.m. Lazy, indolent person, laziness 
personified, (lit. son of laziness.) 
mac-mallachd,* ssm. The devil. 
mac-meamna, see mac-meanmna, 
—-—ch, see mac-meanwuach. 
mac-meanmna, &.m. Fancy,imagination,conceit. 
———ch, -aiche, a. Imaginative, fanci- 











ful. 

dh,'-aidh, ¢.m. Imagination, fancy. 

mac-mic,** s.m, Grandson. 

fmac-muà,** s. f. Handsome young female, 2 
Young girl. 

mac-muirigheach,(AF) s.m. see maighdeag. 

mac-na-bracha, s.m. Whisky (Jit. son of malt.) 

mac-na-dearcaig, s.m. Wine. 

mac-na-praisich,** s.m. Whisky. 

macnas, -ais, s.m. Wantonness, lasciviousness. 
3 Sport, mirth. 3 Fancy. 4**Festivity. 5** 
Kindness, 6**Prosperity. 7** Fondness, 

macnasach, -aiche, a. Wanton, lascivious, 2 
Licentious. 3 Sportive, merry, gay, wirthful, 
jovial, festive. 

————.—4, s.f, see macnas. 211Buxomness. 

mac-peathar, s.m. Sister’s son, nephew. 

mac-piuthair-athar, s.m. Father’s sister’s son, 
first cousin. 

mac-piuthar-seanamhathar, sm, Grandmother’s 
sister's son, second cousin. 

mac-piuthar-seanar, s.m. Grandfather's sister's 
son, second cousin. 








macraidh,tt s.f.coll. Band of young men, youths, 


male children. 2 Sons. 
#macraidh,** s./. Disease. 
¢macrail, a. Like, as. 
macrail, s.f. Gaelic spelling of mackerel, 
macras,** s.m. Sobbing, peevishness. 
ach,** a. Peevish, sobbing, sighing. 
mac-ratha, s.m. Prosperous or fortunate person 
(lit. son of prosperity.) Is tu mac-an-ratha, 
what a lucky fellow you are ! 
macruidh, see macraidh. 
mac-samhlach,** -aidh, s.m. Equal. 
lent, 3 Fellow, match. 
mac-:amhlaidh, see mac-samhuil. 
mac-samhuil, sm. Likeness, sameness, simili- 
tude. 2 Emblem, 
,"* a. Like as, such like, similar. 
-——t,** s.m. Equal, compeer. 2 Fel- 
low, match. 3 Emblem. Do mh air mis- 
neach, thine equal in courage. 
mac-sgal,* s.m. Echo. Bheireadh e m. á creag- 
aibh, he would make the very rocks re-echo. 
mac-stalladh,(DC) Uist for mac-talla. 
mac-strodha, E s. m. Candlewaster. 
mac-struidhe, Spendthrift. 
mactach,** a. Pernicious. 2 Destructive, 
4mactadh, -aidh, s.m. Killing, slaying, slaugh- 
ter. 2**Surprise. 
mac-talla, s. Echo, (lif. son of the rock,) also 


2 Equira- 











gen 


621 


madar 


sea) rg ap MR 
mac-talladh, 
mac-thallaidh, ] seo mac-talla, 
mac-thogail,** s.f, Adoption. 
mac-tire,(AC) s.f. (**m.] Wolf. 
Hmad,** s.m. Hand. 

mada, see madadh. 
madach,** a. Caniue. 





ail, -e, a. Doggish. 2 Fierce. 3 Surly, 
mada-chuain,(AF) s.m. Grampus. 
madadh, -aidh, -aidhean, 8. m. Dog. 2 Mas 


tiff. 3 Any wild animal of the dog species. 4 
Wolf. 5 Fox. 6 Cock of a gun-lock (the parb 
in which the flint used to be fixed.) 7**Butt- 
end ofa gun. 8 The larga mussel, like the 
bait-mussel and as large as the mùsgan. 
M. is the usual term in Arran for @ dog, 
where cà is seldom heard. 

m.-all, see m.-allaidh. 

m.-donn, -aidh-dhuinn, otter. 2 brown mgs- 


tiff. ; 
m.-gul, -aidh-ghuil, wolf, 
m.-mór,(AC) wolf. ` 
m.-ruadh, -aidh-ruaidh, pl. madaidh-ruadha 
fox ; 2 brown mastif. ; 
m.-ulaith, see m.-allaidh. 
m.-uisge, otter ` 2 fresh-water peart-mussel— 
W. of Ross d Lewis, ` 
madadhail, see madachail, 
mada-galluidh, see madadh-allaidh, 
madaidheach, see madachail, 
madail, see madachail. 
madag, see malog. 
madainn, on Linn, 


se^ 





498. Malar. 499. Madar. 
màdar, -air, s.m. Wild madder—rubia peregrina. 
2 The colour produced therefrom. Luchd- 
dheiseachan màdair, the wearers of red coats. 
(ill. 498 represents Wild madder—rubia pere- 
grina, and 499 Field maider—sherardia @r- 
venais.) 





500. Màdar-fraoich. 


madar-fraoich 


madar-fracich $ sm. Heath-bedstraw—gallium magair, -ean, s.m. Jester, scorner, mocker, de» 


saxatiie (ill. on p. 621.) 

-na-machraeh, -air-, sm  Field-madder— 

sh^ar n arvensis 

malb. -aidh, an, see mach. M. 
beag, w littl, a small share. 

,conj. see ma 

tmaidha, a. Unlawful, unjust. 

madhanta, -ainte. @ Dexterous in arms, vali- 
ant. 2Coy Siod am fear m., 
hero dexierons in arms 





t2 Ecstasy. 





————chd, s.f.ind Dexterity in the use of! 
| mazairt, s.f. Pawing. 2 Creeping, A’ m—, pr. 


. arms. 2**Valour 3**Covuess. 

madhar.-aiír, sm see maghar. 

mivi't-fhiadh, see maigheach 

madhm, -a -an, see mam 

jMadhrail** sf. Tuly. 

màlog, son. Mattock, kind of pick-axe with 
vroad instead cf pointed ends 3 Spade. 3 
IToe. 

ach,** a. Like a mattock, spade or hoe 

ma‘irach, -aiche, a Doggish, like a Jog 

-—— —— alluidh, s. Wolves, 

madrath, see madadh. 

madraith, s.f.collect. Number of dogs. 
dos species, 

malrail, e, @ see madrach. 

madrakachd,** s.f. Dogzishness, 

midrnich, see madraida. 

maluiun, maidne, -ean, s. f. The morning. 
Moch ’sa mhaaninn, early in the morning, 

-— — — ach, -eich2, a. Early. 2 Auroral. 

——-———-enag, -eig, s.f. The morning star. 

——-——eagach, æ. Like the morning star. 2 
Auroral. 

———--———ean, s.pl. Morning devotions, matins. 

——-—eil,tt -e, a. Matin. 

mag, -aig, -an, St Paw. 2 Claw. 3 Ludicrous 
term forthe hand. 4 Seal’s paw—Argyll. 6 
see marach. 6* Soft, plump haud. Air a 
mhàgan. on-all-fours ; m. an leòmhainn, the 
lion's paw ; gu "pn gleidheadh Dia a’ mhuir- 
ichinn's a’ nhàg-hhleóthainn, may God keen 
the chil!r»n and the milking hand—a Perth- 
shire wish when one gets a drink of milk, 

maz, Alz, -an, sf. Arable field, field that can 
be ploughed, arable land— North. 2 Very 
broad ridge of lind—West. Chuir mi a’ mh. 
liath ort, / have finished my rig before you— 
Suth’d. | 

mas, pr.pt. a’ magadh, v.a. Scoff, deride, ban- 
ter, ao J**Mo^k, jeer. [Followed by air, 
simple or ceompouaded.] M. air, mock at him. 
mag, -a, Sm, see magadh. 

mas, pr. nt. a’ màradh & a’ magail, v.n. Creep, 
move on all fours. 

——ach, -aieh, s.f. Toad. 2 Prog. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Having clumsy hands. ? 
Having paws. 3 Creeping, crawling 4 Be- 
longing to a paw. 5* Having short legs and 
Frond, asacow, 6*Having large, soft, plump 
bands. i 

——ach, -aiche, o Abounding in arable fields, 

magich, -aiche, @. Mockiag, given to mocking 
or derision, 

magadh, -aidh, s.m. Deriding, 
scoffing, mocking. 2 Mockery, derision, ri- 
dienle. 3 Burlesque. A’ m—, pr pf. ct maz. 

magaãdh, sm t pr pt. Creeping on ali fours. 

ma lh-ulaidh, see madadh-alluidh. 

maigig, see mazach Ss 

magaid,t sf. Whim 

waril, s.f. d pr.pt. see magadh. 

magail, see magach. 

, 9. See mag. 

magail, ** q Apish. 

eachd,** st Apishness, 





2 The 


act cf deriding, 





- 





D 


NTERNET ARCHIV 


[ TI 


yonder is the. 








4 
maide 
rider. 
magair, pr.pt. a magairt, v. a. & m. Creep, 
crawl 2 Paw, handle clumsily. 


magair, pr.pt a’ magairt, v.n. **Ape. 

eachd, s f./n?. Habit of mocking or jest- 

ing. 2 Buffoonery. : 

le, an, s.m.[**f.] Testicle, stone. 

magairleach,** @ Having testicles: 2 Havin 
large testicles, 3 Like the testicles. 4 Of, 
or belonging to the testicles, 

migairlean, 2.pl. of magairle. 








pt. of mag 

magau, ain, -an, s.m. Little paw. 2 see màig- 
ean D Properly mial-mhagain, squat beast.) 
3 Clumsy little hand. 

macar.** Air, s.m. Word, expression, 

máàzgzarain,** v.n. Creep 2 Move on all fours. 3 
Walk with a creeping gait. 

màgaran, -ain, s. m. Creeping on all fours. 2 
Crawling 3 One who has a creeping gait. 4 
Person of low habits. 5 (AF)Toad, 6(Fionn) 
Young child before it begins to walk, 

ach, -aiche, a. That creepeth on ail 





fours. 





achd, s.f. see màgaran. 
- aich. (M3) v.n. Grovel. 

màgarlan. (MS) s.m. Cod. 2 pl. Posteriors. 

màgarnach, (M5) s.m. Sneaking. 

màgarsaich,** s.f. Creeping. 

mag-dhealbh, sm. Caricature. 

magh, -a & -aizh, an, s. m. (f. in Badenoch.) 
Field. 2 Level country. 3 Field of battle. 4 
at Gu Buaidh air m., victory on the field of 
attie. 

ach, -aiche, a. Of many flelds or plains. 

2 Abounding in fields, | | 

tmaghair. s.m. Ploughed land. 

ma-ghamhiinn, see math-ghambhuinn. 

each, see math-zhamhuinneach. 

ma;han,(AC) see math-ghamnhuinn. 

maghan, s.m. Stomacech—sSutA'd. 

magh-aoraidh, pl. -a- & -an-, s.f. Field or plain 
of worship. 

maghar, -air, -airean, s.m. Bait to fish with, ar- 
tifi^ia! fly, fly for saith. [also ite-mhaghar. | 
2 Spawn, young fishes. 3 Moving about when 
fishing, in contradistinction to ‘‘air chruaidh” 
(at anchor)—Uist. 4 Act of fishing for young 
saith, &c. with a fly—iasgach a’ mhaghair.— 
(AH.) 

fmaghar, air, -an, s.m. Word, expression. 

magharach, -aiche, æ. Having much fishing-bait, 
or 2Spawn. 

fmagh-fhal, -ail, sm, Field barrack. 

magh-ghamhuinn, see math-ghamhuinn. 

tmash-lann, -lainn, pl. -lainn & -linnan, s.m. 
Field-barrack. 

magh-shluagh,**-shluaigh, s.m. People inhabit- 
ing low countries. 2 (DMy) Common people, 
the masses, in contradistinction to the classes. 

magh-suinne, s.f. Slavery. 

maxzh-uisge, -eau & -eachan, s.f. Winter lake. 

magranach, see màgaranach, 

mai^ean, -ein, -an, s.m. Bauch, cluster. 2 Mop, 
tufi. 














ach, -aiche, @, Clustered, bunchy. 2 
Growing in bunches. 38**fufcy, moppy. 

fmaicne, s.pl. Children, relations. 

maide, -an &.-achan, s.m. [**7.|] Wood,timber. 2 
Stick. 3 SEAM, cudgel. Cas mhaide, o wooden 
leg or shaft ; cha mh. halachain do shleagh, 
thy spear is no boy's staf; ged bhiodh na 
t gill 'san aon mhaide, if [ hal engage- 
menis three, I would fly to succour thee—(lit, 
were there three wagers ou ong stick)—in 





e 
WOR NASH 





-— te 


gan. ` 
Én Aig 7 
id . k 1 4, AAA í 7 
e X e » i | 
» yt p tre oft 7? LA a A - e 


Mm 
-— ^ 


ws ee 


v 
we 





maide 623 


allusion to the old style of keeping a score by 
nicks on a stick, by those who could not 
write ; tha 'n t-àm cur anns na maidean, it 
i8 time to be starting (lit. to put [motion] into 
the sticks, i.e. the oars.) 


m.-a’-bhallain, s.m.stick runthrough the hand- 
les ofa tub when carrying it. 

m.-a’-bhuntata, stick for mashing potatoes. 

m.-briste, broken stick ; 2 pair of tongs formed 
of a broken stick. 

m.-builz, bilge-piece oy boat, see bata, F8, p.73. 

m.-buinn, base or stock of a spinning-wheel. 

m.-ceangail, piece of wood joining the two beams 
of the rafters of a house, 

m.-coire, spirtle—Arran. 

. m.-crois, & crutch. 

m.-doichill, (lit. stick of inhospitality), stick 
placed across a doorway instead of closing the 
door, when people were dining. No one en- 
tered when they saw it up. 

m.-dvoma, roof-tree. 

m.-feannaig, (MMcD) a projecting piece of wood 
which appears above the thatch at each end 
of a, “ black ” house. 

m.-frasai lh, stick used for separating the ears 
of corn from the sheaves. A sheaf was held 
top downwards in the left hand, and the top 
struck smartly with a stick held in the 
right. 

m.-leigilh, weaver’s turninj-stick. 

m.-leisz,(DMK) s.m. Trial of strength per- 
formed by two men sitting on the ground 
with the soles of their feet pressing against 
each other. Thus seated, they held a stick 
between their toes which they puilled 
against each other till one of them was rais- 
ed from the ground. [Sco’s, smeir-stick.] 

m.-;unnudaidh, lever, handspike. 

m.-a1ease, boy's top. 

n.-umeidhe, beam of a balance. 

m.-milis, /iguorice, (siùcar dubh.) 

m -na-cudainne,(DMK) The cudainn differed 
from other tubs in having a stave on each 
side projecting above the others. These 
were perforated and the maid? thrust 
through the perforations. The eudaiun was 
thus suspeuded from maide-na-cudainn, 
which was borne by two persons on their 
shoulders, tae cudainn being filled with wa- 
ter or other commodity. 

m.-nigheadaireachd, washtng-stick. 

1n.-poit, thivel, pot-stick, spirtle. 

m.-reang, stringer of a boat, see bata, F 5.p.?3 ; 
2 ladder-step— Arran. 

m.-rongais, see m.-reang. 

m.-singlidh, single-stick. 

m.-siubhail, connecting-rod of svinning-wheel, 

m.-slabhruidh, bean from which the chain 
hangs over a fire in a black-house. 

m.-sla?h laidh, swingle-stick. 2 washing-stick. 

m.-sniomh, distaff. 

m,-sniomaailh, dis‘aff. 

nes, rubbing-piece in a boat, see E 6, 
p. 73. 

m -starraiz, see m.-feannaig. 

m -st/üraidh, pot-stict ; 9 tiller ofa rudder. 

m.-suirn, stick over the flue of a kiln. 

m.-ton-an-eien, stick placed under the tail of 
a horse when rigged in the pa:k-saddl», 
mvil'-a’-chrann-sparraith, s.m. stick in plough 

for holding mould-board, see p. 263. 


M maideachan -ain, -an, s.m. see maidean, 


—— —, npl. of mide. 
maideag, see mvighdeaz, 
mailen :, -eig, -an, sf. Pivot. 2 see maigh- 


deag. 
maidealag,* s.f. Small shell—Lewis. 2 Part of 





maighdean-buaine 


a spinning-wheel. 

mailean, -ein, an, $ m. dim. of maide. 
staff or stick, 2 Piece of timber. 
piece of wood. 

—— ——, pl. of maide. 

——ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in little 

sticks, or 2 Pieces of timber. 

—-—nasS, -ais, s.m. Morning dram. 

maideog, s. Mussel— Harris, see maighdeag, 

maidh, see maoidh. 

each, -ich, see maigheach. 

——eag, -eig, -an, s.f. Midwife. 

maidhean, -ein, -an, s.m. Delay, slowness. 2 
Tediousness, irksomeness. 3** Laziness, 

—ach, -aiche, a. Delaying,dilatory,slow. 

. 2 Deliberate. 3 Late. 4 Tedious, irksome. 6 


Remiss. 
achd, s.f. Tediousness, irksomenesa 

2 Slowness, tardiness. 3**Laziness, 

màilheanaiche, s.m. Protractor, procrastinator. 

maidhm, -ean, s.m. see maoim. 

2adh, -eidh, see maoimeadh. 

mai:linn, see madainn, 

maine, gen.sing. of maduinn, 

—ach, -eiche, see maduinneach, Dh’ 

éirich mi maidneach, I arose early. 

—achadh,** .aidh, s.m. Dawning, draw- 

ing towards morning. 

—ag, -eig, -an, see maduinneag. 

agach, see maduinneagach. 

un, s.pl for maduinnean, 

maiduicb,** v.n. Dawn. 

maidse, -an, s.f. Uncouth or shapeless lump. A 
Apolied in ridicule to persons, 25 Cord, ! 

e ach, -eiche, a. Lumpish, clumsy, shape- 
ess. 

màidsear, -eir, -an, s.m. Major in the army. 

-—achd,** s.f. Majority in the army. 

mà 7, gzn.sing. of mag. 

maig.** sf. Affected attitude and disposition 
of the haad. 

maizeag, -eig, s,f. Midwife. 

maigean, -ein, son. Fat little man. 2 Child b9- 
ginning to walk. 3 Toad. 4 Frog. 5 Ludi- 
crous term for a man with a creeping or 
sprawling gait, or moving on all fours. 
—— —ach, -aiche, a. Creeping, crawling like a 
toad, 2 Fat and little. 3 Abounding ia toads 
or frogs. 4 Likea frog. 5 Of, or pertaining 
to, a frog. 

—achd, s. f. ind. 
Creeping gait. 

much, -e, a. Pleasant, agreeable. 

Màigh, -e, s./. Month of May. 

maighdeag, -ig, -an, S.f. Empty shell of the 
scallop fish—concha veneris, 2 (AF) cowrie. 
3 Periwinkle, 4 Mussel— Harris. 5 Upright 
support of flyers of spinning- wheel. 

maighdeag-tiraghaid, s.f. see maiendeag. 

ma!zhdealaz,* -aig, -an, s. f. Whelk. 
maizhdeas. 

maivhdean, -ein, pl. | maighdinnean &] an, s.f. 
Maid, maiden, virgin. 2 Any female servant. 
3 Cha/nbermaid. 4 Last handful of a crop 
of corn eut off the land. 5 Standard or 
bearer of driving-wheel (spinning-wheel.) 6 
Upright support of flyers of spinning-wheel, 4 
Beheading instrument. 8 Phe sign Virgo : i) 
in the Zoliae. M. sheòmair, a cha nbermaid ; 
ma’s fios do mhaighdinnibs rào maighdein, 17 
'naidens know a meiden’s wish, 

miighdeanachd, s.f. Maidenlisess. 

maighdeanail, -*, œ Maidenly, modest, chaste, 

maigudeanas, -ais, s.m. Virginity, mai lenh^a:l 
Comharran maigndeanais, tokens of virjin’. 

ma'ghdeaun-buaine, ¢.f Last handful of corn c6 
of the tani, 


Little 
3 Little 














EE 





























Habit of creeping. 2 





2 see 


maighdean-chuain 624 mair 
maighdean-chuain, s.f. Mermaid. . mail. 
maighdean-coimhead, s. f. Waiting-woman, | màilleach, -eiche, a. Furnished with rings. 2 


lady's maid. 
maighdean-mhara, s.f. Mermaid. 
niaighdean-na-tuinne, see maighdean-mhara. 
inaighdean-phósaidh, s.f. Bridesmaid. : 
maigheach, -iche, s.f. Hare. Cuilean maigh- 
iche, à leveret. ! 
— — ail, -e, @. Leporine. j 
maigheach-gheal, s. f. White, blue, alpine or 
uiountain hare. 
ma‘ghean, -ein, see maidhean, 
—ach, see maidheanach. 
——achd, see maidheanachd. 
maighisdreachd, see maighstireachd., 
maighistir, see maighstir 
maighneas,** eis, s.m. Field. 
maighre,(AF) s.m. Salmon. 2Salmon-trout. 3 
Shoal of salmon, 
adh.(AF) s.m. Shoal of salmon. 
maighrealan,(AF)s.m. Salmon trout, 
maighstir, -ean, s. m. Master. 2 Teacher. 3 
Ruler. 
—— -dannsaidh, s.m. Dancing-master. 
—each, -eiche, a. Magisterial. 
—eachd, s.f.ind. Office ofa master. 2 
Superiority, mastery, rule. 3 Habit of assum- 
ing authority. 4*Officiousness. 5 Masterdom. 
6 Superintendence. 
—eas, s. m. Same meanings as maigh- 
stireachd. 
—eil, -e, a. Masterly, lordly, authorita- 
tive, assuming authority, domineering, dog- 
matical, arbitrary, Gu m., in a lordiy man- 
mer. 














——eileachd, s.f. see maighstireachd. 2 

Assumption of undue authority. 

-sgoil, -ean-, s.m. Schoolmaster. 

-sgriobhaidh, s.m. Writing-master. 

maildheach, -eiche, see mailgheach. 

maile, -an, see maille & mala, 

———ach, -eiche, a. see mailgheach & màil- 
leach. 

achan,* -ain, s.m. Elt. 

— ——aàn, see mailghean. 

maileathan, see malaidhean. 

màileid, e, -ean, s. f. Bag, wallet, knapsack, 
budget, satchel, scrip. 2 in derision, The 
belly or stomach. 3 Clumsy, indolent person. 

——F— ijieh,(MS) v.a. Bag. 

—ea^h, -aiche, a. Having bags or wallets. 
2 Large-bellied. 3 Clumsy, indolent. 4** 
Like a wallet or knapsack. 

fmailge, s.f. Funeral pile. 

mailgeag, -eig, s.f. Midwife. 

mailgheach, -eiche, a. Having large or shaggy 
eyebrows, beetle-browed. 

mailgnean, pl. of mala. 

màilin, màilne, -ean, s.f. Eyebrow, see mala. 2 
Space between the eyebrows, also called 
* maolchair na mailne." 

mailios,** s f. Cloak-bag, wallet. 

tmailis, s.f. Ill-will (malice.) 

F——-—each, a. Malicious. 

maitisidh,** s.f. Gaelic spelling of militia. 

malle, s f.ind. Delay, hinderance, impediment. 
2 Slowness, tardiness. 3 Deficiency, want. A’ 
cur m. air an léirsinn, dazzling their eyes (used 
e.g. of the sun or of anything gorgeous)—Ar- 
Tan. 

maille, comp. of mall. 

màille, pl. -an & -achan, s. f. Ring. 2 Armour, 
mail. 3 Helmet. 4 Heddle ot a loom. 

maille, (maille ri) prep. With, together with. 
M, ri sin, together with that; maille rium, with 
moe. 

màilleach, eich, $. f. Armour, mail, coat of 




















2 Made of rings. 3 Mailed, armoured. 4 
Male of mail. Lùireach mb, a coat of mail. 

mai leachadh, -aidh, s.m. Retarding, act of re- 
tarding or hindering, deferring, act of defer- 
procrastinating. A’ m—, pr.pt. of maill- 
ich. 

màilleachan, -ain, s.m. Sprite, brownie. 

, HD. of maille. 

maiilead, -eid, s.m. Slowness, degree of slow- 
ness. 

màilleag, -eig, -an, s.f. Ear-ring. 

maillich, v.a. & n. Retard, hinder, delay, pro- 
crastinate, defer, retard. 2 Suspend. 

eadh, -eidh, -ean, s.m. Obstacle, hinder- 
ance, impediment. 2 Act of retarding or hin- 
dering. A’ m—, pr. pt. of maillich. 

maiilis, v. see maillich. 

miailmheas,** s.m. Malmsey. 

ach, -aich, s.m. Malmsey. 

maim, s.f. see mam & maoim, 

maim,* $.f. Pavic, horror. 

maimseach, -ich, s.m. Bubonocele, 

main, (a mhain) adv. Downwards. 

main, (a mhàin) adv. Alone, merely. 

main, gen.sing, of màn. 

fmain,-e,-ean, s. f. Hand. 2 Delay. 3 see 
maduinn. 4 Day. 

finain, SE see man. 

Tmàin, v.n, Remain, linger, stop. [chill. 

tmainchill, -e, -ean, s.f.[**m. | Sleeve, see muini- 

maindreach,** Ach, s.m. Hut, booth. 2 Fold. 

màineachdail, a. Neglectful. 2 Lingering. 8 
Undevout, 

Hnàineag, -eig, -an, s.f. Little hand. 

tmàineag, -eig, -an, s.f. Glove. 

tmainear, -eir, s.m. Gaelic spelling of manor. 

maineil,(AC) a. Mindful, 

tmaineas, -eis, -an, s.m. Mistake, blunder. 

mainidh,** s.f. Madness, 2 Rage. 3 Folly. see 
bàinidh. 

mainistir, -ean, s.m. Monastery, [** gives nom. 
mainistear, gen. mainisvir.] 

maing, see minn. 

maingeag, s.f. Pod. 

mainne, -an, see mainneas, 

— — ——- 858, -ais, -an, s.f. Delay, procrastination, 
hinderance, impediment, slowness, tardiness, 
sluggishness. 2 Deficiency, want. 3**Drawl- 
ing. prov. for maille, s. | 

mainneasach, -aiche, a. Slow, tardy, procrasti- 
nating, slugzish, 

mainnich,( M3) v.a, Relax. 

mainnir, -ainnreach & -anrach, pl. -ean & 
mainnrichean, s.f. Fold for cattle, sheep or 
goats on the hill-side, pen. 2 Booth, 3 Prison. 
O "n mh., from the fold. 

mainnis, -e, see mainneas. 

mainniseach, -eiche, @ see mainneasach. 

mainnreach, gea.sing. of mainnir. 

— —,a. Abounding in, or having folds 
or pens for cattle, sheep or goats. 2 Of, or be- 
longing to, folds, pens or prisons. 3 Having 
prisons. 

mainnreach, -rich, s.m. Hut, booth. 2 Fuld. 
3 Prison. [** gives s./.] i 

maiunsear,-eir,-an, s. m. Gaelic spelling of 
manger. [** gives s.f.j | 

main-obair, -oibre, s.m, Handiwork. 

tmaiuse, s.f. Maintenance, sustenance. e. 

mair, pr.pt. a’ maireann, a’ mairsina & a mair- 
eachduinn, v.n, Live, exist. 2 Continue,last, 
endure. Am feadh 's a mhaireas an ruaiy, 
while the pursuit lasis ; cha. mhair iad leth 




















1 ” 
mma Ja a. Na 


an la, they shall not live half their days; ` 


mairidk tròcair Dhé gu stor, God's mercy 








mair | 

sall endure for ever ; ain nd, e P is he alive ? 
or will he live ! cia mh. e, 4e is not alive, or 
he will aot live. 

mairbh, gen.s/nj. & nom.vl. of marbh. 

e, see muairbhead. 

———— —ea. -eid, ef Degree of deadness, 3 
State of being dead or hfeless. 

mairbh-ghreim, -e, s. f. Morphew, scurf on the 
face. 

maire,* s.. f. Objection, subject of regret. Co 
chuir m. ort ? who objected to you * cha do 
chuir mise m. sam bith air, 4 did not oppose 
him. 2 see mairg. 

màireach, s.m. ‘I'he morrow, next day. An 
diugh ’s am m., to-day and to-morrow ; air 
au là m., on the morrow ; an là an déidh am 
m., the day fter to-morrow. [1n the oli l'ales, 
aud in common conversation both in Scotland 
and Ireland, **an la arn-a-mhàireach "is 
used for '* to-morrow” —MM.] 

maireachduinn, sf. & pr.pt. see mairsinn 

mairealach, -aiche, a Benumbing. 

mairealaih,** -aidh, s. m. Benumbing, 2 
Numbness. 

maiiream, (for mairidh mi), I shall live. 

maireann, a. Ẹ pr.pt. of mar. Lasting, durable, 
enduring, perpetual. 2 Surviving, alive, ex- 
isting, remaining, living, in the land of the 
living, 3 sudsiantively, Life-time. Ri d' mh., 
during your life-tume , cha mhaireann e, he is 
not living ; &m fear nach m., he that is no 
more; am m. da P is he alive? is m. a chliü, 
lasting ws his praise, 

ach, -aiche, @ Everlasting, eternal, 
lasting, perpotual. 2 Long-lived. A’ bheatha 
mh., everlasting life ; saoibhreas m., durable 
riches. 


uance. 








achd, s.f.ind. Durability, long contin- 
2 Long life. 

maireantas, see maireannachd, 

maireasail,** s.f. Life. 

maireulan, see maighreulan. 

maireun, s.m. Small salmon. 

mur, æ. Pitiable, deplorable. 2 Despicable, 3 
Silly, foolish, simple. | 4 Woeful, sorrowful. 
Sonn nach m., a hero that is not to be prtied ; 
is m. a loisgeadh a thiompan dhuit, pity Aim 
who would burn his harp to (warm) you. 

mairg, s find, Pity, woe, 2 Subject of regret. 
o**Wolly. 4}tOvject of pity. Cba mh. té a 
fnuair e, she is mo object of regret that got him 
or it ; is m. dhuit a rinn e, it is a pity you did 
it ; 15 m. dhuit nach tigeadh tu, i! isa pity you 
could not come ; a mh, dhuit ! woe to you ! 

fmairge, -an, s.f. Groan, distress. 

mairgeach, -eiche, a. Woeful, piteous, sorrow- 
ful, sad, mournf"l, sighing, groaning. 

ees) m An, 8.m. Woe, sorrow. [** gives f. & 
no f. 

mairgneach, -eiche, see mairgeach. 

¢mairgnich, v.n. Groan, sob. 2 Bewail, deplore. 

mairieh, -ean, see maraich. 

màirich, -ean, see máireacü. 

mairiche, see maraiche. 

mairidh, Tut af a. of mar, _ 

mairioun, maireann. 

———— --ach, } Aer erent 





mairiste, -an, ëm. Cohabitation, marriage. 2 


Congressus venereus. 3**Match. 4** Husband. 
5**Coupling.  Fhuair i an deagh mh., 
male a good match ; a’ deanamh suas a’ mh., 
making wp the match, 





habitation, conjugal, spousal. 

able. 3 Fond of match-making, Thai m. 

banail, she is marriageable and modest, 
tmairl, v.a. Bruise, pound, crumble, 2 Maul. 


625 





she 


ach, -eiche, a. Of, or belonging to, co- 
2 Marriage- 


maislinn 


Cr EE 
tmairn, v.a. Betray. 

**8.f. Spying. 2 Betraying. 

each,** -nich, sn. Betrayer, 

mairueach,(A E) sm. Full salmon. 

màirneal, -cil, An, 8. m. Delay, lingering, de- 
tention 2 Hinderance, obstacle. 3 Dalliance. 
4 Backwardness. 5 Procrastination. Na dean 
m., or na cuir m., do not delay. 

mairnealach, -aiche, o. Slow, dilatory, apt to 
delay. 2 Causing delay, hindering, procrasti- 
nating. 3 Drawling in manner, tedious. 4 
Backward, 5 Slothful. Í 

——, -aich, s.m. Mariner, 2 Pilot who 

fortells the state of the weather from the 

appearance of the sky, or from a certain 
arrangement or modification of clouds. 

—— d, s.find. Delay, procrastination, 
habit of procrastihating. 2 Slothfulness. 3 
Backwardness. 4 Slowness, tediousness, dile- 
toriness. 

mairnealaich, v.n. Delay, procrastinate. 

e, s.m., Delayer. 

mairneamh,** -nimh, s.m. Spy. 

maurseal,(CR) s.m. Merchant—Arran. 

mairseanta, see marsanta, 

—— — —.-—chd, see marsantachd. 

mairsinn, sm. Lasting, state of lastinz,contin- 
uing, abiding, remaining. 2 Continuance, 
duration, A’m—, pr.vt. of mair, 

achd, see mairsinn, 























mairt, gn.sing. of mart. 


mairt.** san. Matter. 2 Consequence, 3 Harm. 
Au deamhan m., the devil may care. 
mairteach, -eiche, a. see martach. 
mairt-fheoil, -fhedla, s.f. Beet. 
mairt-fheolach, a. Beef, pertaining to beef. 2 
Abounding in beef. 
maireann. 


mairtheann, { 
a. see 
—ach, 


——ach, 

—achd, see maireannachd, 

mairtir, -ean, s.m. see mairtireach. 

each, -eich, s.m. Martyr. 

eachd, s. f. iud. Martyrdom, fate of a 
martyr. 

mais, gen.sing. of mas. 

mais -e, -ean, s.f. Lump. 2 Heap. 3 Acorn. 

tmaise,** s.f. Food, victuals. 

maise, s.f.ind. Beauty, comeliness, gracefulness, 
elegance, bloom, 2 Ornament, decoration. 
Chuireadh tu m. air baile, you would prov’ 
an ornament toa town; m. nam ban, the or- 
nament of women ; air son m., for beauty ; vn. 
ma dealbh, handsome in her person or form. 

maiseach, -iche, @. Beautiful, handsome, fait, 
graceful. 2 Modest. 30f engaging manners, 
4 Ornamental. 5** Having an imposing ay- 
pearance. Is maisiche thu na clann nau 
daoine, thou art fairer than the sons of men ; 
nighean mh., an enant female. 

maiseachadh, aidh, s. m. Beautifying, act of 
beautifying, adorning, decking or decoraiing. 
A’ m—, pr. pt. of maisich. 

maiseachail,-e, a. see maiseach. 2 (MS) Cos- 
metic. 

maiseachd, s.f.ind. Beauty, handsomeness, ele- 
gance, comeliness, z* Superiority in beauty. 

















maiseag, -eig, -an, sf. Pretty female. 2 Mod- 
est or eng ging female. 
maisealachd, s. see maiseachd. 2** Delightful- 


ness. 

maiseil,-e, a. see maiseach, 

maise-mna, -an-, s.f. Fong beauty, 
maisich,** v.a. Deck, decorate, beantity. 
e, comp. of maiseach., 
mai:leadh,** -idh, s.m. see masladu, 
maislean, see nüdean, 

maistion,** 9. Mastlin. 





ma isteag 


facia lentiscus. 
East. 
maistidh,(AF) s. Mastiff dog. 

mistig, see maistidh. 

maistir, sm. Urine prepared for dyeing. 

- (AF) s f. Churn. 

-, pr.pt. a’ maistireadh, v.a. see maistrich. 

-eadh, pr.pt. of maistir. | 

‘ich, see maistrich. 

maistreachadh, -aidh, s. m. Churning, act of 
churning, making butter. 2 Mixing. 3 Agi- 
tating. 4* The quantity of butter taken off 
a churn. A’ m—, pr. pt. of maistrich. 

maistreadh, s.m. & pr.pt. see maistreachadh. 

maistrich, pr. pt. a’ maistreachadh, v.a. Churn. 
2 Mix together. 3 Agitate. 

— — ——--te, vast pt. of maistrich. Churned. 2 
Shaken together, mixed. 

maiteach, see maithteach. 

maith, -e, a. see math. Also pronounced moith 
in Arran, 

, pr.pt. a’ mathadh, v.a. Forgive, pardon, 
2 Suffer, allow, permit. 3 Abate. Cha mh. 
mi peighinn, Z will not abate a penny. 

maith, $. £ adv. see math. 

maithe’, s.pl. for maithean. 

maitheach, -eiche,a. Ready to forgive,relenting. 

— — — —, -eieh, -eichean, s.f. ses maigheacn. 

—— — ——As,** -ais, s. m. Forgiveness, pardon. 
2 Abatement. 3 Manure, 

maitheadh, -eidh, s.m. Forgiving, act of for- 
giving, pardoning, remitting. 2 Suffering, 
allowing. 3 Slackening. 4 Abatement, dis- 


Much used for chewing 1» the 

















count. 
maithean, s.pl. Chieftains, nobles, rulers. 2 
Heroes, 3*Magistrates, aldermen. 4 Best of 


any class of beings. M. an treud, the princi- 
pal of the flock ; thàinig ard-bhaillidh agus m. 
BaiU-ath-cliath a mach "na chvinneamh, the 
Lord Mayor and magistrates of Dublin came 
out to meet him; m, na Féinne, the nobles of 
the Feinne. 

———-achd,ff{ s./. Nobleness. 

maitheanas, -ais, sm. Pardon, forgiveness, re- 
mission of a penalty. Tha mi ag iarraidh 
maitheanais, Z ask pardon ` m. dhuit ! may 
God forgive you ! 

—— —— —— achd,( MS) s.f. Pardonableness, 

maitheas, -eis, sm. Goodness, kindness, mercy, 
bounty. 2 Virtue, 3 Druidism, sorcery. 

--ach, -aiche, a. Good, benevolent, virtu- 
ous, forgiving, lenient, benign, 

-achd, s.f. see maitheas. 

maithich, prov. for mathaich. 

maithreach,(AF) s.f. Mother cow or sheep. 

adh,(MS) s.m. Matrienlation. 

màithrean,** -ein, sm. Aunt on the mother's 
side. 

maithrich,(MS) v.a. Matriculate, 

maithteach, -eiche, a. Forgiving. 2 Forbearing, 
charitable. 
— —-———-às, -ais, s.m. Forgiveness. 2 Readi- 
ness to forgive. 3 Forbearance, indulgence. 
final, -ail, -au, s.m. King. 2 Prince. 3 Cham- 
pion, soldier. 4 Poet. Seaehd cathan de 
mhal-shluagh, sewn companies of soldiers. 

mà, -ail, sm. Rent, tribute, tax, subsidy. La 
a mhàil, rent-day ; an am togail mail, in the 
time of collecting ients. 

mai, -ail, an, s.f. see mol 

mala, -n, s.f. Bag. budget, sack, satchel, scrip. | 

sag of a big-pipe. 3**Husk, shell. Da 

mh., two bags, 

mala, pl. -ichean [mailghean & malaidhean, | s. ! 
J. Brow, eye-brow. 2 Brow of a hill. M. na 
sgòrr, the brow of the rock ; bha mise ’n Talla 














025 


| | d | maida ! NEC 
majisteag,§ eg, -an, sf. The mastic tree—pis-| nan cruth saileathan, is chunna mi’n crùn a’ 


dol mn thrì malaidhean, Z have been to tha 
hall of the engraved beams and seen the crown 
placed upon three brows—Sgeul.-nan-caol ; m. 
cnoic, the brow of a, hill. 

malabhar,** ar, s.m. Dwarf elder. 

malach, -aich, -aichean, see mala. 

malach,** -aich, s.m. Load. 

, See mala. e 

,* -aiche, a. Having large eyebrows, 2 
Surly, sulky, forbidding. 

maladair, -ean, s.m. One who pays rent, ten- 
ant. 2** Farmer of the customs. 3*Sub-ten- 
ant who pays rent in kind. 

maladh, -aidh, -aidhean, see mala. 

maladh, -aidh, -aidhean, see mala. 

malaieh,(DU) Gairloch for mala. 

malaid, -ean, see màileid. 








malaid.** oan, s.f. Flail. 2 Scourge. 3 Thong. 


malaidhean, n. pl. of mala. 
malaind, see malairt. 
malair, -ean, s.m. Merchant. barterer, 2 Rent- 
er. 3 Cottager holding of a farmer The màb- 
air does not depend for his whole support on 
farm labour, but may derive his sustenance 
from any handicraft of which he is master, 
the farmer of whom he holds, however, ex- 
pects bis aid during harvest. Malair is also 
applied to a cottager who builds his hut ona 
barren spot of ground, and digs and cultiva- 
tes patches around it, for which he pays no 
rent for a certain number of years—**, 
malairt,-ean, $.f. Exchange, barter. 2 Ex- 
changing, act of exchanging. 3 Business. 4 
Affair. 5*Space. A’ m—, pr. pt. of malairt- 
ich. Thoir am m., give in exchange ; a’ dean- 
amh m., exchanging. 
,* v.a Exchange, barter, traffic, trade. 
each, eich, s.m. Exchanger, barterer. 
M.-airgid, money-changer, banker. 
each, -aiche, a. Exchanging, given to 
exchange or barter. 2 “gore daa fit to 
exchange. 3 Mutual, reciprocal. 
malairteachadh, -aidh, s. m. } & pr ot of mal- 
malairteachd, s.f.ind. airtich, see mal- 
airt. 
malairtear,* see malair. 
malairtich, pr.pt. a’ malairt, a’ mal«irteachd & 
a’ malairteachadh, v.a. ;Exchange, barter. 
—e, 8. see malairteach, $. 
— ————^e, past pt. of malairtich, Exchanged, 
bartered. 
malanach,tt a. Rented. 
— — —-—, (DU) s. m. One who pays rent— 
Gairloch. 
malart, see malairt. 
malc, pr.pt. a’ malcadh, v.a. & n. Rot, putrefy. 
2 Become putrid, 3 Cause to rot. 4 Corrupt. 
5** Carry, bear. 
—— ach, -aiche, a. Rotten, putrid, 2 Apt to rot, 
3 Causing rottemness or putrefaction., 
—achd, see malcaidheachd 
—-adh, -aidh, s.m. Rottenness, putrefaction. 
2 State of becoming putrid. 3 Act of causing 
torot. 4**Carrying, bearing. A’ mc, pr.pt, 
of male. 
malcaidh, -e, æ. Rotten, putrid. 2 Stinking. 
—————eachd, s. f. ind. Rottenness, putres- 
cence 
malcair.** s.m. Porter (of a burden.) 2 Sales- 
man. 
— ———eachd,** s.f.ind. Porterage. 2 Selling, 


sale. 
maleta, past pt. of malc. Rotten, putrid. 2 
Become rotten or putrid. 3 a. Cadaverous. 


malcte, see maleta. 
màlda, @ Mild, calm, gentle, modest, coy, 


we a+ 


: 
9 ^ 


“2 
Ly T oe 


"RJ 
B 


d €» 


I UR 


(re 


E m^ 


"EC 


"uS Ce 
lgl "e 








malda 


bashful. 
màldachd, s.f.ind. Mildness, gentleness, mo- 
desty, diffidence. : 
màldag, -aig, -an, s.f. Mild, modest, quiet, gen- 
tle female. 
—ach,** æ. Mild or modest, asa female. 
mal.ios,**:s.m. Portmanteau. 
¢mall,** a. Bad. 
mall, alle, o Slow, moving slowly. 2 Lazy. 
3 Not forward, 4 Calm, placid. 5 Tardy, 
late. 6 Weak, pithless, 7 Dull, senseless, 
Bitheadh gach duine ealamh chum éisdeachd, 
m. chum labhairt 's m. chum feirge, let every- 
one be ready to hear, slow to speak and slow 
to wrath ` feasgar m. 's na h-eòin a’ seinn, a 
calm evening and the birds warbling; m. a 
chluinntinn, dull of hearing; is m. a chas, 
pithless is his leg. 
mall, s.m. see mathalt, 1. 
mallachadh, -aidh, s.m. Cursing, act of cursing. 
2 Swearing. 3 Curse, imprecation. 4**Oath. 
Luchd-maliachaidh, swearers; bheir e m. 
orm, he will bring a curse on me. [Pronoun- 
ced mollachadh in Argyll.*] 
mallachd, -an, s.f. Curse. 2 Oath, imprecation. 
_ M--eaglais, excommunication. 
mallachd,** s.f. Modesty, gentleness, soft- 
ness, mildness, 2 Debility. 
Been v.n. Grow mild, grow calin or com- 
posed. 








Dë. & n. Curse, 2 Swear, imprecate, 

3 Execrate. 4ttCondemn. 

te, a. & past pt. of mallaich. Cursed, 
accursed, M. gu'n robh an corruich, cursed 
be their wrath, 

mallan,(AF) -ain, s.m. Mole. 

mall-bheurlach, -aiche, a. 
rach, 

mall-bhriathrach, -aiche, æ. Hesitating, slow of 
speech. 2 Drawling in speech 2 Not fluent 
in language. 4 Having feeble language. 

————— "a8, -ais,s.m. Slowness of speech. 

— — —-d, 8.f. Slowness of speech, 

mall-cheumach, -aiche, o. Slow, that walks 
Slowly, having a feeble gait, 2 ttGradual. 

 muli-cheumnaich,1f aa. Jog. 

~mul-chodach,** s.m. One who sups late. 

mall chreideach, -viche, æ. Ineredulous, 

mail-enreilimh, s.m. Incredulousness. 

mall-dromach,** a. Saddie-backed. 

| mall-zliluasadach, -aiche, o. Slow. 

 mall-imich, see ma!l-cheumnaich. 

mall-mhuir,** sf. Neinv-iide, 

mall-phune, sm. Semi-breve, in music. 

amall-shiübhlaen, a. Loiteriug. 

mall-:h:uazh,* see mal-shlussh. 

mali-smuainceadh, -eidh, -eidhean, s.m. Deep 
m'sing or study, 

mall sneimh, s.m. Delay. 

mall sniamh, Arran for mall sneimh. 

ma!'lta, sse mala. 

mill-thiia'lach, -aiche, a. Slow or feeble in 

o traveiling, slow, lazy, loitering, 





see mall-bhriath- 






















adh. 
mailuieh, v. see m .llaich. 
te, see mallaichte. 
maloimh, s.pl. Mallows (plants) — malva. 
malpais, see craebh-mhalpais, 
malraich,** v.a. Exchange, barter. 
mil-shluagh, -uaigh, s.m. Host, army. 2 Com- 
monalty. 
alt, see mathalt, 1. 
malta, see malda. 
———chd, see maldachd. 
maltag, see mà!dag. 
—-——-ach, sce mà. 








agach. 


627 


Mallichadh, -aidh, s.n. & pr.pt. see mallach. | 


Tm^nenàin, 8. 


mandrag 


màl-thosd, s.m. Hush-money. 

maluidh, -ean, see maia. 

tinàm, Am. an, s.f. Hant, fist. 2 Mighf, po- 
wer, 3 Gap, pass through mountains. 4 
Mother, 5 Breast, pa» 6**Rruption, sally. 
7 **rarely Battle. 8** raærely Breach. 

màm, -àiin, -an, s.m. Hill of a particuiar form, 
slowly rising and not pointed, large round 
hill. 2 Handful, as much of grain or of any 
such substance as can be taken up by holding 
the two han Is together. M. air muin an i- 
saic, & handful over and above the sack; m. 
nan gleann, the hil of the valleys. 

mam, -aim, -an, s.m. Boil or ulcerous swelling 
in armpit, or palm of the hand. 2ttMole on 
the skin. 

mamaidh, -ean, Gaelic spelling of mammy. 

ma mar, )** prov. expressions, signifying On 

ma marsa, my word, by my troth. Ma mar 
fnéin, by my troth. 

mamas,** -ais, s.m. Might, strength, power. 

màn-léighin,ff sm. Ki:d of muiture paid for 
sifting meal in-a mill. 

mam-sic,s.m. Rupture, swelling, hernia. 

mamuin,** em. Instant. 

màn, see màm. 

tman, -ain, s.m. Hand. 

m’ an, cont. for mntän, About the. 2 About 
their. Ag iadhadh mw’ an torr, hovering about 
the rill ; dubhradh mw’ an gruaidh, gloom about 


their visa ye. 
tmana, sm, Cause. 2 Condition. 
manacn, -aich, s.m. Monk. 2 Friar. 3 Fore- 
teller. 4 Conventual. 5 Angel-fish, 6 (AF) 
Hooed skate, 
ail, -e, a. Monkish, recluse, monastic, 
conventual. 2 Predicting. 
an, -ain, -an, s.m. The groin. 
as -ais,s.m. Stata of a monk, monkhood. 
2 Monkishaess. 3 Monkish or conventual 
practice or observance. 
— — —-d, s.f.ind. State of a monk, monkhood, 
2 Monkisnness. 3**Oloister, monastery. 
uinn, -ean, §. 7. Conveat, monastery. 
[f gives manachainn. ] 
manadail,(MS) a. Auspicious. d 
manadaireacnd, s.f.ind. ForeLoding, predicting, 
foretelling. | 
manadh, -aiih, -aidhean, s.m. Chance, luck, 





fate, lot. 2 Incantation, enchantment. 3 
Omen, sign. 4 Prediction. 5 Allevation, 
plea. 6** rump at cards. 7 (AF) Owl. 8 


Apparition. Chunnaic e m., A^ saw on ap- 
parition; tha e 'cur air mh, dhomh, he pro- 
phsies tome. [** gives manadh for Nos. Í, 3, 
aud 4.] 

manag, -aig, -an, $.f. Glove, mitten. 

ach,** a. Gloved, having gloves on. 

managhise,** s.f. Spear. 

manaich, gen.si ng. & n. pl. of manach. 

manaig. see manag. 

manair, see mainnir. 





(grieve. 


manaistear,** s. f. Monastery. 2(WC)Overseer, 
manaran, 


s.m. Necromancer, conjurer. 2 see 


mànran, 


mànas,** -ais, $.m. Strength, power, 
màaüvs, -ais, -an, s.m. The portion of an estate 


cultivated by the proprietor, “mains.” homa- 
farm. 2 Farm. targe or level farm. 3t+Manse, 
4** Wurm-stea ling, 

Tribute of the hand, gifts, pre- 
scuts given at wakes and funerals, 


fman-cacuinh, s f. Cheese-mite, maggot, 
ma'n cusict, see mu'n cuairt. 
man:dal** -l, san, Auger, 
qiindzeium, -ug mp, 6. f. Manudrake—7andra- 


2 Roughness, 


Guid ONE, 


mandragach 


mandragach, a. Abounding in mandrakes. 
Like a mandrake. 3 Of or pertaining to, a 
mandrake. 

mang,-aing,-an, s.f. Fawn. 
old, brocket. 3**Young hart. 4**Craftiness, 
deceit. 5**Bag, budget.  6** Moroseness, 
sournuess, Gleann "aan lìonmhor mang, a glen 
where harts aound. 

———— —4ach,. -aiche, &. Abounding in fawns or 
oung harts. 2 Of, or belonging to, a fawn or 
hart. 3 Bounding. 4 Crafty. 5**Deceitfal. 
6 Morose, sour, Laoghach, m., maoisleach, 
abounding in calves, deer ani roes. 

ach, AF) s.m. Whiting (fish.) 

ail,** a. Deceitful, treacherous. 

$mangair,** -ean, s.m. Inn-keeper, taverner. 2 
Costermonger. 3 Pedlar. 

an, -ain, -an, see mathghamhuinn. 

anach, see mathghamhuinneacb. 

mann,$ s. Wheat, see cruithneachd. 

4——, -ainn, s.m. Food, 2 Wedge. 3 Ounce. 4 
Sin. 

*——, a. Bad, naughty. 

*mannar,** Air, s.m. Evil, loosening, 

mannd,* s.m. Lisp, stammer. 

mannda,** a. see manntach. 

-—ch, see manatach. 

manndaich, MS) v.a. Hack. 

maundatche,(MS) s.f. Inarticulateness, lisp. 

manndaidh,** a. Gagged. 

manndair, s.m. see manntair. 

manndal, see mantal. 

mannraichean, pl. of mainnir. 

mannraichibh, dat.pl. of mainnir. 

mannta, see manntach. 

ch, -aiche, a. Lisping, stammering, stut- 

texing, tongue-tied. 2 Demure, modest, bash- 

ful. 


2 Dar one-year 




















ch,** -aich, s.m. One who stutters or 





lisps. 

chd, s. f. ind. Stuttering, stammering, 
lispin 9 Bashfulness, demureness, 

manntair, -ean, s.m. Stutterer, stammerer. 42 
Demure person. 

-eachd, see manntachd. 

manntal,** -ail, see mantal. 

manntan, -ain, s.m. Slight degree of stammer- 
ing in speech. 2 Timidity, bashfulness, de- 
mureness. Crith manntain, a bashful tremor. 

manoise,s f. Spear. 

manrach, -aich, -aichean, s.f. 
Gift. 

*————4,** s.f. Gift. 2 Happiness. 

manradh, -aidh, s.m. Destruction. 

manrain, v.n. Dander. M. thus’ air t’ aghaidh, 
dander forward. 

mànran, -ain, An. s. m. Tuneful sound, mel- 
ody. 2 Humming of a song or tune, cooing. 
3 Entertainment, feasting. 4 Blandishment. 
dalliance, amorous discourse. 5 Report, 
rumour, intelligence, news. 6 Murmur. 7** 
Love-song or sonnet. SttHumming song. 9* 
Danderiny. Le m. 'sle mireadh, with feasting 
and fun ; cumhach air lag mhànrain, discon- 
solate, with a faint voice ; m. binn an orain, 
the sweel melody of sony ; rim. ciùil, sinjing a 
love-song. 

ach, -aiche, a. That hums, bumming, 
iven to humming of songs or tunes, 2 Me- 
odious, musical, tuneful. 3 Amorous, toying. 

skilled in love language. 4 Abounding in 

rumours. tt Ready to raise or spread re- 

ports. 6ffNoisy. 7 Murmuring. 8**Hospi- 

tabls,feasting.convivial. Òigh a’ bheòil mhàn- 

ranaich, maid of the melodious voice. 

achd, s.f.ind. H bit of humming tunes. 

2 Melodiousness. 





see mainnir, 2 








0715 





macianseig 
2| dallying. 4 Amorousness. 5 Noisiness, 6°® 
Musicainess, 
: aich,( MS) v.a. Carol. 
manras,** -ais, s.m. Motion, 2 Noise. 
fmantach, -aich, $.m. Toothless person. 
mantag,** -aig, 8. f. Bridle-bit, 2 Gag. 8 
Muzzle, 
mantal, Gaelic spelling of mantle. 


mao-bhiasda, see maoth-bh'asda., 

maoch,** s.m. Bleaching-green. 

maodal, -ail, -an, #.f. Stomach, maw, tripe, 
paunch. 2 ludicrously Large belly, gorbelly. 
3** Bird’s crop. Cho dorch ri m. a’ mhairt 
dhuinn, as dark as the brown cow's inside, 
(ër gives m] 

ach, -aiche,a. Having a stomach,paunch, 

crop or maw. i 





2 Having a large stomach or 

paunch. 3 Like, or belonging to, the paunch, 

stomach orcrop. 4 Fat, gorbellied, corpu- 

lent, clumsy. 

ach, -aich, s.m. & f. Paunches, tripe. 2 
Big-bellied or corpulent person. 3 Greedy, 
voracious person. 4ffYoung woman. 5(CR) 
Maid-servant who does more or less other 
work than house-work. 6*Clumsy or corpu- 
lent female, 

maodh, -oidhe, à. see maoth. 

adh,** -aidh, s.m. Moistening. 2 Boast- 
ing. 3 Reproaching. 4 Proclaiming. 

maodhaich, see maothaich. 

maodhaia, gen.sing. of maodhan. 

maodhan, see maothan. 

-— — —-ach, see maothanach. 

-————-achd, see maothanachd. 

maodhar, -air, -an, s.m. see maghar, 

maodlach,(MS) a. Pot-bellied. 

maodlach,** -aich, s.m. Servant. 








maoidh, pr.pt. a maoidheamh & a’ maoidheadh, 


v.a. & n. Grudge, give unwillingly. 2 Re- 
proach, upbraid. 3 Threaten, bully. 4 Cast 
up to onea favour bestowed on him. 5 Boast, 
vapour. 6** Envy. "rg Proclaim. Dia, a 
bheir do gach neach gu pailt agus nach m., 
God, who giveth to all mn libera//y anl up- 
braideth not ; is fhèarr a mh. no dhibir, it is 
better obtained grudgingly than not at all; 
mh. sinn cath, we proclaimed battle. ) 
mavidh,** s. Grudge. 
each, -eiche, a. Grudging, giving unwill- 
ingly. 2 Reproaching, upbraiding. 3 Threat- 
ening. 4 Boasting. 5 Proclaiming. 
eachas, -ais, s.m. Habit of grudging. 2 
Upbraiding. 3 Threatening. 4 Proclaiming. 
5 Objection. 6 Vain-glory, boasting. 
—eadh, -eidh, s.m.Grudging, act of grudg- 
ing or giving reluctantly. 2 Upraiding, act 
of upbraiding reproaching. 3 Threatening,act 
of threatening, threat. 4 Proclaiming, pro- 
clamation. 5 Boasting, boast, bravado. 6* 
Casting up favours bestowed. A’m-—, pr.pt. 
of maoidh. Thae’m. orm, he is threatening 
me; tha e 'm. gu'n q’ rinn e siod "ua seo 
dhomh,Ae casts up that he did this and that for 
m» ; nach dean m., who upbraideth not. 
—eamh,-eimh 8.n.d&pr.pt.see maoidheadh, 
—ean, -ein,-an, s.m. Interest, personal 
influence, favour, 2 Entreaty, supplication. 
3 Good work. Deanaibh m. as mo leth, or 
air mo shon, make supplication for me. 
—eanach, -aiche, a. Haviug personal in- 
terest or influence, favoured. 2 Entreating, 
supplicatory. 3(CR) Frieadly— Perthshire. 


—eanachd, s.f.ind. Entreating, supplica- ` 
ting. | 
Bully. 


—ear,** s.m. 
maoidhm, see maoim, 























8 Blandishment, habit of | maoidhse'g, see, maoiseag. 








~ 


maoil 


maoil, see maol. 

maoile, comp. of maol. Balder, baldest, 

——_, 3.f.ind, Pa'dness. 2 Bluntness of an edge 
or point. 8(M-» Homeliness. 4 Heap. 5 
see maol. An àite fuilt bithidh m., inst’ad of 
hair there shall be baldnoss ; sgaoil do mh., ' 
spread thy baldness ; m. nan cruach, the bald. | 
mess of the rocks. 

, -àn, EE Brow ofa hill. 2 Forehead. 
3 Upper part of the forehead. 

maoileachd,(MS) s.f Thickness. 

maoilead, eil, s.m. Baldness, degree of bald. ` 
ness. 2 Bluntness, degree of bluntness Air; 
mh. 's gu'm bheil e, however bald he be ; &' dol 
am m., growing mor» and more bald. 

maoileag,(AC) s,f Stout little girl. 2 Filly. 3 
Young female animal. 

maoilean, -ein, sm Bald person 2 Stupid per- 
son. 3 Brow ofa bleak hill. 4 Bleak emi- 
nence. 5**Summit. 6 Postern, 7** Sea-maw, 
Thar a’ mhaoilein bharr-lath, over the grey: 
coped postern. 

ach, -aich, s.m. Youth who goes bare- 

headed. 2tt Bald or bare-headed man. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Bald, like a bald person. 
2 Abounding in bleak hills, 3 Having a 
bleak top, asa hill. 4**Ridgy, topped, as a 
hill, 5**Pinnacled. 6** Of, or belonging to, 
sea-maws. 7**Abounding in sea-maws. 

maoileann, (AF) s.m. Mule. 

maoilinn, -ean, see maoilean. 

-—————-each, see maoileanach. 

maol-mhullaich, (DU) Common in Gairloch for 
maoile 1. 

maoilseach, see maoisleach. 

maoim, -e, -ean, s.f. Terror, alarm, consterna- 
tiou, fear. 2 Surprise, panic, flight. 3 Sudden 
burst, sally, eruption, as of water. 4 Ouset, 
sudden attack. 5*Wild expression of counte- 
Dance, 6*Expression of fear. 7**lmpetuous 
onset.  Bith adh m. air do naimhdean, Lef 
your enemies be panic-stricken ; le m, with 
terror ; m. sléibhe, æ water-spout, a mountain 
torrent, 

, pr.pt. a’ maoimeadh.v a & n. Be afraid, 

or terrified. ? Hesitate, pause from doubt or 

fear. 3 Horrify, terrifv. 

each, -eiche, a, Causing terror. 2 Burst- 

ing forth suddenly. 3 Impetuous, asa torrent, 

4 Causing mountain torrents. 5** Boasting. 

eadh, s. m. State of being alarmed or 

terrified. 2 Hesitating from fear or doubt, 3 

Pouring forth, bursting forth, as a stream. 4 

Sallying, making an onset, 5 Terror, alarm. 

A’ m—, pr. pt. of maoim. 

-sleibhe,* e m. Water-spout, 

plump of rain. 























sudden 


|J maoin, -e, -ean,s.f. Substance, property, wealth, 


goods and gear, 2 Smallquantity. 3 rarely 
Love, esteem, 4* Hoarded wealth, wealth 
worshipped. An spréidh agus am m., tharr 
caltle and their substance ; m. a mhaighstir, | 
the goods of his master, 

moaoin-chunntas, -ais, s.» Inventory. 

maoineach, -eiche, a Wealthy, substantial, 2 
Fertile, productive. A’ Bhealltuinn mh., pro- 
ductive May. 

—ail, -e, d. see maoineach, | 

maoineas, -eis, $.f. Slowness, tardiness, 

--—ach, -aiche, a. Slow, tardy. 

maoir, gen.sing. & n. pl. of maor. 

—--each, -eich, s.m. prov. for maorach. 

—--eachd, s.f. Stewarlship— Dain f. Ghobha. 

maoirne, -an, ¢.m, Bait for a fishing-hook 2 
Single bait, 3*Little one, 4 see moirnean, 

ach, siche, a, Furnished with fishing: | 








baits, 


629 





‘maolaich, pr. pf. 


maolaich —— 

maoirneachd-eaglais,( MS) g.f. Sextonship. 

maoirneag,* -eig, 8.f. Spat. 

maoirnean, -ein, -an, s.m. The least quantity of 
anything. 2 Small potato 3ttKind of cockle. 

maoirseachd,** see maorsainneach41. 

maois, -e, -ean, sf Large basket or hamper, 
now used principally as à measure for her- 
rings. 2 Certain number of fish, 500 herrings. 
3 Quantity of seaweed collected and bouud 
together, and flonted to ang desired place. 4 
**Burden. 5**Carriage. 6**Gaelic speling of 
maize 1** Bag. M. sgadan, a measure of 
500 ber: ings. 

maoiseach, eiche, & Of or belonging to, targa 
baskets or hampers, or to 2 heaps of sea- 
weed. 3'*Mosaic. 4 [n measures of 500 6 
**iike maize, 6 Abounding in roes or deer. 
7 Like a roe or deer, 

—— —-—., -eich, -eichean, s.f Roe (female 

of the hart, a species of deer smaller than fal- 

low-deer.) 2 Doe (female of fallow-deer or 

buck.) 3 Heifer. 4 see miseach. 





maoiseag, -eig, -an, s./., dim of maois. Little 
hamper, burden or pack, 2 Scolding female, 
3 Stingy, niggardly female. 4**Heifer. 


—— —— ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in small bas 
kets or hampers. 2 Like à basket or hamper. 
Abounding in does. 3 Like a scoliing fe- 
male. 4 Like a niggardly female. 5 Prone 
to scold, 

maois-eisg,t et Five hundred fish. 

maoisgeag,tt -eig, -eigean, see maoiseag. 

maoisleach, eich, -eichean, s.f see maoiseach. 
Caraid na maoislich, twin roes. 

———, -eiche, a. Abounding in roes or 
does. 2 Like a roe or doe. Mangach, m., a& 
bounding in deer and roes ; a’ Bhealltuinn mb., 
roe-producing May. 

maoith, see mao:dh. 

maoithe, s.f.ind. Softness, tenderness. 

—— ——, comp. of maoth, : 

————ach, -eiche, a. see maoidheach, 

achas, see maoidheachas. 

maoithead, -eid, s.m. Softness, degree of soft- 
ness or tenderness. 

maoitheadh, -eidh, -eidhean, s.m. & pr. pt. see 


maoidheadh. 

maol,-aoie, d. Bare. 2 Bald. 3 Hornless. A 
Blunt, edgeless. pointless. 6 Bare, without 
foliage. 6 Foolish, silly, easily deceived. 7 
Barren, bleak. 8(MS) Home-bred. ITarunn 
m.. blunt won; mullach m. liath, a bleak 
grey eminence ` maol,gun duilleach, bare, withe 
out leaves, 

maol. -aoil, s.m. Brow ofarock. 2 Cape, pro- 
montory,mull. 3ttfForehead. 4**Bald head. 6 
**shaved or shorn monk. 6*Holy man’s ser- 
vant. 7 Great bare rounded hill. 8 Hornlesa 
cow, see maolag. Mar chrainn ri maol car 
raig, SE e? on the brow of æ rock. (** gives 

l. -ean. 

Sec v.a. & n. Make blunt, bald or bare, 2 
Become so, see maolaich. 

maolachadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of making bald, 
bluntor bare. 2 State of becoming bald, 
blunt or bare. 3* Laying down of the ears, 








ax a horse. 4 Gibbosity, gibbousness. A’ 
m —, pr.pt. of maolaich. 
maolad, see maoilead. 
maoladh, -aidh, s.m. & pr. pf. of maol. Same 


meanings as maolachadh. 


mao'ag, -aiz, -an, S.f. Hornless cow. 2 Stuoid 


female. 3ttBald woman. 4 Footless stocke 
ing .mogan.) 4St{Small tub without handles. 
6* Disn for milk. d 

ach, -aiche, a. Having footless stockings. 
a’ mactachadh, va, & a. 





maolaich  . 630 maor-sith 
Blunt. 2 Make bald or bare. 3 Become SO. ing. 2 Baldness, 
4ttLower the ears, as a horse, hare or doe. maoloisean, see maol-oisinn, 
5** rarely Allay, calm. Mh. an leac a bhàrr, maol-oisiun, -ean, s.f. Obtuse angle. 2 Round- 
the plate blunted tts mint; cha mh. iad an ed angle. 3 High temple, 
cinn, they will not make bald their heads ; mh. --—each, -eiche, a. Having obtuse an- 
mo chlaidheamh, my sword became blunt ; mh. gles. 2 Having the hair far back upon the 
an t.each 3 chluasan, the horse drew back his| forehead. 3 Having large temples. 4t+Bare 
ears. iu the temples, high-templed, 
—te, pas! pt. of maolaich. Made or be- maol-ruainith, s.f. Nickname for an idle female 
come blunt, bald or bare, fond of places of amusement. Cha'n 'eil féill 
miaol-a:g»aun,** -aigue, sf Dull comprehension,| no faidhir air nach faighear m. ,'there is no fat? 
stupidity. or market where m. cannot be found. 
— —— ——Ach., -aiche, see maol.aigaeach. maol-suaotha, s.m., Mental vacaucy, suspended 
maol-aigeantach. see maol-aigneach. perception. 
maol-aigneach, -eicha o Stupid, dull of com- ma3ol-snéimh,(DU) s.m. Indifference. 
prehension, 2**Blunt. maol-snéimhealas, -ais, s. m. Carelessness, iu- 
maolainn,** er Mule. difference, 2 Tawdriness, slovenliness. 
molan, -ain, pl, -ain & -an, s. m. Dull person, | Maol-snéimheil, -e, a. Careless, indiferent. 9 
2 Beacon 3'AF)Hornless animal, 4**Bleak Tawdry, slovenly. 
eminence. 5**That part of a pile Which is| mvoltau, pl. of maol, prov. 
&tove the water in a fishiug weir. 8ttBald inaoluich, see maotaich. 
man. maoluin, see maolaiun. 
maolanach, -aich, s.m. Stake used in construct. | maom; s. & v. see maoim, 8. & v. 
ing wooden folls or pens. 2** Stake driven maomach, -aiche, see maoim2ach. 
into the ground to suppor:; “ flakes ” (movable  maoiuialh, -aidh, s.m. & Dr.pt. see maoimeadh, 
hurdles) for keeping cattle in a fold. 3 Blun- | tmaon,** a. Dumb, mute. 
derer. 4 see maoileanach & maolan. fmaon,** -aoin, s.m. Hero. 
—— — -,** -aiche, a. Like a beacon, 2 Of, or 


inaonag,** -aig, sf. Bog-berry. 
belonging to, a beacon, 3 Abounding in bea- mion-chlar, s. Invoice, 
cons. 4 Bleak. 


maor,(AC) s.» Field. 

maol-aodainn,** s.f. Bald brow. 2 Bleak hill- | maor, -aoir, s.m. Officer of justice, bailiff, catch- 

side, poll, messenger. 2 Inferior officer in various 
maol-aodainneach, -eiche, a, Noiseless. 2**| capacities, constable. 3 Underling agent su- 

Bald. 3**Bleak-sided, as a hill. periutending part of & gentleman's property. 
maol-aodainneachd,** s.f. Baldness. 2 Bleak-| steward. t4**Baron. 5 (WC) Church-officer. 

ness. 6 (WC) Grave-digger. A ni a chuir na maoir 
fmaolas, -ais, s.m. Sandal. a dn’ ifrinn, farraid a ni a b’ fhèarr a b’ aiti- 
maol-bhathais,** s.m. Bald forehead ne dhaibh, that which sent the officers to hell, 
inaol-bhathaiseach, -eiche, a. Bali in the fore-| asking what they knew Jull weli—the maor is & 

head, 2 **Having a bald forehead. person inveterately disagreeable to the Celtic 
maolchar, an. s. m. Space between the eye- 


mind.—N.G.P. 
brows. [Also called * maol:char nam mal.|maora, see maorach. 
aidhean."] 


maorach, -aich, & m. Shell-fish in general 2 
maolchar,** o Having a large Space between| ifMussel. 3(AF)Limpet. 4 Fishing-bait.— 
the eyebrows. North. 5 Bait, allurement, enticement. G** 
maol-cheann,** -chinn, s.m. Bald head. 2Stu-| Place where shell-fish is found. 
pid-head, dunder-head. -» aiche, o. Abounding in shell-fish, 
maol-cheannach, .aiche, a. Blunt. 2 Shy, bash- 


mussels, limpets, &c. 
ful sheepish. 3 Bald-headed. 4 Stupid. maorach-bàu,(AF) s, m, Shell-fish. 
maol-chiaran, -ain, s.m. Forlorn person, child 


maorach-Muire,(AF) s.m. Kind of limpet— 
of grief. 2 Term of pity or reproach. 3 Her-| Eriskay. 
mit. 4 Melancholy—Sar-Obarr, mvor-baile,* s.m. Under bailiff. 2 Town-officer. 
maol-chluas,** -chluaise, s.f. Blunt or deaf ear. | maor-ciladaich,(AF) sm. Redshank. 
maol-caluasach, -aiche, a. Dull of herring, some- maor-cise,f s.m. Tax-gatherer, assessor. 
what deaf. 2**Tl'am», gentle. 3**Inactive. 4 maor-coille,* s.m. Wood-ranger. 
“Blunt, dull. 5 Stupid, maor-eaglais** $. m. Beadle, church-officer, 
maol-ciluasaiche,* s.f. Stupidity, dulness, life- church warden, ech 
lessness, maor-ghairm,"* »m. Herald. Chruinnich e na 
maol-chnuac,** sr Bald forehead or brow, muioir-ghairm, he summon-d the heralds. : 
-- ach, a. Having à bald forehead maor-righ,* s.m. Messenger-at-arms. 2 King’s. 
messenger, 

maur-rinndeil,* s.m. Ground-officer. 

mvorsachil, s f. see maorsainneachd. 

m orsainneachd, s.f. Stewardship. 2 Office of 
an under-bailiff or officer of justice, 3 The 
duties ot such an officer. 4* Officiousness, 
meddling. 5**District, prefecture. 6**That 
part ofa landed gentleman’s property that is 
under the inspection of a bailif or ground-offi- 
cer. 7** Office or business of a constable. 8 
* Office of a messenger. 

maor-sàraidh, sm. Bailiff, 

maor-siorraimh,* s.m. Sheriff-officer. i 

inaor-siteig,(Fionn) s.m. Sanitary officer or in- 
spector. (siteag, a dtunpAill.) 

maor-sith, s.m. Policeman, 




































or brow. 


miol-coinein, s. m. Rabbit. 2 Brown mole, 
luadi-dhearc.§ -an, s.f. òl ulberry-—moaris nigra, 
Craobh mhaol-dheare, a mitlberry-tre-, 
—ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in mul- 


berries. 2 Like, of, or pertaining to, mulber- 
ries, 








Ag, -aly, -an, $.f. see maol-dheare, 
——agach, -aiche, see maol-dhearvach. 
maol-dobhrain (AF) s.m. Otter. 2 Mole or spot 

on à person's skin. 
t:xaol-dorn, -uirn, s.m. S word-hilt. 
imol-füa&obhar,** -air, s.m. Blunt edre. 

ach, -aiche, a. Blunt-edged, as a 

bladed instrument, 


maol-labhartas,t{ -ais, s.m. Meanness of writ- 











` 
pr ó NUS K 
EELER VERE A 


Lae r "Tue d mia 
a M as * 
besen, , RK a 





EH 
" 


d 


ni 
3 
r 


A 
Ce 


2 e 


A4 Sr 


a mdi 





E 2 Ki 5 
Rte 
rt IR 


OPE 


A 
mm 
aS" 


Géi ".. 
Re 


d 
D d 

€ ei A 

X. e E 


LJ 


X ZE "e. rr 
fo. 


` ur L^ 
WC E nd 
E GC um 


D'A quU 


d , 


'" maothachail, -e, a. 





tnaor-striopaicb 


maor-striopaich, s.m. Pimp. pander. 

maos,(AU) s.m. Goat. Air shealbh mhaosa, for 
luck of goats. 

maosganach, -aich, s.m. Unshapely,large lump. 
2 Huge or shapeless trunk. 

——, -aiche, a. Shapeless, clumsy, a- 
bounding in shapeless lumps. 

maotag,(AF) s.f. Cabbage-worm. h 

maoth, maoithe, æ. Soft, tender delicate. 2 
Young, of tender age. 3 Effeminate, of deli- 
cate constitution. 4 Soft, moistened, 5 En- 
ervated. 6ttGentle, calm, tranquil, quiet. 7 
** Tame. 8** Smooth, Muirichinn mh., o 
large yamily slenderly provided for, of tender 
age ; an osag mh., the gentle breeze ; tha a’ 
chlann m., the children are tender. 

maoth, v. see maothaich. 

maothach, -aiche, o Producing softness, em- 
ollient, softening, soothing, lenitive. 2 Ten- 
der, gentle. 3 Moistening. 4** Enervating. 

—adh, -aidh, s.m. Softening, act of soft- 

ening or soothing. 2 State of becoming soft 

or tender.  3**Smoothing. 4**Taming. 5** 

Becoming soft, tender, or smooth. 6 Becom- 

ingtame. 7 Moistening. 8 Irrigation. 9 

Enervation. A’ m—, pr. pt. of maothaich. 

see maothach. 

maothachd, see maothalachd. 

maothag, -aig, -an, s.f. Premature or shell-less 
egg. 2 Delicate young female. 

maothaich, pr. pt. a’ maothachadh, v. a. da. 
Soften, make soft. 2 Soften, alleviate, miti- 
gate. 3 Moisten. 4 Become soft or less 
hardened. 5 Become delicate enervated or 
effeminate. 6 Become moist. 7**Tamo. 8** 
Enervate. 9**Grow exorable, grow less hard- 
ened or less cruel. 10 (MS) Addulce. 

——ear,** fut. pass. of maothaich. 

—— te, past pt. of maothaich. Softened, 
become soft, 2 Mitizated, alleviated. 3 En- 
ervated. 4 Moistened. 5 lamed. 

maothail,* -e, a. see maothacnh. 

maothain,* s. Abdomen. 2 Disease of young 
persons caused by lifting heavy burdens. 

maothalach, -aiche, see maothach. 

— d, s.f.und. Softness, tenderness,deli- 
2 Gentleness, calmness. 3 Pity. 4 
** brittleness, 5 Moistuess, 6 Smoothness. 7 
Tameness, 8 Lenitiveness. A thaobh mùirn 
agus m., on account of tenderness an! delicacy. 

maothan, -ain,-an, s.m Twig. 2 Tendril. 3 
Bud. 4 Oster, see fi»exinhuin, 5 The 
chest or breast. 6 Anything cartilaginous or 
soft. 7 The cartilage terminating the lower 
part of the sternum —ziphoides. 8 Young per- 
son, youngster. 9 Anything tender or soft. 
10 Che gristle 1n the scrobiculum cordis. 11 
Cowardly fellow. Gun mh. ri’taobh, without 
@ tendril by her side ; gach m. snidheach, 
every tender maid weeping ; cha gearan i 'm., 
she will not complain of her chest. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in twigs or 

osiers. 2 Like a twig, osier or tendril. 3 Of, 

or belonging to, the human chest, 4 Cartila- 
ginous. 5**Slender in person. 

—achd, s.f.ind. Gristliness, likeness to 
gristle or cartilage. 2 Tenderness, softness. 
3 Cowardliness, 4**Slenilerness. 5** Limber- 
ness. 

maothar, -aire, a. 

inaoth-bhlas, -ais, s.m. 
taste or flavour. 

——da, d. 
pleasant to the taste, 
Sweet-tasted sap of tres. 

— — ——(üachd, $8. f. ind. Pleasantness of 
taste or flavour. 

















cacy. 








see mòdhar. 
Mild taste. 


Sweet-tasted, mild-tasted, 
Suothach m., the 


2 Sweet 





osi 


mar 


maoth-bhlath, -a, An. s.m. Soft or tender blog 
som or twig. | | 

, -Ailhe, æ. see meagh-bhlàth. 

an, see maoth-bhlàth. 

| -AS,-2ls, see meagh-bhlàthas. 

maoth-bhos, -ois, -an, $.f. Soft or smooth palm 
of the haud. Do mh. a bu ghrinne, thy soft 
palm that was the fairest. 

ach, -aiche, o, Having soft or smooth 























palms. 

maoth-bhuidhe, æ. Softly or delicately yellow. 

maoth-chaidreamh, s.m. Indulgence. 

maoth-chloimh, s.f. Soft down or wool. Leab- 
aidh mh., @ bed of soft wool. 

maoth-chnàimh, s.m. Cartilage. 

maoth-dhéauadaen, -aiche, d. Lenitive. 

maoth-lus, -luis, -an, s.m. Tender herb or flo- 
wer. 2** Grass. Mar mh. fàsaidh tu, like œ 
tender herb thou shalt grow. 

maoth-lusach, -aiche, a. Abounding in soft or 
delicate herbs. 

maoth-lusrach, see maoth-lusach. 

maothran, -ain, pl. -an & -ain. s.m.Tender twig. ` 
2 Tendril. 3 Infant, suckling. 4 Little boy 
or girl. 

maothranach, -aiche, æ. Puerile, tender, of ten- 
der age, infautile, 

maoth-rosach, -aiche, @ Soft and delicate as 9 
rose, rosy. 

maoth-rosg, -roisg, -an, s.m. Tender or soft eye- 
lid. 2 lender or delicate eye. 3 Mild eye 
eye expressive ofa mild temper. 4 Langui 
eye. 5 Langnid look, 

—ach, -aich?, æ. Having soft or tender 

eye-lids or eyes. 2 Having a mild, gentle look. 
3 Having a languid look. 

maoth-shüil, -shüla, -shüilean, s. f. Soft eye, 
tender eye. 

each, -eiche, a. Tender-eyed, soft- 
eyed. 2 Ophthalmic. 

—— .—— — —eachd, s. f. ind. Tenderness or softe 
ness of the eyes, 2 Wateriness of the eyes. 

maothuich, see maothaich. 

mapag,( DO) s.f. Moppet — Uist. 

mapaid,(DC) s.f. Moppet— Uist. 

mar, conj. As, even as, like, like'as, in the same 
manner, in this or that manner. 

Mar tha, already ; am bheil e air sgur mar 
tha ? has he ceased already? mar seo, in this 
manner, in this direction; mar sin, in that 
manner, in that direction ; mar sin fhéin, so 
and so ; mar seo chaith sinn an oidhche, thus 
we spent the night ; mar a's sine am boc, "a 
anu a’s cruaidhe ’n adharc, the older the buck, 
the harder the horn; mar siod, tn yon man- 
ner; mara theicheas ial, as they scamo- 
er ; mar rinn mise, justas I did ; rinn e m. 
sin, he did $0, in like manner ; mar bu mhiann 
leis, just as he would wish ; mar gu'm b' ann, 
just as it were ; mar siod agus, so also ; m. aon, 
together ; mar gu'n, as if; naà's mó mar àir’ 
a’ chinn, higher by ahead ; mar uisge balbh, 
lik: still waters ; cha robn e mar mhìle dhomh, 
he was not within a mile of me ; is e a's fhaisge 
mar dha mhìle, i£ is nearest by two miles ; mar 
mhilteau dhomh, within miles of me; tha e 
mar sin, he or itis so; mar sin bha mi og, $0 
was lin my youth ; mar nach ole, not at all 
badly ; is ann mar seo a tha &' chùis, the case 
stanls thus ; mar...., @8....80....; Mar & 
thubhairt thu, mar sin thachair e, as you said, 
80 tt happened ` leth-inar-leth, half-and-half. 

[Governs a noun definite in the nom., bub 
a noun indefinite in the dat. and aspirated. 
It does not aspirate adefinite noun beginning 
with d, s, or t.] : 

mer, Compared with. (Not over as transla, 








mar 


632 


ENOAS 


marbhchann 


eegen 
tedin W. H. Tales, in the sentence ‘‘ mar |marasglach, -aiche, o. Ruling, bearing rule. 2 


reul air na rionnagan mar mhuir mor air 
lodannan.''] 

mar fhéin,** prov. expression, On my word, on 
my troth. 

mara, gen.sing. of muir, 

marach, see màireach. 

marach,t s.m. Big, ungainly woman— Argyll. 

marachadh, -aidh, s. m. Anchoring, mooring. 
2 Anchorage. 

marachan, Suth’d. for manachan. 

marachann, see marbhehann, 

marachil,* see maraidheachd. 

wmarag, -aig, An, Sr, Blood-pudding. 2 in ridi- 
cule, Fat, shapetess person. 3 Mustard. M. 
dhubh, a blood-pudding ; m. gheal, a pudding 
made of meal, &c. Cha truagh leam cu is 
m. m'a amhaich, I don't pity a dog having a 
pudding about its neck—applied to anyone who 
was thought to bave enough, and should be 
satisfied. [** gives sausage. | 

—— — ach, -aiche, @. Abounding in puddings or 
sausages, 2 Like a pudding. 3 Corpulent, 
fat. shapeless, pot-bellie4. 

m^rag-bhuidhe,$ sf. Cherlock, wild mustard — 
sinapsis arvensis. 

à 


Ss 
e X By A 


A 
Ye 
Phe cL 
ete | 





509. Maraiche. 
2 Ride at 


501. Marag-bhuidhe. 


maraich,** v.a. £ n. Moor, anchor. 
anchor. 

maraiche, -an, s.m. Sailor, mariner. 
grass—cochl aria officinalis, 

adh, -idh, -idhean, s.m. Iron or wood- 

en bolt. used to drive out another. 

maraidheachd, s.f.in.1. Seamanship, business of 
a manner, navigation, Ri m., following the 
82a. 

maraig, gem. & dat. sing. of marag. 

màrain, gen. sing. of màran. 

wmaraireachd, see maraidheachd. 

imaraiste, -an, see mairiste. 

ach, -aiche, a. see mairisteach. 

máàran, -ain, see mànran. 

——— ach, -aiche, see mànranach. 

mar an ceudna, adv. Likewise, also, too, in like 
manner. 

marauna, à 

marannan, \ ol. uf muir. 

maraon, adv. Together, in concert, (lit. as one.) 
Ghluais iad m., they moved together. 

maras,** -ais, gan. Myriad, ten thousand. 

marasgail, v.q. see marasglaich. 

inarasgal, -ail, -an, $. m. Master, regulator, 
overseer, 2 Managing. 3 Subjection, servi- 
tuda. 4 Marshal. M.-cogaidh, feachd-m. or 
m.-feachd a field-marsha8; cuir air droch mh., 
set a bad master over him. 

marasgalach, see marasglach, 


2 Scurvy- 


(a 





tt Magisterial, 
marshal. 
——arth, -aidh, s.m. Ruling, act of rul- 
ing or bearing sway, exercising of mastery, 
management, superintendence, supervision. 
2**Marshalling, regulating.  3* Traffic. A’ 
m—, pr.pt. of marasglaich. 

—— —— —d, s. f. ind. Regulating, superin- 
tending, bearing rule. 2 Marshalling. 3 
Office of marshal, marshalship. +**Subjection. 
Fo ’mh.-san, um ler his subjection. 

marasgladh, see maraszlachadh. 

marasglaich, v.a. Superintend, regulate, rule, 
guide, oversee, 2* 'l'rade with. 

marasglaiche,** s.m. Conductor. 

marbh, mairbhe, a. Dead, lifeless. 2 Dull. 3. 
Benumbed, torpid. 4 Vapid, tasteless, as 
beer. 5 Spiritless. Duine m., a dead man ; 
corp m., a dead body. 

marbh, pr.pt. a’ marbhadh, v.a. Kill, slay, ass- 
assinate, murder, slaughter. 2 Subdue, mor- 
tity. 3 Benumb. 4 Make stale or flat. 

marbh, -airbh, s.m. Dead person, pl. the dead. 
Am bed 's na mairbh, the living and the dead. 

marbh, -airbh, s.m. Stillness, silence, repose. H 
State of quietness, absence of life or motion, 
M. na h-oidhche, the dead of night; m. a 
gheamhraidh, £he dead of winter. 

marbhach, -aiche, d. see marbhtach. 


3** Marshalling. 4** Like a 


marbhachd,** s.f. Languor, languishment. 21$  — 


Slaughter. 3ffHavoc. 

marbhadair, ean, see marbhaiche. 

marbhadairean, The Gael of old were of the 
opinion that the food in the stomach was di- 
gested by a number of living creatures, to 
ri) they gave the name of marbhadairean 
TI A) y. 

marbhadh, -aidh, s.m. Killing, slaying, act of 
killing, slaying or slaughtering. 2 Mortifying, 
act of mortifying or subduing. 3 Slaying, mas- 
sacring. A’ m—, pr.pt. of marbh, Chum &' 
mharbhaidh, to the slaughter. 

marbhaiche, -an, s.m. Slayer, killer, murderer, 
assassin. 2 Sanguinary warrior. 

marbhaibh, dat. pl. of marbh. 

marbhaidh, gen.sing. of marbhadh. 

marbhaidh, fut. aff. a. of marbh. 

marbhain, gen.sing. of marbhan. 

marbhaisg, -e, -ean, see marbh-phaisg. 

marbhalachd, see marbhantachd. 

marbham, 1st.per.sing. imp. of marbh. 

marbhan, -aiu, -an, 8.m. Dead body, corpse. 2 
Carcase. 3**Margin of a book. Cha téid de 
mh., thy carcase shall not go. 

marbhanach, -aiche, @. 
Abounding in dead bodies or carcases. 

marbhanach,* -aich, s.m. Person almost dead, 
or pretending to be dead. 2(DU) Sluggish 
roller seen ia calm weather, gentle undula- 
tion of the sea without any crest. 3 (DMy) 
Wool or fleece of asheep killed at Hallowtide. 
(called ** rusg " when shorn off in May.) 


marbhau-leabhair, s.m. Margin of a book or - 


page. 


marbhanta, -ainte. a. Dull, inactive, not lively, 


2 Benumbed. 3 Lukewarm. Gu m., inac- 
tively, in a spiritless mann-r. ? be 
marbhantachd, s. f. ind. Duluess, inactivity, 


stupor, deadness, torpidness. 2 Lukewarm- 


ness. 
murbhautas, -ais, s.m. see marbhantachd. 
marvh-aodac., -aieh, 8.70. Dead-clothes,suzoud. 
marbh-aodaieh,** v.a. Shroud, clothe or 

a dead body. 
marbh-bhreitn, a. Stillborn. 


marbhchann, s. m. Morling, flayed skin of & 


Le 4 ih à 


uj E 


"T ^ — 
— omo "e IP, Kp ffe 


Like a dead body. 2 ` 


-—— O^ ue ae 





ep æ +A 


` 
~ 
E: - 


RE 


` marbh-phasgadh,** -aidh, s.m. 


. marbhuach,** s,m, 


mare, -airc, -an, s.m, Horse, charger, steed. 





N^ marbhchann 


sheep. 2 Wool from a dead sheep. Olainn- 
-mbharbhchann, or cldimh-mharbhchrann, wool 
Jrom the dead skin. 
marbh-chras, -ais, -an, s.m. Carcase. 
maroh-chu,(AF) s.m, Wolf. 
marbh-dheoch, -a, -an, s. f. Deadly draught or 
drink, poison, 2 Dirge, funeral dirge. 
marbh-dhraoidh, -ean, s.m. Necromancer. 
marbh-dhraoidheach, a. Necromantic. 
marbh-dhraoidheachd, $.f. Necromancy. 
nmuarbh-fnonn, -uinn, s. m., Death-song, 
march, dirge, fuueral air. 
mar bhi, prov. for mur bhi. 
mar-bhith, (AC) s. Fault. 
fault. 
+ Gast $.m. Still, cloudy day, dull, heavy 
ay. 
marbh-lap,** v.n. Become benumbed or frost- 
bitten. 2 Become torpid. ) 
marbh-lapach,** a, Benumbed, frost-bitten, 2 
Causing torpor or paralysis. 
marbh-lapachd, $.f. Numbness, torpor. 
marbh-lapadh, s.m. Numbness, torpor, 
marbhnach, ** -aich, s.m. Epitaph. 2 Elegy. 
marbhphaisg, -e, -ean, s. f. Death shroud, 
grave-clothes, 2 Generally used as au impre- 
cation— m. ort! ( lit. a deatli-shroud upon 
thee !) fatal end, catastrophe, woe. 3 * says 
** Coffin used as hearses are now. It was very 
:ngeniously constructed, having a slider ia 
the bottom, and otherwise formed so as to 
revent the body being seen till covered by 
the earth. Afterwards it was conveyed to the 
church, there to be kept till again required." 
marbh-phaisg, v.a. Shroud,clothe with a shroud. | 
te, past pt. Ee 
hrouding. Air 


là do mharbh-phasgaidh, on the day of thy 
shrouding. 

marbhrann, -rainn, -an, s.m. Elegy. 2 Epitaph., 
3 Funeral song. 

ach, -aiche, a. Elegiae, funereal. 

marbh-sgitheachd,tt s./,?nd. Lethargy. 

marbh-sgios, s.m. Lethargy. 

marbh-shruth, -a, -an, s.m. Still stream. 2 The 
wake of a ship. 3ttTide at the turning-point. 
4**That part of a river or stream the current 
of which is scarcely perceptible. 

marbh-shruthach, -aiche, a. Abounding in still 
streams, 

marbhtach, -aiche, a. Deadly, mortal. 2 Des. 
tructive. 3 Fierce. 4 Murderous, ready to 
kill. 5 Expert at killing or slaughtering, 6 
Poisonous, 7 Baneful. 8 Sanguinary. 9 
Cruel. . 

marbhtach, s.m. Wool froma dead sh»ep— Skye. 

7 —d, EE, Deadliness, destructiveness, 2 
Banefulness. 3 Cruelty. 4 Bloodiness. 

see marbhnach. 

Tmarbhuas,(AF) s.m. Many cows. 

Tmarbraid, -ean, s.f. Fort. 

Tmarbul, sm. Playing marble. 


























dead 


Gun mh., without 

















M, uaibhreach,ard-cheumach, a proud, high- 
bounding steed ; m.-choimhliong, o horse-race; 

. m. dubh, a black horse. 

marcach, -aich, s.m. Horseman, rider, eques: 
trian, 2 Knight. 3 Dragoon. 4 see marc- 
achadh, ; 

marcach, s.m, Standard or bearer 
"(spiuning-) wheel, 

marcachadh, -aidh, s.m. & pr. pt. of marcaich. 
Same meanings as marcachd. 

marcachd, s.f. Hiding, art or act of riding, e. 
questrianism, horsemanship. A’ m—, pr. pt. 
of marcaich, 

Marcach-dain, $£. m. Rehearser of poetry. 2 


of driving. 


633 


margadh DIE Be a an n 

Person who attended the poet, 

marcachd shine, (WC) s. f. Wild and stormy 
shower. 

marcachd-shith,(AC) s.£, Kind of paralysis in 
the spine of sheep, cows and horses, attribu- 
ted to fairies riding on them. 2 In some pla- 
ces, the perspiration, due to weakness which 
‘comes out on cattle. [Preceded by the art. 
ol Also called “ na marcaich-shith." 

marcach-sian, (DMy) s. Sea-drift in a storm at 
sea, when the wind sweeps along the tops of 
the waves. 

marcaich, pr.pt. a’ marcachd & a’ marcachadh, 
vd. én. Ride, 2 Sail. Marcaichidh e le 
greadhnas, he will ride joyously. ` 

marcaich, see marcach, 

marcaiche, see marcach. 

marcaichean-sion, $. pl, The storm-riders, ses 
gath-dubh. 

marcair, -ean, see'marcach. é 

marcaireachd, s.f.ind, prov. for marcachd. 

marcais, see mareuis. 

—eachi, see marcuiseachd. 

marcait, s.f. see margadh. 

marcan, see marcachd., 

marcan,** -ain, s.m. Horse. 

mare-cheann, (AF) s.m. Leader among horses.. 

murchann, see marbhchann. 

marclach, -aich, sf. Provision, victuals, 

mare-lanu, -ainn, -an, sm. Stable. 

marc-r4ineach, $ $.f. The male fern—lastrea 

filix-mas. 








508. Marc-raineach. 
mare-shluagh, -shluaigh, 8. sing. Horsemen, 


riders, 2 Cavalry. 

marcuis, s.m. Marquis. 

—eachd, stad, Marquisate. 2 Riding, 
horsemanship. 

mar fhéin, int. On my word, by my troth ; prov, 

marg, -airg & -a, -an, s. f. Merk, Scots coin 
value 134d. sterling. 2 Merk-land, i.e. land of 
the annual value of 13/4 Scots. — Marg fhear- 
ainn, @ merk-land. | 

margach,** a. In merks, of money. 2 Like a 
fair or market. 

margad, -aid, s.m. see margadh. 

margadail, -e, a. see margail. 





margadalachd, see margaiachd. 
margadh, -aidh, -ean, s.m. & 


f. Market, fair. 
2 Buying or selling, sale. Au d’ fhuair thu ra. 
dha ? have you obtained a sale for it 3 baile 
margaidh, a market-town, 2d 


marzadh 
in. an éisg, the fish-inaret. 
m.-chaorach, the sheep-market. 
m.-cnloimh, the wool-marcet, 
m.-chruida, tre cattle-narket. 
ra.-na-feola, the meat-marke-t or shambles. 
wi.-na-Iqine, the m^a!-market. 
m.-vam-meas, the fruit-market. (ket. 
m -nan-luivhean, the green or vegetable mar- 
m.-nam-muc, the hog-market. 

mhrgaidh,* see marga:th. 

margail, -e, @. Marketable, saleable, (ness. 

margalachd, 8.f.$nd. Saleableness, marketable 

Ynargban, Ain, 8.21. Gaelic spelling of margin. 

murglaiche, € am. Merchant. 

ma’ ri, for mar ri or maille ri. 

maria, 8.72. 
Gaelic has the sense of marble also, where it 
confuses this word and the English '* marble" 
together.''] 

mariach, -aiche, a. Marly, like marl. 2 Abound- 
ing in marble. 

marihor, see marmor. 

marmhur, -uir, see marmor. 

marmor, -oir, sm. Marble. 
ble is marbul—f.] 

ach,-aiche, a. Abounding in marble, 
marbly, marble. 

marnia!ach,**-aich, s.m. see màirnealach, 

marr,* v.a. Obstruct, hinder. 

-—ach,* -aich, s.m. Thicket to catch cattle in. 
2 Labyrinth, 3 Enchanted castle that kept 
one spell-bound. 

marraisgeach.(MsS) s. Virgin. 

mar ri, prep. With, together with, in company 

with Mar ri nàmhaid, together with the enemy. 
see maille & maille ri. 
Mar ribh, with you ; mar ruinn, with us; mar 
ris, with him ; mar riu, with them ` mar rium, 
with me ; mar riut, with thee ; mar rithe, with 
her. 

mar-ros,** s.m. Rosemary. 

marrthaisgeach, see marraisgeach. 

marruinn,(AC) Milk, cream, and their products. 

—each, (AC) a. Productive of cream, 
milk, &c. Mart math m., @ good productive 
cow. 

marrum, see marruin. 

marsadh, -aidh, s.m. March, marching of troops. 

màrsail, -e, s.f. see màrsadh. 

marsainn,* s. Strength. 2 Strong constitution, 
3 Durableness. 

.— — ——each, a. Hardy, strong, 
petual, 

marsel, -ail, sm. Marching. 2 see marasgal. 

marsai,** -ail, s.m. Merchant, shopkeeper. 

marsalachd,** s.f. Business of shopkeeping. 
inàrsaladh,** -aidh, s.m. Marching. 2 Marshal- 
ling. 

Weak ca -ain, see marsanta, 

mirsannachd, see marsantachd. 

marsanta, an, $.$m. Merchant, one who deals 
10 wares. 

.—— — ——. core, -n-, s.m. Earwig. (So called from 
the * knife ” in its tail. 

inarsantaen,ff-aiche, d. Mercantiie. 

varsautackd, s.f.nd. Merchandise, wares. 2 
{rade or business of a merchant, traffic, deal, 


ing. 

Viso AR adv. In this manner, thus. 2 In this 
airection, towards this place. 

mar siu, adv. Mar sin duit-se, the same to you. 

mar siod, adv. see mar, 

mar onta, see marsanta, 

—chd, see marsantachd. 

mar sud agus so, likewise. 

Mart, -àirt, s. m. Month of March. 2 Tuesday. 


3 Lime suitable for agricultural work. 4° 
Busst time ab anybhing. 6 Great baste, 6* 





(A playing mar- 


à 





2 Durable,per- 





Marl, kind of clay. [f says '' The 


martach 





Seed-time 
_ There appears to be considerable confusion 
in Gaelic proverbs, &-., regarding the first three 
sig ifications given above for Mart, as is ex- 
eiuplifled in the following notes from Nicole 
son's Gaelic Proverbs (NGP), Waifs & Strays 
(W), and Carmina Gadelica (AC.) 

In the first-place the old ** months" appear 
to have been moveable, and depended tor the 
time of their commencement upou whether 
the suitable weather had already arrived. If 
the weather had not come, neither had the 
month, e g. Luath uo mall g'an tig am 
Maigh, thig a’ chubhag, late or early as May 
comes, (t.e. as May-weather comes), so coms 
the cuckoo The names ol several mouths, or 
rather periods, of various lengths occur twice, 
while Mart occurs uo tess thau three times. 

‘Lhe comparatively modern Mart O. S., 
Which is still in vogue in some parts, (says 
AU in speaking of the months in general) 
being stili used in an O.S. manner, does not 
commence until the orthodox calendar month 
is half gone, AC i. 245, Uu. 263, & NGP 413, 
both make Mart extend into April. Nicol- 
son appears to nave been puzzled, for his 
explanatious are obscure. On p. 26 (NGP) 
he translates rz au ciad Mhart.” as the firat 
Tuesday, while from a note explaining the 
same proverb, it 1s evident that he thought 
Mart stood for March. 

.The first Tuesday of the sowiug-time ot 
times, would appear to be ** An ciad Mnáàrt 
de Mhart-na-curachd, '' in the same way as 
there was a Bealltuinn of the Bealltuino and 
a Liànasdal of Liünasdal,. AC gives “gaoth 
gheur nam Mart” (pl.) NGP p 26 speaks of 
three Marts, W. iii, 218, 293, 299 speaks of 
three—Apl. 12 to May l, Aug. 12, Sept. 12— 
(This triple occurrence of 12 ıs noteworthy.) | 

NGP says Ist. week of Apru is too soon to 
sow, so he would appear to prefer the 2nd. or 
3rd. week. Is fhearr an sneachd na 'bhi gua 
sian, an déidh an siol a chur "aan talamh, bet- 
ter snow than no rain-storm, when the seed w 
wn (he ground, (p. 251) shows that sowing were 
better done when snow is out of season, t, e. 
late in April. AC says seed is winnowed by 
“gaoth gheur nam Màrt,” before being sown, 
therefore the Mart or Marts must be nearly 
over, i.e late in April, before the seed is in 
the ground. W. gives Apl. 12 to May 1, i.e. 
late in April. Another proverb, (NGP. 24) 
Am feur a thig a mach ‘sa Mhart, théid e 
staigh 'sa Ghiblean, the grass that comes ouf 
in March shrinks away in April, implies that 
seed should not appear till Mart be over, or 
else it will be killed by the weather. 

On the other hand, NGP gives ls fhearraon 
oidhche Mhàirt na tri là Foghair (for growth), 
so the seed, to Judge by this,ought to be com- 
ing up in March, or else that sowing ought to 
be doue earlier. [lt is most likely that it is 


not growth which is referred to in this proe — 


verb, as Nicolson supposes, but the winnow- 
ing referred to by AC.] NGP says Tuesday 


for sowing, AC prefers Friday. There was - 


also the '' fior," or suitable Mart. 

mart, -airt, $ m. Cow or steer tattened for kill- 
iug. The common expression was m.-lamh- 
aig, or m.-tuaighe, (lit. a hatchet cow —J M.) 
2 WC) Milch-cow —Gairloch. M. geamhraidh, 
a winter “mart.” (Mart in a general sense, 
is applied to cattle of any description. Gille 
duvh uam mart, the black-haired drover— West 
coast of Ross. 

martach,-aiche, a. Having many cows. 2 Per- 
taining to cows 











Martain 

Martain,** et Martinmas, 

mairtair, -ean, s,m Cripple, lame p?rson, 
Mutilated person; 3 One who mainis. 

martanach, -aich, s.m. Crionle, 

martarach, see mairlireach. 

snart-bainne, pl, -airt-bh-, s.n. Milch-cow., 

martfheoil, -fheola, s.m. see ma'rtfneoil. 

mart-fheolach, see mairtfheolaen 

mart-zeamhraidh, s m. Cow for winter food, 

mar tha, Already. 

mart.làmhadh, s m. Cow for killing. 

mart-lànhaig see mart Jambadh 

martlan,(A E) sm. Maw-worm belly worm 

martrachadh .ailh, s,» Laming act of making 
Jame. 2 Maiming. A m—,pr pt of mart- 
rach. 

martradh, -aidh,s.m & pr.pt see martracnadh. 

martraich, pr.pt a martrachadh v « Lame, 
make lame. 2 Cripple. maim  3**Muti'ate 

——te, past pt of martraich Lamed, 2 
Crippled maimed. 

mart-tuaighe see mart-lamhadh. 

ma’s, [ma, conj. is v } lf. Ma’se., if tt be he 
orvt;ma’se agus, (f 1t so be; ma 's e agus gu, 
if it so be that ; ma 's e nach, (f 1t so be tha’ 
mot ; ma 's fior e féin If he judges arvg't, 

màs, -àis,-an, s. m. 
Bottom of a vessel, as of a cask. 3 Bottoin of 
a cart, 4 **Mace. 5** Duch Do mhasan 
your buttocks , m. na cuinneige, the bottom of 
the pit^her ; m. a’ chroinn, the regr-piece of 
the plough 

mas, con), for mu'n or mum, 

fmas, ~ Excellent. 2 Handsome. 
heaped. 

masach, -aiche, a. Having larg» buttocks or 
ue round-hipped, broad-hipyed. 2 Of or 
belonging to the hips. Laoch giocach, màs- 
ach, @ sturdy, s'out-thighe! prs n. 

masach, -aiche, s.f. Large-hipped female, 

masag, -aige, -an, SE Simailt red berry. 

ach, -aicne, a. Abounding iu small red 
berries. | 

masaglas, -ais, s.m. Species of red berry. 

niàsair,* -ean, s.m. Large-hipped man. 2 Mace- 
bearer. 

masan, -ain, s.m. Delay, slowness, dilatoriness. 
2** Reproof. : 

màsan, n.pl. of mas. 

ach, -aiche, æ. Slow, tedious, dilatory. 

achd, s.f.ind. Slowness, tarliness, habib 
of dilatoriness, delay. 

masduidh,** -ean, s.m. Large dog, mastif. 

—each, a. Like a mastiff. 

ma seach, see mu seacn. 

ma seadh, conj. If so, if it be so. then. 

masg, pr.pt. à' masgadh, v. a. Compound, mix. 
2 Iufuse or steep, as malt or tea. 

Ą.— achadh, (MS) s.m. Maceration. 

masgadh, -aidh, sm. Mixing, act of mixing. 2 
Steeping, infusing, mashiig. 3 Mash. mfu- 
sion. A’ m—, pr.pt. of masg. Ionad masg- 
aidh, @ place for steeping malt. 

masgair, -ean, s.m. Steeper, infuser. 2 Mask- 
man. 3**Lump. 

| each, tt s.f. Mixing. 2 Mashing. 

‘masganach, -aiche, @  Mirgled, mixed. 2 
Confused. 

ma sgaoil, see mn sgaoil. 

masgta, past pt. Mixed. 2 Iofnusel. 

masgul, -uil,s.?n. Flattery, sycophancy. cajoling 

ach, -aiche, æ. Flattering, inclined to 

flatter, sycophantic. Gu m, iu a sycophantic 

manner, 

achd, s.f.ind. Sycopbancy, habit of flat. 
tering, disposition to flatter, © 

-————àaiche,-an, sm. Flatterer, sycophant, 








8 Round 




















ee 








Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIV 


635 


2 


Hip, buttock, breech. 2! 


M math 
masla, see masladh. 
ma lich,-\iche, « Di:graecful. ignomiouas, 
renvoaentul. sham fal, slaadering, reproac i- 
ing. degra ting. Iomoehar m., disgraceful cone 
duzt. 








adn. -aidh, sm. Reproaching, shamisg, 
act of reprorenine, m»cki-g. afronting seat 
daiizirg, disgracing, degrading, afront, re 
proach, slander, A’ m—, pr pt. of inaslaich. 
Fbuair e m., he was disyraccd. 
ail. a. AFronting. 2 Libellous 

———— 1f s.f.ind Opprobriousness. 

—aic ** s,m. Affronter, 

masladh -aidh, -ean, sm. Reproach, disgrace, 
shame. 2 Affront, scandal, Cha mh. sith ri 
laoch, p«&ce with a hero is mo disyrace ; ma 
naire 's mo mb, ! shame and conf usvon ! 

maslaich, p-.pt. a’ maslaciadh, v.g. Reproach, 
slander, 2 Disgrace, degrade. 3 Affront. 4 
Taunt 

———-te past pt of maslaich. Reproached, 
slandered. 2 Disgraced, degraded. 3 Arront- 
el. 4 Shamed. 

maslail,** æ. Disgraceful. 

m^slain,** s.f. Mastlin, mong-corn. 

masluchidh, see mislachadi. 

masluica, see masleich,. 

moustuidh, see maistidh. 

mit.(AF) sam Pig. 2 Monster. 

ma, Sea mof. 

tmata, s.m. Mattress. 

ma tà. ad». -Keally, truly. indeed. Ma ta gu 
dearbh, v'rily, indved ; ni nis e mv ta, I will 
do it them; am bhoil thu faloh ? ma tà, tha, 
are you going * yes Lam, ys inled. 

Dua a, 4! Great. 2 Dark. gloomy. 

màtag, -aig, -an, seo madag, 

——&'h, see mà lagach. 

mith, wl, -A, æ. Ist. coinn. fèarr or foabha, ?n4. 
com», ferirr Lor feabhai d, 3rd. comp. feabias. 
(fF says fearr is a comp. froin the prp. ver (— 
trachic fur, for. sures, Now comp. for math, 
but evilently onee for fern good. Stokes re- 
fers Oid Irish frr to yers, ra’s? J 
Good, havi ig the proper or d irsd qua-ities. 
2 Proper, fit, expediant, convenient, 3 Use- 
ful, profitable, 4 Uncorruptel, undimsged, 
5 Good to eat, pleasant to the tasts. 6 Com- 
plete, full. 7 Favourable, favouring, kin. 8 
Gocd. moral, virtuous, pious. 9 Charitable, 
compassionate. 10 Valil, lezal. 11 Cousola- 
tory. 12 Considerable, not trifling. 13 Pleas- 
ant, agreeable. 14 Dexterous, skilful, skilled, 
expert, 15 Proper, becoming, befitti (v, seem- 
ly.. 16 Powerful, able, strong, influential, 
having authority, mighty. 17 Healthy, ia 
gool health. 18**Happy, glad. 19 Correct, 
accurate. 20 Prosperous, successful. 21 
Sound, not false. 2%¢tReady, prepared. 23 
Desirous, willing. 24 Just. 25 Fine, excel- 
lent. | 

Duine m., æ good man ; astar m. air falbh, 
@ considerable distance of ; ithibh na nithe 
tha m., eat thy things which are good ; is m. 
leam, I am glad ; 2 lam williag ; I wish : is 
fhèarr leam, I ain more qlad , 2 t had raher: 
3 I rather wish, £ wish mor»; is f»éarr dhomni, 
it if better for me ; is m. leam sin, I am 
glad of that; is m. dhuit, it is happy zue 
you; am m. leat mis’ a dheanamh seo? do 
you wish ane to do this ? bha e m. dhuinn, he 
was kind to us ; is m. mo choir air. L have d 
good right to it; ma’s m. mo bneachdesa, if 
my opinion be correct ; fhuair sinn cuv! mo», 
dheth, we had a considerable portion of it; is 
m. an salano, salt is useful; thaem aig a h- 
uile ni, he is deaterous at Ee a làith- 
2S2 





math L 


ean matha fhaicinn, to see prosp'rous days ; 
cho m. "aa bhaiad, as prosperous as they were; 
is m. an ni dhuit fhaicinn, you can hardly sze 
it; là m. dhuit ! goo day to you ! oidhche mh. 
dhuit ! good night to you !tha e m. air dol 
dachailh a nis, he is desirous of goin; hom 
now ; tha mi m. air a h-uile ni dhiubn seo a 
dhearbhadh, Z am prepared te prove all these 
things ; is m, leam e, Z am fond of it; I am 
glad of it ; tha 'n t-earrach ann 's gur m. leam 
e, it is spring and I rejoice at it; math 
thu fhéin! well done! m. an airidh, wel/-de- 
serving ; 2 deservedly, rightly ; bu mh. anair- 
idh sin a thachairt dha, that has deservedly be- 
fallon him ; gu’n robh m. agad ! trank you ! 
gu’n robh móran m. agad! thank you wry 
much ! 

mith, adv. Well, pretty well, considerably, 
skilfully. Is math a labhuir thu, you spoke 
well ; is m.a chi thu, you see well; is m. a 
gheibhear thu, you do well; is m. a fhuair 
thu, oris m. a fhuaireadh thu, you did well ; 
am m. thig e dhuit P does it become thee ? is it 
well for thee ? is m. a rinn thu siod, you did 
yon well. 

math,tt pl. -à & maithean, s m. Noble, hero. 

math, -aith, s.m. Good, profit, advantaze, bene- 
fit, prosperity. 2 Inclination, wish. 3 Ame- 
Duration, 4**Fruit. 5**rarely Hand. 5 Pur- 
pose, end. 6* Kindness. Is ann air do mh, 
fhéin a tha mise, it is your own interest I have 
gn view; m. an aghaidh uile, good for evil ; 
eha'n 'eil m. sam bith an sin dhuit, that serves 
n^ end to you; dé am m. a th’ ort P what qood 
are you? am m. leat sin ? do you wish that ? 
am m. ’S as t-ole, the good and bad. 

math, pa. see maith. 

mathachadh, -aidh, s.m. Manuring, act of ma- 
nuring land. 2 Improvement, cultivation. 3 
Anything to enrich land. A’ m-, pr.pt. of 
mathaich. A’m. an fhearainn, improving the 
land; a’ m. air, to insist on his believing—lit, 
making it good upon him. 

mathadh, -aidh, s.m. & pr.pt. see maitheadh. 

mathaich, pr.pt. a’ mathachadh, v.a. Manure, 
cultivate, as iand. 2**Am-liorate. 3( MS) Ex- 
postulate. 4**Improve, make good. 

te, past pt. of mathaich.  Manured. 2 
Cultivated. 3**Improved, made good. 

mathaim, for mathaidh mi. I will forgive or 
abate. 

mathain,** Mercy, disposal. 

mathair, s.f. Gore, matter. 

màthair, -ar, -thraichean, d@f.pl. mathraichibh, 
s.f. Mother. 2 Dam of a beast. 3 Cause, 
source. Mo mh., my mother, cha bhruich 
thu meann 'am bainn’ & mháthar, thou shalt 
mot seethe a kid in its mother's milk ; m. ao- 
bhair, a primary cause. A Highlander when 
addressing his mother, sometimes says "a 





2 Good-nature, 


bhean,” woman, like the Hebrews of old ; but | 


when writing to her, or in apostrophising, 
he uses ** a mhàthair,” not ** a bhean.” 
màthair-altóruim, s.7. Nurse. 
mathair-an-duileisg,§ s. Irish moss, see cairgein. 
màthair-aobhair, s. Primary cause. 
E s.m. Metropolis. 
mathair-bhaiste, 
m Atbhair-bllaistidh, 077 Sodmobher 
mathair-chéils, s.f. Mother-in-law. 
màthaireachd, s.f. Motherhood, rigut of a mo- 
ther. 
mathaireag, see mughairn. 
maAthaircalacha, s.f. Motherliness, female ten- 
derness, kinduess. 
mathaircas,*-eis, s.m Motherhood. 
màthaireil, -e,@. Motherly, like a mother, ten- 


Digitized by 
"INTERNET ARCHIVE 


636 


meacan-buidhe 


der, kind. Mae m., a sonlite his moth>-. 

—each4, s. f. Motüerliness. 2 Female 
tend:rness, kindness. 

màthair-ghuir,* s.f. Cause of suppuration. 2 
Queen of ths hive. i" 

mitihair-ijongair, see mathair-zhuir 1. 

màtha:r-mhort,* see mori-mpà5nar. 

"lh, sse mori-m*h vr. 

ur, see nz orca ir-amà^n vr. 

màthair-na-làaiz. s.f. Lbicd or ring-fi .ger. 

matha;rae, 

mathaira2ag, 

mathair-orn, see mnazort-m3à'har. | 

mà^hair-üi:ge,* s.f. Resecvoir, con lut, sources 
of a river, well, foun:ain-nead, deducsi om. 

ma'halach@,** gf.. Allowance. 

mathalt, s.m. (COR) Potato-basket. 2 Biunt 
sword, knife, or other w23apon.—;»à;-O.a:r. 

Hmàthan, -ain san, ‘Twig. sne«er. see maotuan. 

matha», -ain. -an, see math-zuanriuion, 

wh, -aiche, a. Bearish. 

mathanas, see maitheanas. 

-ach, -aiche, see maivheasach. 

matharail, see màthaireil. 

mathas, -ais, see maitneas. 

ven, -aiche, see maitheasach. 

achd, see maitheas. 

math-gùamhuinn, -mina, -ean, Sm. Bear. Dà 

mh. bhoirionn, two sàe-hears. 

each, @ Bearish. 2 Like a bear. 
3 Abounding in bears. 

màthraichean, 2.vl. of máàthair. 

mathrail, see màthaireil. 

mAthralachd, see mathaireileachd. 

mathroinn,’? sp Disposal, risk. Fàg air a mh 
e, leave it to his risk ; air mo mh.-sa, at my dis- 
posal, at my ris’. 

mathsach, ** -ai lh, s.m. Doubt. 

m wth-shlogh, -oizh, see mor-shlnagh. 2 (D 

math-shlusgh, -uaigh, My) Comm ou people. 

matruis,** Gaelic spelling of m vttre ss. 

mé, see méith. 

mè, &. Tender, fat. 

msaban,* -ain, s.m. Scovel, 2 (WO Refuse of 
anything. M. duine. an tustynificant p*rzo. 

meabhadh,** -ailh, s.m. D-feas, 2 Birs'ing. 

1meabhal,** son. Perfilv. sitt, reproaca. 
29ttFraud, deceit. 3ff{littery. 

1 veh, tt œ. Deceitful, treacherous, frau. 
dulent. 

m-'abhar, seo meamhair, ' 


2 Shamefal. 

meabhlach, a, see meabhalach, 3 

tmeabhra,** s.m. Fiction, lis. 

t—--—ch, æ. Cheerful, merry, pleasant., 

t-—ich,** v.a. see m3am Araich. 

+ -——ichte, past pt. se» meam:raichte. 

meacan, -ain, -an, s.m. Root of a tree or plant. 
2 Bulb. 3 Birth, extracíion, nativity. 4 
Parsnio. 5(MS) Carrot. 6 Turnip. 7 Hire, 
reward. 8 Oifsoriaz. 9 Twig, shoot 10 Sinall 
rod. -11..Piaat. 
buan m. na folach 1, lony /asts the rod whose 
root sprang from bloo? ; cha robh m. ann,/Aere 
was not an individual there.—C uth ness. 

——ach, -aiche, &. Abounding in roots, hav- 
ing many or strong roots. 2 Lixe a root. 3 
Like a parsnip, carrot, or turnip. 4 Aboual- 
ing in, or belonging to, parsnips, Carrots oF 
turnips. 

— -a’-chruilh,§ s.m: 
odharan. 

———aich, s.f. Sobbing, d 
meaean-an-ri.h,Q s. m. Parsnip—pas!ina:d sa- 
tiva. [ill. see p. 637. ] TR 
meacan-an-tathabhay$s.m Bulb of the white lily. 

2 Parsnio, see mo^acaa-an-righ. 
meacau-buidhe, -ain-, -am-buidue, sm. Carrot, 

















see muzhairaü. 














— re oe - 














Cow-parsuip, ses 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY’ OF ILLINOIS 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGIN 


12 (DMK) Individual. Is —— 





d 
A 













meacan-buidhe-an-t-sléibhe 





505.Meacan-buidhe an t- 
sléibhe. ` 
meacan-buidhe-an-t-sléibhe,§ s.m. Mackinboy, 
one of the spurge fainily—euphorbia hibernia. 
aneacan-dogha, -ain-, -an-,¢.m. Burdock, burr— 
arctium lappa. 


604.Meacan-an-vigh. 


meacan-dubh, ez. m. Comfrey—syephytum ofi- 


cinale. 


— o ———— 





506. Meacan-dubh. 507. Meacamn- hibh-fiadhain. 

aneacan-dubh-calgach, s.m. Prickiy comfrey. 

meacan-dubh-fiadhain,§ s.m. Bugle—ajuga rep- 
tans. 

meacan-each, -ain-, -an-each, s.m. Horse-radish 
—armoracia rusticana. 





508. Meacan-each, 
Tneacan-easa,$ s.m. Peony—peonia. 
wmeacan-o4,(MMcD) enn. Root with thorny pro- 

,minencies slanting upwards, sometiiing like 


509. Meacan-easa. 


Digitized by 


PEITUTPPEAEIE bh Enn IE 
[ d kp DW A A i í 
KAN Lo i Reg | 


NK 


637 





meacan-sléibhe 





/ 
UE E eu 
leg 2 


510. Meacan-dubh-calyach. 
the tines of an antler. It was hung up to the 
rafters, and used for banging balls or hanks 
of woollen thread on— Lewis. 


| meacau-racadal, s.m. Horse-radish, see meacan- 


each. 

meacan-ragaim, s.m, Sneezewort, see cruaidh- 
lus. 

meacan-raguim,} s.m. Horse-radish, see meac- 
an-each, e 

meacan-ragnim uisge,§ s.m. Sea-radish—raphe- 
nus maritimus. [McL & D gives water-rad- 
ish, | 


Vv AT) 





511.Meacan-raguim-uisge. 512. Meacan-righ-fiadk- 
ain, 

meacan-raidigh, $.m. Garden radish. 
m.-raidich for Carrot. ] 

meacan-righ, -ain-, -an-, s.m.Parsnip, see meae- 
an-an-righ. 

meacan-righ-fiadhain,} s.m. Wild parsnip—pas- 
tinaca sativum. 2 Wood angelica, see lus- 
nam-buadha, 

meacan-roibe, s.m. Sneezewort. 

meacan-ruadh, -ain-ruaidh, -an-ruadha, s. Ma 
Radish—raphanus raphanistrum. 


[** gives 





514.Meacan-sléibhe. 


meacan-sléibhe, -ain- -an-, s.m. Stinking helle- 
bore, great bastard black hellebore, bear's 
foot—helleborus jetidus. 


518.Meacan-ruadh. 


meacan-tobhach ` 


Ee o —À———— ————— —————— —————— 

m-acau-tobhach, -ain., -ai-, s.m. Great c. mmou 
burdock, bur, eioth-our, see suirietican-suir- 
ich. 

meacan-tobhach-dubb,)? s.m. DBurdoexk (Zit. the 
black plant that s izes— obhach, wrestling. 
seizing,) see sniiiel.ean-sutrich. j 

meacan-uiileanu, -ain-uilleina, -an-uilleann, s. 
m. Klecampane, see aillean. : 

imeach, -a, s.m. Hos iiaity. [** gives f.] 

tineach, og. Soft, tender. 2 Kind, hospitable. 

meach, AF) s. Bee. (for am beach—eclipsis.) 

meach, a. Mild, modest. m | 

meachaiun,** s, Luck-penny, (iscount, abate- 
ment, as of rent. 2ff Softness. 3 Kindness, 
mercy. 

meacininn, -e, s». Abatement, discount, de: 
avction. 
viu. 3 Meicy. 4 Lenicy. 5*parti&bty. Is 
mairg a rachadh fo d’ mh., I pity him that 
depends on your will, 

Meachair, -e, qd. Soft tender delicate. 2 Agree- 
able. 3 Mellow. 4 Pretty, beautiful, hand- 
some. 5 Checrful, sportive, talkative. 6* 
Having an uncommonly white eountenance 
tinged with rel. Gruridhean m., pretty cheeks, 
cheez8 hav. mr red and white delicately mixed ; 
m mar mbhaishdean, pretty, asa maid. 

Mecachannas,*-ais, s.m. Lerity, indulgence. 2 
Mitigation, partiality. Gun mh. do dhuine 
seach dnine, without pa, tialiiy to anyone. 


Meachar, tt -aire, a. Soft, tender, mild. 2 ind. 





stt s.m. see meacharachd. 

meacharachd, s. f. Sweetness or delicacy of 
look. 2tt softness, tenderness. 3* Beautiful 
countenauce, beautiful mixture of colours in 
the face. 

meacharan, see meachran. 

—— —--— ach. see meachranach. 

meachdann, -ainu, -an, s.m. see meacan 9 & 10. 

ieac.nasach,* -aiche, a. Iudulgent,lenial. 2 
Partial. 

meachrainich,(MS) v.a. Meddle. 

Mvachran, -ain, -an, s.m. Hospitable kind per- 
son. 2 Oflicious person. 3**Obliging person. 

m 3cuüranach, -aiche, a. Kind, hospitable. 2 
Obligiug, ready to serve. 3 Busy. 4 Offici- 
ous, meddling. Gu m., oficiously. 

— —-— d, s.f. Kindness,hospitality. 2 Offi- 

ciousness, habit of meddling. 

Meachranaich,tt v.a. Feel, try. 2 Meddle, in- 
terfere. 

——  — — ——e,ii-an, s m. Meddler. 

meachuinn, see meachainn. 








meac-treabhaidh,(AF) s. m. Ox or horse next 


the plough, 

m.acuiun, -ean, see meacan, 

mead, see meud. 

meadach,** -aich, s.m. Knife. 

meadachadh, see meudachadh. 

meadag,** aig, s.f. Kuife. 

meadaich, see meudaich. 

meadan,(MS)s.m. Lay. 

mea'lar, -air, pl. -an & -draichean, 
pail, or circular wooden vessel. 2(AF) Milk- 
bail, 3 Bicker. 4 Churn. 5 (AF)Measure. 
{ine Irish meadar is of one piece, quadran- 
guiar, and hollowed with a chisel, the Scot- 
tish Gael's meadar is like the lowland *'* lug- 
gie,” round, hooped and ansated.—**] M.- 
bleoghainn, a milk-pail, m.-ime, a butier- 
pail ; 1n.-im:deal, a pail whose mouth ts covered 
with a skin ( for any liquid) ; m. fhuail, vessel, 
frequently fashioned out of a solid block of 
wood = It stool just outside the door of a 
dwelling-honse and was used for storing 
vrine in, which was used, when stale, for 
Washing, Ou account of the ammonia it con- 


s.m. Small 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


633 


2 Power, discretionary power or 


meadh an 


ee M — e 


tuined.— 37. coast of Hos». 

Tiicalor, meo drach, 3 m. Metre, verse. 

ineadarach,** a. Like, or pert.iuisg te a bicker, 
2 Ausatel, asa biexer. 3 In verse or rhymes. 

meadarachd, s f, Metre, vers-. É 

meadaraich,** v.n. Versify, modulate. 

meaduran, -ain, -an, s.m. vim. of meadar. 
tle cireular wooden dish. 

méad-bhronn, see inevd-bhronn, 

niea dn, s.m. Methartin, mead, 

meadh, st see m dà. 

imeadiüac.hb, -ich, s.m. stalsion. 

-————-—, &. [i'uddled witn meat. 2 Lite 
mead. 3 Of, or belonging to, m.ad. 4 Abouud- 
ing in mead. 

meadhach.(AF)s. see mei !h-e»ch, 

meadhachan,** -ain, 52. Force. 

meadhaica, v.a. see modbien. 

meadhail,-ean, sf Mirth, joy, eestasy. 2 
Company. 3** Carousal. 4 Uncommon aud 
unaccountabie burst of joy on the eve of get- 
ting some distressing uews. 5**Memory. 6'* 
Belly, paunch. Cha robn m. mhór riamh 
gun dubh-bhron "na dé dh, there never was om 
extravugani burst of joy without ajXicting news 
in its iram. 

meadhail,** see m-azha!aich, 

meadnai:each,** a. Carousing. 
ouse, 





Lit- 


2 Prone to car- 


meadhair, -e, -ean, see meaghar.. 


meadhal, see meaghal. 

meadhar,1]-air, s.f. Memory. 

——-——ach,** qa. Cheerful, lively, glad, festive. 
Brataichean m., cheerful banners. 

meadharachd,** s. f. ind. Cheerfulness, liveli- 
ness, giadness, festiveness. 

meadh-bhlàth, -bhliithe, a. Lukewarm. Do 
bhrieh gu 'm bheil thu m., because you are 
lukewaran. A 

meadh-bhlathachadh,** -aidh, 3. m. Warming, 
making lukewarm. 

meadh-bhlathaich, pr. pt. a’? meadh-bhlàthach- 
adu, v.a. Make lukewarm. : 

mea lh-duach,$ s. Fever few—matricavia parthee 
Wi iv. 





515. Meadh-duach. 


meadhlachd, see meadbradh. 

meadhlaich, see meaghalaich. b 

meadhon, -oin, -an, s.m. Middle, centre. midst. 
2 The waist. 3 Mean, means. 4 Medium. 5 
Average. Dean meadhonan, strike an qv?- 
rug? ` vitheadh mo chaomhaich ai; am m. mo 
chairdean,let my loved ones be giad in *he centre 
of my frienls, ; am m. nan iom, in the midst 
of the hilis ; "a ihéarr iomall a’ phailteis na 
teis-mea lhon na gainne, the border of plenty 
is beiter than the centre of raut; ma d' mii., 
about your waist ; smuain.icheadh e alr 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOf 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGH 


=< 











meadhon 


EE I eener ere 
moa lhonaibh, let him devise means. 

meadhona, 

meadhonan, lant Means. 

meadhonach, -aiche. &. Intermediate, central. 
2 Indifferent, mildlinz, tolerable, 3 Instru- 
mental. Àite gu mith m., a prety central 
situation ; ciamar tha thu ? meadhonach, how 
are you ? middhng well, ina middiing state. 

tneadhonacn. -aich, s.m. Middle state, in point 
of situation or health. 

mealhonachd, s./.1n/. Mediocrity, intermedi- 
ateness. 2 Instruimentality. 

meadhonail, a. Internal. 

meadhonaireachd, s.f..nd. Interposition, medi- 
ation. 

meadhonan,” -ain, An. s. m. Medium, average. 
2 n.pl.of meadhon. Dean m., strike à me- 
dium. 

meadhon-aoiseach, a. Mediæval. 

meadhon-aomach,** -aiche, a. see m.-aomachd- 
ail. 

meadhon-aomachdail, e, a. Centripetal, 

meadhon-aosda, a. Middle-aged, 

meadhon-là, s.m. Mid-day. noon. Fad an déidh 
mh., long past mid-day; roimh mh., «n the fore- 


noon. 

meadhon-làthach, -aiche, a. Meridian. 

meadhon-oidhche, s.m. Midnight, Mu mh., 
about midnight, at midnight. 

meadhon-sheachuach, -aiche, a. Centrifugal. 

meadhrach, -aiche, a. Glad, joyful. 2 Festive. 
hospitable. 3 Pleasant, lively, cheerful. 4 
*Lustful, merry. 

meadbrachadh, -aidh, s. m. & pr. pt. see meor- 
achadh. 

meadhrachas, -ais, s.m. Gladness, joyfulness, 
cheerfulness, 2* Lust. 

meadhrachdail, see meadhrach. 

meadhrachdas, see meadhrachas, 

meadhradh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m, Deceiving, de- 
ception, alluring. 2 Gladness, joy, ecstasy. 
8 Sport, festivity. 4°*Ravishment. 5° Lust. 
C’ arson a bhios tu air do mh. ? why wilt thou 
be ravished ? 

meadhraich, v.n. see meoraich. 

meag, see mei». 

¢meng,*® s.m. The earth. 

mag, -èig or -éig, see meòg. 

méagach, -&iche, see meogach, 

mea-ad, see meig. 

meaxadan, (AF) s. Snipe, see gobhar-adhar. 

meagail, see meig. 

meagail, see meogach. 

meazhail,(AC) s. Expression. M. a gniis, the 
expression of her countenance. 

meaghairn,** s. Joy. 

meaghal, -ail, a.m. Barking of a dog. 2 Mee: 
of a cat. 3(AC) Bleating of a lamb, 4 Alarm. 

meaghalaich, v. Bleat, 

————  —-.—, $.f. Continued barking. 2 Mew- 
ing ofa cat. 3 Bleating. Thóisich e air m., 
he began to mew. 

Meaghar, Air, 3.m. Sport, mirth, festivity. 2 
Speech, talk, 3**Cheerfulness. 4**Prettiness. 
5**Pomp. 6 see meamnhair. 

meagh-bhlàth, -àithe, see meadh-bhlàth. 

Meagh-bhlathachadh, $. m, see meadh-bhlàth- 
achadh. 

meagh-bhlathaich, v.a. see meadh-bhlathaich. 

meazhlach, -aiche, @. Barkiag. 2 Mewiug. 
Alarming. 4 Glad, joyful. 

meaghlachd, ¢.f.ind. Alarm, giving an alarm. 2 
Barking. 3**Gialness, joyfulness. 

meaghrach, see meadhrach. 

meaghradh, -aidh, see meadhradh. 

mémrle, see mèirle. 


meal, pr. pe. a’ mealtuinn & a’ mealadh, v. a. 


3 



















meal] 


Possess. £ Enjoy. 8**Suffer, brook. Gu'm 
m.'s gu'n caith thu e!may you enjoy and 
wear it /—said to a person who wears any new 
garment for the first time, and considered 
unlucky if first said to the wearer by a female, 
na 'n na mheal thu e ! may you mver enjoy it I 
— never liv» to wear it, In Arran, meal do 
naidheachd, I congratulate you, is the seb 
phrase for congratulating a bride and bride- 
groom on their home-coming: chuir e m.-à- 
naidheachd air, he congratulated him ; chwi? 
EE orra, he congratulatJd 
them. 

meal,(DU) Gairloch tor mil. 

meala, gen.sing. of mil. 

meala,** s.m. Reproach, grief. 

mealach, Suth'd. gen.sing. of mil. 

mealach, -aiche, a. Honied, sweet. 2 Abound- 
ing 1n honey. 3 Of, or like, honey. 4 Dispos- 
ed to enjoy, brook or bear  Snotbach m., the 
sweet sap of trees ; gu m. céireach, abounding 
in honey and waz ; io phog mhear mb., thy 
wanton homed kiss T 


mealadh, -aidb, s.m. & pr.pt. of meal, see meal- 


tunna. 
mealag, s.f. Belly, protuberances. —Sár-Qidir, 
, see mealg. 
ach, -aiche, à. see mealgach, 
achadh, -aidh, see mealgach 
mealaich, s. Broom, see bealaidh, 
mealaidh, s.m. Reaper 











mealaidn, Skye for bealaidh. 


mealaunan, 3.pl, Sweetmeats, 
mealasg,-aisg, -an, &.m. Flattery 
Great rejoicing. 3**Cajoling. 4 


joy. 
ach, -aiche, a. Flattering, fawning. 
Rejoicing greatly. 3**Cajoling. 
mealbh, see mealbhag. 


fawning. 9 
Clamorous 





x 


mealbhac,* -aic, see m»^al-bhuo. 


mealbhag, -aig, -an, 8. f. Corn-poppy, see meil- 
bheag. 2**Satchel, knapsack, budget. 
ach, -aiche, see meilbhea-ach. 


mealbhan,(CR) s.m. Stretch of sand dunes with 


sea-bent growing on them— W. of Ross-shire. < 
Sea-bent— Easter Ross & Suth’d. 
meal-bhuc, $ -uic, -an, &./. Melon—cucumis melo. 
— —ach, -aiche, -aiche, o Abounding in 
melons. 2 Like, of, or belonging to, a melon. 
meal-bhucag,*® -aig, s.f. Little melon, 
weal-bhuean, -ain, 8./. see meal-bhuc. 
-——ach, -aiche, see meal-bhucach. 
mealcair, s.f. Hasty pudding. 
mealg, meilg & -a,-an, s.f. Milt of a fish. 
ach, -aiche, à. Having much miit (of fish.) 
2**Like milt. 











3 Adipose. 4 Abounding ia 





achadh, -aidh, s.m. Spawning. 

meall, pl. -an & mill, s. m. Lump, mass of any 
matter, 2 Heap, as of earth, hill, eminence, 
great shapeless bill, mound. 3 Knob, boss, 
4 Bunch, cluster. 5 (DC) Shower (properly 
meall-uisge)— Uist. 6(DMy) The croop. Am 
mullach nam m., at the top of the heights, 
th» height of passion; m. luaidhe, a lump oF 
lead ; m. fhigean, a bunch of figs ; m. a chal- 
pa, th» calf of the leg ; ceathach mu na meall- 
aibh, mist around the hills. 

meall, pr.pt. a’ mealladh, v.a. Deceive, beguile, 
defraud, cheat. 2 Entice. 3 Disappoince. 
Mur am m. thu 'nam bharail mi, unless yore 
deceive me in my opinion, c’ arson à mh. tht 
mi ? why hast thou beguiled m» ? mh, onu mi, 
you deceivel me ; mh. e staigh mi, he enticcd 
me into the house ; mh. an nathair Eubh, the 
serpent bequiled Eve; meallaidh gach neul à 
dhali-shuil, every cloud deceives his dim eye. 


Ah meallach 


"ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in lumps, heaps, 
or clusters. 2 Knobby, bossy. 3 Hilly,abound- 
ing in hilis or eminences. 4 Lumpish, round- 
ish. 6** Soft. 6** Fat, rich, 7** Rank. 8 
** Alluring, 9 (DC) Showery—Uist. —10** 
Knotty, 

mealladh, -aidh, s.m. Deceiving, act of deceiv- 
ing, cheating, beguiling. 2 Enticing. 3 Dis- 
appointing. 4**Allurement, deceit, delusion. 
5**Goods, riches. 6 Deception. A’ m—, pr. 
pt. of meall. Mur ’eil mi air mo mh., if I am 
not mistaken ; bithidh m. ann, there will be 
disappointment. : 

moalladh-duüil,(WC) s.m. Disappointment. 

mealladh-naidheachd,( WC) s.m. Good wishes. 
meallaidh, fut. aff. a. of meall. 

meallain, gen, sing, & n. pl. of meallan. 

~————ich,(MS) v.n. Hail. 

meallair, see mealltair. 

meallan, -ain, -an, s.m. dim. of meall. Little 
lump, knob, knot, heap. 2 Knoll, little hill. 

e 3 Bulb. 4 Cluster. lachan meallain, bo. 
stones ; meallain-chruinne, gourds. 

ach, -aiche, «4. Abounding in small 
lumps, heaps, knobs or clusters: 2 Knotty, 
knobby, lumpy. 3 In hillocks or eminences. 
4 Of, or like hail. Sian mh., a Aail-storm, 

meallanaich, Tt v.a. Kern. 

meallan-criona,(WC) s.pl. Chilblains. 

meall-an-sgórnain, s.m. Adam's apple. 

meallan-tachais, pl. -&in-th-, s.m. Chilblain. 

Wa fut. pass, of meall. Shall be ,deceived, 

e. 

meall-reum,(CR) s. m. Pyrosis, water-brash— 
Gairloch. 

meall-sgriobhadh, s.m. Forgery. 

meall-shuil, -ula, -uilean, s.f. Full, round eye. 
2 Winning or alluriug eye. 3 Gogyle-eye. 4 
Leering eye. 

-—each, -eiche, @. Having full round 
eyes. 2 Having EST or alluring eyes. 3 
Leering. 4* Goggle-eyed. 5*Having a deceiv- 
ing eye. 

mealita, a. & past pt. of meall. Deceitful,fraud- 
ulent, false. 2 Deceived, cheated, beguiled, 
3 Enticed. 4 Mistaken. Tha thu m., you are 
misinken ; gu m., falsely. 

measitach, -wiche, a. Fraudulent, deceitful, 
false, deceiving, deceptive. 2 Alluring. Meilh- 
dhean m., /@/se weights ; gn m., deceitfully. 

mealltachd, s.fiind. Deceitiulness, imposition, 
imposture, fraud, swindling. 2(M3) Attract- 
tiveness, 

mealltair, -ean, s.m. Deceiver, cheat, swindler, 
fraudulent person, sharper, impostor,  2** 
Biter. 














-eachd, s.f.iad. Fraudulence, deceitful- 
ness, imposition, imposture, 2 Habit of de- 
ceiving or cheating. M. a’ pheacaidh, the 
deceitfulness of Sum ` luchd-m., deceivers, swin- 
ders; m. mna, the deceitsulness of woman. 

meal-maig,(AF) see mial-mhag—badenoch. 

meal-mhaàgain, see miai-mhàgain — Badenoch. 
inealodach, s.m. Melitot. 

mealtag.(AF) s.f. Bat. (ialtag.) ) 

inealtuiun, s.m. Enjoying, act of enjoying, en- 
joyment, possessing. A’ m—, pr.pt. of meal. 
Math a mh. 'na shaothair, to enjoy good in his 
labour. 

Tmeam, v.a. & s.m. Kiss. 

meamanach, -aiche, see meanmnach. 

meambran, -ana, s.m. Parchment. 

Meamhair, -ean, s.f. Memory, rem»mbrance,fa- 
culty of memory. 2 Memorandum. Faigh 
air do mheamhair, get by rote ; gleus do mh., 
excite your memory. ! 

nealnhair, V.a. see meamhraich. 


640 


meanbh-chuileag 


meamhlach, see meabhalach. 

meambhrach, -aiche, a. Mindful, having a good 
memory. 2 Meditating, pensive. 3 Geutle. 

—,** -aich, s.m. Record, register. 

meamhrachadh, -aidh, s.m. Meditating, act of 
meditating or pondering. 2 Recollecting, ac’ 
of recollecting. 3 Stuly, remembrance. A? 
m—, pr.pt. of meamhraich. 

meéamhrachan, -ain, s.m. Memorandum, record, 
miuutes, 2 Note-book. 

meamhraich, pr.pt. a’ meamhrachadh, v.a. Re- 
member, recollect. 2 Consider, meditate, 
ponder, think. 3 Mention, put in mind. 4 
Schema, plot. 5 Note, commit to memory. 

— —— e, 8.. rder. 

te, past pt. Remembered. 2 Men- 

tioned, considered of. 

meamhran,** -ain, s.m. Membrane. 2 Regis- 
ter. 3 Memorandum. 

——ach,** .aich, s.m. Memorandum, me- 
morial. 2 Note-book. 3 Record. 4 Minutes. 
meamna, see meanmna. . 

———ch, see meanmnach. 

meamnachair, see meanbh-chrodh. 

meamnachd, see meanmna. . 

meamnadh, see meanmna. 

meamnag,if s.f. Amorous woman. 

meamnaich, oo see meanmnaich. 

meamra,** -ai, s.m. Shrine, tomb. 

meamram,** s.m. Vellum, parchment. 

mean, -a, @ see meanbh. 

meanach, see mionach, 

meanachair, s.m, see meanbh-chrodh. 2 (DMy) 
Smallness. | 

meanad, -aid, s. f. Smallness, minuteness, de- 
gree of smallness. 

meanadh, -ailh, s.m. see manadh. 
3 see minidh. Tha thu ‘cur meanaidh orm, 
you provoke me— n. 

méanach,** -aidh, s.m. Gaping, yawning. ` 

meanaidh, see minidh. 

meanaigean,** s.pl. Mittens, gloves. 

meanalach, see mionalach. 

mèanan, -ain, -an, s.m. Yawn, gape. 

meanan, -2in, -an, s.m. Sawdust, dung of sie 
goats, deer or doves, 2t+Anything quite 
M. còinnich, a species of scented wild herb. 

fmeanan, a. Plain, clear. 

meananach, -aiche, a. Abounding in, or like 
saw-dust. 2 Of, or resembling the dung of 
sheep, goats or deer. 4 d 

méananach, -aiche, o Yawning, gaping, given 
to yawning or gaping. 

meananach, -aich, s.m. Manikin, dwarfish per- 
son, 

méananaieh, -e, $.f. Ostitation, continued gap- 
ing. ’S ann ort tha a’ mhéananaich ! how you 
do yawn ! thóisich e air mh., he began to 


qn. 
Mi inta -a, @, Little, small, diminutive. 2 
Pulverized. 3 Pigmy. Lusan m., little herbs; 
a chog:vih ris an iarmad mn, to fight with the 
pigmy rice. l 
məanbhach:l, s.find. Smalluess, minuteness. 
meanbhacha,(MS) s.f. 'renuity. 
meanbhad, s. Smaiiness. 
m2anhhaich (MS) v.a. Bedwarf. 
meanbhaidh,* @ see meanbn. 
meanbh-bheathach, s.m. Auimalcule. 
mae PORE) CE BORN yen Á 
meanbh-bhiastag, s.f. Insect, vermin. 
meanbh- bhithi- ean d see meanbh-bheathach. 
meanbh-chrodh, -chruidh, s. Sheep or goats, (lit. 
smal! cattle. > ^ 
meanbh-chruimh, s. Mite, cheese-mi*e. 
meaubh-chuileag, -eig, -an, s.f. Midge, gnat. 
M. shamhruidh, the summer gnact. 

















Is aw hw > 


D 


UPM TS 


A 3: 7 D 
ut vow b ^ 
- t 


T 


M 


Kid? 


hn E. 


e 
4 
D 








meanbh-chuileagach 


meanbh-chuileagach, -aiche, d. Abounding in 
midges or gnats, 

meaubh-chüis, -ean, s.f. Trifling matter. 2 
Parsimony, stinginess. 

—each, -eiche, a. Trifling, unimpor- 
tant. 2 Curious, prying. 3 Parsimonious. 

meanbh-eachdraidh, s.pl. Annals. 

meanbh-fhraoch, 8.m. Young growth after the 
old heather has been burnt.—Colonsay. 

meanbh-ghàir, s.m. Ridicule, derision. 

——each, -eiche, a. Ridiculing, deri- 











ding. 
meanbh-ghairdean, $.m. Armlet. 
meanbh-ghuireanach,(MS) a. Miliary. 
meanbh-ghuireanan,(MS) sm. Miliary fever. 
meanbhlach, -aich, s.f.coll. Dross, refuse, frag- 
ments, 2* Small potatoes, or the refuse of 
Such. 3ttHerd of small beasts. 
meanbh-pheasar, -srach & -air, s.m. Millet seed, 
millet plant — Bible. 
meanbh-reic,** v. Retail. 
eadair,** s.m. Retailer. 
meanbh-righ,**il-rean, s.m Petty king. 
meanbb-spréidh, e, s. see meanbh-chrodh. 
meandanach,** -aich, $.m. Mendicant. 
meang, A & -ing, -an, s. f. Craft, deceit, guile. 
2 Blemish, want, fault.  3**Deformity. 4** 
Branch. 5ttKnob. Gun mh., faultless. with- 
out blemish ; mo charaid gun mh., my guile- 
| less friend. 
meang, -eing, s.m. prov. for méag, Whey. 
meang, v.a. Lop, or cut off branches. 
meangach, -aiche, @ Branche, of or belonging 
to a branch. 2 That lops off branches. 3 see 
| meangail. 
|. meangach,$ -aich, sf. Common cinquefoil—po- 
tentilla reptans. 
meangach,tt s.m. Branches lopped off. 
meangadh, -aidh, s.m. Lopping, pruning or cut- 
‘ting off of branches. 2 Act of cutting or lop- 
ping off. A’ m—, pr.pt. of meang. 
meangail, -e, &. Crafty, deceitful, cunning. 2 
Blemished, full of blemishes, faulty. Gu m., 
deceitfully. 
meangalachd, s.f.ind. Decsitfulness, 2 Fault- 
iness, blemishment.  3**Sprouting, budding. 
meangan, -ain, pl. -an & -ain, s.m. Branch,twig, 
bough. 2[fTooth or fork of a trident. 
meanyauach, -aiche,a. Branchy, having branch- 
es or boughs, 2 Of, or belonging to, a branch. 
meanganaich, see meang, v. 
meangan-Muire,§ s.m. Alpine lady's mantle, 
see trusgan. 
meanglan, ain, pl. -an, 8.m. see meangan, 2 
Creeper (bird), see snaigear. 
meanglanach, -aiche, a. see meanganach, 
meangianachd, $,f.ind. Branchiness. 
meanglanaich, v.a. Shorten. 2 Burgeon, 
meanglanaiche,(MS) s.m. Brancher. 
meangta, past pt. of mzang. Lopped, cut off, 
as branches. 
mamua, see meanmna. 
- , see meanmnach. 
meamnaich, see meanmnaich. 
 uieanmainn, Suth'd. for meanmna, 
meanmainueach, -eiche, a. see meanmnach, 
meanmann, -ainn, see meanmna, 2 see mean- 
mhuiun. 
meanmarach,** .aiche, o Spirited. 
. tineanmaradh, -aidh, s.m. Thought. 
.meanmhuinn, s. Titillation of the nose, an 
omen of a stranger's arrival, or of good news. 
. tmeanmlaige,** s.f. Dulness. 2 Laziness. 3 
. Weakness, 
meanmna, $.m.in?. Courage, magnanimity. 2 
Spirit, pride, mettle. 3 Bolduess, bravery. 4 
Strength. 5 Joy, gladness. 6 Will, desire, 





641 


meannt-gharaidh 


wantonness, 7 Imagination, fancy.  8* Sez- 
sation about the lip or elbow, supposed to por- 
tend sudden death. 8 Mettlesomeness. 10 
Whim. 11**Animal spirits. 12 Titillation of 
the nostril, which, when felt, ís su to 
portend the arrival or sight of a relation or 
acquaintance. Lion m. sinn uile, proud joy 
filed us £s ` 
— ch, -aiche, a, Courageous, magnani- 
mous, 2 High-spirited, proud. 3 Prancing, 
mettlesom», of a horse. 4 Bold, brave 
strong. 5 Joyful, glad. 6 Wanton, lustful. 
7** Violent. A’ beueaich gu m., roaring vio- 
lently ; en o m., strong Pa : 
, ** -aidh,s.m. eering, inspirit- 
ing. 2 Exhortation. 
meanmnaich,** oo Cheer, inspirit, exhort. 2 
Regale. 
meaumuin,** s.f. Gladness, joy. 
—neach, a. Joyful, glad. 
meann, minn, s.m. Kid. 2 Young roe. 3 Goat. 
4** rarely Rib. Da dheagh mheann, twe good 
kids ; ceann?a' mhinn, the kid's head. | » - 
3 Fa- 











meann,** a. Dumb, 2 Clear, manifest. 
mous, 
meannach, -aiche, &. Abounding in kids or 


young roes, 2 Like a kid. 
mh., kid-producing Mav. 

meannad,** -aid, s.m. Place, room. 

meaanan, -ain, pl. -ain & -an, ga dm, Little 
kid. 2 Young kid. 3 Little goat. 4 rarely 
Rib. Ionaltair do mheannain, ford thy kids. 

meannanach, -aiche, @. Of, or abountiag ia 
young kids. 2 Like a young kid, 3 Frisky. 

meannanachd,** s.f. Friskiness. - 

meannan-athair, -ain-, -an-, s.m. Snipe, see 
gobhar-athair. 

meannanaich,(AC) s. Bleating like a kid, ap- 
plied to the snipe. | 

meann-bhoc, -bhuic, s.m. Year-old he-goat. 

meann-choinneach, s.m. Kid's moss. 

meannd, see meannt, 

meann-earba,(Al) s.m. Fawn. 

meann-mhara,(AF) s.m. Whale. 

pine haa i s.f. Happiness, bliss. 2 Good 
uck. 

meannt, -a, s.m. Mint, cartal. 2 Spearmint. 

meann » -aiche, a. Abounding in mint. 

meannt-an-arbhair,{ s.m. QCorn-niui -mata 
arvensis, 


A’ Bhealltuinn 








516. Meannt-an-arbhair. 517. Meannt-zich. 
meannt-an-uisge,ff s.m. Water-mint. 
meanntas § -ais, s.m. Garden-mint, see meannt- 

ghàraidh, 2**Spearmint. ` 
meannt-choille,$ s.m, Horse-mint, see meannt- 

eich. 
meannt-eich,§ s.m. Horse-mint—mentha sylves- 
tris. 
meannt-findkaich pk 
meannt-fiadbain, ' } see meannt-eich. 


‘meannt-gharaidh,} a.m. Garden-mint, spearmaas 


meannt-gharaidh 


-— 








518. Meannt-gharaidh, 

—mentha viridis. 

meanntachd.** st Happiness, bliss. 
luck. (** gives meanntrachd.] 

meantail,** s.f. Deceit. 

meantairig, v. Gaelic form of venture. 

meanntalach,** a. Deceitful, 

meantalachd,*® sr Perfidy. 

meantan,** .ain, s.m. Snipe, see gobhar-athair. 

meapaid,(WO) s.f. Mop for tarring. 

mear, A & meire, a. Merry, joyful. 2 Sport- 
ive, playful. 3 Wanton. 4 poetically Incited, 
keen, enraged. 5 Lustful. 6**Apish. 7** 
Buxom. SI Aeitated, in quick motion. 9** 
Sudden or quick in motion. 10(MS) Airy. 11 

! (MS)Comical. 12 Very joyful, in high glee. 

. Lestilibh m., with lustful eyes ; éisteadh a 
bhantrach mh., let the wanten widow listen ; 
bha sibh m., ye were merry. 

méar, -eoir, 8.m. see meur. 

mearachadh, -aidh, s.m. Perishing from expos- 
ure. A’ m-—, pr.pt. of mearaich. Chaidh a 
mh. air a’ mhonaidh, he perished from expos- 
ure on the hill—a common occurence in snow- 
storms— Caithness. 

mearachas,tt -ais, s.m. Mirth. 

mearachasach, see mearcasach. 

mearachd, -an, s.f. Error, mistake, fault. 2 
Wrong, injustice. 3 Aberration. 4 Over- 
sight. 5 Merriness. Chaidh thu am m., you 
have gone wrong ; tha thu am m., you are mis- 

| taken; mur'eil mi am m., if I am not mistak- 

' en; cotha gun mh. ? who is faultless? na h- 
abair mu choinneamh an aingil gu'm bu mh, 
e, say not before the angel that it was an error; 
m.-céill, madness, an error of judgment ; m. 
is laigsinn, error and weakness. 

mearachdach, -aiche, &. Wrong, erroneous, in- 
correct. 2 Improper. 3 Culpable, faulty. 4 
Wrong, unjust. 5 Misleading, false. Barail 
mh., an erroneous opinion; a’ deanamh na 
meidhe m., falsifying the balances. 

mearachdachadh, -aidh, s.m. Mistaking, act of 
mistaking, erring or missing. A’ m—, pr. pt. 
mearachidaich. 

mearachdachd,* s.f.ind. Erroneousness, faulti- 
ness. 2 Culpability. 

mearachdaich, pr.pt. a’ mearachdachadh, v. a. 
Mistake. 2 Miss. 8 Err. 4 Go wrong. 5 
Put wrong. 

mearachdas, -ais, -an, s.m. Merriment, hilarity, 
mirth. 2 Error, mistake. 3 Liability to mis- 
take. 4 Wantonness, indelicate romping, 
nearly wanton joy. 

mearachdasach, -aiche, @ Wanton. 2: Fond 
of sport or amusement, merry. 

¢mearadh,** -aidh, s.m. Affliction. 

mearadh-loisgeach, D ve Phosphorus—4 r- 

mearadh-sionachain, ran. 


2 Good 


mearagan, -ain, an, s.m. Puppet. 2 Automa- 


ton. 
mearagan, see meuragan. 


042 


mearsadb 


mearaich, pr. pt. a’ mearachadh, v. see mear- 
achdaich. 2 DMK) Perish from exposure. 

mearaiche, -an, ¢m, Merry-andürew, droll. 
Merry fellow. 3**Mountebank, 4**Fool. 

mearaichiun, -e, s. f. Madness, insanity, 2 
Drunkenness. 3 Giddiness. | 

mear-aithne, sf. Slight acquaintance of a per- 
son. 





mearal, ail, an, 8.m. prov. for mearachd. 2. 


**Disappointment. M. na h-aoise, the dotage 
of old «ge, 
mearalachadh, 8. m. 
pointing, erring. 
mearalachd,** s.f. Disappointment. 
mearal:dh, s.m. Disappointment. 
mearalaich,** v. Disappoint. 2 Put wrong. 
m.aran,-ain,-an, 8. m. Madness, delirium, 
brain-sickness. 2 Drunkenness. 3 Lascivi- 
ousness. 
mèaran, -ain, -an, 8.m. see meuran. 


Disappointment, disap- 


2 Error. 


mearanach, a. Delirious, mad, insane, brain- 
ish, brain-sick. 2 Drunk. 3 Lascivious. 4 
(MS)Hypochondriacal. 


mearanachd, see mearan. 

mearan-céille, sr, Light-headedness. 

mearanta, a. t*Mirthful. 2 see mearanach. 

mearbh, Ray co. for meanbh. 

mea‘ bhadh, -aidh, sm. Lie, fiction. 

mearbhal,** -ail, am, Mistake, 2 Random. 

fmearc,** .a, $.f. Merchandise, wares, goods, 

mearcach, -aiche, @. Rash, confident, head- 
strong. 

mearcachas, -ais, s.m. Rashness, confidence. 

mear-caiteach, o, see mearganta. An ti? ro òrd» 
ail mh, far am bheil na daoine coire, the or. 
derly lively land, where the honest kind men 
ave— Filidh, 21. 

mearcantas,11 -ais, s.m. Sportiveness. 

mearcasach, -aiche, a. Proud, elate, boastful. 2 
Active,nimble,vigorous—Sàr-Obair. 3tt Rash. 
4łtWanton. 


mearchall (AC) s. Death-loss (of cattle, &c.) 


mearchann, 8. see mear-chinn. 

mear-cheannach,** a. Insane. 
headed. 

mear-chinn,** s.m. Insanity, delirium. 2 Gid- 
diness, 

mear-chunnt, v. a. Miscalculate. 2 Cheat by 
misreckoning. 

mear-chunntadh, -aidh, 8.m.see mear-chunntas, 

mear-chunntas, -ais, s. m. Miscounting, mis 
calculation, misreckoning. 

mear-dhàn, o Foolhardy. 
—achd, sf. see mear-dhanadas. 
mear-dhànadas, -ais, s.m. Fool-hardiness. 
meardradh, s.m. Metre, crambo.—Sár-Obair. 
meargadaich, v.n. Be impatient. 
mearganta, -ainte, a. Brisk, lively, sportive. 9 
Obstinate. 3 Wanton. 
like wanton rams. 

meargantachd, s. f.ind, Briskness, liveliness, 
sportiveness. 2**Obstinateness, 

mearg intas, -ais, s.m. Same meanings as mesar- 
gau tachd. 

mear-ghràdh, -aidh, s. m. Fondness, excess of 
love, wauton fondness. 

——-—ach, -aiche, @. 
wanton. Gu m., wantonly. 

méarla, see méirle. 

mearlach, -aich, see mèirleach. 

mearlag $ age, $.f. Scale-fern. 

mearmainn, see meanmua, 

mear-macuusach, -aicae, @ Wanton, full of 

Gaelic form of 


2 Giddy, Debt, 





sport or pleasure, 

mears, pr.pt. A mearsadh, v.a. 
march, 

mearsadh, -aidb, s.m. Marching. A’ m—, pr. t. 





SA 


Mar réitheachan M., 


Fond, amorous, ` 


mèarsadh 


of méirs, see wàrsadh. ! 
mearsuinn,-e, 8.f. Strength, constitution. 
‘* DPurableness. 
` emmer. -aiche, d. 
Durable. 27 Perpetual. 
mèarsail, s.m. see marsa.th. 
——-——, Q. Stately iu gait. 
'mearsal, -ail, s.m, see màrsadh, 
suear-sbaillt,* y. Nitrous. 
mear-shal, -ail, s.m. Brina. 
mear-shalainneach, d. Nitrous. 
Inear-shalann,*-ainn, s.m. Nicre, salbpetre. 
imnear-shalann-gintinn, s.m, Nitrogen. 
mearsuinn, see niarsaian, 
——-— —each, à. see marsainneach. 
*meart,** s.m. Garment. AU 
tnearbuinn,(A H) s.f. Cold-resisting quality ina 


Qs 


Hardy, strong. - 





man. 
meartuinneach,(AW) a. Enduring extreme cold 
without any iil-effeets, 
#meas,(AF) s.m. Fish, aa mon. 
meas, s.m. Measure. 2 Rod to measure graves. 
3 Weapon. 4 Poiut, edge. 5 Pair of shears. 
6 Wind. 7 Foster-ciild. 
meas, A. An, s.m. Fruit. 2 Acorn, 
craobh, the fruit of the trees. 
meas, s.m.ind. Resp ct, regard, esteem, 2 Re- 
utation, fam», 3 Opinion, judgment, vala- 
ing, estimate, appraisement. 4 Conczit, 
fancy. 5 Act of valuing or appraising. 6*?ub- 
lie notice. Lem. is miadh, with respect and 
esteem ; thoir gu m., bring to notice ; cha ro^h 
m. aig’ air Cain, he had no respect for Cain ; 
tha m. aig’ air-fhéin (or dneth-fréin) he has 
& good conceit of him.elf; cha d'thug mi m. 
freagairt air, I did not give him the honour of 
a reply ; mu chail am :., about the loss of his 
fame, repuiasion ; a réir do maeas, according 
to your reputation ; m. nan taizhean, the ap- 
praisement, valuation or esti mate of the houses; 
gun mh., gun mhiadh, mar Mnanus, wthore 
respect or approbation, like Magnis ; i3 beaz 
m. à bh’ agad-- a air,yon dig ln østre ned hin. 
meas, pr.pt.a’ mea-:adh & a’ m2as, v.a. n. Con- 
sider, think, judge, suppose. 2 Attribate, im- 
pute. 3 Value, appraise, estimate, reckon, 
weigh,calculate. 4 Esteem, deem, regard, rəs- 
ect. 5 Presume. 6** Lay a tax or rate on. 
easar an t-ama'lan fhéia "oa dhuine ele 
nuair a bhios e ‘na thosd, even d roo m; b? 
reckoned a wis» man while he holds his tm ju? ; 
mh. iad am bàrr 's na taiznean, they apprais- 
ed,or valued the crop and s‘vatinys ; tha m: a’ 
m., I regard, esteem; na measaibh, do not 
think, do not suppose. 
measa, see miosa, 
measach, -aiche, d. 
fruits. 12 Fishy. 
measad, -aid, see miosad. 
measadair, -ean, s.m. Appraiser, valuer, valua- 
tor. 
measadaireachd, s.f.ind. Business of appraising 
or valuing, employment of an avpraiser. 
measadh, -aidh, s.m. Considering, act of con- 
sidering, thinking. 2 Reckouiag, judging, 
valuing. A'mc-, pr.pt. of meas. 
measag,** -aig, s.f. Acorn. 
measaidh, fut. aff. a. of meas. 
measail, e, a. Respectable, worthy. 2 Estima- 
ble, esteemed, respected, valued. Duine m., 
a respectable individval ; m. aig uaislibh is ìs- 
| pon. respected by high and low ; gum., reput- 
ably. 
measain, gen.sing. of measan. 
measair, (DMy) pr.»t. a’ measradh, v.a. Churn. 
M. am barr, churn the cream. 
measair, -rach, -raichean, s. /. Dish, moasur2 


M. nana 


Fruitful, abounding in 


Dit 


NTERNE 


i e | 
i i 
P į a Y. 
] EM 
aol i kj 
i Re h 


643 
(mias,) 2 Tub, measure. 


measeacha 


3 Measure of a 
4 of meal. 5** Apprais- 


pow luor-flask or belt. 
HAF) Milk-dish. 


er, 6 Weiznt or meas ire, 
8 Just wegnt or m ` asure. 
measairicn,** v.a. M.asure. 
m-a-alachd, s.f.ind. fospectibilitv, merit, dg: 
nity. 2 State of beinz respected. 
mzasà3,-ain, s. m. Lao-dog. 2 Littla dog. 3 
Pert or forward person, ** puopy "' 
m2asanach, -aiche, a. Puopyish, forward, pert. 
m.asauacad, s f. forward or petulaueé eoi t to. 
m»sa4s-4n-tuirc-alita,$ s. m. Marsh Si. John's 
wort (lif. wild hog’s fruit—so ca!led from 
its smell when bruised —Aynericum odes. 





512. Mvas-an-tuirc-a’lta. 520.M°as-in-tuire-coille, 

m2as-an-buirc-coide,§ sm Commun tnbsan, or 
sweet amber—hynericin amdzos emuim—one 
of the mest baaatifal of the St. Jos worss, 
growing from Ross-shire southwards; anl fair- 
ly frequent iu 4ArayU. 

measar, fuf.pass, of mas. 

msasa“, -a/r, s.m. see miosar. 

Measara, see MensarTa, 

measarich,-si:ho, @ Having measures. 2 A- 
bounding ia measures. (also miosarach.) 

measarac id, see measarricad, 

imeasaradh, see Measirra. 

measar tha, @ see mea arra. 

measarra, d Temperate, sober, moderate, reae 
sonavle, 2 Fragal. 3 Modest. 4 Coutineut. 
Uime sin, bithioh m., therefore be sober. 

measarrachd, s. f. inl. Temperance, sovriety, 
moderation, moderateness, fraga!ity. 2 Uon- 
tinence. Am m., in m-deration, 

measarradh, see measarra. 

meas-chaor,** -chaoir, s.m. Plummet. 2 Sound- 
ing-iine. 

BETEN -chraoibh, -chraobhan, s.f. Fruit- 
ree. 

meas-chruimh,** s. Canker. 

mea:-chruinneachadh. -aidh, s.m. Gathering of 
fruit. 2 Gathering of acorns. 

meas-chruiunich,** pr. pt. a’ meas-chruinneach- 
adh, v.a. Gather fruit. 2 Gather acorus. 3 
Gather corn. 

Meas-chu, -choin. s.m, See measan. 

ueas-chuilean, -ein, -an, s$. m. Young lap-dog, 
little lap-dog. 

measg, (am m-asz) s. Among, amongst, ia 
the midst. Am measg bheanntan fàsail, a- 
mony desert mountains ; am measg tamhaisg ‘w 
shluaigh, amidst the spectres of his people ; am 
measg ua strì, in the midst of the battle ;’aar 
measg-ne, among us; 'nam measg, amony them; 
nur measg-ne, among yov. 

measg, GO. pr. pt. a’ measgadh, Mingle, mix, 
stir about, move. Mharohia feòil, mheasg i 
a fuil, she hath killed her beasts, she hath min- 
gled her blood. 

measgach, see measg. 

measgachadh, -aidh, s.m. d' pr.pt. of measgaich. 
Maine meanings as measgadh, 

maasgachd, SL, Misceilaneousness. 


moeasgadh 
measgadh, -aidh, s.m. Mixing, act of mixing or 
mingling, stirring about. 2 Mixture. A' m -, 
pr.pf. of measg, 

m 'asga.lh-litrcaeh, s.m. Monozram, 

measgaich, v.d. Same meanings as measg. 

measeaichte, see measgta, 

measgain,(A€) s. Miscellaneous articles, 

measgan, -ain, -an, s.m. Dish usel to hold but- 
ter, butter-crock. ?11Mash. 3**Butterwort. 

measgnachadh, soe measgadh. 

measgnadh, -aidh, see measgadh. 

measgnaich, v.a, Same meanings as measg. 2 
**Copulate. 

measgnaichte, see measgta. 

meas-ghort, -ghoirt, an, s. m. Fruit-garden, 
orchard. 

measgte, past pt. of measg., Mixed, mingled. 

measra, see measarra, 

measrach, gen.sing. of measair. 

—— —— —Adh. -aith, 8. m. Thinking, act of 
thinking, judging, supposing. 2 Thought, 
design. 3 Act of rendering temperate or mod- 
erate. 4 State of becoming moderate. 5(MS 
Apprehension. 6 Conception. ' m—, pr. 
mt. of mea«sraich. 

measrachail,(MS) a. Apprehensible, 

measradh, see measarra. 

—— ——— —/(DMy) -ailh, s.m. The quantity of 
cream or butter in the churn at any given 
time. A’ m—, pr.pt. of measair. Am bheil m. 
agad an diugh ? hav» you a churning to-day ? 
tha i a m., she is churning. 

measraich, pr.pt. a measrachadh, va. Think, 
judge, suppose, 2 Temper, moderate, sober. 
3 Become sober, temperate or moderate, 4 
Conceive. 

eau, n.pl. of measair. 

te, past pt. of measraich. Tempered, 
sobered, become temperate. 

meas-tnirc-allta, see msas-an-tuire-allta. 

meas-tuirc-caol,$ see moas-an-tuirc-coille. 

meata, œ. Fesble. 2 Soft, cowardly, timid, 
faint-hearted. 3** Distrustful, Sìol m., a 
timid race ; cha bhuadhiich am m. gu bràth, 
the chicken-hearied shall never comquer, or 
prosper. 

meatach, -aiche, o see meata. 

meatachadh, -aidh, s.m. Enfeebling, act of en- 
feebling, debilitating or terrifying. 2 State of 
becoming weak, faint, soft or cowardly, dis- 
piriting, growing timid. 3* Benumbing, 
daunting, damping the spirits. 4*Starving 
with cold. A’ m—, pr.pt. of meataich. Thug 
sin m, mór as, that daunted him greatly. 

meatachd, s find. Cowardice, timidity, faint- 
heartedness. 2 Feebleness. 3**Dismay. 4** 
Hinderance. 5*Delicacy of feeling or senti- 
ment. Sheas Fionn air leirg gun mh., F. 
stood on a declivity undauntedly. 

meatag, -aig, -an, see miotag. ‘ 

——ach, -aiche, see miotagach. 

aich, see miotaga ch. 

— —-———aichte, see miotagaichte, 

moataich, pr.pt. 2’ meatachadh, v.g. & n. En- 
feeble, terrify, make feeble. 2 Make spiritless. 
3 Grow effeminate. 4 Become feeble, weak, 
effeminate or fearful. 5 Daunt, damp the 
spirits. 6H Be afraid or terrified. 7 Starve 
with cold, benumb. Mbh. siod gu mór e, that 
daunted him greatly ; ua meataicheadh gart 
a' ehuain sibh, let not the threatening aspect of 
tie sea terrify you. 

meatailt, see miotailt. 

— —— —-.each, see miotailteach. 

mèath, -a,@ Oily. 2 Fat, rich. 
rich sgoil. 


e———— 








Talamh m., 


eu 











meath-thinneas 


sumption. 8**Effeminacy, A’ m—, pr. pt. of 
meath. Nah-alltaichean a! fas, agus na h- 
aibhnichean ai m., the burns increasing ant 
the rivers fail/ng—a proverb applied to the 
growth of new families and the decay of old 
ones ; a’ toirt m. dhòmh-sa, taunting m». 

meath, pr.»*, a^ meath, pa ta Move with pity, 
affect. 2 Discourage, dishearten, 3 Intimni-« 
date, make timil. 4 Decay, wither, fade. 5 
Become weak, soft, effeminate or timid, 6 *# 
Die. 7 see meat- aich. Mh, a’ chraobh, the 
tree faded ; mh. i gach cridhe, she softened 
every heart, or she damped every spirit. 

meath, a. seo meathach. ` 

moathaeh, -aíehe, @ Affecting, causing pity. 2 
Discouraging, dishearteni ig. 3 Decaying. 4 
Perishabie. 6 Causing decay or languor. 6 
Mild, soft, tender. 7 Despon lent. 8 Meek, 
soft-hearted, 9 Cansing efteiminacy. 

meathach, -aich, s.m. Weakly, efominate or dis- 
heartened person. 2 Degenerate person. 3 
Pespondent person, 4 Teuder, excoriat^d part 
of the skin. 

adn, -aidh, &.m. & pr.pf. of meathaich, 

see meathadh, 





meathieuan, -ain, s.m. Effeminate or cowardly 


person, 
Glutton. 

meathadh, -aidh, s. m. Affecting. 2 Causing of 
pity. 3 Discoura^ing, act of discouraging, or 
damving the spirits. 4 State of becoming cim- 
id or weak. b State of withering, decaying 
fading or failing, 6 Shrinking, degener. 
ting, desponding,despondency. 7*flaunt.jaer, 
gibo. 8 Act of moving, as with fits. 2 Efem. 
inacy  A'mc-, pres. part. of meath. Cha 
ruiz thu leas a bhi toirt meathaidh dhomh-sa, 
yo neel not taunt me. 

meathaich, v.a. € n. see meath. 

————-—te, past pt. of meathaich. Affected, 
softened, moved with pity. 2 Discouraged, 
disheartened, 3 Withered, decayed. 4 Be- 
come weak or timid. 

mea'hanas,** ais, s.m. Consumption. 

mea‘has,** -ais, s.m. Fat, fatness. 2 Effemin- 


2tt Deeayiag or fading man,  3** 


acy. 
meath-challtuinn, s.m. Southernwood, old man 
—artem'sia abrotanum. Sometimes used in- 
steal of hops in the preparation of malt 
liquors, 
meth-chiridhe, -chridheachan, s.m, Faintness of 
heart, cowardice, timidity. 2**Faint-heart. 
meadh-chrilheach, -eiche, o Faint-hearted, 
cowardly, timid, effeminate. Tha sith 'gam 
fnàzail m., peace renders me effeminate. 
meath-chridheachd, s.f. see meath-chridhe. 
meath-enrith, -e, s.f. Trembling from fear or 
cowardice, 
meath-chrom,** v. Crouch. 
meath-ghaire, an, SP, Smile. 
in Gairloch -CR.) 
meath-ghalar, e Disease, Is treasa deagh- 
àrach na m., good nurture overcomes disease. 
mea. h-ionnsuidh, e, -ean, s. f. Feeble attempt 
or attack, feeble onset, 2 Spiritless invasion. 
Thug e m. air, he feebly atlemonted it. 


{meath-gaire 


Meathiachalh, -aidh, see meathadh. à 


meathlaich, see meathaich. 2ttsee meilich. 

—— ——-.— te, see meathaichte. 

meath leighbixeach, a. Autiseptic. 

meat h-oidheirp, -e, -ean, s.f, Feeble attempt. 

meath-oidneirpeach, -eiche, aq. Making a fee- 
ble attempt. 2 Irresolute. 3 Unenteryprising. 

meathras,** ais, s.m. Fat, grease. 

meath-shüil, -shüla, -ean, s.f. Blear-eye. 

meath-shüileach, -aiche, a. Blear-eyed. 


meath, -à, &m. Decay, failing, fading. 2 Con-| meath-thinneas, -eis, -an, &. m. Consumption. 


D 


TRE Asta E IE 


e " 
L^ SM UT ras 


CA 


Si 
y 








meath-thinneas 


Lë 
wasiing disease, 2**Debilitating sickness. 
meath-thogar,** -air, s.m. Faint invlinailon. 2 
Indifference. 
meath-thograch, -aiche, a. Indiferent, having 
but a faint desire, lukewarm. 
m-ath-thogradh, -aidh. -can, s.m. Faint inclin- 
ation or desire, indifference, lukewarmness. 

meaihusradh,(AF) s. Fatlings, 
meatrag, see meathras. 
Inviceinn, -ean, s.m. see meacan. 


tmeide, sf. The neck. 


fmi each, -2ich, see meidh-each. 

meideal, -eil, sm. Gaelic spelling of mda’. 

4ineidealach, -aicn, s.m. Large knife. 2 Lea- 
tner hinge of a flai!. 

m idh.(DU) pr.pt. a’ ineidheadh, v. a. Prune, 
e ^ar of twigs. 

m-idh,-e,-ean, s.f. Balance, beam for w?:g'l- 
ing, scale. 2 Weight, measure. 3 Stem, 
stock, truuk, 4 The sign Libra (œ) in the 
zoliac. Is fhèarr guth na m., a word is bet- 
ter than a balan-e—a dubh-fhaca!. The mean- 
ing probably is, that the voice of a powerful 
frien! is of more yalue than strict impartial- 
ity. In his first editiou, Maciatosh gives the 
wotd meith pand his translation is, better 
speak than/o. rig.t -—N.G.P ; anns na meidh- 
ibh, tn the balances, 


meidh, a see meath, 


meidh-àile, s.f. Barometer, 2 Anemometer. 3 
Thermometer. 4 Thermoscope. 

meidh-allach, see meitheallach. 

na>idh-chothrom,** s.f. Balance. 


-$meidhe, see meidh 3. 


meidh-each, -eich, s.m. Stallion, 

meidheach, -eiche, a. Of, or belonging to, beams 
or balances. 2 Like a scale or balance. 3** 
Having scales, weights, measures or balances. 

metdheach, --icho, a. see meathach. 

midheachadi, -aidh, s.m., Weigning. act of 
weighing. A'moc, pr.pt. of meidhica. 

moidheadtair, -2, -ean, sn. Weigher. 2 Steel- 
yard, instrument for weighivg. 3 Balancer. 

me dneadn, -i!h, see meidhsachadh., 

meidhean, s.n. Favour, influence. 

meéidhich, pr.p'. a mei lheachadh, v.a. Weigh, 
balance, weiga with scales or ba'ances, 

mei lhicheau, see meidninnean, 

meidbichte, past pt. of .meidhich. 
balanced. 

me dnin, see meadhon. 

nieblhiunean, s. pl. ‘The hip-joints. 2 The back 
side of the hip below the smail of the back. 
As na meidhinnean, the hip-joint dislocated. 

meilhis,* s.f. Instalment. 2 Part, measure, 
Phaizh sinn air mheidhisean e, we paid it by 
instalments; a’ cheud mh., the first instalment; 
'na mheidnisean, by instalments. 

meidhisich,* v.n. Graduate. 

ineilhlich, see meaghalaich. 

mei lil, -ean, $.f. Medlar-tree. 

m ilileach, -eiche, a. Of, or abounding in med- 
lars. 2 Belonging to a medlar. 

meig,* s. f. Protuberant chin. 2 Snout of a 
goat. 

meig, s.m. Voice, ery. 2(CR) Sign of life. Cha’n 
Ge n, ann, he shows no sign of life—W. of 

oss. 

me g, -e, -ean, prow: of meidhinnean. 

PDA, -eid, -an, s.. The bleat of a goat or 
Kid. 

meigeadaich, er Continued bleating of a goat 
or Kid. Lem. fann, with faint bleating. 

m-ige&lan (AF s.m. Goat. 2 Kil. 

meigeall, pr. nt. a; meigeallaich, v.n. Bleat, as 
a goat or kid 

meig2all, am Mewing, caterwauling. 


Weighed, 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


645 


meilreag 


;meigeallaci,** a, Bleating, as a goat. 
: meigeallaich.s.f. Bleatinz, as of a goat. A’ m—, 
pr.pt. of mrizeall. 
meigean, prov. for meidhiunean, 
meigeardaich,* see me'gea.iaich. 
meigeil,* see meigeall, 
meizh. -ean, s.f. see meilh. 2 Part of a hand 
fishing-line, see under dorgh. 
m»igheach,-eiche, see meidheach. 
m:izhch, see meidhich. 
meighlich, see mèilich, 
meil, pr.pt. a’ mèilich, v.n. 
lambs. 
mèij, -ean, s.f. Bleating of sheep or lambs. 
meil, pr.pt. a’ meilich, v.a, Grind, as corn, pul- 
verize. Meileadh mo bhean do'neaeh eile, l: 
my wife qrinil to another ; a chaile air a meii- 
ealh, the chalk pulv-rized, 
Meiluhe g, -2 g an, $.f. Poppy - papaver rheus. 





Bleat as sheep or 


e 





521. Meilise. 
meilhh»agach, -aiche, a. Ab sun ling in poppies. 


meile, AC) s. Sweetness. M.abvhi’nam aod- 
ann, sweetness bein my face. 

meilcein, see milcein. 

meilecheart, s f. Chilblain—A rgyll. 

me^ild-ar, Ap, -an, see meiltear. 

meildidh,(CR) see meildreach. 

mj'dir, see meildreach. 

meildreach, ich, -ean, s.m. Quantity of grain 
sent to be ground, grist, multure. 2 Food, 
provison—SwutA'd. 

meile, -an, Sp. The stick by which a quern is 
turned, mill-staff. 2 Quern. hand-mill. SA 
F) Sheep. 4**Jaw-boue. 5**Pestle. 

meileach,** a. Of. or belonging to a quern, 2 
Like à quern. 3 Apt to faint with cold. 


meileach,(DC) s.m. Meal ground very fine. 2 
Thi». spindle-shanked child. 
m ileachadh, -aidh, s.m. Fainting with cold, 2 


Grinding with a quern. 3*"Reproachiog. A’ 
m—, pr.pt, of meilich, 
meileachd,* s. f. ind. Multure. 
abuse, 
meilea/lair, see meiltear. 
meileadh, -eidh, s.m. Grinding, act of grinding 
very fine, as corn. A’ m—, vr.pt. of meil., In 
Uist ordinary meal is said to be “air a 
bhleith,” fine meal, ** air a mheileadh.” 
me.leadaireachd, see meiltearach 1. 
méileadh, s.m. Bleating, as of sheep. 
meileag, see beileag. 
| meilean, -ein, -an, s.m. Hasty pudding. 
meilearach,§ -aich, s. m. Sea-inaram, sea-mat- 
weed, see muirineach. 
meileartan,* s.pl. Flesn mites, generally under 
the toes. 2 Arran for meille-charcan. 
Tmeilg, s m, Death. 2 Pod. 3 Milk. 
meilg (DU) sf. Milt of a fish. [In Gairloch 
both mealg and meilg are used as nom. | 
,Meiigeag, see meiligeag. 


2 Reproach, 





Tnm Im ME 
E- ké x " | 


UNIV 


ELE - g; rof 
4 p Pi 
WEP he! LLE d Lia A 

E| EN D A Fi Te "n Ng Lr P o> 

A Mi Lj CA d FA^ L H H Mar e i ki 1 


méilich 





6:6 — 


2irdreach, 





mèilich, e Gi Bloating, act of b'eating, as | mèinn, -e, sf. Ore, 2 Mine, 3 Voin of metal. 4 


sheop or lau, 2*Q9uerulonsness. A’ —, pr. 
mt, of mèil, M. nan caor» eh, the bleating of 
the sheep ; m. mhaoth, Soft vivatind. 

méilich, v. Bleut, as sheep or goats. sea mèil. | 

m^ilich, v.a. da. Cnill, benumb, 2 Become 
faint fron cold, become chiled. 

mei'ch, 8. Hollow, Gun mheili 'he/an? gn 
to'cean, without hollows or howes—Beinn Do- 
Tran. 

mailigeag, -eiz,-an, s.f. The husk of pease, or 
of any leguminous vegetable. 

mizeagach, -aiche. a H ving husks or pods. 
2 Like husks or pods. A’ pheasair inb., (he 
podded pets. 

mailigir, s. Mill 

moiliunich, see meile. 

meilis, see milis. 

m ilise, s. f. Hedge-mustard, bank-cress—sis- 
ymbriam officinale, | [illust. on p. 615.] 

méiil, -e, -can, s. f. Chsek. 2 Mill-c.anper. 3 
Biubber-lip. 4**zdiot. [meill in W. of Ross 
—CR weill in Lochcarron—DMK.) 

méilleach, -ciche, a. Having large or swollen 
caeeks, pouch-moutned, 2 Blubver-lipped. 
tt gives m iileach.] 

mé ileachadh,** s.n. Nambness. 

méiileadna, -idh, sm. Luciung, iucitement. 
i$ .courazement. 

meileag, -eiz, s. f. Bridle-bit. 2 Blubber-lip. 
3 Blubber-iipped female. 

méilleaz, -eig, -an, s.f. Outer rind of bark. 2 
oBar& of tne birch-tree. 

méilicazach, -aiche,a. blnbber-lipped. 2 Of, or 
pertaiaiag to, bluober lips. 3 Having povat- 
i^g lips. 

nieill awu,** -ein, s.m. Diam», reproach. 

mé liear, -ir, -An, ssm. Biibber-lisped person. 

o ile-e'artan, -ain, $. f. Cailbiais, izching in 
the sole of the foot. 

maille-enraosach,(MsS) a, Pouch-mouthed. 

meillg,** s,f. Rind. 2 Pod. 

tmeilliach, s.f. The globe. 

aixilliceach, -eiche, a. see meilleagach. 

meillicean, -ein, an, s.5*.' Blubber-lipped per- 
son, one with pouting lips. 

meil.iceir, seo meillicean. 

mailen (MS) v.a. Pouch, pocket. 

weilt,*” e, s./. Grinding, mastication, chewing. 
2 Hurling, casting. 3 Consuming. 4 Friction, 

meilte, past pt. of meil Ground, as grain. Gra 
A., Ground grain. 

meiltear, -ir, pl. -teirean, s. m. Grinder, miller, 
hand-mill grinder. 

m^ilsearachd,** s.f.in, Grinding, business of 
a mier. 2 Hantlni l grinding. 

wəiltir, -treach -trichean, s.f. see meildreach. 

m :ltreach, -eicho, a. Sinvosh, level, plain. 

in. iltrichean, pl, of meiltir. 

meia, -e- s.f. see mòian, & mèinneach. 

meineabhag, -aig, s.f. Fomdunz, caressing. 

ach, -aiche, a Foadliug, earossiug 

given to fondling, 2 Affection rte. 

— aich,-e, see meinzabhag. 

mèinneach, -eiche, a. see mèinneil, 

meinear, -eire, «. see mèinneil. 

l;éiuear, s. mèinnear. 

lngmealacad, see mèinaealachd. 

meinojll, see meinacil. 

uinich, Gairioch £ Lochbroom for meilich (b.- 
coine numb.) 

Me Diche, comp. of meinneach. 

meivigoag, see meuiligeag. 

i sulgsan, spl. Gloves, mittens. 

Lil, S.f. see Mean mua. 

weinmeach, -eiche, a. see meanmnach., 

Liclüm.un, e, See meauninüa. 


2 











A 
ws 


Miad, desire, inclination, disposition, whether 
good or bid. 5 Native qnatity or energy. 6 
lov^fondaess. 7 Disererion, ciemsney,  8* 
9 mxXpression. 10**Air, il Mien. 12**dLercy, 
13** Kindness. 14**fenderness, 1 
Is don’ a’ mh. ath’ ori, your ezpreasion of 
countenance does not hetoken anything gooi; 
cia mór a mhb, ! how majestic his countenance! 
fay 'na mh. féin e, leave it to his own diser». 
tion ; duine air 'fnàgail ga mh. fhéin, a man 
left to his own prudence ; thia e 'nad mh. fhéin, 
it 18 left to your own clemency ; am m. na 
gaoithe, to the mercy of the wind; talamh a 
bheir barr 0 à mh.fhéin,land that proces erops 
of its own maiive energy ` to mù., with the pure 
pose of, having a mind to; m. airgid, silver 
ore ; 2 a silv?r mine ; m. iaruinn, iron ore; 2 - 
an iron mine. ! 
me:nn-Z&thiopach, s.f. Aithiop’s metal. 
méinn-aite, -an, s.m. Miue. 
ineinne, see mann. — 
mèinneach, -eicas, a. see mèinneil. 2 Having a 
good mien. 3 Airy. 


Meinizacu, ëmt, Mercy, pity. 2 Discreetness, 
3 Fondu^:s, NIIT 
inéinveadair, -ean, s. m. Miner. 2 Miaeral- 


ogist, student of ores, 
——— — —»aend, s. f. Occupation of a miaer, 
mining. 2 Mineralogy. 
meinuerircud, s.f.ind. Goodness of disposition, 
amirbieness. 2 Kindoess. 3 Discretion. 4 
traccab lity. 5 Fiexibilivy, dactiiity, as of 
metal,  6**lenderness.  7**'Foudness, 8** 
Affab.eness. 9 Mofiness, as of leather, grass 
or tallow. 10*Pcoductive quality. : 
mèinnear, -eir, s.m. Mineral, 2 Miner. 3 Mian- 
eralogist, 
— ——ach,** -aivhe, o Min. ra'ozical. 
—— — ci, -aich, s.m. Mineralogist. 2 Miner. 
mè naearachd,** s f. Mining, 2 Mineralogy, 
meinneil, e, @ Mineral, abounding in ore or 
mines. 2 Substantial. 3 Sappy. 4 Flexible, 
ductile, 5 (MS) Piacid. 6 Productive, pro- 
liic, as a female. 7 Native. 8 Valuabie, de- 
sirible. 9[twWell-lisposed, 10t} Affable,kind. 
—üffDiserseo, prudsat. 12 ffTractab:e. 13 
**.ouder, atfvc iouate, merefal,pitifal, fond. 
mé‘nuire, s.m. Mine-sieve, 
me.auueach |, sce méinneadaireachd, 
'uéeiuneadair, -ean, sin. Miner, 2 Mineralogis6. 
——eacid, sf.ind. Mineralogy, business - 
of 4 m'neralogist, 2 OGeenvation oi a miner. 
ms;nu--0:83, -ais «7» Mineralogy. 
mòi im-theazacg, see mèran-eòlas. 
Hreirsh, -e, sy. Sour or weak driak. 
usech, -3, a. Sleador, stim, delicate, slight. 
Mille, feeble, spiritless. 3 **3low, tedious 
in. irba3, pr.pt. a meirbneada, v.g. En. Digest, 
concoct la the sho wai. 
mirohe, x. fred. steaderuess, delicacy of forn, 
2 siiliness, feebleness, vw Aen, 3**Deull- 
esi, slowness, bodiodsaass ttiie, 5 Spitiee ` 
lessa ess. 
m irbhe, comp. of meirvh. 
ucivoüh-a |, -eid, s. f. Mleudorness, dezree uf 
siend-raess. 2 Silliness, de ree of siliaess, 
9 Feocbi2uess. 
m irbheadh, idh, s.t, Dig:stion, process of 
di csiion. AT m—, pr.p. of meirbh. 
arurohco&u. (AU) -sia, s.m. LDnligosiuoa. 
tm sirceann,** -iin, s.m. l'iagor. 
meire, seo UG, A 
werc can, DU) s.m. Siem of various kinds of 
tangis Waen pared, tas sium is eaten by 
ch Liran, wao cousiler it & EI 
| 12 -irdreach, -civh, -cau, sf, Concu»ine,courte- 


Or iai di Wom i 
LU / | ' y = H g | T Y CO FIL iW | € 


URBANA-CHAM 


PAIGN 
LE X 





meirdreach 


gan, harlot. ` 
as, ais, s.m, Concubinage, 








fornica- 
tion. 

mcire, see mire. 

meireal, (MN) s.m. Brine, 

meirealaoh, MS) æ. Brackish, briny. 

moiroan, -ein & -e, see mearan, 

— -na:a-mia&zh, s.m, Agrimony, 

meirg, s.f. prov. for mairg. 

moirg, -e, 8./. Rust. 

meirg, v.a., & n. Rust, become rusty. 2 Cause 
to rust or corrode, 

tmeirge, see meirghe. 2 Sign, signal. 

meirgeach, -eiche, a. Rusty, covered with rust. 
2 Cadaverous, ill-tempered, as a person, 3 
Having banners. 4 Ot, or belonging to, a 
banner. 

—— —— —Aadh, s.m. £ pr.pt. see meirgeadh. 

meirgeachd,(MS) s./, Rust. 

meirgeadh, -eidh, s.m. Rusting, state of becom- 
ing rusty. 2 Rust, 3 Act of causing to rust. 
A’ m—, vr.pt. of meirg. ! 

meirgeal,"* eil, s.m. Cadaverous person. 2 
Part of crann-nan-gad, No. 20, p. 263. 

meirgeall,** -ill, s.m. Roughness, ruggedness, 

meirghe, -an, s. f. Banner, standard, flag, pen- 
non, 2 Band, troop, company. 3**Pair of 
colours or flags. 

meirgheach, -eiche, a. Having banners or flags. 
2 Like a banner orflag. 3 [n companies or 
troops. 4 Having many troops. 

meirgich, see meirg. 

meirgichte, see meirgte, 

meirgneach, -eiche, a. see meirgeach, 

meirgneachadh, -aidh, s.m. & pr. pt. of meirg- 





nich, see meirgeadh. 
meirgnich, v, see meirg & meirgich. 
——————te, see meirgte. 
meirgte, past pt. of meirg. Rusted, covered 


with rust. Olaidheamh m., @ rusted sword, 
meirin, see mearan, 
each, see mearanach. 
mèirle, s./.in/. Theft. 2 Thieving, act or ha- 
bit of stealing. 3 Thing stolen. 








. mèirleach, -ich, s.m. Thief, robber, 2**Rogue. 
3**Rebel. 

-AS, -al3, Em see mèirle. 2"*Treason 
rebellion, 





-d, see meirle. 


méirleadh, s.m. see meirle. 
méirneal, oi, -aa, s.m. Merlin—/a/co csalon. 
2(AL) Falcon, 





592. Méirneal. 
meirse,** et Smaliage, fine. 
¢meirtneach.** a. Feeble. 2 Fatigued, 
f:meis, a. Bad. wicked. 
mèi, gen.sing. of mias, 
¢meis-cheol, -chiüil, s.m, Singing, modulation, 
mueic. i 


meidt? ef- Burst, 


A 


647 


meògaohd seenen 

meisd, -e, comp. of ole. see misde, 

mel«de,**s.f. Deterioration. A’ dol am m., grow» 
ing wores and worse. 

méise, g^n.sin.j. of mias. 

méisean,** -ein, m. Little plate, 

ineisg, -e, &.f. see misg. 

each, see misgeach, 

ear, -eir, -eirean, see misgear. 

eireachd, see misgearachd. 

meisimean, (for misimeau dearg) ¢.m. Bog-mint, 
gee cairteal, y 

meislean,** ein, s.m. Mastlin, 

mvisneach, see misneach. 

meisnich, see misnich, 

meite,(DMC) a. Weak, frail, 2 Imbecile. 

meiteal,(DMC) a. Proud, boasting (moiteil.) 

meiteal, -eil, s.m. Metal. 2 Mettie, hardness, 
strength of body or mind. 3 Courage, stuff. 

—— ——uach, see meitealtach. 

— — —a&ch4,( MS) s.f. Dwarfishness, 











2(DMO) 

Weakness, 3(DMC) Imbecility. 
tach, -aiche, @ Metallic. 2 Mettled, 
hardy, spirited, enduring, strong. 3**Keen, 


smart, made of good stuff, 

meith, v.a. £ n. see meath. 

mèith, -e, @ Fat, greasy, oily. 2 Fat, corpu- 
lent. 3 Sappy, rich, as soil. 4**Soft, timid, 
Mias mh. an t-sagairt, the priest’s fat mess. 

méitheachd,"* s.f. Fatness. 2 Softness, 3 Ti- 
midity. 

meithealach, -aich, s.m. Fatling. 2 Nursling. 

: ——4, s.f.ind. Oiliness. 2 Fatness, cor- 
pulency. 3 Sappiness, richness, as of soil. 

méitheallach,(AF) s.m. Fat cattle. 

meithean $ -ein, 8.0. Sea-rush—juncus mariti- 
mus & acutus. 








524, Meithean. 


625. Meòir Moire. 
mèitheas, -eis, see meithealachd. 
méitheil, -e, a. see mèith. 
tmeithle, s.pl. Reapers, 
meithleachadh,(MS) s.m. Algor. 


2 Crowds, concourse. 


meithlich, v. see meilich, 

ineithreas,** ém. Kitchen stuff. 2 Fatness, 

tmelg, s. Death. 

——, see meilg. 

melis,(DMu) a. Suth'd for milis. ` 

meó-bhlàth, -àithe, æ. see meadh-bhlàth, 

——achadh, see meadh-bhlathachadh. 

— aich, see meadh-bhtathaich. 

meódar, s.m. Luxuriaut pasture. 

meòg, -edig eg, s.m. Whey. (mrang in some 
AU RS Gen. sing. in N. Aryyllis miz— 
AH. 

meògach, -aiche, a. Of whey, like whey, serous. 

— 1, MSY uf) Retrostty. 








meózatl 


meo«ail, -e, &. see meògach. | 

meoghail, -e, s.f. Mirth, joy, jollity. 2 Medley, 
mixture. 8 Company, mixed company. 
eoxhair, -e, sf. see meamhair. 
ail. 


meoghlach,** g. Mixed, confused, in a medley 


meorhrach, -aiche, o see meadhrach. 
ineoiun,(AW) e Cat. 
meòir, gen.sing. d n.pl. of meur. 


meoir Moire,$ s.n. Kidney vetch, lady's fingers 


—anthyliis vulneria. 
meomhair, see meamhair. 
—each, -eiche, o see meamhrach. 
—eachadh, -ailh, see meamhrachadh. 
meomhairi h, see meamhraich. 
meòmhrachadh, -aidh, see meamhrachadh. - 
meomhrachan, see meamhrachan. 

m ómhraich, see m»amhraica. 

micorach, -aiche, d. see meaimhrach. 

adh, -aidh, s. m. & pr. pt. see meamh- 
rachadh. 

meoracuan, see meamhrachan. 

meoragan, see meuran. 

meora.ch, v. see meamhraich. 

meoran, see meuran. 

medranach, -aich, see meamhranach. 

mevthal,** au, s.m. Help. 

Tmer,] s.m. Madinan. 


mere, jam Blackbird, see lon-dubh. 


DU. 525 on p. 647. ] 











merg, 
mersgirra,(AF) s. Angler-fish —Caithness. 
ineuchd, sf. Mixture, mass or compound form- 
ed by mixing— Dàin 1. Ghobha. 
meud, s.m.ind. Greatness, largeness, degree of 
greatmess or largeness, dimension, extent, 
quantity, stature, size, bulk. 2 Degree, mea - 
sure, extent. 3 coll. AS many as, magnitude, 
number, quantity. 
M. an taighe, the size of the house ; air mh. 
's gu 'm bheil e, let him (or it) be ever so 
great; mu 'n mh. ud, about yon size; m. do 
ghàirdean, the greatness of thy arm; in. a 
bhróin, the magnitude of his grief; ciod e a 
mh. ? what is his stature (or tts size) £ ; m. a’ 
ghoirtein, the size of the field ; co mh. a th’ 
ann ? how many are there? agus a’ mh. 's a 
bhean ris, leiguis e iad and as many as touch- 
ed him, he healed them ; a mh. 's a tha làthair, 
Qs many as are present, Aas many as are alive, 
Or surviving; a mh. agus gu ’n d’ rinn thu 
sin, maymuch as you have done that: co m 
a fhuair thu P what quantity did you got? a 
dol am m., growing wn size, s'ature or extent. 
meudachadh, -aidh, s.m. Luercasiag, act ot in- 
creasivg, eulargiug, or making larger. 2 
State of becoming larger or greater. 3 In- 
crease, augmentation, adding, addition. 4* 
Growth. A’ mo, pr.p!. of meudaich. 
meudachail, -e, a Intensitive, 2 Metric. 
tucudachd, $./.«nd. Bulk, size, magutitutde,;reat- 
Ness, dimension, 2 Stature. 3 increase. Ls 
ionghnadh leam à mh., / am surprised at its 
dimviusions , dnne de nih. mhoit, @ man of 
great size or stature, agus thainig losa air 
azaidh am m., and Jesus increased in stature. 
mvudaich, pr pt. a meudachadh, v.a. dn in- 
crease, multiply,cause Lo increase. z Enlarge, 
become larger, grow in size, improve. 3 
Abound. 4 Add to, augment. Meudaichidh 
mi do dhoilgheas, J wedi militply thy soriow; 
meudawhidh tu a luach, thou shalt. increase 
¿è s$ price; am fear pach m. an càra, gu m 
meudaich e a’ chroich, he that will not acd 
(a Stone) tothe cairn, may he add to the diy- 
niiy of the ua'lows ; faran do mh. am peac- 
adh gu ro mhóa mh. gràs, where sin abound- 
ed grace did much more abound. 


2 see meagh- 


618 meurandachd 
OS  meurandach 


meudaicheam, Ist. sing. imp. of meudaich. Let 
me increase. 

meudaicnear, fut.pass. of meudaich. 

meudaichte, past pt. of meu:laich. Increased, 
augiuieuted, enlarged, 2**Advanced. à 

meud-bhronn, s.f. The dropsy. [Preceded by 
the art, a'.] z**Pregaaney. Theasd e leis ai 
mh., he died of the dropsv. 

E ach, -aicne, a. Dropsical. 2 Swag- 
bellied. i 


meudmhor, Sr o. Ample. 
meudrach, æ. Metrical. 
meudradh, s.m. Metre. 
mug, see meòg, méig & mize, 
meugich, see m-óg.ch, 
meuyail, see meògach. 
meugar,** s.m. Serous, 
meuuan, see mèanan. 
ach, see méauanach. 
aich, see meananaich., 
meunaich, see meanaich. 
meunanda, see meuranda, 
meur, -eòir, pl. -eòir, sm. F iager. 2 Toe, 3 
Branch, bough. 4 Branch of a family, kin- 
dred, clan. 5 Branch of a river. 6 Prong. 
/* Knot in wood. 8 Slight degree. Tham 
an sagart a mh., the priest dipped his finger ; 
na casan agus am meoir,the feet and their toes; 
meur a’ dene oe the prong of the fork: m. de 
'n teaghlach sin, a branch of that family ; tha 
meòir 's an fhiodh, the wood is knotty; m. de mm 
chaitheimh, @ slight degree of consumption ; 
m. a' ghiomaich, the lobsier’s claw ; ged nach 
rachadh clach ceann a’ mheòir an aghaidh na 
gaoithe, though one could not send a stone a 
nail’s breadth against the wind; am m. meadh- 
oin, the maddle finger. ( 
meurach, -aiche, a. Fingered, 2 Branche, 3 
Pronged. 4*Knotty, full of knots or bumps. 
5**Nimble-fingered. 
adh, -aidh, s. m. 
















Act of fingering. 2 


Growing into branches, putting forth of 
branches, 3** Pawing. A’ m—, pr. pt. of 
meuraich. 


meurachd prov. for méarachd. 

meura'lan,* Ain, s. m. Delicate, slender, weak 
person. 

-—ach, -aiche, a. Delicate, 











—achi,* s.f. Conduct of a delicate per- 
son, 2 Eating or dealing with gently. 
mcurag, -alg, -au, 8. f. dim. of meur. Small. 
finger, z Small clew or ball of yarn. 3 Tuft 
of wool, prov. 4t1Small pebble. 
- ach, -aiche, o Abounding in small 
clews or tufts of wool. 2 Abounding iù small 
pebbles. 





aich, ng see meuraich. 
-=— an, ain, pl. -ain & -an, s m. 
handling 2 Little thimble. 
anaich, see meuraich. 
meuraibh, dat.pl. of meur. 
uieuraicü, pr pt. a’ meurachadh, v.a. 


Fingering. 





Handle, 


finger. 2*Fiıdget. 3**Branch. 

———— te, pasl pt. of meuraich. Fingered. 
Landled. 2 Braucbed.- 

meuran, -ain, pl. -ain & an, $. m. Thimble 
2 Little branch. 3 Small finger. 4 (DMO 


Piece of cioth sewn in the form of the finger 
of a glove and worn as such. 
meuràiu-a'-biais,(DMK) s. m. 
coast of Ross. 
ach, iche, qa. Of, or belonging to, 
thimbtes, 2 Like a thimble. 8 Full of thim- 
bles. 4 Dranchy. 
—— —-48, -aiude, a. Weakly, delicate, tender, 
2. T VTIBV. à 
— ——-daehd, $.f.ind. Weakliness, delicatenesa 


Foxglove— West 


[] 


ae werd 








Auf, 


4 - 


TUE 
p Ér > 
e Lagti eL læ Aapan 


= 


E 


du. a d 


» 


vil 


^ 


meurandaehd 


—————————— 4 F z 

tenderness. 2 Silliness of person. 
gnouran-na-mnà-sith, see lus-nam-ban-sith. 
— — —- -nan-cuilleachan-marbua, €. M. Fox- 


glove, see lus-nam-ban-sith. 





see lus-u&m-ban-:ith. 
-sith,§ s.m. F'ox-glove, 
«ith. 


meuranta,* e Delicate. 
Ü ed, ** sf. 
2 Silliness of person. 
meurlag.$ et Polypody, see clach-raineach. 
mh For woris besinning with ma, see un- 
H der m. 
mhàin. (for a whain) ads. Only, 


see lus-nam-ban- 








alone. Is tus’ 


a mhàin Iehobhah, thou a'on? art Jehovah ; 


cuan esina mhàin, that vs nut all. 


mhan, see a bhan. 


mneuil (for a mheud) adv. Inasmuch, forasmuch. ` 


Mnoire ! int. By Mary ! e mmon form of «ssev- 
eration, Air Moire ! by Mary ! 

tmi, s.f. Mouth. 

mi, pref. neg. Indicating the opposite of, or the 
want of, the quality expressed by the word to 
which it is prefixed, equivalent to the lùng- 

Jan, in-, un-. as ciall, reason ; mi-chiall, folly. 
*sometimes ib signifies kl, the worst. 

mi, pers. pron. l, me. Emphatic, wise, mi- 

fngin (prov. mai-fhin) myself. Ls mi, itis 4; 
bithidh mi, i shall be. 

when used immediately after bu and cha, as 

cha mhi, i£ is not [.] ! 
mi-auairt, -ean, sf Mis-sayi'g. 

miabhadh, -aidh, s.m. Chagrin. 

miabhall, -e, @. see mij-Lhàigh-il. 

miabhalachd, s.f. see m -biiiguealachd. 

miabha!as, -ais, $.. See mi-bhà ghealichd. 

miabhan,** -ain, s.m, Megrim. 

miach,** s. Budget. 2** Measure. 
chel. 

air,** a. Kind, loving, affable. 

kindly, affa ^l. 

miad, see meud & miadan. 

miadaich, v. see meudaich. 

mia lan, -ain, pl. -an & -ain, s.m. Meadow,plain, 
giassy piain. 

ach, -aiche, a. 
or grassy plains 

m 3 lar, -air, -an, see miadan. 

miad-fheur, -fheoir, s.m. Meadow grass. 

à -—Aeh, a. Abounding in meadow grass, 
grassy. 2**ifaving long grass. 

ps -adh, -àilh, s.m. Bad fortune, 
fortune, unlucky event. 

miadh, s.n.ind. Honour, esteem, respect. 2” 
Demand, call. 3 (DMO)Love, desire for. Cha’n 
'ei] m. sam vith air crodh, thzre is no de- 
mand for cattle ; meas agus m., respect ant 
approvetion ; gun mh. gun bhaiga, without 
honour or affection ; Fioan a chuir m. oirnn, 
Fionn who honoured us. 

miadh,** s.m. Misfortune, mishap, bad luck. 

ach, -aiche, @ Precious. 2 see miadhail. 

mi-àlhach, -aiche, œ. Unfortunate, unlucky. 

miadhai!, -e, @ Honourable, noble. 2 Ws- 
teemed, respected. 3 Famous. 4 Desirable. 
5 In great demand, precious, yaluabie. 6 
*Fond of. Tha’m buntàta m., potatoes arein 
great demand ; m. mu chloinn, dotingly fond 
of his children ; gnothach m., & precious thins. 

miadhalachd, s. f. ind. State of being neld in 
great respect or esteem. 2 Preciousness. 3 
Rareness. 4(DMO) Attachment, fondness. 5 
Degree of demand. ^ 

miadhar, -aire, @. see mi-àdhmhor. 

mi-adhartaeu, -aiche, a, Backward, hesitating. 
zttUmprogressive. 


3 Bag, sat- 





Gu m., 





[bd 


Aboundiag in meadows 





evil luck, mis- 











Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


649 


-naa-daoine-imarbha,$ 8. m. Fox-glove, ' 


| miag, $. see miDg- 2* Mew. 


Delicacy of constitution. 


miagail, see megall. 
| mi-agh,** s.m. disrespect, dishouwuur,disre ute. 


[Always aspirated | 









d, s. f. id. Backwardness, hesita- ' 


mial-mhagach 
tion. 2 State of being backward in auy 
work, 
mi-Adhimhor,** o. Unfortunate, unlucky, unto- 
ward. 2 Awkward. 


— —aued, s.f.ind. Unfortunatenesa, 





| mia lui zh,(AF, s f. Hog, sow. 


miag, see meig sad. 

: t( DC) see méag— 
Pert. 

miig,* v. Mew. a: cat. 

miagacai, see mìogach. 

2 Mewing, asa cat. 


mi.ga, see miadi. 

ach, see ri adhach. 

miaghar, see miaghail. 

mi-àgamhor, ses mi-àdnm^or. 

M aeud, see mi-àlhmaàorachd, 

mi-àigh, see ini-alu. 

--vil, see miadhail. 

miag-shüil, -shü.a, -shüilean, see miog-shü'l. 

—earh, -eiene, @ see mi g-sbuileac.. 

mi-aichris, 2.0. Miscite. 

mial, -a, -a2, $.f. Louse. 2 (AF) Barbel, see 
breac-fousa;ach. 13 Any animal. 

malaca, -aiche, œ. Lousy, pedicaliur. 
m., pithy. tas's, the lousy disease. 

as, ais, Sna. Lousiness, 

d, s.f.ind. Lousiness, 

mialag, -a g, -àn, s.f.dim. of mial. Littie lousas. 

acn, -a che, a Abounding in small iic» 

nivlaich, tf va. Louse. 

ma aint,(OSIO) 8. fo Misfortune, trouble. 
ort ! bother you ! 

each, (DMC) a. Troublesomo, annoying, 

mia'ai^, s.n. Bearer of a quern (slick on Wuica 
the upper stone rests. ) 

eachd, s.f. Lousiuess. 














An g lar 











M. 








mial-bhalla,(A#) s.f. Walt-insect or louse. 
mia\-bhuidue,tt s 7. Hare. 

nial-buirn,(AF) s.f. Whare. 

m al-chaorach, s.f. Sheep-tick. 2 Sheep-ked— 
| anelophagus ovinus. 


VER ! ? 
SE 


! Cd 





596. Mial-chaorach. 597.Mial-nan-eache | 


mial-bhuidhe,(AF) sf. Hare. 
miil-cnoille.(A F) s.f. Wood or tree-louse. 
inial-chon** e.f. Dog-louse, dog-tick. 
mial-chosach,(AF) s.m. Centipede. 
mial-chrìon, s.f. Moth. 2 W ood-louse, 
mial-chü.-choin, s.m. Greyhound. 
mřala-criona, s.pl. ‘Viner acari. 2,DMO) Ring- 
worm. 3 (DU) Frequently applied to chil- 
blains. 
mia!-fhiodha, sf. Bug. 
mial-ailsach,(AF) s. 
ach. 
mia'-goile,** s f. Belly-worm. 
m ainognach, gr, Crav-louse. 
wii l-anag, see muile-mnag. 
—ach, see mà,ach. 


Barbel, see breac-feu-az- 


2T 





Origit al from 
IK ‘ff RS fees Jg j = = 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


| 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


mial-mhagain 


mial-mhagain, s./. Toad, squat baast, 

mial-mhaiyheach,(Al’) s. Hare. 

mial-mhara, s.f. Whale. 2 Sea-monster. 
Nea-louse. 

mial-mhouaidh,(AF) s.f. Water-louse, flea, wa- 
ter-spider. 

miai-urihór, s./. Whale. 

m.4l-mhór-a/-ehuain, s.f. Sea-serpent. 

m:a'-mhór-mnara (AF) sf. Sea-monster, Seachd 
ròin sath mial-mhór-mhara, s-»-n see's make 
a ma! for th? s-a-monster. This cannot re- 
present the whale, as it is generally trausla- 
ted, for whales eould not swallow seals. 

mial-moine,* s.f. Peat-louse. 

mial-nan-each, s. f. Morse-louse—trichodectes. 
ejui. [illust. 527 on p. 619.] 

mial-nam-muchd, s.f. SoW-louse —Aamatopinus 
Suis. 


3 





528, Mial-nam-muchd. dé 
mial-phónair, s.7. Bean-vlant louse—aphis fave. 


599. Mial-ohonair, 


The wingless female is shown in iliust. 529, 
aud the winged male in 530, 


' CR n f 4 
: \ 
d | 
4 à 
| d T) E x 
j 3 
P keep x 
| ` d De t 
ij Sey L.S 
is edi ae E. i f 
iA PORE = 
cw f a Gë S 
\ S 
Lo 
WË i 


mial-ròn, sr Seal. 

mial-spagach,* s.f. Crab-louse. 

mialta, a. Of a soft, pleasant or sweet coun- 
tenance, prov for màlda. 

mialtachd, s. f. ind, Softness, pleasantness, 
Sweetness of look. 

mialtag, s.f. see ialtag. 2 (AF) Fly, gnat. 

-leathair, see ialtaz. 

mial-thràghad,(W €) a.f. Seashore-floa. 

mi-altrum, -uim, s. m. Bad nursing or careless 
rearing. Cinnidh mae o mh., ach cha cninn e 
@'D acg, a son may grow in spite of bad nurs- 





DU 


miannmhor 


in), but he cannot escape the grave. 
miawh, (AC) s. Substanca. i 
—, @ Fat. sweet, rich, as milk. 
målda m. ina voice low ant sweet, 
miami, f? va Mew, . 
miambaii, -2, sf. Mewiug, as of a cat. 





Le gutb 


II an, see mèinn. 


miaiaach,** u, Aboundiag in ore, (meiuneil.) 
manan, Aia, “Au, prov, for meauaa. 
miin-ibkaoiuüdn,** e, Yawa. 
m:audn, A0, -can, son. d f. . Desire, will, pur- 
pose, laceulion. 2 Appetite, huazer. 38 De- 
sire, love, lust. 4 Tho thing desired ur loved, 
9 Longing pecuiiw to 3 woinin wich call. 6 
Moie on cae child, due to that desire nob 
being, satisfied. 7 Complete satisfaciva. 8 
** Doiigab. - 

'Dé ina. a mh. ort a dheanamh ? what da 
you intent to. uo? am m leat blàr ? is your 
tention battle? an sàsaich thu niana am 
ledinhaiun dig 2 wilt thou sa'isfy the appetite 
Of tue young tio ? a suluaiga gun cuiall, a 
thug miaun do "n or, y» senseless people ihat. 
bes'owed your affections on - gold ; tha a 
mh. siu orm, 4 purpose to do thui ; tha a' mh. 
air teicheadh, Ae mans to desert, to decanip ; 
m. nan aingidh, the d ëire of the wicked ; bas 
mo naimudean cha mniann leam, 4 do not de=- 
sire th: death of my foes ; M4 tha a’ mn. ort 
dol dnachaidh, if you in end going homz; 
cha'u'eil ain m.-sàn sàsaichte, their a ppetiie ig, 
nol appeased ; am m, leat sith P do you wish 
Jor peace Z rinn e e g’ ad mh., he did it ta 
your entire Satisfaciwn ; taa m, air 'aodann, 
there isa moe on his face ; bu mh. lois triall, 
he chose to go m. mo shùl, the deiight of my 
eyes ; m, & chait 'san tràigh "us cha toir e 
fhéin as e, @ prorerbial saying referring to the 
cat’s fondness for fish, which he cannot catch 
himself. in Arran, thaea mh.—h- wishes to, 
astha e a mh. a dheanamh, he wishes to do it, 
miaunach, -aicae, a. Desirous, wishful, longing. 

“4 Huugry, having a keen appetite. 3 Desice 

able, iouged fur, loved. 4 Covetous, greedy. 

5** Pleasant. 
adh, -aidh, s.m. Desiring, act or cir- 
cumstance of desiriug, longing, wishing for. 2 
*Covetiug. A'mc, pr. pt. of miannaich. A? 
m. cuid dhaoin’ eile, coveliny the property of 
others; a m. gu mór 'fhaicinn, longing to. 
see him. 
as, -ais, s.m. Appetite, desire, longing.. 
2**Greed. 3**#'layour. 

-—asach, a. Desirous. 
-—d, see miann, 















\- 











miannag,** -aig, -an, s.f. Covetous female. 2 
Greedy girl. 
-—&ch,-aiche, a. Fond of dainties. 2 


Desirous of trifles. 

miannaich, pr.pt. a’ miannachadh,v.a. & n. De- 
sire, Wish for, long for. 2 Covet, 3 Lust 
after, fix one’s heart on. Nam. a sgéimh, do. 
not lust afier her beauty. E 

—te. past pt. Desired, longed for, wishe 

ed. 2 Coveted. 

miann-amhaire,(MS) v.n. Leer. 

miannar, -aire, a. (for miannmhor) see mianne 
ach. 

miatiuas, see miann. 

————ach, -aiene, 
Lustful, longing, 

achd, 
lustfulness, 

miaun-sion, s.m. Kind of mole, 
Wiue mark.” I 

fmiannghas, -ais, see ana-miann. 

Maung, see miannaea. 





a. Covetous, greedy. 2 
desirous. 
Sud, Covetousness, greediaess, 





known as ‘“‘ porte. 





miannmhoeracht 





miannmhorachd, see miann. 


m.ann-Muire,$ s. The plant Alrine lady's man- , -——-— 


tle—alchem.il« al» io, see trusgan. 

4m annuich, see miannaich. 

m.-aogas, -ais, s.» Bad or uncomely appear- 
ance, unse m'iness, 2 Unlikelihood — 

-—ach, -aiche, æ. Unseemly, unb coming, 
ofa bad appearance. 2 Uniixely. 3 Indeco- 
rous, | 

mi-aoidh, e, s.f. Di- favour, 

mi-aontachd, e f. ind. Ineonformity, moncon- 





. .fotmisy. 

miapachd, see mi-thapachd. 

minpadh, -aidh, s. n,  Disgracefulness. 2 
Surprise, scare. 3 Oowardice, 4 see mi- 
thapadh. 

miapaidh, -e, €. see mi-thapaidh 2**Disgrice- 


ful, 3**Sad. 4(DMO) Frightful, easily scar- 
ed. 5* Cowardly. | 
miar,-eóir, -an, see Meur. 
——-.achd,(UR) s.f. Skye for méarachd. 
miarag, see ineurag. 
miaran, see meuran. 
miaran, Skye e for mèanan. 
miarbhail, see miorbhuil. 
—each, see mìorbhuileach. 
mias, -èise, -an, s.f. Plate,dish, platter. 2 Plate 
of meat. 3(DU) Basin. 4** rarely Altar. 
Geal-mhias mhór, & large white plate ; crann 
Eòin Baistidh air mèis, the head of John the 
Baptist on a dish. 
miasach, -aiche, a. Abounding iu plates or 
dishes. 2 Like a plate or dish. 
miasdadh,( DC) s.m. Mischief done by cows and 
mores that have broken loose in corn, &c.— 
ist. | 
miath, -a, a. see méith. 
achd, see meitheachd, 
miathlachd, s.f. Huff—Dain T. Ghob, for 
mìothlachd (=mi-thlachd.) 2(DU) Uapleas- 
antness (particularly applicable to a person in 
.& social capacity.) Chan eil m. sam bith 
ann, he is qui e a pleasant. fellow (sociuiiy. ) 
miathluimicn, (MS) oe Az;rease, 
qi-bhaigh, -e, s./, Unkindness, want of com- 
passion. 2* Unfriendliness, Fear na in., tu 
merciless man. 
—-each, -eiche, a. see mi-bhàigheil. 
mi-bha'‘gheil, -e, a. Unkind, unmere fui, cruel, 
merciless, unfeeling. 2**Unfriendly. Gum, 
cruelly. 
mi-bhà/ghealachd, s.f. see mi-bhaigh. 
wi-bhaii, -e, SE Profusion, extiayagance, un- 
thrifciness. | 
mi-bhail, o MacMhaighstir Alasdair for mio- 
mnail. i 
mi-bhaileach, -eiehe, a. Extravagant, profuse, 
unthrifty. Gu m., unthriftily. 
—adh, -aidh, s.m. & pr. pt. see mi- 
bhuileachadh. os 
mi-bhailich, v. see mi-bhuitich. | 
mi-bhanail, -e, a. humodest, uawomanly. 
m., minodest/y. j 
mi-bhanalachd, s.f.ind. Immodesty, indelicacy. 
m -bhanalas, -ais, s.m. see mi-bhana achi. , 
m -bheus, -a, -an, $ m. Baidl-breeding, bad-man- 
3 immodesty.. 4 











Gu 


ners, 2 Iwmorality, vice, 
Indecency. Hirig ram m. a rinneadh, a re- 


compens? for the mis-ieeds commitied. 

ach, -aiche, a. Unpolite, ungenteel. 2 
Immoral, indecent. 3 Immodest. 4 Ill-bred. 
Gu m., immodestly. 

mi-bheusach4, stil Unpoliteness, rudeness, 





= bađ-breeding. 2 Want of principle, 3 Im- 
modesty. 4* Immorality. 


mi-dhlasda, -bhlaizde,*a@. Ili-tasted.. 2 Insivid, 
tasteless. Do phògan mosach m., thy nasty 


Digitized by 


E "p" pm fe, m Ld E p — — 
i rr i RIE A Ti o LJ 
d ! I — Au | NEEN H mi L eme H M E 


651 


mi-chalma 


ta:tel 8s ki ses ; biadh m., unsavoury food. 
ehd,* sg Iu ijidity. 

ÜUnhandsome, ug'y. 
loiucaaz m., 





mi-bhdoilncacn, -eich», aq. 
2 Unseenuy. 3 UnLkccoining. 
ung?» mly conditet 

mi-bireith, -e, -e2a2, SE Wrong judgment or 
decision, 

—neachadh, -ailh, s.m. Misconceiving, 

misconceptiva, misapprehension, 2 Mi iacere 

pretation. A’m--, pr. nt. of mi-bhreitunich., 

nich, pr. pt. a’ mi-bhrciuhneaceh dh, 

ido Misconceive, misapprohend. 2 Misiuter- 

pret. 





ae 








nichte, past pt. of mi-bhreithnich. Mis- 

conceived, mi wuderstood. 2 Misiuterpreted, 

mi-bhuaidh, -e & -bhuadhach, pl. -ean, ¢f. Un- 
suceessinlness, bal lucx, unluckiness. 2 Ca- 
laity, disaster, 3 Defeav. 

each,** g. Unsuccessful in fizuting. 
2 Unlucky. 

mi-bnuaireas, -eis. a.m. Placility of temper. 2 
Quietness, tranquility. 3 Harmlessness. 

ach, aiche, a. Qwnist, not quarrel- 
some, good-tempered. Gu m., quietly. 

mi-bhuilheach, -niche, &.  Unüibankful, un- 














grateful, 2 Dissatisfied, displeased, discou- 
vented. 3 Greedy. Do bhag m., thy greedy 
guts. 


mi-vhailheachas, -ais, s.m. Unthankfulness, in- 
gratitude, 2 Viscontent, dissatisfaccion. 

mi-bhuil, s.m. MisappMeation, abuse. 2 Mis- 
improvement.  3* see m -bbail. 4 Profusion. 
Rina thu m. dheth, you misapplied it, wasted 
ùt. 

———eachadh, -ailh, s. m. Misapplying, 
abusing, aouse, extravagance, syuaudering. 
neglecting to improve. A’ mc, pr. pt. of 
mì-buuilici. 

m'-bhuilich, pr. pt. a’ mi-bhuilea hadh, v. «. 
Misapply, abuse, misiinprove, squander. Mh, 
thu E nine, you wasted your tim». Pi 

-—— ——..—te, past pt. of mi-;huidch. Misap- 
plied, abused, mi-improved. 

m -bnuineadn,** -eidh, s. m. Despair. 2 Dis- 
trast. l 

wni-bhunailteach, see mi-bhunaiteach. 

—d, soao.mi-bhunaiteaead. 

mi-.hunaiteaeh, -eich», @ Uusteady, inse- 
cure. 2 Not well founded. 3 Uusettied, 
char g »able. 


———— 














d,** s.f.ind. Unsteadiness. 2 
Chang^ablenoss 3 Want of foundation. 

mie, gen.sing. & nol. of mac. 

fmichadas,** -ais, s m. Atfrout, 2 Ingratisuda, 

mi-cha'dreach, -eich?, @ Unfriently, unkind, 
not aifee jiouate. 2 Unsociable. 3* Disa tected. 

ail, -e, à. see 1ni-chaidreach. 

mi-chaiireamh, -eimh, s. m. Bal fellowship, 
wan of fellowship. 2 Waub of familiarity. 3 
Unfriendiiness. 4 Shyness, 5 Unsociable- 
ness, 

mi-chaidreas,** is, s. m. Unfriendliness. 2 
Unsociableness, 3 Shyness. 

mi-chàil,( Ms) s. Gro su ess. 

mi-ehàieil, (DM) a. Unpalatahle, distasteful, 

Ed UE ON -eiche, &. Unfriendly. 2 Un- 
kind. 








as, -ais, s.m. Unfriendliness, 2 
Unkiudness, 

mi-chairdealachd, s.f. see mi-chairdeachas. 

mi-chàirdealas, see mi-chairdeachas. 

mi-cuàirdeas, -eis, sm. Waut of friendship, un- 
kindness, 

mi-chàirdeil, -e, a see mi-chàirdeach. Gum., 
unkindly. 

uli-ciàirich, v.a. Abuse, mismanage, 

m-.chaima; d. Feebie, weak. EE DE of 








mi-chalma 6 


a slender form. 3 Cowardly. 4(DMC) Un- 
able to stan 1 cold or fatigue. 

mi-chalmachd, s.f.ind. Kecbleness, weakness, 
2 Cowaruii ies3. 

mi-chalimarra, @. see mi-cha!ma. 

mi-chaoimhinn, v.d. see wi-chaomhainn, 

mi chaoimhne, s.f. Unkinduess. 2 Uniriendli- 


ness. 
— — Alas, -ais, s.m. see mi-chaomhal- 





achd. 

mi-chaoimhneas, -eis, s.m, Unkindness. 2 Un- 
friendliness. 

mi-chaoimhneil, e Unkind. 2 Unfriendly. Gu 
m., in an unfriendly manner. 

mi-chaomaaiun, v.a. Mis-spend, squander. Is 
baileach a inhi-chaomhainn thu do mh., you 
Aan: completely squandered your substance. 

Mi-chadmhalachd, s. f. Unkiudness. 2 Un- 
friendliness. 

mi-chaom.inach,-aiche,a. Prodigal, squandering. 

mi-chaombnaila, -aidh, s. m. Mis-spenting, 
squand:ring, prod g «ity. A’ m—, pr. pt. of 
mi-caaomaaiun. 

mi-cnean, -a, s.m. see mi-chion. 


——--—— il, -e, æ. Surly, sul&y. 
mi-cheanalta, -ailte, æ.  Ungenteel. 2 Un- 
handsom». 3 Unclean. 4 Unkiid, unami- 


able. 5 Untily, uubecoming, uaseeinly. 
mi-cheannsa,** o Imoudeat. 

mi-chearmauta,** a Untidy, slovenly. Gu m., 
untidily. 

mi-en art, -eirte, a, 
right, not proper. 

—ach, A che, a. Wrong, unjust, 

——&aáchadh, -aidh, -s. m. Disarranging, 
setting out of order, A’ m—, pr. pt. of mi- 
cheareaich. 

Mai-cheartaich, pr. pt. a mi-cheartachadh, Y. a. 
Confuse, put out of order, misadjust. 

——te, past pt. of mi-cheartaich. Dis- 
composed, put oud of order. 

mi-cheartas, -ais, s.m. Injustice. 2 Impropriety. 

Xn-echéil!,-e, see mi-chiall. 

mi-chéillidh, -e, a, Uuwise, foolish. 
3**Uneonjugal. 4( Ms) Absonaut. 

mi-chiall,-chéille, s. f. Folly, inprud:nce, 2 
Madness, iasaniuy. 3**Want of meaniug. 
Tha thu air miii-chéill, thou art mau. 

———--———àch, -aiche, d, Unwise, imyrutent. 2 
Insane, š Wibhoub meaning. Gu 1%, fool- 
ishly. 

————achd ft s.f. Irrationality. 

mie: iat,** sm, Poor o inion, z* Di like. Is 
mór mo ma. dheth, Z hw? a very poor opinion 
of hin. [is beag mo mh. dheth, in W. coast of 
toss. ] 

mi-ciiita, see mi-chiata th. 

mi chiatach, -a ehe, @ Unseemly, unbecoming, 
improper,ungiinly. Urra m., an unya@inty per- 
son ; giù an 19., wnsermly conduct. 

Mi-cniatadh, -aida, s.m. Disapprubation, dis- 
like. 

mi-chiitfach, see m:-chiatach. 

mi-chiatfada, see mwi-chiata:ih. 

lii-cnin.aenhuinn, s. f. Misadventure, mishap, 
inisenanee. 
fortunate. 

mi-chinnie, s.f.i1, Uncertainty, doubt. 

mi-chinnteach, -eich3, a. Uncertain, doubtful. 

——— ——— — —.—AÀ5, -ais, 8). see mi-chiunce, 

mi-chinnteachi, s.f.ind. Uncertainty. 

mi-chion, -chin, s.f. Aversion, displeasure, dis- 
like. 

m.-chiüin, -e, æ. Boisterous, troubled, stormy, 
fierce, not mild,not calm. Gu m,, boisterousiy. 

xni-chiüineas, -eis, &2w Storminess, boisterous- 


Wrong, unjust, evil, not 














2 Insane. 


—each, a. Misadventurous,mis- 








T "s f 
Lë L 
i RIT Ar e bg 
n ` Eh rm | kt 
1 — Li 3 Të L| 


| 
rri 
DC) 


| mi-chostach, -aiche, 


59 mi-chreideamh 


ness, disquiet. ; 

EN E S: v.d. Abrogate, disuse, render ob, 
solete. 

m.-eh'each lach, -aiche, a. Unusual, unwonted.. 
2 Of bad habics, immoral. 

rica -à, -an,s.m. Low, «dishonest deed, 
rick. 

mi-chieasach, -aiche,@. Full of tricks, dishonest. 

nu-chlis, -e, @ Inactive, lazy, awkward, not. 
clever, inexpert. 

mi-chlia, au, Infany, bal fame, disgrace, re 
proach, dishonour, defamation, Lot agus uu, 
a wound and dishonour. 

mi-chlititeach, -eiche, œ Infamons, dishonour- 
able, reproachful, disgrac:ful. 2 Nob reuow a- 
ed, obscure. Gu m., in/amousty. 
i-ehliüitich,** v.g. Defame, disparage, 
into disrepute. 

mi-chliüibaich,** v.a. Defame. 

mi-chneasta, -eiste, & Uncharitable, uncivil. 
2 Cruet, inhuman, barbarous. 3, Periloas, 
ominous [also mi-chneasda] Gu m, inåt 
maily. 

m.-chn :astaehd, s. fint. Uuchiaritablseuness. 2 
Ineivility. 3 Cruelty, inhumanity, barbarity, 
4 Omiuousness, perilousness, 5 Atheistical- 
ness. [aiso mi-chueasdachd.] 


bring 


mi-choiluis,"* @ Not indifereut. 2 Nice or fas- 


tidious ia appetite. 

mi-choiugheall, -eill, -an, s.m. Diso'livzinz ac- 
tion. 2 L[ocoaveniencs. 3 Deceit, treachery. 

Mi-vhvingheadach, -aicha, oO Disobig aug, 3 
Treacherous, 3jf[luconvyenient. 4**vuwilliug 
to lend. 

mi-choisrig,¢¢{ v.a. Desecrate. 

mi-choltach, -aich», @ see mi-cho lach. ADU?) 
Improper, wrong. Gnothach mM., an unproyperg 
uns2ein/y deed. 

mi-choltaehd, $.f. see mi-choslas. 

ini-choltas, -ais, see mi-enoslas. 

mi-chomhairiich,{f v.g. Miscouusel. 

ini-cchómhnard, -airde, @ Uneven, not level, 

mi-chum.anta, -ainte, d. Unsociable, morose, re- 
served, distant. 

mi-ciompantach, -aiche, d, see me-cho.uprnta, 

mi-chompantachd, sf.ind. Unsociableness, ro- 
serveness, moroseness, distant mann :r. 

ini-chompantas,** -ais, s.m. State of being with- 
out a companion. 

mi-chórd, pr.pt. a’ mi-chorda.th, v.a. Disagrees, 
dissent, 

mi-chordadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Disigra2eiog, 
dissenting, disagreement.  A'm-, pr. pt. of 
mi-chord. 

ini-cnorrach, -aiche, a. Not steep, easy of Aa: 
cent or descent. 2 St aly, mot giddy, 

o Uuiixely. 2 npissini- 
lar, unlike. 

mi-choslas, -ais, s.m. Improbability, lissimlari- 
ty, unlike:iness. 

mi-chuosnmphuileachd, s.m. Dislikeuess, 

mi-cuosuihuileas, s.m. Dislikeness. 

mi-ciothrum, -oim, -an, 8.7». Injustice, unfair- 
ness. 2 Disadvantage. 

m:-ciio-hrumach, -aiche, @ Disalvantag ous, 
unfair, unjust. 2* Rugged, uneven. 3 Dis- 
proportionate, inconvenient, 4(DU) Poverty- 
stricken. 

mi-chrabnachd,ft s.f.ind. Indevotion. 

mi-chreasda, see mi-chaeasta. 

mi-chreasdachd, see mi-ehneastach 1. 

mi-chreid,* v.n. Disbelieve. 

ini-echreideach, -eiche, a. see mi-chreid mheach, 

mi-careideamh, -imh, s.m. Heresy, unbelief, 2 
Want of faith, scepticism, 3**infidelity. Air 
son am m., for their unvelie/ ; lucid-m,, scope 
Lic& 


» 
D 
A 





ERD 


vm mm Pa he 


wd. et. |" 


et 


"apa m. ef PE EP 


tu 
mnr 


mi-chreideas 


mi-chreideas, -eis, s.m. Distrust, want of cont- 
dence, unbelief, e want of credit. 
gmi-chreideasach, -aiche, @. istrustful, uncon- 
tiding. 2 Discreditable, unworthy of confi- 
dence, 8*Disrespectful. Gu'm., umcreditably. 
mi-chreidimh, see mi-chreideamh. 
mi-chreidmheach, -eicne, a. Sceptical, unbdelie-. 
vying, distrustful. 
mi-chreidmheach, Ach, s. m. Infidel, heretic, 
unbeliever, sceptic. 
mi-chreidmbhiíche,"* em. 
chreidmheach, 
mi-chridhealachd, s.f. see mi-chridhealas. 
qmi-chridhealas, -ais, s.m. Dejection, dulness, 
= lowness of spirits, 2**Heartlessness. 
‘ymi-chridheil, -e, a. Dull, dejected, dishearten- 
ed. 2 Heartless, Gu m., d»jectediy. 
mi-chruinnealas, -eis s.m. Slovenliness, want 
of neatness, carelessness, untidiness. 2 Pro- 
fusion. 
mi-chruinneil, -e, @ Slovenly, 
2 Profuse, uneconomical. 3 Heartless. 
m., untidily. 
mi-chu, (AF) s.m. Fox. 
mi-chuileag, see mion-chuileag. 
wi-chuimhne, s$. f. Thoughtlessness, 
ness, heedlessness, forgettulness. 
mi-chuimnneach, -eiche, œ. Careless. thought- 
less, forgetful, unmindful, Gu m., carelessly. 
wi-chuimhneachail, -e, @. Forgetful, unmund- 
ful. 2 Careless. Gu m., forgetfully. 
mi-chuimse, $.f. Misproportion. 
--—acil, a. Disproportionate, unpropor- 
tioned. 2 Aimless. 


Same meanings 83 mi- 


untidy, careless. 
Gu 


careless- 





mi-chuineas,"* -eis, ëm Donation, 

mi-chuis, -e, -ean, s.f. Misfortune 2 Unworthy 
deed. 3*Jilting. 4*Suirking. 

‘mi-chuiseach, -eiche, a. Unfortunate 2 Of, 


or belonging to, unworthy deeds. 3 Coquet- 
tish, flirting.  4"*Modest, unassuming — 5** 
Attractive, bewitching. 6"*Unenterprising. 
mrchiiseach, Ach, s.m. Coquette, flirt 
mi-chfiseacnd," sf. Flirtation, coquetry. 2 
Assumed indifference. | 
mi-chumacnd, ¢.f. see mi-chumadh. 
yai-chumachdail, e @  Unshapely. unhand- 
some, not’proportioned, % Clumsy, Gu m., 
clumsily. 
mi-chumadail, -e, «. see mi-chumachdait. Do 
chasan m,, thy shapeless legs. 
ani-chumadh, -aidh, sm. Shapelessness, 
of shape or form. 2 Clumsiness 
gi-chunnadail, see mi-chumachdatl. 
mi-chunntas,f] -ais, 8.72. Miscomputation, 
mi-chüram, -aim, s.m, Carelessness, negligence, 
remissness. 
mi-chüramach, -aiche, a. Careless, negligent, 
inattentive. 2 (DMC) Irrelhgious. Gu mm., 
carelessly. 


want 








A,tt s.f. Carelessness. 

mi-dhaichealachd, s.f.in*. Awkwardness, un- 
handsomeness, ungracefulness. 2 Absurdity. 

mi-dhàichealas, -ais, s.m. see mi-dhaichealachd. 

mı-dhàicheil, -e, @. Awkward, ungraceful, un- 
handsome, ungenteel, 2 Unstately, undigna- 
fied. 3*Absurd, nonsensical. Fear m., €n 
awkward man. 

mi-dhaonnacüud,ff s.f. Inhumanity. 

mi-dheabhaltach, see mi-dhealbntach. 

mi-dhealbh, v.a. Deform, mis-shape. 
bad likeness. 

mi-dhealbh, -a, s. m. Inconsistency, unseemli- 
ness. 2 Unshapeliness, 2 Mismanagement. 
3* Absurdity. 

— ach, -aiche, a. Unshapely, unhand- 

some, 2 Improbable, unlikely. 3 Inconsis- 

tent. 4**Unmatehed. 5* Absurd. —6** Un- 


2 Take à 





653 


mi-dhiadhaidh, -e, a. Irreligious, 


mi-dhileas, -dhilse. a. Treacherous, 


mi-dhilsead, -eid, sf Faithlessness, 


mi-dhleasannach, -aiche, 
mi-dhleasnach, aiche, @ 


mi-dhiighe, -an, s. f. Undutifulness, 





mi-dhreachail 


1 


seem. 


mi-dhealbhachadh,tt -aidh, s.m. Deformity. 
mi-dhea!bhaich tt v.a. Deform, distort. 

mi-dnuealbhaltaen, 
mi-dhealbhtach, o Frugal. 
mi-dhealbhte, past pt. 
*mi-dheamhnas,** -ais, 8.771 
mi-dheanadach,(DMC) a Inactive, 


gee mi-dhealbhtach. 


Deformed. 

Honour, exaltatione 
not indus- 
(rious. 


mi-dhéanadair, s.m, Misdoer. 

mi-dhearezch, -aiche, @ Absent. 
mi-dheareadh,( MS) 8.m. Absence. 

mi-dheas, -dheise, a. Awkward, unskilful, in- 


expert. 8 Unhband, 


some, 


2 Wrong, unprepared. 
4**Unstately in gait. 


mi-dhéirceil, -e, @ Uncharitable, 
mi-dheoin,* $.f. Reluctance. 
mi-dheonach, -aicne, @ Reluctant. 
mi-dhaiadhachd, $.f. vg. 


Irreligion, ungodliness, 
unholiness, profanity 

ungodly, pro- 
fane, 


mi-dhiadhaidheachd, s.f. ind. see mí-dhiadh- 


achd. 

unfaithful, 
dishonest. Gu m., farthlessly. 

mi-dhalseachd,s.f.ind. Faithlessness, 
disloyalty. 


treachery, 


degree of 
untaithfulness, 


mi-dhiongalta, see mi-dhiongmhalta. 
mi-dhiongmhalta, -2ilte, 


a. lmperfect, ineffect- 
ual, 1nsufhicient, 3 Notfirm. 4 


Not tizht. 


2 Improper. 








hd, s.f.ind. Insufficiency, im- 
perfection, inefficacy, unmeetness, want of 
firmness 


mi-dhirichead, Ad, sm Disingenuity. 
m:-diuugh, (DMC) 8. Carelessness, 


disinterest- 
edness. 

— —— — — ail. a ‘Careless, negligent. 

mi-dhiüthaich, v.@. Scorn. 

see mi-dhleasnach. 
Disloyal, undutifil, 
unfaithtul, unfriendly, Gu m., induti ully. 

mi-dhleasnas, AIS, $8.9 Undutifulness. 

mi-dhleasdanas, see mi-dhleasnas. 

unlawful- 


ness 
mi-ihhgheach, -eiche, œ Not due, undutiful, 
unlawtul 2 Not according to its kind, 


m., utawful!y. 

mi-dhligneadhn, see mi-dh'ighe. 

mi-dhiigaell,-e, see mu-daligheach. 

mi-dhluizheil,** @ Careless, inattentive. 

mi-dhlüthaich, tT v.a. Misjoin. 

mi-liiochas, -ais, s.m. Despondency, despair. 2 
**Want of conceit 

-—ach, -aiche, @. Despondent, despair- 
ing. 2*Diftident, unpretending, retiring, not 
conceited, 

mi-dhoigh, -e, sf Want of method, 2 Awk- 

wardness. 8* Absurdity. 4**Want of condi- 

tion, want of health 

mi-dhoighealacha,tf s. find. Immethodicalness. 

mi-dboiheil, -e, a. Awkward, immethodical. 
2 Ill-tempered. 3* Absurd. 4 (DMC) Disor- 
ganized. Gu m., unmethodically. 

mi-dhreach, -a, -an, sm. Deformity, disfigura- 
tion. 2 Bad look, uupleasant appearance, 
unpleasant exterior. 

mi-dhreachadh,** s.m. Disfiguring. 

mi-dhreachaich,(MS) v.a. Besmirch, deflower. 

2 Deform. 

mi-dhreachail, -e, @. Deformed. 
3 Not pleasant to look at, ugly. 
5** Dishgured. 





2 Disfiguring. 
4 Botchy. 


ini-dhreachmhor 


mi-dhreachmhor, -oire, og, see mi-dhroachail. 

mi-thnalach, a. Degenerate, | 

m-dhualchas,(CM3) ais, e, m. Degon^racy, de- 
generateness, | 








mi-dhnineil, a. Unfriendly, unsociable. 2 Un-! 


manly, | 

mi-diirachd, -an, sf, Neglizenco. 
cerity, 8 Il-will, 4 Inattention. 
——ach, -aiche, o Neg'igent, indii- 
ferent, careless. 2 Insincere, 3 fnattentive. 

mi-eagnaidh, e, og Indiscreet, un wise. 

- ——en ch, 
prudence, 

mi-earbsa, em. Distrust, suspicion. 

—ch, -aiche, œ. Distrustful, suspicious. 
2 Despondent, despairing. . 

mi-éifeachd, af.ind. Inefficiency, insufficiency, 
ineffectualnoss, 

--—ach, -aiche, a. Ineffectual, ineffiea- 
cions, uselags, vain. Gu m., inefeciually. 
mi-cirexchdail, -0, @ Unhandsome, unseemly. 
ugly, Giùlan m., unseemly conduct ; gu m., 

'ngnteesity, 

mi-sireach las, -ais, s. m. Deformity, unseemli- 
ness of appearance. 2 Rudeness of behayi- 
our, ungenteelness, 

mi-eudmhor, -oire, a. Unsuspicious, 2 Not 
jealous, 8 Disloyal. 4**Not zealous, 

mi-fhà^har, air, -an, s.m. Disfavour. 

—-ach,** o Adverse. 

mi'-fhaicerllach, -aiche, e. Inattentive, 
watchful, unobservant. 2 Incautious. 
considerate, (Gu m., inattentively. 

———— -—d.ii s.f.ind. Inattention. 

mi-fhaicill, -e, s.f. Inattention, earelessness. 2 
Ineautiousness, unguardedness. 3 Want of 
observation, 

mi-fhaighidinn, see mi-fhoighidinn. 

mi-fhaigiidneach, see mi-fhoigiidneach. 

mi-íhallan, -aine, a. Unwholesome, unsound, 
unhealthy. 2**Rotten. Gu m., unsowundly. 

—— —eachd, s.f.?n. Unwholesomeness, 
unsoundness, unhealthiness. 2**Rottennass. 

mi-fharasda, -aisde, a. Inquiet, turbulent, un- 
gentle, not mild. 2 see mi-fhurasa. 

mi-fhasgach,** a. Unshelterable, 2 A ffording 
no shelter, unsheltering. 

mi-fhearail, e, o Soft, effeminate, cowardly, 
unmanly. Gu m., in aa unmanly manner. 

mi-fhearalachd, sf. see mi-fhearslas. 

mi-fhearalas, Ais, s. m. Softness, effeminacy, 
cowardics, unmanliness. 

mi-fhearantas,** s.m. Emasculation. 

mi-fheargach, -aiche, a. Not angry. 2 Not 
easily provoked. 3 Not causing provocation, 
unirritative. 

mi-fhéin, emphatic form of mi. Myself. 

mi-fheum, -a, s.m. Bad use, misapplication, 
Uselessness. 

--—alachd, s.f. see mi-fheum. 

mi-fhialachd, s.f.ind. Churlishness, niggardli- 
ness, unsociableness, 1nhospitableness. 

mi-fhialaidh, -e, a. Churlish, inhospitable, nig- 
gardly, unsociable, 

—eachd, s.f. see mi-fhialachd, 

mi-fhianuis,tt -ean, s. m. Misallegation. 
gives s.f. and gen.sing. -e.] 

mi-fhios,tt -a, -an, s.m. Misinformation. 

mi-fh'à, a. Worthless, useless, 

mi fhiushachd,** et Worihlessness, demerit. 

ni-fhiughaireach,** œ. Spiriuess, dull. Gu m., 
spiritlessly. 


2?Insin- 

















not 
3 In- 








2 








(tt 





——— -—d, s f. Spiritlessness, dulness. 
mi-fhiughantach, -aiche, a. Illibzral, niggardly. 
2 Cowardly. Gu m., illiberally, 

-—d, sf. ind. Illiberality, 
2 Cowardice. 





Se nig- 
gardliness, 


654 


&.find. Indiscretion, im- i 


mi ghnàthaichte 
m -fh'üghar,** o Spicitless, dull. 
mi-fiila hail, -e, a. Mean, of mean appearance, 
ungenteel, ixnobl», ? 
mi-faoignidiua, s.f.ind. Imoatience, restleĝs- 
ness 2* Greed. 3* Ke nnes. Va 
mi-fhoign daeach, -eiche, o. impatient, restless, 
, Gà ma, impatintly, e 
mi-fnoisdi.neach,ff -ciche, a. Careful. 
m.-fhoisneach,** oe Anxious, 
—d** s f. Aching, | 
mi fhonn,** san. Inl: &renes,lownessof spirits 
m -fhonunxior,ii a. 
in spiriss. | 
mi-fhortan, -ain, -an, 8.7 Mi-fortune, mishap, 
bad luck. | | 
-—ach, ai he, o Disastrous, unlucky, 
uofortunite. Gu m., unluckily. — e. 
mi-fhrearzarrach, -aiche, a. Unsuitable, unfit, 
unanswerable, unam-wering, — 
oo dd, s fihd. Uas iitableness, 


fitness, 
(DMC) s.m. Misfortune, 








D 


Absonans, indifferent, low 





uns 
mi-fhrea:dal 
mi-fhreasdilach, -aiche, a, [morovilent, he^d- 
less. 2 Unfavourable. 3 Inattentive. 4 Uu- 
assisting: Gu m, improvidently, | 
mi-fhuraciiail,* .e, a. see mi-fhurachair. 
mi-fhurach ar, -e, a, Inattentive, car-less, une 
guarded, unobservant. Gu m., carelessly, ` 
mi-fhuracaras, -ais, gin. Inaticution, caceless- 
ness, unwatchfulness, 
mi-fhuran, -ain, s.m: Charlishnass. unsociabla- 
ness. 2 fi3ad iess, dulaess, $** Dis nelin- 
tion to welcome or congratulate. Aral vylessq 
Ness, 





ach, -aiche, a. Churlish, inhospitable, 
21fDull sad. 3** Backward to welcome or 
Congratulate. Gu m., churlish/y. 

m!-fhuras, -aise, @. see mi-fhurasda. 

mi-fhurasach, -aiche, @. Impatient, restless. 
Gu m., umpatiently. d 

mi-fhurasda,* a. Hard, difficult to accomplish. 

migead, -id, -an, see m izead. ’ 

migeadaich, see meigead.cich. | 
migeanaich, see mei:eadaa-n. 

mi-ghean, A, s.m. Dissatisfaction, displeasure, 
discontent, disgust, discord. 2 Sa iness, imel- 
ancholy. 3 Grudge. Fògraidh tu m., thow 
shalt banish disgust. 

mi-gheanach,** a. Angry. 
i-gheanmnaidh, -e, q. Incontinent, 
uuchaste. Gu m., incontinenily. 

— — ——eachd, s.f.ind. Carnality, nfi- 
chasteness, incontinence, lewdness. 2**Dis- 
honesty. kré - 

mi-gheimnidh, see mi-gheanmnaidh. 

mi-gnéire, TT s./.ind. Dulness. 

mi-gneur,** a. Blunt. 2 Stupid. 

-—aich, v.a. Blunt. 

mi-ghiülan, -ain, s.m. Misconduct. i 

mi-ghleidh,** s. f. Abuse, mismanagement, 
want of frugality. : : 

mi-ghlic, -e, a. Foolish, unwise, silly, rash, Ín- 
experienced. Gu m., unwisely, 

mi-ghliocas, -ais, s.m. Folly, imprudence. 

mie Jotne, s.f.ind. Filthiness, uncleanuess. 

mi-ghnàthach, -aiche, a. Abusive, 2 Misap- 
plying. 3**Mischievous. 4 Rare, not customs. 
ary, unusual. 

-———a th, -ailh, s.m. Abusing, act of 
abusing or misapplying, 3* Misconduct, A’ 
m—, pr.pt. of mi-ghuadthaich, 

mi-ghi.achachd, s.f.ind. Misapplication, bat 
usage. 2 Rareness. OI strangeness 

mi-ginàtha'eh, pr.pt. a’ mi-ghnathachadh, v.a, 
Abuse, misapply, put to an improper use, 
Mh iad i, they abused her. n 

mi guudchaichte, past pt. Abused, misapplied, 


lewd, 














“s Bo 


gg 4 ^ 


Sot dy 


4 


^ 1 d 
Katie idee ge A d Lët 
mar a e, eg d Kë AOI. EE 


mi-gnnrathaicnte 


2 Rare, uncommon, unusual. 

mi-ghneithealaciid, s.f.ind. Badnegs of temoer 
or disposition. 2 Ungratefulness, unthauk- 
fulness. 3 Ill-fayouredness. 

. @i-ghneitheil, -e, €. Iil-tem»ered, ill-disnosed. 
2 Ungrateful. 3 Iil-looking, having a bad 
complexion. 4**Having a forbid ling look. 

Mi-ghniomh, ~-a, -ara, s.m, Bad action or deed, 
mischief. 2 Lewdness. Luchd-m,, evil doers, 

mi-ghniomhach,--aiche, œ. Idle, lazy, deedless, 
indolent. 2 Mischievous, misdoing. 3 Pro- 
fligate. 

-mi-ghoireas, -eis, §.m. Inconvenience. 2 Insuf- 
ficiency. 


ai-ghoireasach, -aiche, a. Inconvenient. 2 In- 


sufficient. 3 **{mmoderate. 
i-ghramail,--e, a. Insufficient, unfirm, un- 
steady, unstable. 2 Slim, slender.  3**in- 


firm, not muscular, 

&nr-ghraimnalaend, s.f.ind. Insufficiency, unfirm- 
ness. % Slimness, 3 Want of resolution or 

mental decision, 4 Instability. 

‘mi-ghrama!as, -ais, s.m. see mi-ghramalachd. 

mu-ghras, Aus, $. 1. Gracelessness, want of 
grace. 

ini-ghrasail, -e, 
probate, 

mi-ghreann, -a, s.m. Disdain, loathing, disgust. 

ami-ghrunnd, -a, s.m. see mi-ghrunndas. 

^mi-ghrunndail, e o. Profuse, prodigal, careless, 
unfrugal. 2 Not industrious, 

qmi-ghrunndas, -ais, s. m. Want of economy, 
carelessness, indifference. 

migiall, see meigeall. 

anigialilach, see mgeallach, 

migídlaich, see meigeallaich. 


a. Graceless, abandoned, re- 


Mi-innealta,** a. (nelegant, ungenteel, clumsy, 


unseemly, ungraccful. 

mi-innealtachd, zi. Awkwardness, ungrace- 
fulness. 

»mi-iomairt, -e, $.f. Bad usage, abuse, 

mi-iomchuidh, -e, a. Improper, indecent, un- 
fit. 2**Inconvenient. 

umi-iomchuidheachd, s.f.ind. Impropriety, un- 
fitness, indecency. 

mi-iomradh, -aidh, -aidhean, s. m. Evil repute, 
bad name, slander, ovloquy, evil report, 

‘mi-ionracas,** s.m. Disingenuity. 

mi-ionraie, -e, a. Dishonest, unjust, unrighteous. 

mil(AC) a. Mild, A Mlucheil mnil ! Q mild 
Michael ! 

emul, gen. meala [mealach in Sutbrd 7, dat. mil. 
voc. à mhil ! p/. meaian, sf. Honey. Do pho: 


ait blas na meala, your kiss with the taste ur 


honey. 
‘Mi-labhrach, -aiche. a. Speaking wrongously, 
impudent, forward, pert. 2*Tlacitura. sullen. 
mi-laghachadh,** s. m. Abrogation. 2 Abol: 
tion. 
4ni-laghachair, s.m. Abolisher. 
mi-laghaich,** v.g. Abrogate. 2 Abolish or re- 
peal a statute. 
mi-laghail, -e, a. Illegal, unlawful, illicit, pro- 
hibited. 
ami-laghaileachd, s. f. ind. Illegality, unlawful- 
ness. 
-milbhir, s.m. Mead, metheglin. 
mil-bariathrach, -aicne. a. Uf sweet words, 
speaking plea-ant words. 
mile,(AC) æ. Sweet. 
milc,(AC) s. Sweetness. 
4milcein,(AC) s. Solil warm white whey, 
mil-cheod,* s.m. see mill-cheo. 
imil-chuuimheag, -eig, -an, s f. see mill-cheo. 
mibehuile:sg, Arran d K:n'yre for meanbh- 
enniiaag. 
.inibdheoeh, -a, s.m, Mead. 


DH Itl 


NAR y 
ITERNET ARCHIV 
ERNET ARC 


655 


mi 

mil-dieorhladh, -aidh,s.m. Extraction of honsy, 
suckin» honey, as from flowers. 

mile.(DU) -acian, s.m. Sweet. 

mile, -ite &-ltean, og 'Paousand. Làn mh., a 
Jull thousind. [Commoiiy used in the sing. 
with num :rals otherwise followed by the pl. 
and gensrally foilowsd by the sing. as 
deich mile,fen thousant: mìle fear, a thousand 
mn; dam, bliadusa two thousand years ; 
but, mile miltean, æ thousand miles. | 

mile, -ltean, s.f.ind. Mile. Wa mh., tvo miles z 
dzich m., fen miles: m. shligue. a mile of road, 
æ milzin len th ; clich mhile, @ milestone, 

mìl-each, eich, s.m. Blood-horse, war-horse. 

mileaci, -eiche, see m allach. 

mileachadh, -aidh, e vm. Benumbingy starving 
with cold. A’ m—, pr. pt. of milich. see 
meileachadh. 

mileachd,( MS) s.f Mellification. 

mileadh, adh, -1dhean, s.n. see mìlidh. 

mileag, -eig, -an, s.f. Melon, see meal-bhue. & 
mealbhag. 

mileag, CR) sf. Mean woman—Arran. 

mileagach,tt a. Abounding in melons. 
moalbhagach. 

mileamh, æ. lhousandth. Am m. bliadhna, the 
thousanith year. 








2 see 


milean(CR) s.m. Fawning ~Perthshire. 
anleanacu,(DOC) s. in. Marine grass — zosterg 
marina. 


mileanta, -einte, a. Soldier-like, heroic, brave 
2 Elegant, stately. 3 Pompous. An ceann- 
sgalaca m.,the brave coininander—MacVuirich. 


|mileanta,* -einte, @ Sweet-lipped. 


mileantachd, s.f.ind. Bravery, heroism, 2 
Hvidsom-ness. 3 Genteelness. 4{fFeats of 
valour. 5**Stateliness. 

milearach,3 s.m. Sweet tangle, see smeartan. 
2 (AC) Sea grass, sweet grass—a.va marina. 

mile-guath, -a.-an, sm. Anxiety. 2 Hurry. 

mileid,§ s.f. Miilet-grass—inidéiuin effusum. 





531. Milvid. 
milich,* v.a. Bennmb, see meilich. 
milidh, -ean, s.m. Soldier, champion, hero. 2 


58?, Mil-mheacan. 


Renowned person. 
tles of heroes. 
nuiidheach,tf -eiche, a. Military. 

m:-liosda, a. Unimportunate, unsolicitous, un- 
obtrusive. 

mil-itneach,** o, Mellivorous. 

milis, milse, @ Sweet, savoury. 2 Melo:ious, 
musical. 3**Flattering. Cainnt mhb., fair or 
fla‘leriny speech; aran m., any sweet kind of 
bread, especially gimger-brea l. 

mill, pr.pt. a’ milieadh, v.a. Spoil, mar, injure, 
hurt, destroy. 2 Lay waste. 3**Abuse, make 
useless. 4 Ruin. violate, 5* Benuiab wich 
cold. (mil) 6* Disarrange, Mhill thu e, you 
snoiled it; m^. mo bhroz mo caas, my skoe 
has blistered my oot. 


Cathan mhilidh, the bat- 


2 Pale, wan. 


mi'l 

mill, pl. of meall. 

miil-cheo. s.m. Mildew, blight blast. 

milleacn,* -eica, see militeach. 

millea lair ff -e, -ean, s.in. Destroyer. 
er, spendthrift. 

milleadh, -eidh, s.m. Spoiling, act of spoiling, 
marring, injuring, dim giwr. 2 Destroying, 
destruction. 3 Laying waste. 4 Starviug 
with cold. 5 Defaving.  6**Baue. A’ m—, 
pr.pt. of mill. 

amilleadh-maigh'che, s.m. Harelip. 

nilleadh-ma thei:,, WC) s.m. Despoiler. 
ath’ ann; he is a desooier. 

millean,** -ein, s.m. Tax. 

milleantach, (D) a Showery—Uist. 

milliudh, s m. Blasting eye. 2 Fascinating look. 

milineach, @ Brave. gallant. 

milineachd,** er Bravery. 

Oillise, see mìlse. 

millseachd, see :nilseacha, 

mitlseail, -eil, see milsva |, 

millsean,** -ein, s.m. Mil.. 

millseanach, -aich, see mi'seanach, 

millte, past pt. of mil. Spoiled, destroved. 2 
Laid waste. 3ii3tarved with cold. 4 Made 
useless, violated. 

am'lteach, -ciche, q. 








Ruinous, destructive 2 
Prodival, 3 Abusive. 4 Grassy. 5 Verdant. 
6 Wasting 7(M3) Baneful. 8**Dead!v. Mar 
uisge m., like destructive waters ` maghanan 
nr., verdant m vows. 

m liteach, -ici, s.m. Good grass, tufts of grass, 
mountain grass, 2łf Destructive person. 3fti 
Prodigal. 4**Wickeil man. 
Barr a’ mhilliich. the top of the grassy tusta ; 
gieann a’ mhilltich, the grassy glen. 


miilteachil, s.f.;nd. Destructiveness. 2 Des- 
truction. 3 Prodigalitv, profusion. 4 In- 
jury, 5 Abuse. 6 Halefulness, 


millteachd-rathail, s.f. Highway robbery. 

aunllteachd-uisge,$ s.m. Sweet fioaliug zrass,see 
malsean-uisgee. 

millteae, ci, s.f. Bottle of thatch, 

nilltean,** em, s.m. Prodigal. 

millteanas, -ais, s.m. Blunder, 2 Injury. 

milltear, -eir, -an, s.m. Destroyer, spoiler. 2 
Oppressor, 3 Waster, spendthrift. Is bràth- 
air e don mh. mhór, he Leo brother to the 
great waster ; o shaunt a’ mhillteir, from the 
greed of the destroyer. 

milltear, Zu. pass, of mill. 9 imp. pass. of mill. 

nulltearachd, see millteachd. 

milltich, s.pl. Tufts of good grass. 

milltineachd,** s.f. Bravery, gallantry. (mill- 
neachd ) 

mii-mheacan, -ain, pl. -an & -ain, s.m. Mallows 
—malve. (illust. 532 on p. 655.) 

milneach, -ich, s.m. Thorn. 2 Bodkin. 

mi-loinn, -e, s. f. Awkwariness, uutidiness, 
want of order. 2 Irregularity. 3 Impropriety. 
4 Inelegance, ungracefuiness. 

mi-loimnealas, -ais, s.m. Want of order. 2 Ir- 
regularity. 3 Impropriety. 

m'-lomneii, -e, a. Awkward,disordered, untidy. 
2 Irregular. 3 Disfigured. 4 Improper, Gu 
m., without order. 

miise, s. fand. Sweetness, 

milse, comp. of milis. More or most sweet. 
Ciod is m. na mil ? what is sweeter than honey? 

milseach, -eiche, a. Sweet, 2 Enticing,alluring, 

milseachadh, -aidh, s. m. Sweetening, act of 
sweetening. 2 Growing sweet. A’ m—, pr. 
pt. of milsich. 

milseachd, s.f. Mellifieation. 2 Sweetness, sa- 
vouriness, lusciousness. 8 Fragrance. 4 Flat- 
tery. 5(MS) Mellowness. 

Tmsead, am Degree of sweetness, Air mh.. 


INTERNET ARCHIV 


656, 


3 Wast- 


Sem, 


5Iisee milieadh. | 


mi-mheasarrachd 


—9 «s 








's gu'm bheil e, Aowever get it be ; l3 m. an 
deoch an siùcar, drink is the sweeter for su. 
gær; mar mhil air mh., like honey for sweet- 
Ness. | 

mìlsean, -ein, -an, 6 qm. Anything sweet, as 
Sweetmeats, 2 Fiatterer. 3 Kl-grass, 

mMilseanich, -aich, An. s.m. see nylearach. e 
see milsean. 

milseanach, -aiche, a. Desirous of sweets 
Sweet ats, 

mülseanuei,** -aich, s. 
"wee*-lioped, person, 

mils2ana:h L,** 5.7 Confection ary. 


or 


m. Confectioner. 2 


'mìiseanajene., Son. Uonieci o ier. 


mi!sean-erom-iuis,** s.m. 
uxiseau-nrwra,-ein, An. Som Sea-piuk —varyo- 

phyllum. 2 Edible sea- weed. 
nulseau-moaasva, son. Jain. 


Syrup of poppi3. 


uNlsean-moaailh,$ s. 7n. Red-rattle, see luse 


riabh ie. 


,milseanta, -einte, d. Sweet.sweetish,sweetened. 
Milsean-usg>.§ s.m. Floating 


Sweet grass—gíy- 

ceria fiitans. 

nyl-shli»snach,** -aich, s. m. 
Chilise tron. 

nmi-shrutnaend, s.f,ind, 
lifluenee, 

milsich, pr.pt. a’ mìlseachadh 
v.@ Zweeten, make sweet, 
addulce. 2 Make savoury. 
3 Make fragrant. 

te, past nert of mìlsich. 
Sweeten2! made sweet, 2 
Made frz nt. Fion m., 
mulled wine. 

multe, mi of mile. Milte de 
mhuillionaibh, thousands of 
ma:lions (many. 

milteach.12 a. Numerons,very 532 Mis Gi-uisge. 

milteamh, a. Millesimal, | 

miltean, pl. of mìle. 

mi-luchilmhor, -oire. @ Tncapacious. 3 

———achd, s.f.ind. Lucapaciousness. 

mi-mhacanta. -ainte, o Di-ovedrant. v Not 
meek, ungentle. 3**Unpfilial. 4**i).shones¢. 

—chd, s.f see mi-mhacantas. 

mi-mhacantas, ais, s.m. Want of meekness or 
gentleness. 2**Dishonesty. 

mi-mhaighdeanail, -e, @. Immodest, unmaiden- 
ly, unwomanly. | 

mi-mhail, see miomhail. | 

mi-mhaise, sr Deformity, unseemliness, un- 
handsomeness. 

mi-mhaiseach, -eiche, @ Peformed. unhand- 
some, uncomely, Gu m., «unhandsomly. 

mi-mhaiseil, -e, se» mi-mhaiseach. 

mi-mhaisich, v.a. Deflower. 

mi-mhaida, a Immodest, 
mild. 3 Unkind. 4**Not lenient. 

—chd, s.f./nd. LImmodesty. indelicacy. 
2 Want of mildness, gentleness. or kindness. 

mi-mhar, see miomhar. 

mi-mheadhonach, -aiche o Immoderate, dis- 
proportionate. 2 Eccentric, not centrical. 

—d, s./ ind. Eccentricity. 

mi-mheas, «à, sm. Contempt. disrespect, af- 
front 2 Indifference, abjection. Cuir air x, 
Show disrespect. 


—,v.a@ Disrespect, disesteem, despise, 


underyalue 
Contemptible. 


Mel- 














bees a = 


a 


— 


ege Soe 


indelicate, 2 Not 











| 
1 
| 





—all, -e, a. 
pected. 3 Disrespectful. 
fully. 

mi-mheasarra, œ. Intemperate, immoderate. 2 
Dissolute, incontinent, 

ch, see mi-mheasarra. CR 

chd, sJnd. Latemperance, im: 


2 Disres- 
Gu m., disrespect- 

















Original fram. 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOISA 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


ce M. 


mi-m^^a:a rrachd 657 | min-dhus 


- xy ficken ca E ge ZG CHE 
moderateuess, min, s.m. Plain field. 
mi-mheasta, past pt. of mi mheas. Disrespect- | min-, Sve n1n-. 
ed, despised. 2 Vile, mean, ignobl«. 4 mi-nadur, -uir, sm. Ill-nature. 2 Inhumanity. 
wmi-mhèinn, -e, s.f. indisposiuon. 2(DM) Mis- ——r&, 4, Preternatural, unnatural, 2 
disposition. Void of natural affection, cr +21, iv uman. 3 
—— ——-.—eil(DMO) a. Unfeeling, ungracious. I1l-natured, Neo-ghloine m2., uzngtu az ine 
mi-mhineachadh, -aidh, s.m. Misinterpretation, | purity. | 
act of misiaterpreting. A’ m—. pr. pt. of mi- | mi-nadurrach, -aiche, see mi-nà turra. 
mhìnich. mi-nadurrachd, sf.ind. Monsirousness. 
mi-mhìnich, pr. pt. a’ mi-mhineachadh, v. a.|mi-nàdurrali, -e, a. see mi-nadurra, 
Misinterpret, misconstrue. m.-nàire, sf. Shamelessuess,.m 7d nce, effront- 
—-Lbe, past pt. Misinterpreted, miscon-| €TY, iiumodesty. 
strued, 


mi-naireach, -eiciie, a. Shameless, impnudent, 
mi-mbisneach, Ach, s.m. & f. Want of courage, -—d, s. f. ind. Shamelessuess, impu- 
discouragement, fear, irresolution, coward- 
ice, ‘shyness, diffidence, damp. Cuir air m., 
discourage. dispirit. 
In aontachadh, -aidh, s.m. & pr. pt. Discou- 
raging. 
mi-mbisueachail, -e, a. Faint-hearted, uncoura- 
geous, cowardly, 2 Discouraging, disheart- 
ening, 3* Backward. —4** Dispirited, des- 
, onding, irresolute. 5 Dastardly. 
mi-mhisnich, pr. pt. a’ wi-mhisneachadh, v. @. 
Discourage, dishearten. 2* Dismay, damp 
the spirits, blunt, 3 Terrify. 
mi-inhodh, -à, -an, s. m. Bad manners, disres- 
pect, rudeness, impertinence. 2 Immodesty. 
3**Improper habit. Dad de mhb., aught of in- 
civility ; Aird’ a’ mhi-mhodha, the height of ün- 
pertinence. 
mi-mhodh, v.n. Act unpolitely towards one. 2 
Reproach, revile, profane. 
mi-mhodhail, see miomnail. 
mi-mhodhalachd, see mic mhalachd. 
mi-inhodhar, see miomhar. 
mi-mhoil, see mìomhail. 
mi-mhol, v.a. Dispraise. 2 Disparage. 
wi-wholadh, -aidh, son. Dispraiang, act of dis- 
praising. 2 Disparagement, A’ m-—, pr. pt. 
of mi-mhol. 
mi-mhuinicshinn, -e, s,f. Distrust, diffidence. 
-—each, -ciche, a. Dii&dent, dis- 




































v cm 


dence, 

minean, -ain, s.m. Dross. 

mia-aois, see mion-aois. 

mi-naowha, -naoimhe, @ Profane, unholy, irre- 
ligious, uusanctificd. 

m.-iaoihachadh, -aidn, s.m. Profaning, act of 
making unholy, profanation, A’ m-, pr. pt. 
of mi-na mhaici. 

mi-naomhachd, sf fad, Profanity, unholiness. 

mi-nàoinha/ch, pr pt. a’ mi-naomaachadn, | v.a. 
Profane, uahallow, deprave, deprive of holi- 
ness, A mh. an t-sauaid, that projaned the 
subbath. 

mi-naomhaichte, past pt. of mi-aaomhaich. Pro- 
lane, 

mi-varach, see mi-naireach. 

mia-bhailtean, see mion-bbailtean. 

min-ohallach, see miou-bhallach 

wiu-bharr,$ A, -an, s. m. Hem.ock, see mir. 
mheur, 

min-bhean,** s.f. Tender name for a wife. 

min-bheulach, -aiche, a. Soft-inouthed, flatter- 
ing, of smootüu speech. 

min-bheulachd, s.f. Soft words. 

miu-bhileach, -eiche, see min-bheulach. 

mia-bhriatbar, -air, -thran, s.m. Soft expression, 
gentle word, flattering word or expres-ion. 

miu-biritthrach, -aicha, a Of mild words. 2 
Flattering, fawuing, smooth-wortled. 

min-buris, v.a. da. Pound, puiverize. 2 Fall 
ia pieces, crumble. 

min-bhriseach, æ. Pulveriziog, crumbling. 2 
Apt tu pulverize or crumbie. 

min-bhriseadh, -idh, s. m. Round nz, act of 
pounding, pulverizing. 2 Siate of crumotinz 
or falling iu pieces, A’ m —, yr. pt. of Miu- 
bhris. 

min-bhriste, past pt. of min-bhris. Broken or 
crumbled into small pieces, powdered, pul- 
verized. 

min-bhruich, v.a. Boil. 

mii-ohrüth, v.a. Pound, pulverize, mince. 

muwehadh, for mìneachadh. 

min-chagainn, v.a. Masticate, chew into small 
pieces, munch. 

min-chagainnte, past part. of min-chagainn. 
Chewed, masticatec. 

min-ehagnah, -aidh, s.m. Mastieation, munch- 
ing, A’ m-—, pr.pt. ot min-cha zaiunu. 

min-chlach, -chloica, -chlachan, s. f. Smooth 
stone. 2 Pumice-stoue. 

-—aci, -aiche, a. Abounding in smooth 
stones, or pumice-stone, 

miu-chloimh, s.f. vown, 

min-ehruth, -a, -an, s.f. Delicate form or figure. 
2 Delicate person. 3 Smootu-skinned person. 

ach, -aiche, a. Ota delicate form 
or figure. 2 Nofi-feabured. 3 Simoovh-sala- 
ned. 4i**Sofi-complexioued. 

Emiode, $./. Sia aninieriug. 

miu-chüiseaeh, see mion-cauiseach. 








trustful. 
mi-mhurrach,tt -aiche, a. Incapable. 
mi-mhurrachas, -ais, s.m. Disqualification. 
mìn; -e, @ Soft, delicate, tender, 2 Smooth, 
not rough, 3 Level, of even surface. 4 Mild, 
meek, gentle. 5 Pleasant, melodious, har- 
monious, sweet, tender (of sound.) 6 Caim, 
unruitied (as water.) 7 Small, reduced to 
powder, pulverized, ground. 8 Soft, woolly, 
fine, like wool, of fine fabric. 9 Acute. 10 
ln Arran,Soft.gentle, where ‘fa dhuine mh.” 
is used as ** a dhuine chòir ”? elsewhere, aud 
* pàisdean m.” is an expression of endear- 
ment. 1ll**Polisbed, plain. Bruthaidh tu ro 
rain, thou wilt bruise very small ; miu bhasan 
bana, delicate white hands ; aoiach m., smooth 
cioth ; clachan mine an t-sruith, (or srutha) 
smooth stones from the stream ; an gille m., 
the gentle inojensive lad ; an nighean wh., the 
gentle maid ; min mh.,fime meal ; buntàta m., 
small potatoes ; buin gu m., deal softly or 
gently. 
min, -e,sf. Meal. 2 Any comminuted or pul- 
verized substance. M. iaruinn, iron filings ; 
soitheach mine, @ vessel of meal. 
m.-choires, oatineal. 
m.-chruithneachd, wheat meal. 
nm.-eararailh, meal from parched corn, 
m.-eoina. ba: ley-meal, 
m.-güradain, meal made from parched corn, 
ni.-puez vach, peas -nrak | 
m.-phouair, bean-medal, 











m,-sheaseul, re al. d piu dhuine, see mion-dbutrue. 
m.-ararai.L, see wiu-eararaidb, d toid-duus,-s.m, Powder. 2 Eine sand. 3 Dust, 
i| IT 
Digitized by UNIVERSIT F IL 


II) 
— = 
] 

P 


NT E ri NET AD fr Li 
! Sis | = nm AN Kë M 


| mine 658 min-lach n 


ERRER: ONE aE EE E A 
R pu : 0. ! d H ee 
nius, s /7ni. $:200.hness, polish. 2 Softness, preted, expounded. 2 **Snmoothed, polished, 
3 Absiraeied. 


ell, aen, 3 Miauveness, smallness. 4 Com- 
minicioun, Ann, -an, s.m. Kid-skin. 


miuaution. 5 Pasiilanimicy. 
Diva, comp. of min, Aiuvir bu mh. gnè, a vir- — -laoigh,(DMy) s.m. Calf-4kin 
yin of tne Sart-xt temper ; na’s m. na Oladu, Minicueag, JM) s.f. Sxin. 2 (DMC) Piece of 
smoother than oil. ' lamb-skia with wool on, put under saddle 
1| ncach, -eiche, o. M aly, abounding in meal,| M. nain, skin of a newty-born lam». Nie 
‘ike meal. j mini, N. Argyll, Glenlyon, Ze, ior binid. 
mineach, CR) s.m. Tender grass. minidh, -e, -ean, s.m. Shoemaker's awl, 2(AF) 
adh, ridn, s.m. Expounding, act of ex-| Owl. (meanaidn is a better form.—M M) 
poundiog, expiaiuing. 2 Expianation, illust- -tealla:ch,tt s.m. Hot iron for burning 
ration, account, expositiou. 8 Polishing, act holes in wood. (deign in Argyil—Fionn.) 
— —- -teine, Suth’d. for mi.iih-teallaich 


Cf polishing. 4**laming. ó**Pulveriziug. 6 

^" t » y A ds , e x 4 3 e . * 

Smoothing. A’ m , pr.pt. of minich. A m. minig, a. Frequent, often, frequently. Ni m., 
na h-earrainn seo, explaining this passage ; m.| q common thing ; t anmhuinneachd mi., thy 
frequen. infirmity. 


a Bhiobnill, an exvosstion of the Bisle. j 
minéachail, -z, de Illustrative, explanatory. miuiy (1. e. gu minic) a. Frequently. Is m. 
uair ’s is tric, many a time ani ofi sisma 


luimgachd, see miae. 

mincad, -eid, s. m. Degree of smoothness. A’ thaeh:as a leithid sia, the like of that Jre 
uol àui m., growing Susvother. quently happens. Garë 

Inivesadach, -aicue, see mionaideach, 

1iacaaair, s.n. Glosser, glossator. 

niuneadair, san. Mealias. 

niüüeag, -vig, -an, s.f. Gentle, meek or mild wo- 
man. 2**smouvch-saluned girl. 

ach, o Gentle-tempered, as a female. 

miaean,** -e.n, s.m. Dross, the small or dusc of 
coals, 2 Any drossy substance, 

mincan, -in, s.m. see néanan, ’ 

- -— ach, see meananach, 

mireanach, -aich, s.m. see mionanach. 

maluear, -eire, œ. see mineach. 

Lnu-eargnnas,** -ais, s.m. ignorance, 

m'neileaen, -ciche, a. see mi naideach. 

iniucil, -e, a. Mealy, like meal. 

iniueit, see mionaid. 

-——— each, see mionaideach. 

Miu-edlach, see mion-eòlach., 

min-eóías, see mion-eòlas. 

LXueag,OVC) s. f. Very endearing term of ad- 
dress, commonly used in Gutrloch, te, e. g. 
mineag nach toir thu dhomh pog? Always 
used to children by their mothers. 

min-euu,(WC) s.m. see mion-eun, 

nuüaueurach, see milearach. 

min-fhalt, sf. Down. 2 Soft, smooth or fine 
ha'r. 

mi:i-fheur, -fhedir,s.m. Soft or smooth grass, es- 
pecially sheep’s fescue grass. 2 Meadow, 3 
Flag, bulrush, see luacnair. 4**Closely-shay- 
en grass. 

min-fheurach,t a. Abounding in soft or smooth 
grass, 

nun-fheur-ehaorach, s.m. Soft sheep-grass. 

ng, see dena 

min-ghadachd, LN : d 

EE see mion-ghaduidheachd. 

min-jheal, -gLile, o, Soft and fair. Mo chail- 
cag bauvihe mh., my yellow-naired maid with 
skin so soft and fair. 

miü-ghob,(AF) s. Avocet. 

ana-ghoideaehd,** sf. see mion-ghaduidheachd. 

ain-:asg, see mion-iasg. 

ain-iarruino, s.m. lrou-filings. (also smùr- or 
»mürach-iarruiun.) 

"n uie, see minig. 

niniezag,(CR) s.f. Kid-skin. 

vüiaich, pr.pt. a’ mineachadh,[min'ceadh— Dàin 
/. Ghobha,] v.a. Explain, expound, illustrate, 
laterpret. 2 Polish, smoothe. 3 Make small, 
pulverize, 4**Tame. M. seo dhomh, explain 
this tome; mh. iad slighe Dhé na bu choimh- 
honta, they ecpounted the way of God more 
perfectly. 

\wiuiche, -an, s.m. Interpreter, expounder. 

miuichear, fut.pass. of minich. 

\ninichte, past pi, of mìnich, Explained, inter- 


ee ee 


























miaizeacn,(Ms) a. Accustomed. 

m:nigeachd, s$./. lrequeacy. 

unuls,* s. f. De.ree, set portion. ‘Ni sinn air 
muisibn e, we shall do it by degrees or allot- 
ted portions ; a’ choud mh, dheth, the first por- 
tion of it. 

minisdreachd, see ministrealachd. 

winistear, -eir, -an, s.m, Clergyman, 2 Minis- 
ter, $**servaut. Fonnus gu’m bithiun 'nam 
mh. aig Iosa Crìosd, so that I might ve a min- 
ister oj Jesus Christ ; b' aunsa leam minis- 
tear-maide na matadh-ministir, J prefer @ 
wooden minster to a ministerial hound—said 
by a pluughinan who had served under w9 
ministers. One was a “ Moderate” and a 
gentleman, the other an Evangelical and a 
tyrant. Toa friend, who asked his opinion 
of the respective merits of the ‘‘ ministear- 
maide " and the “ ministear-diathaidh,” the 
ploughman replied as above. QCróg ministeir 
agus spòg iolaire, a minister's *' paw '' and 
an eagre's claw—a saying attributed to * Dall 
Mor,” a North Uist bard and catechist. 

miuistsir, see ministear. 

miilsteireacü, see ministreil. 

ministeireachd, s.f. see miuistrealachd. 

winistrealachd, $.f.ind. Ministry, the clerical 
function, office of a clergyman, ministration, 
act of discharging the duty of a clergyman. 
2* Incumbency. M. an Fhacail, the ministra- 
tion of the Word. 

minisireil, e og Ministerial, connected with 
the clerical profession, 

min-ite, s.f. Smooth feather. 

min-lach,$ s. Field chamomile—anthemis ar- 
vensis. 2** finest of grass. 3**Dross. 








53h .Min-lach. — 695, Minmheut. — 





ES TOL 4 


i 
q 
d 
3 
| 


min-lamh 


min-iamoh, sf Soft hand. 2 Soft arm, 

min-lear,** sf Calm sea. Clos na m. uaine, 
the repose of the calm green sea. 

miumheur,$ Ar, ssm. Hemluck—conium macula- 
tum. (ill. 635 on p. 658.) 

minn, gen.sing. & n.pl. of mann: | 

tai Bech ** -ich, s.n. Mill-mountain (plant.) 2 
**Purging flax. 5*"Lie. 

minuean, -ein, -an, s.m., dim. of meann. Little 
kid. 2 Littie fawn or young male of the roe, 
3. WC) see mineun. Na minneanan laghach, 
the pretty young kids. 3 f : 

—— -ach, -aicnse, a. Abounding in kids or 
fawns. 

minnein, see minnean. 

—vach, see miuneanach, 

ninniceaz,-eiz, -an, see miniceag. 

minnicean, see miaicloun. 

minnseach, see miunseag. 

Ininnseag, -cig, -an, $./ Yearling she-goat. 2 
Doe in its firsi year, kid. | 

ach, a. Abounding in yearling she-goats 
or does. 

m -105, -Ois, -an, s.m. Bad custom or habit. 2 
immora'isy,,nisb2naviour, nnchasteness. 

—-—-—aAÓclh,-aicae, 4, Given to bad habits, mis- 
behaving, uuncoaste, immodesc. z**Urabbed, 
morose. 

———m.10r, -oire, a. see mi-nósach. 

min-phruiunte, yas! pt. of min-phronn, 
ed, pulyerized, bruised. 

mia-onaroun,pr pi a’ mii-phronnadh,v.a, Pound, 
bruise, pulverize, granulate. 

-—, à. Pounded, pulverized, 

-—adn, -aidh, s. m. Pounding, act ‘of 
pounding, bruising, pulverizing. A’ m—, pr. 
pt. of miu-pheonun, - 

min-rann, -rainn, $.f. Smooth verse, 

Iniu-rO3g,-ruisg, At, s.m. Soft, meek, mild or 
gentle zye-lui. “ff soft eye. 

ach, -aiche, a. Mceek-eyed, having a 
meek or geutie Look, 

Minseach, see miunseach & minnseag. 
min--shüil, -shüla, -ean, s.f. Mild-eye, soft eye. 
2. PinxK eye. | 
——each, -eiche, æ. Mild-eyed. 2 Pink- 

eyed. 

minsich, see minnseig. 

min-uch l,** s.f. Soft ureast. 9 Smooth breast. 
O ^m. bà», from her soft fair breast. 

ach, a. Haviog a suft or smooth breast, 
soft or smoocn breasted. 

mio-, prefix, see mi-. 

miobhadh, s.m lij-us»g?, as by weather. 

miobnail, -e, @ see miomhail. 

eachd, see mioumaalach.l. 

mioch,** s, Bushel. 

Inlochuineas, s.m. Donation. 











Pound- 

















mioehuis,* s.f. Flirtation, pretended indiffer- 


euce, coquetry. 

each.* æ. Coquettish, flirting as 

prude, leering with the eye. 

eanehd,* s. f. Flirtalion, coquetry, 

assumed indiferenca. ` 

miodair,** gen.sing. & n pl. of miodar. 

miodal,-ail, sow. Elattery, fawning. 2 Fair 
sveech, 3 Insinuation. Le m. tlàth, with 
smooth flattery ; luchd-miodail, fla Lrerg, 

Miviaiach, -aicae o  Fawuin,;, ilattering, 
smooth-lipped. Beul m., a flatterina mouth. 

————d,** s/f. Hab t or practice of flattery, 
sycophancy. 

micodalaiche,** s. m. Fawner, flatterer, 
Am ser. 

Mmivital vir, -gan, see mio 'alaiche. 

--eachd, see m'oda:acnd. 

miodalan (DMO) snr. a" labberer. 








a 








2 


.—— 





| j | i I 
NTERNET ARCHIV 


659 





miolcais fag; 


miodar, -air, vl. -air & an, prov. ior meadar. 
Pasture-ground, meadow, good pasture. 

miodarach, -aich, s.m. Ausated wooden dish. 

—, -aiche, @ seo meadarach. 2 Hary- 
ing good pastures, abounding iu pasture. 3 
(àis) Ausated. 4 Full of wooden dishes. 

miodaran, -ain, s.m. Noggin. (meadaran.) 

iniodhoigh, s. Anarchy, 

miodhoir, -e, @ Ni girdly, penurious, paltry, 
mean, contempti.l:, avaricious. 2 Coarse, 
sordid. Gu m., peuuriously. 

miodhoir, -e, -ean, s.m. Churl, niggard, paltry, 
mean, contemptible person. 2 Miser. 3 
Churlishness. 

-—eachd, s.f.ind. Churlishness, niggard- 
liness, paltriness, meanness, baseness, ava- 
rice, penuriousness, sordidness. 2 Abject- 
ness, poverty. 3 Dirtiuess, 

miodhuil, s, Dislike, aversion. 

miog, -a, -an, s.f Smile, smirk, sly or wanton 
look. (ff{mivog) 

—-—ach, -aiche, a. Smiling,smirking,sly-lookiag. 
2** sparkling, A bianarach mh.! thou dainty 
smili g dai, ymaid ! sùil mh. bhòidheach, o 
sly pretty eye. 

miogadaich, s.f. see meigeadaich. 

mìioghiachadh, (CR) s.m. State of suspense, fear- 
lug or anticipating evil, 

Mivghuataaicite,(sls)a. Odd. 

mi-oileanacn,(M3) a, Home-bred. 

miozg-shuil, -shüla, -ean, s.f. Smiling or laugh- 
ing eye, sly look, inviting eye, leer:ng eye. 

miog-sbuileach, -eiche, @. Smiling, smirking, 
haviag a laughing eye, sly-looking,leering. Z 
Pink-eyed. 3**Having an inviting eye. 

mi-oidhirpeach, -eiche, a. Slothful, lazy, unin- 
dustrious, 2 Not endeavouring, unenterpris- 
liig. 

mi-o:.leanaich,ft v.e. Misteach. 

miol, -a, -an, see mial. 

—ach, -aiche, a. see mialach. 

miolag,** s.f. Melon. 2 Any small thing. 

miolainn ort ! (CR) int. (mi-loinn) Bad condi- 
tion to you ! (an imprecation.) 

miviairtich, pr. pt. a’ miolairtich, v.a. Fawning. 
'S e (an cù; m, gu sodanach, and it (the dog) 
fawning joyjuliy— Donn. Ban. 

miulan,** -ain, s.m. Lie 

miolacan,-a:sn, San, The low barking howling 
or Whiniag of a dog when fawning, whimper. 
2 Lameut, soft, wailing vuice. Rinn e m., 
he howled. 

ach, -aiche, a. Barking,bowling or whin- 
ing with à low voice. 2 Lamenting. 

——— ——Aàich, -e, s.f. Contiuued barking with » 
low voice, howling or wüinmug, whimpering. 
z** Waling voice. 3**Loud lament. 

—aica (Mo) v.m Fawn. 

miolasg, -aisg, s.f. Flattery, fawning, as of a 

| dog. 2 heen desire. 3 Skittishness vi a 

| Lorse. 

ı ——— ch, -aiche, d. Fiatteriog. fawning 2 


p» 














| Koeuly desirous. 3 wkiitish, »estive. 4 Ca- 
joling. Gu m., ina flatieriag manner. 

—-— achd, 8s Jant, see miviasg. 

——-——alr, -ean,s.in. Flatterer, fawning fellow. 

Pena s. Whey. 


M.viC, V.d. Sootne, Cajole. 2 Flatter 

——-—aen,** son. Chur!, clown. 

———aci, da Flaileriug, proue to flatter. 
Clow nish. 

ailh, -ailh, Flattering. 

| dug. A’m-—, pr.gt. vi miolc. 

—-— —air, s.m, Cajoler. 

(———-—adjreachd, s.f. K laoveev, practice of flattery. 

| —-— ais (UR) SJ. Caressing, fundling— West of. 
Ross-shire. 


o 
E 





2 Cajoling, sooth- 


mi»l-choilla 660 








mio -en^í!ie,** s.m. Woodlouse. 

miol-ehià, -choin. see mial-cha. 

miol-m ag, see muile-mnag. 

miol-m agig,(Ms, st see muile-mhag, 

miol-fniodha, see mi il fniocna, 

1n19l-m ór, $. m. see mial-mhór. 

mioltag -Aig. -an, see ialtag. 

mioltag-leathair, s.f. see ialtag. 

Tmiomasg,** -aisg, s.m. Lance, spear, javelin. 

Tiniomhadnh, -aidh. -aidhean, see mi-mhodh. ` 

Tmiom (äich, see mi-mhodh., 

miomhail, -e, 
mannerly. 


miomhalachd, s. f, ind.  Rudeness, imperti- 


nence, unpoliteness. 2 Immodesty, 3 Dis- 
resoectfulness. ; à 
wiomhar, a. Ill-bred, uncivil, impertinent, 


: Of unbecoming habits. 
miomnalachd, see mi-mhodhalachd. 
m on, s 7n. Diadsm. 
mion, A. @ d pref. Small. 

3 Distinct. 4 Mean, 
imiona-h, -aich, s.m, Metal. 
mionach, -aich, -ean, 8.m. Bowels, entrails, in- 

cestines, guts. 2 Fairy-flax, see lion-nam-ban- 

sith, 3(DU) metavhorically, The works in a 

watch or mechanism. Nighidh tu amh.,thou 

wiit wash its entrails, 

——— ail, tt -e, a. Intestinal. 

mionachd,tt s. rind. Minuteness. 

mionachas, see mion-acras, 

mion-acrach, -aiche, a. Hungry, voracious, ra- 
venous, 2**!Iaving a false appetite. 3*Eat- 
ing but little at a tims, as an invalid. 

maion-acras, -ais, s.m, Extreme hunger, voraci- 

ousness, ravenousness, craving for food. 2 

l'alse appetite. 

-— —ach, -aiche, a. see mion-acrach, 

mi mad, -aid, s.m. Degree of minutenesa or 
fineness. Is m. a’ chlach gach buille, the 
stone becom’s mor? powdered at every blow. 

ni»nag,) -aige, -aigean, s. f. Cranberry, see 
muileag. 2(WC) see mineag. 

nvonaich,tt see mionach. 

mionail,-e, -ean, s$. f. Minute, moment of time. 
7** Minute of proceedings. Air a’ mh., this 
minute, this instant ; mionaidean comuinn, a 
society’s proceedings ; m. no dhà, @ minute or 
trou; m. gu leth, a minute and a half. (MeL 
& D vives s.m.] 

zach, -eiche, a. Constant, perpetual, 
in quick succession. 2 Punctual, precise, par- 
ticular. 3*Minute. 4 Circumstantial. arr 
gu m., Search minutely. 

=A chauh,** -aidh, ssm. Inculealing, ex- 
plaining, minute explanation. 2 Act of tak- 
ing down minutes. 

ch,** pr. pt. a’ mionaideachadh, v. a. 
Ineulcate, explain minutely. 
minutes. 

m'onaigir,** s.f. Vinegar. 

mionaire,(M-) s. Barefacedness, brass. 

miovnalach,(MS) æ. Grail. 

mionalaich,(MS) v.n. Garble. 

Thionan, -ain, s3e meanin. 

ach, s.m. Mannixin. 

miou-aois, -e, $f. Minority, state of being un- 
der full age, 

-each tt a. Minor. 

mionarach,(MS; a. Andicious, bare-faced, 

wionohaic tt v.a. Bedwarf. 

mion-viailtean,*, s.pl. Suburbs. 

mion-bhallach, à. Having small spots, spotted, 
speckled. Laoizhmh., spotted calves. 

miou-bhradach, a. Ligut-fingered, prone to petty 
thefs. 

tniun-bhraide,** at, Petty larceny. 


2 Punctual, exact. 








Wee 


Sr 7 








— - 





[D 


a mr F H d ET A R C LIIL E 


2 Take down. 


mionn 


mion-cheasnachadh,** -aidh, 8.m. Scrutinizing. 
crOss-examination,close questioning. A’ m~ 
pr.pt. of mioa-cheasnaich. 

mion-cheasnaich, pr. pt. a mion-cheasnachadh 
v.a. Scrutinize, examine m.nutely or strictly 
cross-examine, 


mion-chlacn, s.f. Gravel. 





—— —A&'h, a. Gravelly. 
mion-chorrach.** a. Very stesp, precipitous. 


mion-chruth, -a, -àn, semn = Abritgment. 


mion-chuileag, -eig,-an,s f see meanbh-chuileag. 


a. Disrespectful, iil-bred, un- | m'on-chüiseach, -eicne, a. Puactiiious, particd- 


lar about trifies. 
tual. 

mion-chunntas, -ais, -an, 8.71. Short, or particu- 
larly strict account or reoxoaing, detailed 
account. 

miondan, -ain, s.m. Long-tailed titmouse, 

mion-dearbnadh, s.m. Account. 2 Detailed proof 
or evidence, | 

mion-dhealbh, 8.723, Miniature (picture.) 2 Little 
image. 

mion-dhuine, pl. -dhaoine, $.m.Dwarf,maunikin, 
diminutive fellow. : 

miou-dreach, s.m Little image, 

tinton-eallach, (AF) ach, 8. m. Small cattle 
(sheep and goats.) 

mion-eolach, -aiche, a, Intimately or thoroughly 
acquainted. 

mion-eòlas, ais, 8$. m. Intimate or thorough ae- 
quaiutance, 

mio neun, (DU) s.» Meadow-pipit, 

mion-fhacal, -ail, «.m. Articl», 2 Minute word, 

mion-fmosraich ff -aiche, a. Well-acyuaiated, 

mion-fhliueh.1f v.a. Bedew. 

miou-fhraoch, see fra»ch-Frangach. 

miong, Suthk’d. for méag. 

miougach,(AC) a Sour-faced., 

mion-ghadachd, see mion-ghaduidheachd 

mion-vhaduidheachd, s.f.ind. Petty chsft, pil- 
fering, larceny. 

mion-ghearr, v. @ Cut into small pieces, hash, 
mince. 


2** Mean. 3**Strictly punce 





—aAdh, -ailh, s. m. Mincing, act of 

miuciug or cutting into small pieces. A’ m —, 

pr.pt. of mion-giiéarr, 

—ta, past pt. of min-ghéarr. Cut inte 
small pieces, minced, 

mion-ghlirinneas.(M*3) s.m. Refia ment. 

m ongradh, -aidh, s.m. Goiwing, 

miou-iAsg, -éisg, pl. -an & -éisg, & m. Small fish 
or fishes. 2 Minnow. 3 Snoal of Dan, 

mion-ite, s.f, Small feather. 

mion-léir aan,(M >) s.f. Penetration. 

mion-mneéirle, s.f. Larceny. 

mion-miotuachail tf e a. Nervous. 

mionn, A. An. s.m. & f. Oath, imprecation, 2 
Vow. 3 Curse, 4**Bell. t6 Crown of the 
head. #5 Skull. t7 Crown, diadem. 8* D:- 
claration on oath, Saor om mhionnaibh, 
free from my oath ;m. nach coir a dheanamis 
cha choir a ghleidheil, & oath that ought 
not to be made ought not to be kept -« great 
deal could be said both fur and agaiast the 
morality of this proverb. If one ventures in 
a company of Gaels to disapprove of it, the 
retort usua'ly is, *'* than you think Herod aci- 
ed rightly in beheading John the Baptist," — 
whicn silences orthodox folk. Th»ir mionn- 
an, swear, give oath; gabh mionnan, æ lminist- 
er an oath ; ceangal nam mionn, the obliga- 
tion of oaths; miounanu-eithich, a false oath, 
[nom. sinj. in Gairloch is mionn.] 

mionn, $. Particle, jot, atom. Cha’n "ail m. 
de m’ rùn dhiot, thou hast not a particte of my 
affection. d 

mionn, Dä. & n. see mionnaich. 











p 
pr 
d 
E 
3 


mionn 


mionnach, -aicae, a, Prone to swear, 2 Cursing, 
swearing. 3 Votive. 

Seegen, -abin, $s. 77. 
swearing or maXiug oata, 
using imurecations, 3 Vow, imprecation. 
m —, yr.p'. of mivunaich, 

misun chail, -o, a, Juratery. 

mionnadh, s.m. see mioun, A 

mionnaivh,** 2nd. per.pl. imp. of mionn. Swear | 

e. 

ehn, pr. pt. a’ mionnachadh, v.a. & m. 
Swear, make oath, vow, avow. 2 Administer | 
an oath. 3 Swear, imprecate, curse, 
dùòmh-sa air Dia, swear to me by God. 
- —te, past pt. of mionnaich., Sworn, 
bound by oath. 2**Cursed. accursed. T'ha e 
m. ris ga'n cuir e as dhuit, he is bound by 
an oath to finish your days. 

miunnan, -ain, s.m. Small mound, 

mionnan, w.p/. of mioon. 2 dim. of mioan. 

miounaran, see miontau. 

m onnt,-a, $.m. Mint, spearmint, eppermint. 

aino,(AH) sr Water-mint —N. Argylt. 

air, $7, Swearer. 

an, see miounain & miondan. 

miountan,** -ain, s.m. Wren. 2 Tom-tit. 

mionntas, -ais, s.n. see meannt. 

mionatuinn, s.m. see meannt. 

mion-oerach, see mion-acrach. 

mi-onoir, s.m. Dishonour, disgrace. 2 Dishon- 
esty, fraud. 

mi-onvireach, -eiche, @. Dishonourable, dis- 
graceful. 2 Dishonest, fraudulent. 

-—adh, -aith, s. m. Dishonouring, act 
of dishonouring. A’ —m, pr.pt. of mi-onoirich. 

mi-onoirich, v.a. Dishonour, 

miou-rann, -rainn, s.f, Short verse, short poem. 

muon-rannsaich, v.a. Search thoroughly. An do 
mhion-ranunsaich thu e ? did you search it mi- 
nutely ? 

fmionsa, s.f. Month, now mios. 

mion-sgrudadh, -aidh, s.m. Criticism." 

mion-snüileach,ff-eiche, a. see min-shuileach. 

miontan, -ain, -an, SL Long-tailed titmouse, 
see cìochan. (also mionntan. ) 

Mion-theagasg, -aisg, $t lnstullation, 

miorailt, -e, sf see miorbnuil. 

each,* -eiche, see miorbhuileach., 

—eachd, s.f. see miorbhuileacnd. 

fmiorbhadh, -aidh, s.m. Killing, destroying. 


2 Cursing, act of 
A' 





athe 























nuorbhuil,-e, -ean, s.f. Miracle, wonder. 2 
Prodigy, phenomenon. [tt gives m. r.l 
——.——each, -eiche, à. Miraculous, marvell- 


ous, wonderful, amazing. 

-—eachd, s. f. und. Wonderfulness, miracu- 
lousness, maryellousness. 

mi-ordail, -e, a. Disorderly. 

m'ortail, see miortalach. 

mortal, -ail, -an, 8.f. Myrtle—myrtus commu- 
is. 





ach,** a. Abounding in, or like myrtle. 

ach,** -aich, sm. Myrtle shrubbery or 
thicket. 2 Place where myrtles grow. [** 
gives s.7.] 

miortalnach,** -aich, s.f. see miortalach. 

muoruu,-uin, see mi-rün 

—ach, -aiche, a. see mi-rünach, 

————-achd, s.f. see mi-ranachd. 

mios, -a, -an, s.m. Month. 2 rarely Moon. O 
mh. a dh’ aois, from a month old ; fuil mios, 
x: menstrua! courses. [McL & D gives m. 

mios, -éis, -au, see mias. 

mios, see meas. 

miosa, comp. of ole, Worse, worst. (Used as 
Positive degree in Uist, W. of Ross. dc., as, 








6-1 


ee eee 
minn, see meannt. "' | tha i cho miosa, she is so bad.] 


Swearing, act of | 


miotair 


Riut-sa na's 
miosa na riü-sau, with thee worse than with 
them ; am fear aa mM., the devil. 

miosach. -aiche, o Moutuly, menstrual An 
gular M., menstrual cours’s. 

, Ach, s.f. Fairy-flax, see lion-nam-ban- 

sitn. | Purgiag-flax,mill-mountain—McL & D] 

in, -ain, pl. -an & -ain, s.m. Calendar, 
almanac. 2 (MM) Monthly magazine. 

miosad, -aid, s.f. Degree of balness. 

mìosa lair, s.m. see miosachan. 

mui sail, -e, @, 32e masail, 

nuiosall,-e, @ see miosach. 

miosar, -air, -airean, see ineasair & meadar. 

———-ach, -aiche, a. see measarach. 

achd, t.f. Measurement. 2 Mensuration. 

miosairicn, see measairich. 

mi bochuin,(Jit. month of swelling—AC) s.m. 

Ay. 

mios buidhe, (am), s.m. July. 

mioscuisich, (MS) v.a. Lessen., 2 Prejudice. 

mios-dhortacn,** a. Menstrual,flowing monthly, 

mio3-dhortadh, -aidh, sm. Menstrual courses, 

mios dubh, (am) s.m. November. 

miosg, see measg. 

miosgainn, -e, s.f. see miosguinn. 

miosgais, -e, s.f. see miosguinn. 

gach, see miosguinneach. 

miosgan, -ain, pl. -an & -ain, s.rn. Kit, wooden 
vessel for holding butter. 2 Cheese-vat. see 
measgan. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to, kits 

or cheese-vats. 2ttHaving much butter. 277 

Butter-making. A Bnealltuinn mh., butter: 


making May. 
miosguinn, -e, -ean, $.f. Malice, spite, hate. 2 
| Luchi do mh., people 


EEN 

















Grudge. 3 Poorness. 
who have a grudge against you; lem. garg, 
with bitter spite. 

miosguinneach, -eiche, a. Spiteful, malevolent. 
2 Envious, grudging. 

miosguinneachd, 8.f. see miosguinn, 

mios marbh, (am) s.m. December. 2 February 
in N. Argyll — AH.) 

mios mhadrail, s.m. July. 

miosneach, -ich, see misneach. 

— — —— —ail, a. see misneachail. 

miosraich,(CR) v.n. Think, sup pose, conjecture. 
—W. of Ross-shire. (measraich) 

mios-shruth,** s. Courses. 

miosta, see miostadh. 

miostadh,"* -aidh, s.m. Mischief. 2 Loss, 'S 
ge b' aobhar stri e, gu'm fuilginn miostadh, 
anl although it should be a cause of strife, I 
would suffer or forego loss ; 'g a ghleidheadh o 
mhiosta, preserving him from harm or los8— 
Duanaire. 


miotag, -aig, -an, $.f. Mitten, worsted glove. 2 
Any glove. : 
tmiotag, -aig, An, s.f. Fright, terror. Cha 


ghabh thu fuathas no m., thou shalt not be 

afraid. (meatag) 

ach,-aiche, @. Wearing mittens, having 

mittens, likea mitten. 2 Full of gloves or 

mittens. 3 Gloved. 

achadh. -aidh, s.m. Putting on of mittens 
or worsted gloves, gloving. A’ m-, pr. pt. of 
miotagaich. 

miotagaich, pr.pt. a’ miotagachadh, v.a. Pub 
on worsted gloves. 

——_——--—te, past pt. 
2 Gloved. 

miotag-bhuilhe,$ s. f. Bitter-sweet, 
nigntshade, see searbhag-mhilis. 

miotailt,s.f. see meiteal. 

—— ——each, see meitealtach. 

miotair,(MMcD) s.f. Drinking-cup, called also 








Furnished with mittens. 


woody 


miotair eui LZ Ome SS T ee 


** noigean.” 

tmiothag. -aig, -an, see spitheag. 

aich, see spitheagaich. 

——--—— .bhuidhe, s. f. Woody nightshade— 
solanum dwutcamara. 

miothair, (MS) a. _Beggarly ' 

m'othairrd," s.f, State of not being looked after, 
unprotection, (mi-aird) 

m othaireachd, (MS) s t Scantiness, 

miothapadh,(MS) sm. see m'apadh. 

miothar, -aire, a. see miodhoir. 

—achd, s.f see miodhoireachd., 

miothlachd, s.find Offence. displeasure, re- 
sentment 2t{Unhandsomeness, unpleasant: 
ness 3"*Contempt, disrespect, 4 Listless. 
5 Discontent disgust. 6 Discord A toilltinn 
m. dume sam bith. incurring the resentment 
of any person, smachd air luchd-m., Sway 
over th» discontented 

mi-phàirteach, -eicne. a. Niggardly. not willing 
to communicate or share. 

-e, 4. see mi-phairteach. 








—— —  — al, 


mi-phiseach. (MS) s.m. Loss. 
mi-phongaich,tt v.a. Mispoint. 

mir, s.f. Mow, built up pile of hay, corn. straw 
peats, &c. 2 Section of a mow. [** gives 
mire. } 

mir,(AC) s. Wort. 

mir, pr.pt. a’ mireadh, v.a. 
wont, ? Flirt. 

mir, e, pl. ean & -annan s. m. Bit, part or 
piece of anything, as of bread. &c. ? Lunch- 
eon. Chan el m. agam, 1 haven't a partiel»: 
na h-uile m., every bit. mir mona, @ subdivy.- 
sion of à peat- -stack . m fearainn. a noch of 
ground ; crioman mire, og smal! bit of bread: 
gearraidh tu e ‘na mhiribh, thou shalt eut him 
"n pieces ; m. cuthaiga. see gretm-cnthaige. 

tmir, -ean. s.m. Lop, summit. [** gives s.f.] 

mjnrcean.$ -eln, $. Badderlocks, hen-ware—ala- 
rid esculenta. 

mircean, s.m,* Certain part of seaweed called 
* badderlock ” It consists of the kind of 
leat-like growths,called ** earball-sàile " from 
their bitter or salt taste. On each side of the 
mircean is the ** rusg ” or peel, and between 
it and the short bare stem (close to the rock) 
called “ cas dhubh,” are the ** duilleach,’ 
several short leaves or sprouts, 

mir-córr, see mir-mor. 

mere, $. find. Plav, pastime. 2 Mirth, sport- 
iveness, merriment, levity, giddiness, 3 Bux- 
omness. 4 Flirting, Deech 6 Transport, 
rapture, ecstasy. 6 Transport of rage, fury, 
ardour, vehemence. 7 poetical, Madness. 8** 
Quickness. | 9**Dissoluteness. 10 see mir. Ri 
m. ghoraich, indulna in foolish mirth : air 
mh., in a transport, in an excess of mirth , tha 
e air mh., he is stark mad : cuir air mn., trans- 
port with joy. dh’ é rich iad suas gu mire, 
they rose up fo pour m-cbatha, rage of bat- 
ile ; m.-chuthaich, m^dness, quickness or vo- 
tence of motion ; m.-shruth, o rapid, ragıng 
ylream. 

mire, com», of mear. 

m'read,-id, s. f. Merriment. degree of merri- 
ment, sportiveness, hilarity 

m readh, -idh, s.m. Play'ng, sporting, diversion, 
frolic, mirth. 2 Pastime. A’ mc, pr. pt. of 
mir. Dh’ éirich mad gu m., they rose to play ; 
air mh., going to excess in mirth, l Qnspor ted 
with jou "a nn, Arrting, sporting, mers y-ma- 
king; a’ m. rt, furting with, 

m reg, -cig, -an, s.f. dim. of mire. Sporting, 
paving’, friskin ig. 2 Pastime. 3** Playful, 
wanton girl. Is tric rinn mi m. rint, oft have I 
spo: ted with you; spréidh ri mireig, cadile | 


Sport, play, frisk, 


——— ——— E 


mi-riaghailteachd 


` ak age ae E n sequeE qn 


sporting. 

mireagach, -aiche, a, Playful, sportive, frolic: 
some, 2 Wanton. Sùilean m., wanton eyes ; 
gu m.. playfully. 

| Mireagachd, s.f.ind. Playfulness, sportiveness, 
jocoseness, 2 Wantonness. 

mireaz-nan-cruaceh, s.f. Uist game—a more ad- 
vanced form of the gums" tig” wnich is 
played in harvest-time round the hav anl 
coru-stacks, the passages among which give 
spiendid opportan'ties - of hidinz When tha 
signal is given, the chaser comes round tha 
Stacks after the other play»rs, and as each 
Oneis found, heis out of the ga ne till they 
are all discovered. when the first to bs 
caught is mide hunter tor Uz next round. 
The. signal for this gam > to bəyin is the «hob 
of ' ' Mha’ Alc nan eruach ^ Un: dt comin 
aijon of "hide and seek aad’ Ug " for tha 
plavers hide ‘round the stacxs, but it is nob 
enough for the searcher to see them, As in 
* hide and seex,” he must touch them ag 
in* tig’ On the other hand, those causnt 
are out of the game till ail are cangat, wie 
the first cvught becomes the chaser—Uist. 
Games in Crltic Remew. No 16 [Walled ** cur 
nau sgiobag” 1n Lewis—DMy ] 

mirean,** -eiu, 3 m. Froli csomeness plavful- 
ness, sporéiveness.. Gille mirein. a whirtg y. 

mirean, § sm. Agrimony, see mur-dhroiginan, 

mìrean, ein, An, 8. m., dim. of mir. Little 
pieee, portion, fragment. 2 Grig. 3 “ Piece” 

mireanach, aicha, a. Merry. playful, causing 
merriment. Fonn m., @ lively strain. 

Mireanach, -aicne, a. Abounding ia small pie- 
ces, portions or fragments. " 

mireanacn -aich, s.n Bridle-bit, rH 

mir2anachd. s.f. ‘Sportiveness, playfulness. 3 
**Liveliness, merriness, 

mireanaich, v.a. Shatter. 2 Portion, share, : 
piece. 

mireann, see mirean. | 

ach, @ see mireanach. 

mireanaiente,** past pt.Shattered, 2 Portioned, 

mireannach, s.m. Bit. 

mireannan, n pl. of mir. 

mire-chatha,** 8. f Battle- frenzy, extreme in- 
dividual fury in battle. Bithibh air mh., rave 
ye for bat'le ; a’ sgathadh cheann le m., hew- 
ing heads in the fury of battle, 

mire-chuthaich,** s.f. Madness, frenzy, trans- 
port. of madness, raging madness, 

mire-meala,(AC) s. Honey ın the comh. 

m're-mhulaa, s.f. Children's game among ths 
corn- stacks, something like * mireag-nane 
eruach.” 

mire-reothairt, s.f. Fury of spring-tide, 2 Vio- 
lent spring-tide. 

mire-sbruth, s. m. Rapid stream, boiling, im- 
petuous current. 

mi-reusau, -ain, s.m. Repartee. | ! 

mi-reusanta, @ Irrational, unreasonable, not 
right, absurd. Gu m., unreasonably, 

mi-reusantachd, s.f. Unreasonab! ieness, uncon- 
scionableness. 

mirfiionnach,(DC) s.m. Bit for a horse's mouth 
— Oust. (also mireanach) 

mir-guailne,** $./, Shoulder-piece. 

mi-riaghaiit, -e, -ean, s f. Misrile, disorder,con- 
fusion, irregularity 2 Anarcay, uproar, riot, 
tumile, quarrel, rebelliousness, dissoluteness, 
informality, unru: iness. 

mi-riag Uno -eiciie, a, Disorderly, confused, 
irregular, 2 'l'urbulent, rebellious, qnarrel* 
some, riotous, unrulv intractable. 3 3 [nforar 
al. 4 Dissorute, 5 Eccentric. y | 

mi-riaghailteachd, st see mi-ria zhailé, 





mi-riachailtich 663 mi-shedltachd 
mi-riaghailtich, v.a. Confuse, confound, disar- misgeach, -eiche,q. Drunken, addicted to drink- 


range, R ing. 2 Drunk, intoxicated. Cha dean (duine) 
mi-riazhladaireachd, sJ. Mis-government, mal-| m. breug, a drunkard nər lies; fear m., a 
administration. drunkard, 





mi-riaghladh, -Aidh, 8 m. Anarchy. 2 Confusion. -—d, SE see misgearachd. 
3 Mis-managing, mis-management, malad: mi-sgeadaich,** va. Dismantle. 


ministration. missealachd, see misgearachd. 
mi-rian -a, -an, s.m. Disorder, turbulence, con- misgear, -eir, "au, s.m. Drunkard, tippler. Am 
fusion. 2 Want of humour. m agus an geocair, the drunkard and the 


mi-rianail, -e, a, Disorderiy, disordered, confus- glutton., 
ed. 2 Indiscreet. Tha mo chàirdean m., my —achd, s.f Drunkenness, habit cf drunk- 











friends are wwliserest, enness. 2*Potations, Rj m., at potations. 
Mi-rianalas, -ais, s.m. Disorder, confusion, 2 misgeil. -e, a see misgeach. 
Indiseretion. mi-sgeilm,(DMy) s.f Untidiness, 
Mi-riasanta, see mi-reusanta. ——Ar.& Untidy 
-—chd, see mi-reusantachd. lui-sgeinm, -e, Er. slovenliness.tawdriness, un- 
mir-córr, see inir-mór. tidiness | ?* Indecorum indecency 


br -rioghachd,** s.f, Anarchy. 2 Republicanism. mi-*geinmeil, -e, a. Slovenly, untidy, tawdry. 
mi-rioghail, e, e Unkingly, unbecoming a Gu m., uniidily, 


king, *unprincely. 2 Disloyal. misgeir, see misgear 
uii-rioghail,* v.e Misrule. mi-sgeul, -é:1, -edil, am. Bad or false report or 
mi-rioghailt, s.f. see mi-riaghailt. tale. cahunny. Tog m., raise a false report. 
ini-riogbalachd, s find. Disloyalty, republican- m--sgiamnach, q. Homely, iuelegant, 
ism. misg cn,tt v.a Inebrniate, 
fiuirle,** at Bat, globo. m -3spileil, o Unskilled. 
Inir-mór, s.m, Mess composed of chopped col- Ini-sgiobalta, .ailte, a. Inactive, lazy. 2 Njo- 
lops and herb seeds. Venly, untidy, sluttish. 3 Awkward in dress 


mirr, -2, s.m. M yrrh—myrrhis odorata. 2$] or gait, not smart, clumsy, Gu m., untidily, 
Sweet cice:y or great charel Bia mMar—see | mi-spiobaltachd, $,f. ind. lnactivity,laziness, 4 
gos-uisge, Sloveniiness, sluttishness, 3 Awkwardness 
in dress or gait, 4* Untidiness. 

m sg.ort, sf. indecent behaviour—Suth’d. 

mi-sgcinn, -e, s/f. Inactivity, want of energy. 2 
Dlameableuness, 3 Indecency. 4 Careless- 
Ness, negligence, inattention, iudifference, 
want of method. 

mi-sgoinneil, -e, a. Inactive, wanting energy, 
2 Milly, awkward. 3 Careless,inattentive,caus- 
ing 1udifference or disdain. 4(MS) Incorrect. 
Gu m., carelessly, 

mi-shamh,** q. Rough, rugged. 2 Hard. 

mi-sheadh, -a, s.m. Want of sense, stupiditv, 
absurdity, nonsense. 2 Heedlessness, indif- 





à ference, inattention, carelessness. 3 Worin- 
- lessness, 4 Indolence. 
586. Mirr. musheadhach, "ache, a. Illogical. 2 Nonsensi- 
- is . ` T 1 1 Ca $ 
oe $m. Brisket. [carran-uchd in Lewis mi-=headhail, e, q. Senseless, stupid, absurd, 


mi-rün, -rüin, s.m. Malice, ill-will spite, mal- nonsensical. 2 Heedless, indifferent. 8 Iu- 
-evolence. Luchd mo mhi-rüin, those who hate dolent, 4 Weak. S(DMC) M orthless, 
me. dE E à A, eres, inattentive, 2 
. Minunach, -aiche, q. Malicious, spiteful, mal.| Seuseless. Tak, Y : 
evolent. ' Seachainn a’ manAR mà., avoid | mi-shealbh, “a, "aD, s.m. Misfortune, disappoiut- 
malicious people ; gn mM., maliciously meut, ill-luck. 


iai-rùnachd, s./ Same meaning as mi-rün mi -shealbhacn, -aiche, a. Disastrous, unfortu- 
d r e mo ^ > : . 

wis, see miseach. nate, unlucky : 

mais, See mios. mi-shealbhachd, s,f. Disastrousness, unsuccess- 

mis' an diugh ! int, Alas! (lit. me the day.) fulness. 


misd’, see misde. mi-shealbhar,** a. Adverse, see mi-shealbhach. 
misde, comp. of ole, Worse, worst. Cha mh. thu | , Gu m., wnluckily. i 
sud, ida are nol a bit the worse for yon ; | tmi-sheamhas, Ais, s.m. Bad luck, mishap. 


'dé is m. thu e? what are you the worse for it ? imi-slicamüsar, aire, a, Unlucky, unfortunate. 
misdeachd,* s, fand. Inferiority, deterioration 2 Ourinous, 


2 Tear. mi-sheire, zë, Sf. Want of charity or benevo- 
mi-sdiüir, see mi-stiüir, lence, unkindness, uncharitableness, 2 Dis- 
Bese,(AC) s. see mixeach, aitection, dislike. 


Mise, Pers. pron. ist. pers. ind., emphat. ot mi, | mi-sheircealaelid, sf. see Eeer 4 
Myself. Có a rinn e? mise, who did it ? I did. (m -5h ircvil, e a, “Uncharitable. 2 Surly, un- 
Maiseach, ich, -ichean, o €. W. Ross-shire and affectionate. ` tom ag 
Suth'd. for minnseach or minnseag. Gobhair, | Mi-shedl, v.a, Mislead, misguide, misdirect. ` 
mi-ich is òisgean. goats, kids and ewes. ~ adh, aidh, e m. M isleailing, act of mis- 
nmsean, Suth'd. form of mise. leading or misgsmd'ng. A’ mCo—, pr. pt. of mi- 
misg, -e, 8.f, Drunkenness, intoxication, 2 De. | *h-ol WA A RET 
bauch, inebriation. Le geócaireachd agus Je | mi-»heolta, a, Wanting 'ngennity, unskilful,in- 
M., with sur feiting and drunkenness ; air mh. expert, unhandy Gu m., in?zpertzy. 
drunk ; uair air mh. is uair air uisge, on’ day mi-sheoltachd, s.fand. Want of lu20enuitv, dex. 
drunk and another drinking watr, | verity Or skill, inexperiness, igoienco, un: 


NTERNET ARCHIV 


mi-sheoltacba 664 j Ini-stitrennan $ 


MÀ EE 


——— 


skilfulnsss. 
ini-syheun, -a, s.m. Ill-luck, misfortune, m'shap. 
mi-shionhailtaach, see mi-shiobhaltach t. 
ini-shiobhalta, -ailte. a. Rude, uncivil,uap lite. 
2 Turbulent, troublesome, unquiet. 3 Imper- 


ti next. 

-— — ———chd, s.f.ind. Turbulence, unquiet- 
ness. Lncivility, unpoliteness, rudeness, im- 
neriinence, ? 


mi-shnas,tf -ais, -an, s.m. Ineleganca. 
mi-sh^a ai 'h. MS) v.a. Botch. 
mi-sinasait, a, Homoly, uncomely, iaelegant. ` 
mi-shnasalachd (M3) s./. Bungle. 2 Rusticity. 
mi-shruadh (JMC) san. Paiefacedaess, sickly Veoh 
1o», 557. Mis'e'*n. 
— ail, (DMC) a. Palefaced, poorly; tude. 2 Alacrity. 3 Manliness, 4 Cheer. 5 En- 
lo «ing. Gonrag ament, Biodh deagu mh. agaibh, be 
ai -hoea r, -e, -ean, sf. Discomfort, uneasiness. | of good cheer ; glac m., or gabh m., pluck wn 
2 Di quietude, uncomfortabieness, unsettlel| courage ; le dith misnich, fer want of courage; 
sb vta. is beag m. tna sin a’ toirt dhomhsa,that afords 
mi-3hoeair,* see mi-shocrach. but sien ier encourajemnt to me ; cum suas do 
mishoeraen, -aiche, œ. Troubled, disturbed,| mh., ke»p up your spirits ; thoir m. math dha, 
uncasy, uncomfortable. 2 Not firmly situa-| kee» him in gon! svirits ; cum am m. mhata 
tel, uasettled, unstaid. Gu m., unco nfort- e, keep him in good hopes ; fear na misnica, 
ably. the brav» man ; chaill e a mh., he is quite dis- 
mi-shoilleireach4, s.f.ind. Inevileneo. hearten’d ; cna’n 'eil a’ mh, agad, you have 
mi-shona, &, Unhappy, unfortunate, unblest.| not the courage ; do mhac-samhutit am m., thy 
Gum , unhappily. equal in courage. 
mi-shonas, Ain, sm. Misfortune, mishap, un-|misneachadh, -aidh, s.m. Exhorting, act of ex- 
happiness. 2 Bad luck. horting or encouraginz, abetting, encourage- 
m -shnaimhneach, -eicn>, a. Restless, uncom-| ment. A’ m—, pr.pt. of misnien. 
fortable, disquieted, disturbed, annoyed, dis- inisneachail, -e, a. Courageous, spirited, intre- 
tressed. 2 In confusion. 3 Causing trouble} pid, brave, manly, undaunted. M. treubh- 
or eoutu ion. ach, courageous and heroic; gu m., courage 
mi-shuaimineachd, s.f. Same meanings as mi-| ously. 
shuai nhneas. | misn»achair, s.m. Encourazer, exhorter. 
mi-shua'mhneas, -eis, s.m. Disquietude,trouble, misn2achas, -ais, s.m. see misneach, 
vexation. 2 Agitation. 3 Discontentment. | misneachd, s.f. prov. for misneach, 
mi-shuaire, e, @ Inhumane. 2 Uncivil, unpo- | misneachdail, -e, prov. for misneachail, 
libe. 3 Uugenerous, Gu m., uncivilly. imisnealacnd, s.f. Courageousness. 
mi-3huaireeas, -eis, s. m. Want of generosity, | misneil, -e, @. see misneachail, Gn M., courte 
ungenerousuess, illiberality. 2 Incivility, | ageousty. 
churlishness. 3 Inhumanity. misnich, pr.pt.a’ misneachadh,v.a. & n. Exhort, 
mi-zhubbaileeach, a Unvirtuous. eucouraze, inspire, enliven, refresh, cherish. 
mi-shuzhar, -aire, a. Sapless, unsubstantial, 2 Be encouraged, become spirited. 3 Venture. 
pithless. 2 Indiscreet, imprudent. 3 Uncivil,| Am fear nach m. cha bhuannaich, who won't 
unpolite. venture shall not win — N.G.P. 
mi-shuim. s.m. Meedlessness, indifference, care- misreadh, see measradh. 
iessness, neglect, inattention, Quir air m., | wmi-stath, s. m. in. Mischief, harm, evi. 2% 
neglect, regard with in iiferencs. Vanity, idleness, 3{{ s.f. Inutility. 
ai-shuimeii, -e, a. Heedless,iadifferent, careless. | miste, see misde. : ^ Mr 
ita m., herdlessly. inistear, Ap, -irean, s. m. Cunning, designing 
m.-3hunnd, WC) s.m. Spiritlessness, dulness. person, under-dealer. À 
- —ach,(DMC) a. Spiritless, cheerless. mi-stéidhealach 1, s.f.ind. Instability, unsteadi- 
mi-shurd, -üird, s m. Indolence, inacóivity,lazi-| ness, fiekleuess, giddiness, tottering condition. 
ness, lowness of spirits, dulness, want of in-|mi-stéidheil, -e, a. Wavering, unsteady, not 
dustry. having a good foundation. 
x mi-steorn, v.g. Mis-spend. 
mi-stiuir, pr. pf. a’ mi-stiuradh, v. n. Mislead, 
misguide, misadvise. 2 Steer in a wrong 
course. 
mi-stiüireachi, s.f. Misconduct. 
mi-stiuireadair,** s.m. Misleader, misguider. 2 
Bad steersman. 
| eachd,** s.f. Misguiding. 2 Mis- 




































vil, -e, a. Indolent, inactive, lazy. 2 

Melbunenoly, dall, sad. 

-—alacnhd, s.f.ind. Indolence, habit of 
laziness or inactivity. 

misimean-dearg, -ein-deirg, s.m. Bog-mint, see 
ealeocal. 

misiomaict,** s.f. Foul or unfxir play. 

misleaeh, s. m. see minnseag. 2 Sweebness— 
Dain I. Ghobha for milseacad. 

misleach 1,(MS) sf. Smoothness. 

mistean,(Afl) -ein, s.m. Very small potato, 

nislean, -ein, s.m. Sweet meadow grass—an- 
rrocanthum odoratum. 2 see beitean, 

—ach, -aiche, a. Abounding iu sweet 
mountain grass, 2 Springing up as grass, veg- 
etative, Glacagm, à grassy dell. 

misieanach, s. see milearacn. 

tiislein, see mislean. 

mi:lien, v.a. see milsich. 

mi;neach,-nich, s.f. (& m.] Courage, spirit forti- 











steeriag. 

mi-stiuireadh, -idh, s.m. Misleading, act of mis- 
leading or misguiding, mismanagement. 2 
Bad steering. 3 Anarchy. 4* Seducing, se- 
duc:ion, 5* Jum snageableness. : 

inistiüireaeh, -aiche, @ Misleading, misguid- 
ing, 2 Mis-sbeering. 

mi-stitrach, see mi-stiüireae^. 

mi-stiüradh, pr.pt. of mi-stiüir. 

mi-s6iürannam, $.pl Misdeeds, bid courses. 2 
Bad intentions. 2 (DMC) Bad instruction, 
evil counsels. 





Original from 
Digi ] by , UNIVERSITY 


2 j M e a eS 
en eee E Se 
/ [B NIE ARCHIV 
d SN d = AN ka W 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


OF ILLINOIS AJ 


Mec * 
pS —— MO 


TX 


sn-pd#asn ssa22e/buo'snaniuyeu'MMWM//:dyu / 53845 payun SU) ui urewog ai[qndg 
J6tusxdpi/ooeccT/:1e'onin/7zozAsu'sjpueu'ipu//:dmu / LNS SO:6T #I-Z1-61T0z uo payesauag 





sn-pd#asn ssa22e/Bio jsnjiujeuMMm//:dyy (sage payun au) ul ulewog ai[qnd 
jJorucydpi/oo6eT/se'onin//zozAeu s|jpueu'pu//:dmu / LW S0:6T tFT-ZI-6I0z uo payeiauag 





sn-pd#easn ssa22e/Bio jsnniueu MMM duu (sage payun ay} ul ureuio ai[qnd 
jJorucydpi/oo6eT/se'onin//zozAeu s|jpueu'pu//:dmu / LW S0:6T tFT-ZI-6I0z uo payeiauag 











2 118030920 


A 





The illustrated Gaelic dictionary : specially designed for beginners 
and for use in schools, including every Gaelic word in all the other 
Gaelic dictionaries and printed books, as well as an immense number 
never in print before / by Edward Dwelly. 


Dwelly, Edward, 1864- 
Herne Bay : E. Dwelly, 1911. 


http://hdl.handle.net/2027/uiuo.ark:/13960/t81k4mp1k 


Hathilrust 





www.hathitrust.org 


Public Domain in the United States 
http://www.hathitrust.org/access use#pd-us 


We have determined this work to be in the public domain 
in the United States of America. It may not be in the 
public domain in other countries. Copies are provided 
as a preservation service. Particularly outside of the 
United States, persons receiving copies should make 
appropriate efforts to determine the copyright status 
of the work in their country and use the work accordingly. 
It is possible that current copyright holders, heirs or 
the estate of the authors of individual portions of the 
work, such as illustrations or photographs, assert copyrights 
over these portions. Depending on the nature of subsequent 
use that is made, additional rights may need to be obtained 
independently of anything we can address. 


hm 


m" 


r 
H 
: 
d 
d 
y 


i 








Qo 
X 
42 
A 
a 
O 
Läd 
© 
Be 
t 
Oo 
= 
O 
aA.” 
O 
O 
Q 
wa 
E 
42 
c 
t 
= 
42 
© 
D 


Latest Date stamped below. 


Library 


inois 


ty of Illi 


IVersi 


Un 


L161—H41 





sn-pd#asn ssa22e/D1o'jsn.niuyeu'wwww//:dyu / sajeis payun 3y} ui ulewog sand 
xXr1duupxXr81/oo6£1/:31e'onin/z zozAeu' sjpueu'|pu//:dnu / LW ESOT £Z-ZT-6T0z uo payeiauag 





sn-pd#asn ssa22e/D1o'jsn.niuyeu'wwww//:dyu / sajeis payun 3y} ui ulewog sand 
3T1duigxreY096£r/:x1e'onin/z ZOZAsu'ajpuey|py//-dyy / LNS €S:9T €Z-ZT-6T0Z uo pajyessusay 





sn-pd#asn ssa22e/D1o'jsn.niuyeu'wwww//:dyu / sajeis payun 3y} ui ulewog sand 
3T1duigxreY096£r/:x1e'onin/z ZOZAsu'ajpuey|py//-dyy / LNS €S:9T €Z-ZT-6T0Z uo pajyessusay 








The 
Illustrated 


GAELIC 
Dictionary 
SPECIALLY DESIGNED FOR 
BEGINNERS AND FOR 
USE IN SCHOOLS, 


INCLUDING EVERY GAELIC WORD IN ALL THE 
| OTHER GAELIC DICTIONARIES AND PRINTED 


i BOOKS, AS WELL AS AN IMMENSE NUMBER 
NEVER IN PRINT BEFORE, 





BY 


EDWARD DWELLY. 
| F.8.G,, 
a 


Y ol. 
JAebíseu Evitton 


HERNE BAY: 


| PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHOR 
e |y) SINGLEHANDED, AT HIS PUBLISHING OFFICE IN 
MILL LANE. | 


gel 


1911 




















VA oy Kg Sms EE Ee — € gë AS 
/ L d» » x 
P ZS V G 19 e uf 2 e" i. Sy y= i ant el ! 
P XP I HT y fer) APTAS, £o. fori SBE s ee] cQ 
a y SUZ SS Ə ) L7 x er, Ne D 
hr? y at T. ed 
—— (ate A vos "2 ———Á D 
—S ( SJ d SS £ 
D 
INIVEI TY OF INO 
URBANA-CHA | A IGAN 























































jJ d Gei E Eso 

l E uh. ‘a . V $ d Kä? 
i i RT ra f. POS 
g À - as ail 4 


4 ^" A * 
E". ve 


e 

Mex: 

, mi-stuama 
ma, &. Immodest, immoral, unchaste. 2 
noderate, intemperate. 3 Unguarded. Gu 
., immodestly. 

. mi-: nachd, s.f.ind. Immodesty. 2 Intem- 
L E ance, immoderateness. 8 Unguardedness. 
— Miteag, -eig, -an, see miotag. 

eagach, o. see miotagach. 


D 


g 4 ^ ed | 
e LE D 
j H: K WË 
wi 
i A SE pus 
Le. | 7 d 
A AE A. 
l t+ 498 
Lat 
E rä 
(E C D 
ps rd 
tow 
re 


x i-s l5 
E 


H - amit 1, -e, -ean, s.m. Obscure or humble person, 
_ ene of the common people. pl The common 
~ people Gach m. agus maith, each peasant and 


noble. 

—mi-thàbhachd, s.f.ind. Inefficiency. 2 Silliness, 

— weakness. 3** Meanness. 4** Uncomeliness. 

— 5(DMC) Undaring. 

= mi-thabhachdach, -aiche, 

m substantial. 2 Weak, silly, feeble. 3 Un- 

- comely. 4**Mean. 5 (DMC) Unventuresome. 

-XY-thàbhaehdas, -as, see mi-thabhachd. 

~ tii-thaicealachd, s.f.ind. Feebleness, infirmity. 
2 Unsubstantialness. 


san 
72 Y 


a. Inefficient, un- 


gr i-thaiceil,** æ. Feeble, infirm, not stout, un- 
_ — able to give support. 2 Unsubstantial, 
-- Mmi-thaing, -e, s.f. Thanklessness, ingratitude, 
^... ungratefulness. 
-—-mi-thaingealachd, Same meanings as mi-thaing. 
= mi-thaingeil, -e, a. Unthankful, ungrateful, 
not easily satisfied or pleased. Gu m., un- 
thankfully. 
— mi-thairbhe, s./.ind. Disprofit. 
-— Inefficacy. 4 Disadvantage. 


Wi 
D 


2 Damage. 3 


 mi-thaitinn, v.n. Dissatisfy, displease, offend. 

~ 8 Disagree with. Mh. e ris an Tighearn. it 
displeased the Lord. 

© mi-thaitneach, -eiche, æ. Disagreeable unpleas- 
ind ant, offensive, unsatisfactory. Gu m., unsat- 

~ igfactorily. 

 mi-thaitneadh, -eidh, s.m. Displeasing, act or 

displeasing or dissatisfying. 2 State of becom- 

‘ing displeasing or disagreeable. 3 Disagree- 

ing with. 4 Disagreeableness. A’ m—, pr.pt. 

| D mi-thaitinn. 


d 


mi-thaitneas, eis, s.m. Offence. 

— mi-thaitnich, v.n. Same meanings as mi-thait- 

pi-thapachd, s.f.ind. Inactivity, slowness,slug- 
— gishness, slowness, unalertness, 2 Inexpert- 
- mess, 3* Cowardice. 

' mi-thapadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Misfortune, 
mishap. 2 Same meanings as mi-thapachd. 

~ mi-thapaidh, -e, a. Inactive, sluggish, dull 2 

7 Not stout, infirm. 3(DMC) Unforward. Duine 

~ mz, a grumbler—Arran ; is mi-thapaidh (pron. 

* . miapaidh), 'tis pitty—Arran. 

— mi-tharbhach, -aiche, a. Unsubstantial, un- 

JESUM pss, unfruitful, unproductive, fruitless. 

Pi age ha iai uile m., they are all nnprofitable. 

- mi-tharbhachd, s. f. ind. Unprofitableness, un- 

= productiveness, unfruitfulness. 

we Et an, n.pl. of mith. 

| mithear, -eire, a. Weak, infirm, crazy. Gu m., 

crazily. —— 

T mi-theist, -e, -ean, s.f. Calumny, reproach. 

| mi-theisteas,* eis, s.f. Ill-repute, misallega- 

r} jrih on, à 

--mi-theisteil, -e, a Reproachful, disgraceful, 
. disreputable, 

A mi-theistneas, see mi-theisteas. 

1 mi-thedma,** a. Artless, unacquainted. 

| mi-bheomachd, s.f. Artlessness. 2 Sluggish- 

|| ` mess. 

d v ithich, a. Timeous, opportune. 

- Mithich, s,f.ind. Tine, proper or fit time or sea- 

= son. Is m.dhuirn falbh, it is time we should 

~ be off ; is m. dhuiba éirigh, it is time you should 
‘ise ; cha'n uair roimh a’ mh. e, it is not an 

hour before the proper time; air mh. a’ dol 

dhachaidh, on the eve of going home ; is mith- 


t 


TTA mp í 
dr NE Í A ai ‘Al E: | ! f 
s DW Sr: "A " "Am . i] In. A. e a " T 


da 








Ec i A? | Ai '. 
E COO 






idh a bhi 'bogadh nan gad, (see 
rug ileanabh roimh ’n mhithich 
livered before the time. 

mi-thlachd, -an, s,f. see miothlach 

mi-thlachdar, see mi-thtachdmhor. 

mi-thlachdmhor, -oire, a. Ill-favoured, unhand 
some. 2 Disagreeable, unpleasant, disgust- 
ing, contemptible, 3 Unsatisfactory. 4 Imper- 
sonable, 6**Cuoleric, angry.  6* Vexing, 
galing, 

mithlean, -ein, s..Soort, diversion,amusement. 
2 Trick, crafty deed, 3tfBad manners. 

———A^h, -aiche, a. Sportive, playful. 2 Cun- 
ning, crafty. 3 Mischievous. 4 Having bad 
manners. 

mi-thlus, -uis, s.m. Hard-heartedaess, want of 
tenderness or compassion, want of affection or 
feeling. 

mi-thlusail, -aile, d. see mi-thlusar. 

mi-thlusar, aire, o Hard-hearted,cruel, unfeel- 
ing, devoid of tenderness, compassion, feeling, 
or affection. 2 Cold, as clothes next the skin, 
uncomfortable. 

mi-thiusarachd, s. f. ind. Harshness, cruelty, 


unkindness. 2 Coldness of manner. Un- 
comfortab leness, as of clothes. 
mi-thogarrach, -aiche, o, Averse, unwilling, 


uninclined, backward. Gu m., unwillingly. 
mi-thogradh, -aidh, -ean, s.m. Aversion, unwil- 
lingness. 2 Evilpropensity. 3 Lust. 
mi-thoil, -e, s.f. Want of will, unwillingness,re- 
luctance, backwardness. 2 Ill-will. 
mi-thoileach,-aiche, v. Averse, unwilling. 2 
IfDiscontented, dissatisfied, displeased. Gu 
m., unwillingly. 
adh, -aidh, s.m. Displeasing, act of 
displeasing or dissatisfying. 2 Dissatisfaction. 
A’ m—, pr.pt. of mi-thoilich. 
mi-thoileachas, tf -ais, s.m. Discontentedness. 
mi-thoilich, v.a. Displease, dissatisfy. 
-——te, a. & past pt. of mi-thoilich. 
mi-thoillteannach,ff a. Undeserving. 
mi-thoillteannas,tf ais, s.m. Undeservedness. 
mi-thrathaich, v.a. Mistime. 
mi-threorach, «. Weak. 
mi-throcair, -e, Ss. f. Cruelty. 
[McL & D gives s.m.] 
——each, -eiche, a. Cruel,merciless. Gu 
m., cruelly. 
mi-tborachas,ff -^is, s.m, Infertility. 
mi-thruacanta, -ainte, œ. Hard-hearted, unfeel- 
ing. 











2 Inclemency. 











chd :.f. see mi-thruacantas. 

S, -ais, s.m. Incler Ly, uncom- 
passionateness. 

mi-thuarail,(DC) a. Ill-looking— Uist. 

mi-thuig, pr.pt. a’ mi-thuigsinn, v.n. Misunder- 
stand, misconceive. 

se, s.f.ind. Misunderstanding, stupidity, 

want of comprehension, senselessness. 

seach, -eiche, a. Senseless, stupid, unin. 

tellizent. 2* Absurd. 

sinn, -e, s.f. Misunderstanding, act of 
misunderstanding, misconception. A‘ m—, 
pr.pt. of mi-thuig, 

mithur,** see miodhoir. 

mi-uaibhreach, -eiche, a. Condescending, hum- 
ble, not proud. Gu m., condescendingly. 

mi-uaigneach,** œ. Not solitary, not secret. Gu 
m., publicly. 

mi-uaill, -e, s.f. Humility, condescension, want 
of pride, ignobleness. 

mi-uallach, -aiche, œ. Dull, spiritless. 2 Hum- 
ble, not proud, 

mi-uasal, -uaisle [& -uasaile] a. Ignoble, mean, 
ungenteel, 2 Condescending. 

mi-uaisle, st Meanness. 

















2 U 


Original, Troon 


E n ha | 
GEM SLE? Pl Td 


TY, AE add NGS 





mug 






eog, 
ean, see miodhoir. 
, &. see miodhoir. 
each, -eiche, a. see miodhoir. 
sachd, s.f. see miodhoirzachd. 
miuinte, a Lady-like. 
mi-ivnhail, -aile, a. Disobedient, rebellious,con- 
tumacious, unsubmissive, insubordinate. 
wi-umaiachd, a tot Disobedience, rebellious- 
ness, disloyalty, insubordination. 
miun, s.m. see miann. 
miuran, -2in,-an, s. m. 
Ee qparsnip. 
-—— n, -aiche, a. Abounding in, or like, car- 
rots or parsuips. 
' wrain,-aim, $. m. Dishonour, disrespect, 
disgrace. 
uch, - ^ehe, æ. Dishonouring, disres- 
pectiul. 2 Dishonourable. 
achadh, -aidh, s.m. Dishonouring, act 
of dishonouring or disobeying. A’ m—, pr. 
pt. of mi-urramaich. 
mi-urramaich, v. a. Dishonour, disrespect, dis- 
obey. 2 Disgrace, degrade. 
miuthair, -e, see miodhoir, 
—eachd, s.f. see miodhoireachd. 
miüthara,** see miodhoir. 
mnà, (for mnatha) gen.sing. of bean. 
mnai, n. pl. of bean (see mnathan.) 
mnuaibh, (for mnathaibh) dot ol of bean. 
innai'ealachd, see mnathalachd. 
mnaoi, dat. sing. of bean. Thug e dha a nigh- 
ean 'na mnaoi, he gave him his daughter to 
wife; mar mhnaoi, as a wife. 
mnaoidh, dat. sing. of bean. 
mnaoidheil, -e, a. see m':athail. 
mnatha, gen.sing. of bean. 
mnathaibh, dat.pl. of bean. 
mnathail,-e, a. Womanish, like a woman, ef- 
feminate, 2 Modest. Gu m., modestly. 
mnathaileachd, see mnataalachd. 
mnathalachd, s.f.ind. Womanliness, modesty. 
muathan, n.pl, of bean. Women, 2 Wives. 
mo, pess.pron, My, mine. Mo cheum, my foot- 
step ; mo nighean, my daughter. [Aspirates 
its noun. | 
mo, comp. of mor. Larger, largest. 2 Greater, 
greatest. Is esan a’s m., he is the greatest; 
cha mh. orm thu 's an cù, Z do not value. you 
. more than a dog; dé is mo orms’ thu ? what 
\ do I care for you ; cha mao ani mi e, neither 
will [do it: is mó e nasin, it is greater than 
that, cna r 2am dé a their thu is beagan, 
I care miserably little for what you say ; o'n 
aon a’s lugha gus an aon aa mo, from the 
least to the greatest ; is mò e na gach aon, he is 
greater than all ; cha mho orm, I don't like ; I 
care not; gu ma mo a ni sibh, may you do 
more ` cha mhò na thu féin a gheibheadh e, 
none but a friend like yourself would get it ; na 
'S mo agus na 's mò, or ni bu mho 's ni bu mhò, 
greater anil greater ; na 's mò na mise, taller 
than I ; (2) any more than me. In Arran, is 
mo tha 's nach "eil, is a common formula of 
reply to questious answered with yes or uo, 
aud has the force of a modified or qualified 
assent, e.g.ia reply to Are you tired ? it means 
a ‘‘ little," the phrase S mo seadh 's no nach 
eadh, is similarly used. 
tmo. s.m. see Tmodh. 
moan, see inothan. 
mob,** gt Mob. 
mobach,** a, 
**Tufty. 
mobag, -aig, -an, s.f. prov. see mabag. 2 Young 
girl with moppy hair. 
ach, -aiche, a. prQy: for mabagach. 








Carrot, parsnip. M. 











2 Tumult. 3 Mop, tuft. 
Bushy, shaggy. 2 Moppy. 3 





666 modhalachd 


mobainn, pr.pé. a’ mobainn & a mobainaeadh 
v.a. Malirsat, abuse, tag, han lie roughly.. 
, $m. & pr.pt. see mobainueadh. Fnuair 
ea ob, he got himself roughly handled. 


mobainneadh, -eilh, s.m. Maltreating, act of 


abusing. 2 Tagging, rough handling. A’ m—, 
pr.pt. of mobaiun. Ji 

moe, v.G. Move, yield, give way. 

moch, moich [& muiche,] a. Early. O dhùsgadh 


na maidne moich, from the awakening of early ` 


dawn. 

moch, adv. Early, betimes, soon, Eirich m., rise 
early; moch an dé, early yesterday ; is m. a 
dh’ éirich thu! how early you rose! m.is an- 
moch, early and late ; m. am màireach, early 
to-morrow ; gu moch, early. 

moch, s.m. Dawn,morn. O mhoch gu dubh, from 
dawn til dusk ; anns a’ mh., in early dawn. 

moch-abachd,** er Early ripeness,prematurity. 

moch-abaich,** æ. Soon ripe, premature, preco- 
cious. 

mochaireach,(MS) a. Early. 

— —d, (M5) s.f. Earliuess. 

tmochd, s.f. Promotion, advancement. 

moch-eirigh, s.f. Early rising. Is tu a rinn a’ 
mh, ! how early you are a-foot ! rinn siad m., 
they rose early ; deanim., rise early. [pron. 
moch'ert. ] 

moch-éirigh, @ Rising early. M. agus ion-éir- 
igh, rising early and sitting late ; bi subhach, 
sùgrach, m., be cheerful, temperate and om 
early riser—alvice to those wno do not wish to 
shorten their days. 

ino chradh ! int. My torment ! 

mo chreach ! int. Alas ! (my plundering.) 

mo ehreachadh ! see mo chreach ! 

moch-ghlaodh, s.m. Early cry. Chual na creag- 
au a mh., the rocks heard his early cry. 

mochthrath, s. f. The moraiug, dawn. 2 
(DU) “ Morning " i. e. morniog dram. "Sa 
mh., in the dawn, early in the morning. 

mochthrath, adv. Very early. Bha e seo m., 
he was here very early. 

—— —a&àch, -aiche, a. Early. 

mod, -did, -an, s.m. Court, court of justice, 2 
Assembly, meeting. 3 Petty court. 4 Baron 
baillie court. 5 Court at which presides the 
agent of landed proprietors, to adjust differ- 
ences among tenants, and to take cognizance 
of all abuses of any portion of his employées’ 
property. 6 Annual competition held in 
Gaelic literature and music, &c., under the 
auspices of An Comunn Gaàidhealach. 7 
Discontent. A’ dol do ’n mh., going to the 
court, 

módach, -aiche, @ Holding courts or meetings 
2** Of, or belonging to, a court. 3 Fond of 
meetings, forensic. 

imodh, s.m. Man. 
Servant. 4 Work. | 

modh, .a,-an &-aunan, s. f. Manner, mode, 
fashion, method. 2 Manners, good breeding. 
3 Respect, honour. 4 Mood in gram. 5 Ad- 
dress. 6 pl. Morals, good morals. Duine gun 
mh., an ill-bred man; aira’ mhodh seo, tr 
this manner ; air mh. àraidh in a particular 
way. 

foal pu a’ modhadh, v.a. Train, tame, as 
a horse. e 

modhadh, -aidh, s.m. Taming, act of taming or 
training. A’ m—, pr. pt. of jmodh. 

modhail,** a. Mannerly, welt bred, courteous. 
2 Moral, well-principled. A Delicate, mild. 
4 Fashionable, modish. 4 

modhalachd, s.f.ind. Mannerliness, good breed- 
ing, politeness, courteousness. 2 Morality, 
modesty, delicatemess. 3 Mildness. 4** Ad- 


brig il Trem 





2 Maleof any creature, 3 


UNIV 





d s 


modhalachd 





dress. 

modhalan-buidhe.$-ain, sm. Yellow ra'ilo or 
cock's-ecomb, peunygrass— A naauthus crista- 
gall, [** gives Red-rattle. ] 





588. Modhalan-buidhe. 

moTh^'an-learg,$ s. m Lousewort, re@-rattie, 
see lus-riabhach, 

 modhan, -ain, s,m, The sound of a bagpipe or 
otuer musical instrument, +2 Childbirth, 
travail. 

modhanach, -aiche, a. 2 Cere. 
monial, customary. 

mo lhanaiche, comp, of modhanach. 

modhanail, -e, @ Ethical, moral, 
nial, (see modhail ) 

modhannan, s.pl, Ethies, means, modes, cere- 
KEE principles. Lagh mam m., the moral 
ai. 

moólhar, aire, a. Soft, mill, tender. 2 Quiet, 
calm, still. -3 Silly. 4 Gentle, 5 Limber, 
mannerly. 6 Precise, 7 Moving calmly. 8 
Mettlesome. An gleann m. nan sruthan lùb- 
ach, 1n the still val of the m "undering stream- 
lets ` oidhehe mh., a .a/m night. 

modharachd,** s.f. Mildness, composednesg, še- 
dateness, calmness. . 

modh-dhamh, ~thaimh,(AF) s.m. Plough-ox, 

tmo:lh-lann, -lainn, s m. Tabernacle, tent. 

hinodh-mhargadh, -aidh, s m. Slave market. 

modh-oide,ff -an, s.m. Moralizer, 

mo dhòruinn ::24. My anguish ! 

modh-saine,** sm. Slavery. 

modh-sanntachd, $ f. Slavery. 

modh-searrach, (AF) Filly or colt of a cart- 
horse. 

modh-sgéil,tt -e, $. Apologue. 

modh-siolaich, s,m. Remnant of seed left to 
produce more. 2 Manner of breeding, 

mo dhuwilichinn ! int. Alas ! amy sorrow.) 

mòg, -oig, -an, s.f. see mag. 

“up maka aber 4. see gens 

mogach, Tf -aich, s. m. Raw youth. 2**8 | 
fellow. 3**Shagwy inis ai hagey 

M. 


mogaách, -aiehe, a. Nhagev, hair 
& f. id. Suagginess, hairiness, 


see modhail. 


2 Ceremo- 


y, rough. 

ladhrach, shaggy and long-toed. 

mogaiche,1f 

. roughness. 
mogaiche, comp. of mogach.- 

mozaiche, com». of wo ach. 

mogain, gen.sim]j. & n.pt. of mogan, 

m gais. AC) Ancient form of ancaor, formed of 
a cylinder made of heather roves, bound ` 
Strongly together, closed at one end and filled | 
with stones. 2 see mogan, 

mogal, -ail, -an, see mogul. 

ach, see moyvulach, 

mogan, -ain, An. $,m. Stockin 
the part to cover the feet. 2 Old Stocking. 3 ` 
Boot-hose, sock, 4 Loose sleeve worn over 
another. 5 Blouse. 6 Leg of a pair of trou- 
Sers or drawers. 





g worn without- 


667 





7 (AC) Spirits distilled from | 


moi1 

oa's—Uist. §** Defect in a thread. A’ dof 
nan mogan, putting on their foot- zar — A r- 
ran ; m. briogais, the leg of trousers ; dà.ha ch 
pam m. the name given to Duirinish, Dunv-g- 
an by the inhabitants of Trotternish. 


| tmogan, -ain, s.m. Young hero. 
|moganach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to, old 


stockings, or 2 bvot-hose, or 3 whisky mada 
from oats. Am Fearann m., (or mogaiseieh), 
the name given to Duis ini-h, Dunvegan, by the 
inhabitan's of Trotie: nish. 

mogarra,tt a. Robust, brawny. 

Tmogh, see modh. 

moghar, -aire, a. see mòdhar. 

mogh-saine, see modh-saine. 

mogh-sanntachd, see modn-sanntachd. 

moghul, see mogul. 

moghna, (AF)3.:4. Salmon. 

moghan, -uin, see modnan. 

moglach, see mogulach. 

moglachadh, -aidh, s.n. Husking, aet of husk- 
ing, or taking off husks. 2 (AH) The act, on 
the part of fixh, of going into the meshes of a 
drift-net. A’m—, pr. pt. of moglaich. 

moglaich, pr. pt. a’ moglachadh, v. a. Husk, 
take off the husks, unhusk. 2 Kmt. 2(AH) 
Get involved in the meshes of a drift-net. 

——-——te, past pt. of moglaich. Liusked, strip- 
ped of the husks. 

moglaidh, a. Soft. 

moglan-garbhi, (CR) s.m. Sea-urchin —Gairloch. 

mogul, -uil, -an, s.m. Husk, as of nucs. v Mesh, 
interstice ofa net. 3 Shell, as of frutt. 5** 
Brauch, 6**skin of a boiled unpeeled pota- 
to. 7**Glebe. 8 Mesh, hed.lle-eye io loom. 
9 Cluster, as of nuts. 10 (WC) Entang'einent 
male by a conger eel in a lierrieg-net. M. 
nau sul, the apple of the eye, the ey»-lid ; 
bha e 'sa mhogul, he was hesitl im, undecided 
—Glenlyon. 

mogulach, -aiche,a. Husky. abounding in husks. 
2 Reticular, formet in m shes, asa net. 3 
Like net-work. 4 Sbelled, uusked. 5 Plen- 
teous, 6 Branchy. 

mogulan-tràghad, (WC) s.m. Sca-urchin—Pool- 
ewe. 

mogul-lin, sam Mesh. 

mogunn, -uinn, see mogul, 

mogur, -uire, a. Buiky, ciumsv, corpulent. 

moibeal, -eil, -an, s.n. Broom, besom, mop. 

ach, -aiche, a. Of, or ^boundingz in, 

brooms or mops. 2 Like à broom, 

moibean, -ein, -an, see moibeal. 

—ach,** a. In tufts, moppv. 

achadh, -ailh, s.m. Act of rubbing, 
serubbing or washing with a mop. A’ m-, 
pr.pt. of moibeanaih. 

moibeanaich, po. Rub, mop, wash with a mon. 

-——te. vast pt. of moibeansicn. Rubbed 
or washed with a mop. 

mvibill,* pr. pt. a’ moibleadh, v.a. dan Gnaw, 
hali-chew. 2 Mumble, mutter. 

moibleach,** a. Gnawing, chewing. 2 Half- 
chewing, nibbling. 

moibleadh, -eidh, s.m. Gnawing, h+'f-chowing, 
"making a mo» of." 2** Nibbliag. 3 Mum- 
bling, muttering. 

moib!eas, 8.12. see moibleadh. 

moiblich.tf pr.pt. a’ moibleadh, v.a. & n.Gnaw, 
half-chew. 2 Mumble. 

muiche, comp. of mci. 

moiche, sf. Earliuess, as of the day, dawn. 

m ;ichead, -id, s.m. Degree of earliness. A’ dol 
WO m., growing etüer, 

mòid, adv. More, the more, 

mòi l, com». of mor. 

mold, -e, sf. Grca.ness, degree g greatness 

2 P 











RE EE EE 
2 Height, size, bulk, dinvensions. 

Cha mh. gn tig e, pov/^aps he will not coms; 
utme;in bu mh. à dh'iarr na h-Iudhaich a 
mharbhadh, in consequence of that, the Jews 
desired still more to kill him; m. meanmnaidh, 
the height of courae ; bu mh. a ghlaodh e, 
th» more he cried ; cha mn. e sin, it is nothing 
the greater for that. 

mòid, gen. sing. of weal. 

mòid, -e, -ean, s. see boid. 2 v.see bord, 

—each,** s. £ a. see bóideach. 

REG -ailh, s.m. & pr.pt. see boideach- 
adh. 

Moi.leadh, see bóideadh. 

moidheach, see maigheach. 

mo.dich, see bóilich. 

—te, see bóidichte. 

moidireadh, @ Out of sorts. 
sickness. 

moilreag, see moighreag. 

méilte, see bóidte. 

moigean, -ein, -an, see mogan. 2tt Dumpy lit- 
t'e fellow. [moizean 1n W. of Koss. | 

moieanach, -aiche, a. see moganach. 2 Fat, 
suat, plump, chubbed. 3 Jolly. 

moign, see muigh, 

each, see maigheach. 

moigheanar,** a. Happy, festive. 

moighre, d. Stout, robust. 2 Handsome. 3 
Bouncing., 

mn ‘ignre, -an, s.m. Stout or handsome man, 2 
s.f. Bouncing female. 

moigüreig, sf Plamp girl, fat, plump, good- 
natured femrle chiid. 

moil, -e, s.f. Hair matted together. 2 Heap 
case up. 3 Kind of olack worm. 4 see mille. 
fit Swelling caused by hammering on the 
haudle or head of a tool. [tf gives muile for 
No. 5. 

Ne Ba (CR) Suth'd. for muinichill. 

moile, sm. Impatience—N. Argyll. (boile.) [M. 
is due to eclipsis. | 

moileadair,** s.m. Molester, 

Bi0:lean, -ain, -an, s.m. Plump, fat child. 92** 
Bulb. 3 Little lump or heap. 4/AC) Kind of 
cake made on the palm of the hand. 5**Dim- 
inutive, rotund person. 6* Plump man. 7 
Stout, young male animal. 

moileanach, -aiche, a. Plump, fat and of low 
stature. 2 Bulby. 3 Having the hair matted 
together, 

moileanach,* s,m. Plump young man. 

moille, prov. for maille. 

ach,** æ. Dilatory, tardy. 2 Pampering. 

moilt,** see muilt. 

moilteac, -eig, -an, $.f. Woman of low stature 
and stout ; term of ridicule. Z**Lusty little 
girl. 3**Comely little girl, 

moiltean,** s.m. Hoggrel. 

moim, -e,-eau, see maoim. 

Divine, gen. mona [& móine,] ts. f. ind. Moss, 
mossy place, morass, bog. 2 Peat, turf. 
Cruach mona, & peat-stack ; poll mona, «a prat- 
moss ` fòid mona, @ peat ; ris a’ mhòine, mak- 
ing peas. 

NAMES OF PARTS OF A PEAT-BANK, (bac- 
moine, poll-móna,$ poll-moiueach or & poll- 
monach.) Names supplied by D. Murray, 
Aberdeen, are distingu'shed by a &. 

barr-fhad, top tier of sedgy marsh when cut- 

ting peats. (barrfhad— ð.) 
broinn a’ phuill, 8 front of peat-bank. (DM 
C) iochdar a’ phuill. 

caoran (an), & lowest tier in peat-bank. 

carcair, H po. tion of peat-bank stripped of the 

tov turf from end to end. 

ceaun & pauill, & upper end of bank, 





gw 


2 Heedless om 











| 


! | L 
TERNET ARCHIVE 


653 


minean 


druim a’ phuill. p back of peat-bank. 

earbali a’ phuil!, lower end of tank, 

fal a’ gpareidh,& second tier, if itis three 
deep.—proe. for fod a ghàraidh. ! 

fala’ chaorain, or an caoran, % lowest tier 
in a prat-bank. ; 

resg, riasz, or rasg,% top turf above moss, 

the $713, marsh, or moss of which the peats 
are composed, 
rudhan (an), & the smal’ h-apin which neats 
are built to dry, after beim) cut for œ 
m consisting of three peats aad one ois 
OD. 

sgeir, (AH) a peat-bank with an adjoining 
piece of heath-land on which the cast nas 
are spread to dry, 

When 12 pea's are placed ina circle to 
dry, they are called teinnteanan 7; 12 placed 
crosswise are bocsaichean ; peats placed dia- 
gonally (generally iu long lines) are air a 
chois bhig ; set two and two diagomal!y in 
rows they are said to be dà fhòid air aon. 

moineach, see mointeaenail. 

—nil, see mointeachail. 

moineag,** -eig, s.f- Bogberry. 

—ag. -aig, -an, $.f. Pea- or bean-pod. 

moineas, (AF) -eis, s. Femalcscal. 2 see 
moinciseach«d. 

—ach, see moineiscach. 

moine-chaibe, (DMIX) s. m. Kind of peats ent 
with a common spade, without the surfece ot 
the ground having been previcusly pared— 
Caithness. 

moineil,(AC) @. Slow. | 

moineis, s.m. False delicacy. 2 tt Slowness, 
laziness, see maiuneas. (AG) s./. Female of 
the grey seal. 

moi¢iseach, -eiche, a. Low. 2 Difident. 3 Di- 
latory, sedate, mild, dall, inactive, see main- 
Wer 4 Fastidious. 5 (AU) Delicate, back- 
ward. 

moineiseachd, s.f. Tardiness, dilatoriness, dul- 
ness, inactivity, selateness, mildness. 

móine-sluasaid,(DM iX) s.f. Kind of peats hav- 
ing the same breadth and thickaess. ‘they 
are cut by the operator standiug iu the f:as 
of the bank, and pushing the spade forward 
horizontally —Caiihness. d 

VE 
DN of 








moiu-fheur,$ -flecir, s Waved 
hair-zrrass, mountain grass, 
coarse meadow-grass — aira 
flexuosa 2 Meadow. 

moingeas^ch, see moineiseach. 

fmoingreult, s.f. Comet. 

moinig, -e, s.f. Vanity, boasting, 
confidence. 2 Boasting of fa- 
yours couferred. 3 Fastidious- 
ness, 

moinig,** a. Vain, boasting. 2 
‘rusting to. 

moinigeag, see meiligeag. 





539. Mó'n-fheur. 


moinigeii,* e, a. Fastidious, assuming iuditier- 


ence, making nice. 
moinse, -an, s./. Great pit. 2 Peat moss. 
moinseach,** a. Abounding in large piss. 
mòinteach, eich, s.f. Mossy place, miss, peate 
moss. 2 Moorlaud. M. liath, grey moss ; a’ 
siubhal mòintich, traveding the moors or iioga, 
mòinteach, -eiche, @ see mdinteacharl. 
| moóiuteachail, -e, a. Mossy,boggzy,marsiy,fenny. 
mòinteach (ab, 8 sf. Bog-mo0ss—sphagnum, 
mointean, pé. of mòine. 
woiutich, -e, @ Moorish. 


molntidh, -e, «Mossy, boggy, marshy,moorish, 


, mo:nitidhcachd, sin l. Gogginess, marsniuess, 
moeal, -eit, -an, see motvral 
| Mo.pean, -eiN, -an, see moibean., 


UNIVERSITY GPALLINOIS AT 


. Se is " vs bp > Ze Geschl 

I 1 LAN. WT AN 4 Wu i 
rim ` - | { Vu r J Lat 

KE i J LI I i — d A i d L] = T 





aft H 


| 
ue | 
| 
l 


móir 

eee ae ee 

mir, oe ging masc, of mor, | 

moirb.** -ean, sf Emmet, ant. 

moirbh, see moirb. 

moircheart, -eirt, s.n, Justice. 2**Merev. 

moircheas,**-eis, s.m. Falling sickness,epilepsy. 

Moire ! see Mhoire ! : 

moire, Gem. ën. Ten, of mor. 

moirea 'hd, see p 

móiread, -eid, see mend. | 

moireaz, -eig, -an. $.f. Borer, torelo, 2t{Small 
shell—testudo exigua. 

moireagad, s.f. see moirigeachd. 

moireagan, dun, of moireas d 

moireal, -eil. an, s. m. Boring iron, wimble, 
anger, 2 see moireag 'deigh.) 

moirealaeh. -a:che, @ Furnished with augers. 
2 Like an augur 3 Boring like an auer, 

moireamas,** int. #Marry prov. corruption 
of Moire (the Virgin Mary) or perhaps m's- 
pronunication of moramas, m’ oram,or air D 
urram, on my honour 

moirear, Ar, -an, see morair 

moirearachd, s f. see moraireachd. 


moireas, -eis, sm Haughtiness priđe. — 2** 
Epilepsy.. 

moireasaeh, -a:che, a Haughty, proud. 2** 
Epileptic. 


moirea:adh,** -aidh, s.m. Enilepsv. 

moirfhear, Ar, -an, s.m. see morair. 

——achd, see moraireach'l. 

moirgean,(CR) s.m. Fat little person— West of 
Ross-shire. 

moirneag,(AF) s.f. Small shell fish, 2 Shell. 

mdirneas, -ais s m. Great carcade or waterfall 
2 Volcano. 3 Melted metal. Mar mh. de 
theine theintich, «s a stream of lana, 

moirneasach.** a. Streamy, streaming. 

moirt,** s.f. Dregs. lees. 

moirteach ** a. Dirty, having dregs. 

moirteal,** -eil, s.m. Cripple. 2**Rafter. 
Mortar. plaster. 

moirtear.** .»ir, -an, s.m. Mortar, 

moirteis,** s.f. Mortice. 
** is wrong.] 

fmois, s. Custom, manner, 
book on ethics. 

moiseach, @. Snouty, sullen, surly. 

moisean, -ein, -an, see m'tisean, - 

moiseanach, -aiche see miuiseanach. 

d, see«muiseanach i. 

moislich (CR) v.n. Stir (out of sleen)— Strath tay. 
Sm^islich in N. Argylt —/ Ail»? (mosglaich.? 

moit, -e. s.f. Sulkiuess, sullenness, 1norosen-ss, 
2 Pride. 3 Short neck, asofa bird erestior 
up. 4see moxtealachd, 5* Pretended "ft, 
ference about a thing oneis very keen for, 
nicety about a thing one is fond of. Gove m., 
a cockng up of the head with a short necit; bean 
gun mh., a wife without sulk ness. 

molrealach, -aiche. a. see moiteil. | 

moitealachd, s.f./md. Fastidiousness, n'cety, 
shyness, daintiness, pettishness, nrudery, as- 
suming airs of importance. 2 (MS) Toss. 

moiteil, -e, a. Sullen, sulky morose. 2 Pettish, 
3 Proud, gallant. 4 Airy, asswning airs, 
dainty, fastidious. 5 Shv. 6 Pridésn, 
Affectioned. 8* Pretending indi?erence. 9 
Boasting. Maighdean mh., @ sulky maid, a 
pride. 

mol, pr.pf, a’ moladh, v.a. Prais2, extol, 
Recommend, advise. 3*fixalb. magnify. Mol- 
ath w aam Div. Pt m^ sow praise God ; 
mnaolainn dhaib dol dachaidh, J won’? l recom- 
mnl you to go homa; mholaian dhait va 
baiun à thoirt Lat or a bnoirs as.) 1 woul. 
regn mé uou fo fal fro hg, 








mol, -oil & -a, An, £f. Sbiagly beach. 2,00) |momhar, see momua-ach. 


Digitiz: ! 
NTERNET ARCHIV 


659 


m iach, -aichs, a. Hury, rough. 2 Stormy. 


mlacias, -ais 


[ Tenon, as given by | 


T | 


momhar 


Shingle., 3(AF) Flock of birds. 
fmo!, lo, @ Laud, elamorous. 
fmol, -à, em, Number. 2 Flock. 3 Assem')ly, 

gathering. 4 Ball. 5 Heap. 6 Beam, 
molach, s. m. (M3) Shonugh. 2 Rough-haired 

d»z, poo lle. 

3 
Hoarse. Cas mh. Bhrain, Bran’s rough lg, 
a’ mhuir mh., t22 sioriny sew ; mar fhalluiau 
mho:aich, Zik» a hairy garm^n'. 

molachaa,**.aia. s.m. Tuft of hair. 
place. 3 Slough, bog. 4 Vessel. 

sem. Rouganess, hairiness. 


2 Hairy 


2 
Hoarseness. 

moladair,** sm. Applauder, approver. 

mo:ada.-aidh, s. m. Praising, euiogising, an- 
plauding. 2 Act of praising or commending. 
Recommending, advising. 3 Act of recom- 
mending or advising. 4 Praise, applaus-. 
A’ m—, pr pt. of mol. M. na h-ainnir, the 
virgin's praise ; tha e air à dheagh mn., he is 
well praised ; cha mh. do mh., your eulogy $$ 
no praise», 

molam,** Isf.sing.tmy. of mol. 

molan, -ain, -au, Small temporary stack of corn, 
see mulan. 

molanach, -aiche, see mulanach. 

mo laochan ! int. We'l done ! (my hero) 

molar, fut.nass. of mol, 

molcha,(AF) s. Horned owl, see comhachag- 
adharcaiche. 

moldair,(MS) s.m. see molltair, 

moldlair-ime, s.m. Butter-print. 

mo léiveadh ! int. Alas! 

mo león ! int. Woe'3 m2! alas ! 

m»l,rmuill, s.m. Chaff, dust. 2**Refuse. 3** 
Station, 4**Wirame. Mar inh. air 'fnuadach- 
adh le gaoith, @s chaff driven by the wind; 
le rba mhuill, a chaff-bed. | 


gee [mll3.(A 8) s. Sheep. 


mollach, -aiche, a see mollmhor. 


{molachl, s.4¢ad. Northern iorm of mallachd. 


mollaich, Northern form of mallaich. 
moliar, see m llmhor. 


M /is-leabhar, c | ™ “ldair, s.m. Plasm. 


mollmhor, -oire, 4, Cha Ty, abounding in chaf. 

mollsgaid (MS) s.f. Neviigence. 

——each, a. Negligent. 

miiltaiv, -eau, s. m. Mould or frame, for east- 
ing iron or other substance in a molten state. 
9**P»lasm. 3 Modal. 

molitair, -ean, s.m. Mill dues, multure, miller’s 
tol. 

mollte, past pt. Praised, lauded, 

molluich, see malla'ch. 

mol mhogag, H. of Ross for muils-mhag. 

m l-nuou:liun,** s, m. Beam which turns round 
in a mill, and sets the whole in movion, 

mol-olla,** 8m. Ball of wool. 

fmolrach,** -aich s.m. Giant. 

molt, yen. moilte & muilt. sm see mult. 

molta, past pt. or mo!. Praised, extolted. 

moltach, -aiche, a. Praising, laudatory, given to 
praising or commending. 2 Praiseworthy, 
commendable. 3 Ready to praise 

moltachail. -e, a. Laudatory. 

mo!tainneach -eiche, a. Recommendatory. 
Panegyrical. 

moltair, -e4n, see molltair. 





2 


2|- ——,(CR) sm. Grist, grain to be ground— 


Skye. 
pe". 
mol -fhear.(MS) s.m. Applauder. 
moln2ehb,** ich, son. Marsh. 
moinha, s22 mo. 
irom!ia/de,* see mòid. 


Mar mh. an opar like grain in @ kop- 


monmharach 


momharach,** a. Stately, noble, pompous. 

mo mhasladh ! int. Alas ! (dit. my disgrace !) 

mo ’n, see mu ’n. 

tmon, -oin, s.m. Truck. 

mona, gen.sing. of moine. 

monabhan, s.m. see monmhar. 

wona-bhuachaill, see muna-bhuachaill, [ning. 

monach, -aiche, a. see monadail. 2** Wily, eun- 

monachan, s.pl. Hills, mountains. 2 Moors. 
(better monaidhean.) 

monadail, a. Mountainous, moorish, hilly. 2 
Desert. 

xaonadalachd,11 s.f. Mountainousness. 

monadh, -aith, -aidhean, s.m. Mountain, moor, 
range. 2 Heath, heathy expanse, desert. 3 
'l'olerably level hill-ground. 4(AH) Any bill- 
pasture as distinguished from meadow and 
arable land. t5**Money. Air feadh mhonaidh, 
through the moor ; 's a’ mhonadh, on (lit. 77) 
the hill; mullach a’ mhonaidh, the highesi 
part of the moor. 

monag, see monog. 

an, (DC) s. m. Little child at the stage 
when he orshe goes on all fours. 

monaghair, e, -ean, $.f. see monmhar. 

-—each, -e1che, @ see monmharach. 

monaghar, see monmhar. 

raonaidh, gen.sing. of monadh, 

morair, gen. sing. of monar. 

wo nàire ! int. Alas ! (Lit. my shame.) Mo naire 
ort fhéin ! fie upon you ! 

mo naire 's mo leaghadh, int. Alas ! alas ! (lit. 
my shame and my melting.) 

mo naire 's mo mhasladh ! in’, O for shame ! 

monais, -e, S.f. Slowness, dulness. 2 Inatten- 
tion, negligence.  3**3edateness, 4** Gen- 
tleness, 6 (DMu) Sense, coherent talk, said 
ofa patient. 6 AH) Clumsiness or awkward- 
ness in any manual work, Am bheil in. aige ? 
dues he talk coherently ?— "lack Isle. | 

each, -eiche, a. Slow, dull. 2 Inattentive, 

negligent. 3**Gentle, 4**sedate. 

- eachd, s.f.ind. see monais. 

mona stir,** s.f. see mainistir. 

monar, -air, -airean, s.m. Dwarf, diminutive 
person or thing. 2 Small matter, trifle. 3* 
R fuse. 4 Couvem otible person or object. 5** 
Murmur. 6 Purling noise, 7+f Uproar. +8 
Work. Tha, ’s cha b' e m. e, yes, and it is not 
th- refuse—he is a great inan or person. 

mo araa, -ain, -an, s.m. Mote.  2**Dogberry. 

monasg, -alsg, 9. f. Chaff. 2 Dross, refuse. 3 
Pariicie— Ar an. 

mora E -aiche, a. Abounding in chaff,dross, 
or refuse. 

mouz., muing, s.m. see muing, 12 Edge, border. 

mongach,** o Fiery. 2 Red. 

m »ngach-mnheur, pl. -aich-mheura, s.f. Hemlock, 
see ininmbeur. 

mong^aineach, -eiche,@ Maned. 

mongair,** s.m. Shaver, trimmer, clipper. 

niongar,** -air, s.m. Roaring. 

morg-steudach, (AI) sam, Fine-crested steed. 

monlach,** o Hairy, rough, shaggy, 2 Brushy. 

mowumiar,-air, -an, s.m. Murmur, uproar, 2 
Detraction, 3 Complaint, grumbling. 4 Moan- 
ing. Is binn m. thonn do "n ron, sweet is the 
mouning of waves to the seal. [Sometimes 
monmhur.] 

- ach. -aiche, o Murmuring, complain- 
ing. grumbling, 2**Noisy. 

monog.§ s. f. Bog- or peat-berry. 
berry. see muileeg. 

mi nuar ! ** int, Alas ! alack-a-day ! woe is the 

ay ! 
monusg. see monasg. 
Dot, P" moip, see mob, 

















2 Cran- 


i } 
L F= F p= Lope gm re 
"i LL NIE yi E VI E 

d " i "I "i Í ^l 
= i bm i 1 unus "LL 


670 


modraichte 


mopach, -aiche, a, see mabach. 2 see mobach. 

mopag, see mobag. 

mór, fei, comp. mo. 2nd. comp. mòid, 3rd. comp. 
muthad, a. Great, large, of great size. 2 
Great, many, of great number, 3 Great in ex- 
tent, extensive, 4 Important. 5 Chief, prin- 
cipal. 6 Noble, of high rank. 7 Tall, of high 
stature. $8 Proud. 9 Lofty. 10 Familiar; 
much acquainted. 11 Valued, esteemed. 12 
Hard, diffieult of accomplishment. 13 Spac- 
ious, capacious. 14 Much, in great degree. 
15 Abundant, copious. 16 Mighty, powerfut. 
17 Haughty. 18**Heavy. 19**Wide. 20 Cor- 
pulent, bulky. 21 Vivid, of lightning. 22 
(DC) Notorious for evil qualities, or such as 
are not to one’s credit—Argyll. 

Duine m., € great man; sluagh m., a are@t 
or numerous people ; an sluagh m., the nobility; 
ni m., an importan! affair ; cho m. as féin ris 
a’ mhae-mhollachd, qs self-importan! as Lu- 
cifer ; tha iad m. aig a chéile, they «re great 
chums ; tha iad cho n». aig a chéile 's is urr- 
ainn iad, they areas familiar as possible ; tha 
e m. ort a dheanamh, it ıs hard for thee to do 
it; tha e m. leat "pa dheanamh, you don’t 
want to be bothered with it ; bu mh. aca féin e, 
they thought much of it themselves ; is m. a dh’ 
fhulaingeas cridhe ceart mu'm bris e, a well- 
reaulated heart will suffer much ere it break > 
bha 'n dealan m., the lightning was vivid ; 
thachair a bhràthair m. ris, he has met oma 
stronger than himself ; eadar bheag is mhór, 
both small and great ; mor-uisge a’ taomadh, 
@ great torrent pouring ; gille m. mhic Eogh- 
ain, the notorious son of Hugh—Arygyll. 

mor, adv. Much, many. Is m. leam, I think it 
too much ; is m. leam sin a dheanamh, J think 
it too much to go that length; is m. a dh'fhuil- 
ing mi, greatly did I suffer ; tha e ro mh., it 
is too big; 2 it is too much ; cha mh. a chi e, 
few shall see it ; cha mh. math ath’ air, it is 
not worth much ; am m. leat na dh! itheas e ? 
do you grudge what he ats ? cha mh., almost ; 
cha mh, nach do bhuail e mi, he almost struck 
me ; cha mh. nach e, ’tis not quite that 13 mêr 
aig’ e, an ironical expression meaning little 
dors he think of it, or he makes little of (GW, 
coast of Ross. | 

mor, -a, s.m. poet. Renowned, famous or mighty 
person. 2 Chivalrous person. Co tha coltach 
ri m. nan cliù P whois like the mighty of rea 
noun? am beag isam m., both great and 
small ; ceha mh, nach, a/most. [Generally mor 
in poetry.] 

mor, see mór, Mor is the spelling adopted by 
all Gaelic grammars aud dictionaries excepb 
MacBain's and MacEachap's. MacBain's or- 
thography has been adopted here. 

morabanas,(WC) -ais, s.m. Murmuring. 

— — —-—aàch, a. Complaining. 

morach,** o, August. 

morachadh, -aidh, s.m. Enlarging, act of ene 
larging. 2 Exalling, act of exalting of digni- 
fying. 3 Aggrandizement. A’ m-—, pr.pt. of 
moraich. 

mòrachd, $.f. Greatness, majesty, dignity,rank. 
2 Excellency. 3* Mightiness. Do mh. riogh- 
ail, yovr royal highmess. 

moradh,** .aidh, s.m. Augmentation. 

moragan,(WC) -ain, s.m. Lump-sucker (fish)}— 
Poolewe. 

moragnhanach, -aiche, a. Calculous, 

moraich, pr.pt. a’ morachath, v, a, Enlarge, 
make greater, Exalt, dignify, ennoble, mage 
nify. Moraichear t' ainm, thy name shall be 
exalted. 

te, past p& of móraich. Enlarged, 2 








ec mbraichte 671 mór-fhlaithe 


Exalted, dignified, advanced. ` 
mór-aigeannach, -eiche, a. see mór-aigneach. 
mór-aigeantach, see mór-aigneach. — 
neo-aigeantachd, s. f. ind. Magnanimity. 2 

Highmindedness. 3**Ambition. ` 
mor-aigne, s. Magnanimity. 2**Ambition. 
—ach, -eiche, og. Magnanimous. 2**Am- 

bitious. 3**High-minded. 

——adh, -aidh, s.m. see mór-aigne. 

morail, -e, a. Majestic, magnificent. 2 Great. 3 
Proud, pompous. 4** Powerful, 5** Vain- 
glorious, 

morail,** e s.f. Triumph. 

morainn,(DMK) s. The day before yesterday— 
Skye. [Used with the article. ] 

morair, -ean, s.m. Lord. 2 Earl. 8 Nobleman. 

dearg, s.m. Judicial lord, law lord. 

- eachd, s.f.ind. Lordship, title, dignity. 2 
** Earldom. 

mòralach, -aiche, a. see mòrail. 

--d, s.f. Greatness, dignity, majesty, 
magnificence. 2 Excellence., M. rìoghail, 
royal majesty ; m. "na shùil, majesty in his 
aspect ; cainnt na m., excellent speech. 

moralta, «. Moral. 

chd, s.f.ind. Morality. 

iche, s.m. Moralizer. 

moram,** (air m’ urram) On my word, on my 
honour. 

moramas,** Marry, a sort of oath, see moirea- 
mas. 

moran, -ain, s.m.coll. Great number, multitude, 
many. 2 Much, great quantity. Tham. aca 
ag radh, many of them assert; m. eile, many 
more ; m. nithean, many things; m. chuid- 
eachd, much company ; m. éisg, a great quam- 
tity of fish ; m. nighean, æ great number of 
daughters ; tha 'm beagan air fas ’na mh., the 
few hav» increased into a multitude. 

moran, adv. By a great deal. M. na’s fhaisge, 
a great deal nearer. 








Que 

















540. Moran. 
moran,§ am, s. m. Meadow saxifrage, fair 
maids of France, first of May —saxifraga 
ranulata. 2§ Heath-rush, stool-bent, see 
ru-chorean. 
mór-aoibhneas,** .eis, s.m. Great joy. 
mór-aonach,** -aich, s.m. Great assembly. 2 
Market-place. 3**Great heath or moor. 
morarail, -e, a. Lord-like. 
mor-beam,$ s. Mulberry—morus. 
morbhaeh,f-aich, s.f. Land liable to sea-fiood- 
ing. 
mór-bhaile, -bhailtean, s.m. see baile-mór. 
morbhan, -ain, see borbhan. 
. mor-bhan-ditc,(MS) s.f. Arch-duchess. 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


mór-bhileach, -eiche, æ. Broad-brimmed. 

mor-bhruidhneachas, -ais, s.m. Magniloquence. 

mor-bhuadhach, -aiche, o Having great or 
noble qualities. 2 Heroic, conquering. 

mór-bhuaidh, -e, -bhuadhan, s.f. Heroism, brav, 
ery. 2 Great conquest. 3 Heroic achieve- 
meng. 

fmore, s. see tore. 2(AF) Sow. 

fmore, a. Great, huge. 

morcaich,** v.g. & n. Corrupt, rot, (also morge 
aich.) 

-——— —., Q. Corrupt. 

morcaidheachd,** s.f. Corruption. 

morcas, -ais, s.m. Corruption, rottenness. 

morchadh, see morbhach., 

mór-chiontach, -aiche, æ. Capital (criminally.) 

morchlais,** s.f. Magnificence. 

mór-chliabhach, -aiche, a. Broad-breasted. 
mór-chliüiteach, -eiche, a. Greatly renowned. 
mór-chnàmhach, -aiche, a. Big-boned. 
mór-choinnde,** s.f. Fleet. 

mór-choinneal, -choinnle, st Flambeau, torch. 

mór-eholainneach, -eiche, æ. Large or thick 
bodied, corpulent, bulky. 

mor-chridhe, ** s. m. Great heart, generous 
heart. 2 Brave heart. 3 High or noble mind. 

—ach, -eiche, a Great-hearted, gene- 
rous, magnanimous. 

mór-chuairt, -e, -ean, s.f. Great circuit, grand 
tour. 2 Justiciary circuit. 

mór-chuan, -ain, -antan, s.m. Great ocean. 

mérchuis, -e, s.f. Pride, pomp, magnificence, 
splendour. 2 Boasting, vain-glory, ainbition, 
state, pride, glery. 2 Exploit. Gun till thu 
le m., that you may return with glory ; erion- 
aidh do mh., thy grandeur shall fade. 

-— — ——each, -eiche, a. Proud, pompous, mag- 
nificent, splendid. 2 Ambitious, high-minded, 
haughty, vain-glorious. 3 Powerful. 4 Her- 
oic. Bu mh. a cheum, proud was his pace. 

-————-eachd, s.f.ind. see mórchuis. 

mór-chuisle,** an, s.f. Artery, great artery. 

mór-chuisleach, a. Having great arteries, arter- 
ial. 

tmorcroid, s.m. The highway. (marc-rod, korse- 
road.) 

mordha,(AH) s, see morghath. 

mordha,«. see mor, morach, & mòrail. 

—chd, s.f. see mòrachd. 

mor-dhail, -ean, s.m. Great assembly, diet, con- 
gress, parliament. M. Bhreatuinn, the Bri:- 
ish Parliament ; m. na Gearinailt, the Ger- 
manic Diet : m. shagart. o conclave. 

mòrdhalach, ** æ. Magnificent. 2 Proud, pom- 
pous. 3 Powerful. 4 Brave. 

mordhalaich,(Ms) v.a. Aggrandize. 

mor-dhamh,(AF) s.m. Leader among cattle. 

mór-dhéidh, s. f. Aspiration, ardent desire, 
great fondness. 

mor-dhochas, -ais, s.m. Sanguineness. 

mór-dhuilleagach. -aiche, œ. Broad-leaved. < 

mor’ear, -eir, see morair. 
achd, see moraireachd. 
mór-earballach, -aiche, a. Broad-tailed. 
mór-earrann, s.m. Great division, see roinn- 
ruith. 

mo A Certainly. 

mor-fhach, 

ior: fhaich; see morbhach. 

morfhaich, see morbhach. 

mór-íhairge, -an, s.m. Great sea, ocean, high- 
sea. 

mór-fhàs,** s.m. "Train oil. 2 Great growth. 

mór-fhear, see morair. 

——achd, see moraireachd, 

mór-fhearrann, s, Great land, see roinn-ruith. 

mór-fhlaithe. vl. of mór-fhlath,.  - 











Original from 
| EX dE EN Cire XE paresis A T 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS Al 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


^ mér-fhlath 


mor-fhlath, -aith, pl. -aiihe & -aithean, s. m. 
Great chief. 2 Grandee, one of the nobility. 
amor-fhleadh,** s.f. Great feast, epulation, 





541. 
mór-fhliodh, -a, s.m. Great masterwort—peuce- 
danum ostruithium. 
tmorgach,** -aiche, a. Rotten, corrupt. 
morgachadh, see morgadh. 
morgadh, -aidh, s.m. ttottenness, corruption. 


Mór-fhliodh. 


inorgaich,** v.a, & n. Corrupt, rot, (also morc- 
ach.) 

morgan,(AF) s.m. Dog-fish. | 

Tmorgantach, -aiche, a. Magnificent. 

d, s.f.ind. Magnificence. 

morgha, a. see mor. 

morghadair, s.m. Smelt. 

morghaileach,** a. Boastful. 

mór-ghairde2ehas,** ais, sm. Rapture. 

morgnan,(CK) s.m. Gravel, shingle. 2 Bank of 
gravel or shingie. 3 Pebbly beach.—West of 
Ross-shire, 

mór-ghaisge, s.f.ind. Heroism, prowess. 

—— —— —— il, e, a. Heroic, of great prowess, 

morghath,t s.m. Fishing-spear, trident. 
Large spear, javelin. 

—ach, a. Armed with fishing-spears or 
tridents. 

mór-ghlonn, -ghluinn, s.m. Heroism, prowess. 

mór-ghlonnach, -aiche, a. Heroic, of great prow- 
ess. 

mór-ghniomh, -a, -ara, s.m. Great deed,exploib. 

--——ach, -aiche, a. Of great deeds, per- 
forming great deeds. 2 Magnificent. 

mór-ghràin,** s.f. Abomination, detestation. 

mér-iuntinn, -e, -ean, s.f. Great or noble mind. 

——each, -eiche, 4, Noble-minded. 2 
High-minded, ambitious. 

——— eachd, s.f.ind. Greatness of mind, 
magnanimity. 2**High-mindedness,ambition. 

mór-ionghnadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Astonish- 
ment, amazement. M. air gach neach, every- 
one amazed. 

morlanachd, s./".ind. Labour performed by ten- 
ants for their landlord, 2**Duty.  (borlan- 
achd is a better form. The m is due to eclip- 
sis—am b—.) 

mor-lannachd,** s.f. Feat in swordsmanship. 2 
Carnage. 

mór-lannair,** s.m. Powerful swordsman. 

mór-laoch,** -laoich, s.m. Hero, champion. 

mor-lethtromach, -aiche, o Far advanced in 
pregnancy (also mór-leatromach.) 

mor-lethtromachd,** s. f. Advanced state of 
pregnanoy. 

morlo,(AF) s.m. Seal. 

mór-luach,-a, s. m, Great value, great price. 
Cha deanainn air mh. e, J would not do it for 
@ great reward. 

imormanta, sm. Wormwood. 

mor-manta,} s, Mugwort, see liath-lus, 

mor-mhadadh, s.m. (AF) Wolf. 2(AF) Pike. 

mór-mbaor, -mhaoir, s.m. Lord-mayor 2 High- 
steward, 3 High constable. 4 see morair. 

mór-mbeanmnach, -aiche, a. High-minded, as- 








2 














672 


|J mór-thorach 


piring. 2 High-spirited. 3 Magnanimous. 
mormieanmnachd, s.find. Higü-mindedness, 
pride. 2 Magnanimity. 





Mor-mheanmnadh, see mor-mheanmauachd. 
mor mueas, -a, s.n. kiga esteem, admiration. 


Am in., in high esteem. (Sa 

———-—,** v.a, Esteem greatly, value highly. 
respect. 

mor-miial(AF) s.f. Whale. 

mor-mhiann,** s. Aspiration. 

mor-mnauinntir, -e, s.f. Great multitude. 2 Nu- 
merous household. 

mor-mhuarne,** s.f. High spirit, mettle. 2 Glad- 
ness. 

mor-mhüirneach,**a. High-spirited,mettlesome, 
2 Cheerful. Each m., a meiilesome horse. 

mornaich, -e, $. f. Considerable quantity or 
nuinber. 

mornan, -ain, -an, s.m. Small timber dish. 

moroich, see morbhach. 

mor’-oich, see morbh ich. 

mór-righ, -rignrean,1f s.m. Emperor. 

inofran,$ s m. Seakale or cabbage, see prais- 
each bhuidhe, 

mór-rath,** s. m. Great luck. 
luck 3 Prosperity. 


2 Continued 


mór-roinn, -e, -ean, 8./. Province (lit. Great di- 


vision.) 

—each, -eiche, o Provincial, of or be- 
longing to, a province. 

mor-sgoil, s.f. Academy. 

mor-snar, -air, s. m. Hero, mighty hero. 2 
Great distress or trial. Lann a’ mhór-shair, 
the sword of the mighty hero. 

mor-sheisear, 8.7. Seven persons. 

mór-shluagh, -shluaigh, s.m. Multitude, host, 2 
Congregation. 3 Army. 

- —— —aàch,(MS)a. Legionary. 2 Many 

peopled. 














achd, s.f. Populousness. 
mor-shoillse,** s.f. Splendour. 
mort, -oirt, & muirt, s.m. Murder, manslaugh- 
ter. 2 Massacre. M. Ghlinne-Comhainu, the 
massacre of Glencoe. A m—, pr. pt. of mort. 
mort, pr. pt. a’ mortadh [& a’ mort] v.a. Mur- 
der, massacre, slay. (also murt.) 
ach, -aiche, @ Murderous. 
ing, massacring. 
achail, -e, a. Murderous, sanguinary. 
adh, -aidh, s.m. Murdering, act oi mur- 
dering, slaughter. A’ m—, pr.pt. of mort. Na 
dean m., do not kill ; farmadis m., envy and 
murder. "7 
ail, -e, a. see mortach. / 
air, -ean, S.M. Murderer, assassin. 
Mortar. 3 
aireach, -eiche, a. Murderous, like à mur- 
derer. : 
aireachd, s.f.ind. Murdering, massacring. 
2 Murderousness. ; 
mortal,** -ail, s.m. Mortar. 2 Lime. 
mortar, -air, sm. Mortar. 2 Lime. 
mort-fhear, see mortair. è 
mór-thional,** s. Diet (meeting.) 
mor-thir, -e, -ean, s.f. The mainland. 2 Conti- 
nent. 3**Great shore. Mar neart tuinne gu 
m., like a billow rolling in its strength to the 
main shore. [** gives ‘* Fàilt’ ort-féin a mh. 
bhòidhich ! hail, thou beauteous mainland !” 
but this saying refers to the Morar district, 
incorrectly written Mér-thir’ in Gaelic.] 
each, -eiche, a. Continental, of, or per. 
taining to à continent. | 
each, -eich, s.m. Mainlander, native or 
inhabitant of the mainland. ` ` 
mór-thorach, -aiche, a. "Very fruitful. ` 
mor-thorach, -aiche, a Far advanced in preg- 


2 Murder- 














2 














Driginal-from 


UNIVERSITY OFJIELINOIS 


URBANA-GHAMPAIGN 


a 


= 


H] 


yum 


mór-thorach 


nancy. 

mór-thriath, A, an. s.m. Great prince or chief. 

mor-thuil,** s.m, Deluge. 

¢moruach, -uaich, 8.7. Mermaid, sea-monster. 

mor-uachdaran, -ain,-an, s.m, High governor, 
Viceroy, regent, 

mor-uaisle, s.f.ind. High nobility or rank. 

—— ——-—ààn, s.pl. The nobility, nobles. ` 

mór-uasal,** a. Noble in birth. 2 Most noble, 
of the highest rank in nobility. 

niór-urranta, -ainte, a. Very boid,daring ,daunt- 
less, 2**Self-confident. Gu m., boldly. 

———chd, $.f.ind. Great boldness, intrep- 
idity. 

mor-uthach, -aiche, v. Big-uddered, 

mos, s.m. Manner, fashion. 

Dos, adv, Too. Tha a’ chomain mo's mor, the 
compliment is too great. [The s stands for is 
asin '' tuille's mor."] 

fmosach, a. Of, or belonging to, fashion or 
manner. 

mosach, -aiche, a. Nasty. 2 Filthy. 3 Worth- 
less. 4 Insignificant. 5 Sordid, mean, ava- 

 ricious, niggardly. 6* Inhospitable. 7 Rough, 
bristly. 8**Of dirty habits. Ni m., @ filthy 
thing ; is tu tha m. ! how inhospitable you are ! 

Mosag, -aig, -an, s.f. Tawdry, drabbish woman, 
2 Worthless woman. 3 Mean, parsimonious 
or avaricious woman. 

mosaiche, comp. of mosach, 

--—_—_——,, $.f.tnd. Nastiness. 2 Filthiness,smut- 
tiness, scrubbimess, dirtiness, 3 Worthless- 
ness, insignificance. 4 Avarice, parsimony. 

--ad, -eid, s.m. Hoggishneéss, 

mosaidh, see musaidh. 

mosan, -ain, -an, s.m. Nasty fellow. 2 Sloven, 
3 Worthless fellow. 4 Avaricious fellow. 

mosan, -ain, s.m. Chaff. 2 Reiuse. 

mosg,** see mosgan. i 

mosgaid, (DC) s. m. Sumph, ‘ a chiel to whom 
Providence has denied gıfts, without making 
him an indisputable idiot ”—James Hogg. 

mosgaid,tt s.f. Sloth, negligence. 

each, a. Sumphish, clownish. 

—each, -eiche, a. Dull, heavy, slow, 
spiritless, 

mosgail, pr. pt. a’ mosgladh, v.a. d n. Waken, 
rouse. 2 Awake, arise from sleep. Mosglaidh 
iad o ’n eug, they skall awake from death. 

mosgaia, -e, a. , musty, carious, mouldy, 
it giae ten, moth-eaten. Fiaclan m., rotten 
teeth. : 

—-—each, see mosguineach. 

—eachd, see mosgain. 

mosgal,(DU) -ail, s.m. Refuse, leavings. 

mosgalach, -aiche, o Watchful, vigilant, at- 
tentive. 2 Active. 3(WC) Trashy, dirty. 

——d, s.f.ind. Watchfulness, vigilance, 
wakefulness, observance. 

mosgaltach, see mosgalach. 

d, see mosgalachd. 

mosgan,} am, s.m. Mustiness, rottenness, car- 
iousness. 2* Dry-rot. 3tfRotten tree. 

ach. Fro Abounding in, or pertaining to, 
rotten trees. 2¢tFull of rotten trees. 3 Musty, 
rotten, carious, mouldy, grey. 4 Worm- or 
moth-eaten. 5 Troubled. 6t{Rheumy. 

mosganachd, s.f. Rheuminess. 2 Mustiness, 
mouldiness. 

mo sgaradh! int. Alas! woe's me ! 

mosgladh, -aidh, s.m. Act of wakening, caus- 


— 


























| ing toawake. 2 Act ot awaking. rising from 


sleep. 3**Excitation. A’ mco, pr.pt. of mos- 


mosglaidh, jut.af.a. of mosgail. 
pee apaneagh, -eiche, a. Religiously inclined, 
evouft. 


673 


mothar 


mosguinea chd, s.f.ind. Devoutness. 

mosrach, -aiche, a, Caressing coarsely, 
indecent freedoms. 

mosradh, -aidh, s.m. Coarse dalliance, 
civilities, indecent freedoms, 
brutal licentiousness. 

mosraiche,* s.f. see mosaiche. 

Tmota, s.m. Mount. 2 Mote. 

Tigoth, s.m. Male of any creature, 

moth,** s.m. Sex. 

moth, *‘air a’ mhoth ’n dé,” Arran for “air 
bho "n dé," the day before yesterday. 

motha, (CR ) Too (good, soon, &c.) Tha e motha 
"a tràth, it is too early—A rran for, tha e tuil- 
leadh 's tràth—CR. 

Tmothach, -aiche, a. Fertile, fruitful. 2 Preg- 
nant. 

mothachadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of feeling, perceiv- 
ing. 2 Sense of feeling, sensibility, 3 At- 
tending. A’ m—, pr.pt. of mothaich. Chaill 
e a mù., he lost his sense of feeling ; muiun- 
tir air dhaibh am m. a chall, people who being 
past feeling ; Guine gun mh., a senceless man. 

mothachail, e, a. Seusible, observant, percep- 
tive. 2 Feeling, kind, considerate. 

mothaich, pr. pt. a’ mothaehadh, v.a. Perceive, 
observe. 2 Feel, know, understand. M. seo, 
Jeel this ; mh. sinn a ghuth 'ga thréigsinn, we 
noticed his voice failing ; mh. sinn gun lùth a 
mheòir, we noticed his fingers without feeling, 
becoming feeble ; an do mhothaich thu e "Gol 
seachad ? did you observe him passing ? ; mh. 
iad do 'n righ, they observed the king—W.& S. 
2.22 ; mh. an sgioba do dh'fhearann, the crew 
observed And McD. 166.1 ; mh. an righ;dhuinn 
a’ toirt à ehlaidheimh a mach, ihe king felt 
us taking his sword away—W.H. 1.14. 

—eadh, see mothachadb. 

te, a. Discreet. 

mothail, s.f. Loud lowing. 2 Repeated or cone 
tinned lowing—PertAshire, see mòdhar. 

mothaileachd,** s.f. Apprehensiveness, 

mothal, -ail,(DMK) s.m. Refuse, particularly 
of fish. M. iasg, refuse of fish—W. coast of 


using. 


maudlin 
2 Brutality, 








Ross. 
mothalachd,tt s.f.ind. Feeling, perception, 





542. Móthan. 
móthan,$ s.m. Bog-violet—pinguicula vulgaris. 


2(AF) Steep grass, earning grass. On cows' 
milk it acts like rennet, 3 (AC) Love-philtre. 
The woman who gives it goes upon her left 
knee and plucks nine roots of the plant (bog- 
yiolet,)and knots them together,forming them 
intoa ‘“' cuach " or ring. It is placed on the 
mouth of a girl to make the man who kisses 
her her bondsman, under parturient women 
to ensure safe delivery, and is carried by way- 
farers to safeguard them on their journeys. 
If a man makes a miraculous escape, it is said 
of him, Dh’ol e bainne na bó baa dh'ith am 
m., he drank the milk of the guileless cow that 
ate the mothan. 

¢mothar, -air, -airean [ & -thraichean, ] s.m. 
Bunch, cluster. 2Clump oftrees. 3 Tuft of 
grass. 4 Green grass. 6 Park, enclosure, 


mòthar 


mòthar, air, s.m. Loud or great noise. 
mur. i 
sound, as of a person in a Cave. 


5ttEcho. 6 
Melodious sound. 


Thug e m. as, he gave a 


674 


2 Mur- | muadh-bhràighe, see-muabhraighe, 
3 High or swelling sea. 4 Deep toned | muaidh,** a. 


mich 


Shapely, well-formed. 2 Noble, 
good. 3 Soft, tender. 4 Middle. Loingeas 
mh,, a well-formed ship. | 


most appalling cry; chuala sinn m., we heard | muaidh,** s.f. Sound. 2 Cloud. 


a most unearthly sound. 

mothar, -aire, a. see mòdhar. 

ach, -aiche, a. High-sounding, loud. 

motharachd, see modharachd. 

moth-chat, -ait, (AF) s.m. Tom-cat. 

mothrach, -aich, s.m. Damp woody place. 

mo thruaighe ! int. Alas! (dit. my misery.) Mo 
thruaigh mi ! woe’s me! 

mothuchail, see mothachail. 

mothuich, see mothaich. 








5548. Moth-àrach. 

moth-ürach,$ s. Early orchis—o7chi$ mascula. 

mra, see mnatha. 

mrathan, see mnathan. 

mu, prep. About, around. 2 Of, concerning. 3 
On account of, for. Mu’n cuairt, about, round 
about ; mu thimchioll, about, around ; 2 con- 
cerning ; mu choinneamh, opposite ; mu dheich 
mìle, about ten thousand ; bba iad a’ bruidhinn 
mu d’ dhéidhinn, they were speaking about 
youi a’ taomadh mu a chliabh, pouring about 
his breast , leig leo dol mu chùl a’ ghnothaich, 
Let them take a back seat; ciod mu 'm bheil thu ? 
what are you about? òigh mu ’m bheil mo 
bhròn, a maid for whomis my grief ; m'a càir- 
dean, about her friends. In the South-west 
mu is used for gu, as, chaidh e mu thuath, he 
went to the north ; tha e mu thuath, he is in 
the north ; ‘nuair, a bhitbeas an sgadan mu 
thuath, when the herring ts in the north; an 
tir mu thuath, the north country. [One can: 
not say “ tha e gu tuath.” although ‘‘ chaidh 
e gu tuath " is quite correct.] Chuairtich e 
mu h-aon agus mu dha, he went round it once 
and twice—W.S.2.98 ; thàinig an té mu dheir- 
eadh & mach, the last (female) one came out. 

Thus combined with;the personal pronouns: 

umam, about me; umad, about thee; uime, 
about him ; uimpe, about her ; umainn, about 
u$ ; umaibh, about you ; umpa, about them. 


[Aspirates a noun sing., definite or indefinite, | 


and governs the dative case.) 

mu, for mo, comp. of mor. 

mu, conj. see mu'n. 

muabhraighe,** er. Platform. 

fmuadh, v.a. Form, shape. 

muadh,"*.aidh, s.m. Form, shape, image. 2 
Cloud. 

,** a. Soft, moist. 

air,** sm. Rogue. 








Digitized E y 
INTERNET ARCHIVE 





mual, -ail, s.m. Top of a hill. 

p cena) -aich, 8$. m. Way, passage. 
ung. - 

mualaich.! sm, (DMC) Bellowing— Uist. 


muasgan, (AF) s.m. Shellfish, said to open like 

a boot— Arran. > | 
-—,CHR)pl--ain & -anag, 8. m. Shellfish 

like the fresh-water mussel, about the 
same length—3 to 4 inehes—but broader and 
thicker ; its shell is not so dark as that of the 
madadh, and both are smaller than the eacA- 
an. (brallach in Lewis.) 

muasgan-caol, s.m. Prawn. 

mubran,** -ain, s.m. Corn heated in the mow. 

—ach,** a. Heated, as corn in the mow. 

muc, muic, -an, s.f. Sow, pig. 2 Perch. 3 The 
heap raised over the mouth of a vessel in mea- 
suring. 4ttLarge hay-rick. 6* Large ball of 
snow. 

tmuc, muie,-an, s. f. Instrument of war, by 
which besiegers were protected when ap- 
proaching a wall. It was covered with twigs, ` 
hair-clotn and raw hides, and moved on three 
wheels. 

muc-abhainn, (AF) s.m. Bear. 

mucach, -aiche, a. Swinish, piggish. 2 Abound- 
ing in swine, 3 Heaped up, as a measuring 
vessel, 4* Dirty. 5 Surly. 6Stupid. 7 ft 
Abounding in hay-ricks. A’ ghraisg mh., the 
swenish mob. 

UPRAER E oa, -àin, s.m. Clown. 2 Piggish fel- 
ow. 

—d,** SE Swinishness, hogpishness. 2 
Moroseness. 3 Grimness. 

mucag, -aig, -an, $.f. Hip, fruit of the dog-rose. 
2 Little sow or pig. 3 rarely Cup. Mucagan 
is sgeachagan, hips and haws; m. fhailm, oa 
hip of the dog-rose—Colonsay. 

mucagach, o Abounding in hips, or 2 in litiie 
SOWS Or pigs. 

mucag-fhiacal,(DMC) s.f. Gumboil, boil on the 
neck. ; 

mucaibh, dat. pl. of muc. 

mucail, -e,@. see mucach. ` 

muc-ainidhe,(AF) s.f. Sew with young. 

mucair, -ean, s.m. Swine-herd. 2 Swine-deal- 
er. 3**Hoggish fellow. 

—-—eachd, s.f.ind. Herding of swine. 2 Deal- 
ing in swine. 

mucalachd, s.f.ind. Swinishness, hcggishness. 

mucauta,** o see mucach. 

muc-bhiorach, -aich, -an-biorach, s.f. The long- 
beaked porpoise. 2 Bottle-nosed dolphin. 3 
Beaked whale. 

muc-bhlonag, -aig, s. f. Hogs’ 
grease, d 

muc-bhuachaill, -ean, s.m. Swine-herd. 

muc-biiuachailleachd,** s.f. Swine-herding. 

muc-ereige, s./. The fish lump-sucker—cyelopter- 
us lumpus. 2 Balian wrasse, see muc-ruadh. 

muc-disgearnach,(AF) s.f. Fierce boar. 

muc-faileag, -an-faileag, see mucag. 

muc-failm,* s.f. see mucag. 

muc-fhinn,(Af#) s.f. Milk pig, brood sow. 

muc-forais,(AF) s.f. House-fed pig. 

muc-ghaineamh, -eimh, s. 7. Sandbank. 2 
Quicksand, 


2 Cow. 











lard, swine's - 


| mue glasach,(AF) s.f. Fatted pig. 


mucb,(AC) see moch. ; ; 
mùch, v. a. Quench, extinguish. 2 Smother, 
sutivcate. 3 Press upon, squeeze together. 


Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ALEINOIS AT 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


tone or voice, 
not quench the spirit ; m. fonn, utter an air. 

buch, -a, san. Grief, affliction. 2 Smoke. 

fmucha,(AF) e, Long-eared owl, see inulchan. 

mùchach, -aiche, a. Extinguishing, that exting- 
uishes or quenches, 2 Suffocating. 3 Press- 
ing or squeezing together. 4 Muttering, hum- 
ming. i 

muchadair, -ean, s.m, Extinguisher. 

mùchadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of quenching or ex- 
Linguishing. 2 Smothering, suffocating, act 
of suffocating. 3 Act of pressing upon or 
squeezing together. 4 Act of quelling or paci- 
fying. 5 Actof muttering, humming or sing- 
ing in a suppressed voice, 6 Extinction, suf- 
focation. 7 (DU) Asthina, [with art.) | A’ 
m —, pr.pt. of mùch. 

michag,** -aiz, s.f. Broom-rape. 

mach vis,(DMK) s.pl. Motas—Cuithness 

muchag,§ s.f. The class of plants known as oro- 
banchacee. 

müchan, -ain, pl. -an [& -ain,] s. m. Vent or 
chimney. prov. 

—ach, (Ciao Blair Atholl for miganach. 

-teine, (DMC) s. m. Half-extinguished 








fire. 

mucheirigh, see mocheirigh. 

mu choinneamh, prep. phrase. Opposite, over 
against. ba dorus mu choinneamh a h-uile 
là anns a’ bhliadhna air an taigh, there was a 
door for every day of the year in the house ; 
tha airgiod agam mu choinneamh a’ mhàil, 
1 have muney to meet the rent. 

muchta, see muchte. ) 

wuchte, past pt. of much.  Extinguished, 
quenched, 2 Suffvcated. 3 Pressed upon, 
squeezed together. 4 Quelled. 5 Muttered, 
hummed. M. fo bhròn, su focated or oppressed 
with grief. 

muchthrath. see mochthrath. 

muclach, -aich, sm. **ilcrd of swine. 
Piggery. 

muclanag, 8.f. Lard. 


2tt 3.f. 


(muc-bhlonag.) 





544, Muc-locha. 


muc-locha, -nic-, -an-, s.m. The common perch. 
muc-lochaidh, see muc-locha. 
muc-mhara, -uic-, -an-mara, sf. Whale, 2(AF) 
Sea-hog, seal. 3 (AF) Porpoise. 
muenaeh,** a. Hogygish, swiuish, morose. 
** 58. f. Hoggishness, swinishness, 





moroseness. 
mucraidb, s. pl. Herd or sounder of swine, 2 
Gammon of bacon, 3**Far. 


END 


WS SRRA 
of Tace s LN ses = 
Le Lë ee -€— 





4L5. Mvc-ruadh. 


Na müchaibh an spiorad, do 





mugaid, s.f. Contents of a dyeiug-vat. 


mügalach 


muc-sgideil,tf see muc-bhiorach. 

muc-sheilche,(WC) s. f. Fresh-water monster, 
said to have been often seen in Loch Maree 
and neighbouring lochs by anglers and others, | 
The late Mr. Bankes of Letterewe tried, at 
great expense, to drain Loch-na-béiste, near 
Aultbea, to prove the identity of one seen 
"my but failed. It is thought to be a huge 
eel. 

muc-shneachda,-uic-,-an-, s.f. see muc-sneachd. 
aidh. i 

———— idh, -uic-, -an-, $.f. Monster 
snowball. 

muc-steallain,* s.f. Porpoise. 

mucuin, (muc-fhinn) (AF) s.f. Snouted pig or 
other. animal. 

mucusg,** s.m. Swine's grease, 

mud, see mod. 

mu d', for mu do. 

mudach,** a Gross, 


pee 


: 546. Mudag. 

mudag (MMcD) s.f Wool-basaet, about 3 ft. in 
heigut made of straw, The top part called 
og ghuite, is used for holding the carded wool 
(peurdan), when spinning, tue uncarded wool 
being placed in the bottom part— W. of Rugg 
& Lewis, (murlag in Argyil—Fionn.) 

mitdag (AF) s.f. Maw-worm. 

madaidh,** a. Dun-coloured., 

inüdan, -ain, -an, s.m. Cover, covering. 2 Cov- 
eri g, as of skin or leather for a gun. 

müdan-croiene,t* s.m Bit of skin to cover the 
lock of a gun, 

*muhara, -airn, -an, s.m. Ankle. 

m^ dhéibhinn, see mu diiéi linn. 

in"! dséidhina, prep. Of, about, concerning. Mu 
dnéiibiun sev, concerning this; mu ni’ dh,, 
concerniny me; mu d’ dh., about thee; m’ adh., 
concerning him ; m' adéidhinn, concerning her; 
m’ ar d., concerning us; m ur d., concerning 
you ; m’ an d., comerniny them. 

mu dheireadh, adv. At last, at length, 

mu dh-ireadh thall, adv. After all. 

mü:,-üig, -an, s.f. see mùig. 2* Snuflle through 
the nose. 


mug,** -viz, -an, s.f. Mug. 


——ach, -aiche,a. Snuffli»g. 2 Speaking through 
the nose. 3 Gloomy, cloudy. 4 Of a gloomy 
countenance. 5 Sullen, surly, morose. 6 
Guttural, 7 Murky, misty. O chul nan sliabia 
m., from behind the misty mountains. 


muyach,* -aich, s.f. see mügag. 
mue ig, -aiz, -an, s.f Surly, morose woman. 2 


»nuidling woman. 
inugaich, -e, sr, Snufling voice. 2 Snuffe. 
à surliness, moroseness. 4 Cloudiness, pioom. 
2 Dyv- 
ing-vat. | 


muüzair, ean, s.m. Gloomy, sarly or morose fel. 


low. 2 Snuthiig fellow, snutter. 
ACH a $.f.iud,. Inhospitality. 2 Snuf- 
ing. 


muc-ruadn,- uie-, -an-ruadha, e € The fiih bal- | mu;a.rle, s. Bunch of nuts— Glenmoriston. 
lau wrasse—(aurus macuatus. (muc-creige.) muga'ach, see nau goauach, 


| 
t L 
" 

LE p = = 

A 1; Lj 
iA m. t Y 
1 / k 
| Zë " ELI 


ITERNET 


mügan 


mügan,-ain,-an, see müzair. 
ean, pl. of mü'g. 

mugan,** -ain, sm. Mn», 

mügauach,(CEP) a. Pam» and misty (of weath- 
er) — Pert shi.e. (mi«qi.) 

f nngaro,** -airt, s.f. Hog. 2 Hogs’ flesh. 

mäh, v. a. Kill, destroy, see much. 

ugua, see muthadh. 

ch, a. Gloomy—Suth’d. 

mughadh, see muthadh. 

mugnairn, see mugharn, 

m'zhairneach,* a. Having large ankles. 

mughard,§ -aird, s.m. Mug-wort, see liath-lus. 

mugharn,* s.m, Ankle, 

niügütach, -aiche, a. see müiteach. 

-— —d, see müiteachu, 

muna. see moziiua. 

muic, Gent sing. ot muc. 

muiceanach, -aich, s.m. Mean person, plebeian. 

muiceil, -e, s.f. see muic-fheóil. 

muic-fheoil, -fheóla, s.f. Pork. 

y uichs,** s.f uud, | Earliness. 

luuiche,* s f  Dulness, sadness. 
darkness, gioom. 

mu.che, comp. of moch, prov. for moiche. 

ad, -id, see moichead, 

muicnis,** s.f. The rope which ties a basket on 
a, porter's back. 

mutdh, -ean, see muing. 

muidh,(DMC) v. see muigh. 

mu'dhe, pl. -an & -achan, s.m. Churn. Thoir a 
mn., churn (lit. bring to chura—Lochearron, 
Gairloch & Torridon. 2(CR) Pad:tle-chura - 
Lochhroom., 

ach, -eiche, 4a. 
churns. 

muidheach, -eiche, d. see muingeach. 

iiuidheachan, -ain, -an, s.m., dim. of muidhe. 
Little churn, 

mu dheadh, see muigheadh. 

muidhean, -ein, -an, see maidhean. 

inuidhe-buana,(CR)s m.Harvest-home—A rran. 
iiaidhe-làgain, sm  Sowens-tuo. 

muidse, -an & -achan, s. f. (m. in Badenoch. } 
Woman's common head-dress, mutch, linen 
cap. (m. in G«awloch where it is muisde».] 

müiz, -ean, sm Cloudiness, darkness, gloom, 
2 Frown, 3 Gloominess, surliness, discouten- 
ted expression of countenance. 4 Melan- 
choly, sadness, sorrow. 5 Snot, snivelling 
nose. 6** Mistiness, smoke. 7 Gloomy sky. 
Cuir m. ort, frown ; torra fo mh., mist-cov red 
Ail's ; sheall e orm fo na mügan (muigvan), he 
looked at me from under Ais $cowiinj eye- 
brows. [tr gives 3.f., McL & D gives s.m. 
but gen. sing. -e | 

mùig, v.a. dn Quench, smother, suffocate. 2 
suporess, quash, | 38 Become gloomy, misty 
or dark. 

muize, SL see muigeachd, 

——ach, -eiche, d. Misty, gloomy, dark. 2 
Surly, frowning: 3 Cold, reserved, shy. O 
chùi nan sliabh m., from behind tha misty 
mountains. 

——achd, s.find. Mixtiuess, gloominess, dark- 
ness. 2 Surliness, gioominess, 3 Smokiness. 

adh, -idh, s.m Act of quenching or suffo- 
cating. 2 State of becoming dark or gloomy. 
A’ m—, pr.pt. of mùig. 

mlivean, -ein, -an, s.m see mügair. 2**Mist. 

ach, -aiche, æ. Surly,churiish. 2 Gloomy. 

3 Misty. 4 Shy. 

achd, s.f.ind. sse muigeachd. 

nidigeas, -eis, -an, s.m. Sour, gloomy or down- 
cast look, 2 Surliness. 3 Snuffling. 

ach, -aiche, a. Sour, gloomy, downcast. 

muigeil, -e, @ see muigeach. 2{tMisty,dark, 





2 pl. for müig- 








2 Dawn. 
2 Mistiness, 


e 





Of, or belonging to, 





^ 








-_ 





e - 





— 


676 


muileann 
obscure. ^. 
rauigh, adv. Out, without, outside. 2 Super. 
ficia'ly. A m., on the outside; a chum am 


m. is am macn, that, by ail means ; avair ris 
abil an seo am mäir ach muigh ’s a mach, 
tell. him to be hers, bu all means, to-morrow. 

inhish,** v.a. Fail, falter. 2 Fall. 3 Be defeat» 
ed. 4 Decay. 5 (DMC) Threaten. 

muizh-buan, s.m. see muidhe-buana. 

muighe, -an, -achan, see muidhe. 

muigheach,.-eiche, a. see muidheach. 

———-—,.Ms) a. Darefui, dariug. 2 Huffish, 

-—- d, see müizheadh. 

müizheadi, (M3)s.44. Bravado. 2 Menace,com- 
minahiou, threac 

muighear, (M5) s.m. Bully, threatener, (for 
maoidnear.) 

muighte,** past p’. Changed, altered. (müthte. ) 

—— ——-J4ch, see muiteach, 

muigire,* sm see mugair, 

müie-mhonadh,** -aidh, s.m. Misty mountain, 
misty hill. 

muil, -e, -idhean,s.m. t f. see muileid maol & 
inaoila, 


Tog 
7, Eat BES 
4f. "Ce 











ei e. 
if » 

Kä , 09» 
Kat 


647. Mutleeann, 
m"ilceann, -inn, s.m. Tue plant spigue! or ball- 


548, Muilerg. 


money—mewwn athamunticum. 2 Fellwori— 
swertia perenn’s,is given by some dictionaries, 
but it is a diferent plaut, and is not now 
foun lin Britain—§, 
miilceannich, -aiche, @ Abounding in, or be- 
longing to, spizuel or b«l money, 
gero W. of Ross-shire for muini- 
chill. | 
muilcnear,(CR) E. Perthshire for muinichill. 
muilchill, see muini»^hiil. 
muilchinn, -ean, see muivichill 
muilchir, Perth for muinic'tl, 
muliicionn, see muinieh li. 
muileach, -Aiche, æ. Dear, ya'ued, heloved, 
muileacha-m':àg, s.pl. of mu le-inhaz. 
muileag,§ -eig, -an, sf Cranberry (u4. the frog- 
berry)—vaccinivm oxycoccos, 2** Frog, 
sft, -cig, -an, 8.f. Dear or beivved fe- 
male. 
ach, -aiche, @ Abounliug in cranber- 
ries, or 2 in little frogs. 1 
muileann, Ann, pl. -an, & muilae^n, s.m., Mill. 
m.-bleith, « grimdbing-mics, 
m.-^rachaidh, a ma/t-mil’, | 
m.-bràdüa, « quern, (see vuelow.) 
m.-bualaid^, a thrss^inaan:id., 
m.-calcai;ih, a futlén.7- ii. 
w.-cardaida, à card.qX;- ind, 





( muilearn 


m.-deitbh, awvarpine-mill, 

in.-gaoi'üe, œ mim, 

ri aimhe, à handmnill, quern. 

m -lin, a int nvt. 

m.-luaidh, see m. luadhaidh, 

in -nataaidh, @ fuldeng-inild, 

m.-mins, 4 m22'-m.:'l. 

m.- àohai.lh, a. suw-mill, 

ni- naojse!n, a smi ff-nv !l, enu f-5ov. 

m - òine-ri-àir, (DIK) s. m. The old turbine 
mill. witb the horizontal water-whzel. The 
ax'a missed vertically through th nether 
i; illstons and, there being no gearing, the 
uer «ton? made only one revoluvion for 
each tucn of the water-whecl, ‘Three of 
these mills were at work in Assynt about 
1860-5, but they were supersed2d soon after 
by a modern mill. 

m.-ui-ge, a wat-r-mill, (see bslow.) 

Air cul a’ mhuilinn, behind the mi". 

Invileanuach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to, a 
mill. | 

muilleannach1, s./. Occupation of a miller. 2 
Grind n». 

muileann-brà, sm. Quern. (for illustrations 
and names of parts see bra.) The quern was 
fermeriy the only mill for eorn-grin iing used 
in the Gàidhealtachd. It is still in use in 
many parts of northern Europeand in Asia, 
and the ** two women grinding at the mili ”? 

(quar ) may be seen to-day in Nazareth ex- 

actly as chey were in the days of Christ. The 

poplement consists of two stones, the lower 
being about two feet in diameter, and com- 
monly hollowed to the depth of about six inch- 
es, ‘This hollow is of equal depth and dia- 

meter. Within this is placed horizontally, a 

smooth roun l flag about four inches thick, 

and so fitted (o the cavity that it can just re- 
volve with ease. Through the centre of this 
revolving fl o thereis bored a hole for convey- 
ing the grain. In tn? lower stone, in the cen- 
tre of its cavity, there is fixed a wooden pin 
on which the upper stone is placed in such 
exact equiponderance, that, though thers be 
some friction from their contact, a little force 
applied will mae the upper stone revolve for 
several times, when there is. no grain under- 
neath. Outhe surface of the upper stone, 
anil near the edge, are two or three holes, just 
deew enough to hold in its place the stick by 
which :t is tarned round. The working of the 
quern is left to the women, two of whom, 
when the grain is properly dried, sit squat- 
ting on the ground, with the quern between 
them and singing loudly an appropriate song, 
perform their work, one turning round the 
stone with the handle placed in one of the 
holes, and the other dropping the corn in 
through the large hole, The law of Scotland 
attempted in vain to discourage the use of the 
quern. Inthe year 1248 it was enacted ‘‘that 
no man shall presume to grind quheit, mais- 
loch or rye, with hand mylnes, except he be 
compelled by storm, and be in lack of mylnes 
quhiik snould grind the samen ; and in this 
case, 1f a man grinds at baud-mylnes,he shall 
give the threttein measure as multer ; and 
gif any man contraveins this our prohibision, 
he shall tyae his hand-mylnes perpetualiiz.’’ 

muileann-uisge, s.m., Water-mill, 

PARTS OF A WATER-MILL (DMy) :— 

1 Loch a’ mhuilinn, mill-pond. 
2 Eas a mhuilinn, mill-race, stream of wa- 

ter that turns the mill-w reel. 
8 Roth mór a’ mhuilinn, the mill-wheel which 

drives the mill. 


mnime 


4 Wrabhailt, mill-hopper, into which t^e grain 
ia put to feed tha mill, 

6 Clagnn,mili-clapp»r with three ridges, strik- 
ing the spout o per to cause the grain to 
fall into the eye of the ml. 

6 Suil a’ mhuilinn, eye of mill. 

7 Fiacaill a’ mhuilinn, mther side of upper 
sione and upper side of nether stone. 

8 Aotroman, screw for increasing or decreas. 
ing pressure of ston?s on the grain and thus 
mating meal fine or coarse. 

9 Rothan a’ mhuilinn, mill-wheels. 

10 Cnoyuisean, n^ fiaclan nan rothan, cogs on 
mill-wheels, 

11 An Criathar mór, mill-sieve, with two or 
three sheets, and worked by water power in- 
8t^ad of hy hand. 

mnuilear, see muillear. 
uuileil, -e, -ean, s.m. tf. Mule. 
(fish.) 


2 Mullet 





each, -eiche, a, Miish. 2 Abounding 
in muies. 3 Abounding in mullets. 

————eachil, s./, Mulishuess, 2 Bad smell. 

miuile-mhaz, Ae, ol. -acha-mag, s.f. Toad. 2** 
Frog. Cha b’ ann air muileacha-màg a 
chaidh m’ àrach-sa, it was not on toads that I 
was reared —a saying current at the time of 
the Napoleonic wars and indicatiug the ab- 
surd contempt that then prevailed towards 
the French. 

m ere ne'ghbourhood of L. Ewe for mui- 
nienilttl. 

"nuilie"eann, -an, s.m. see muinichill. 

——ach, -aiche, æ. see muinichilleach. 

muilichion, -ean, see muinichill. 

- ——each, see muinichilleach. 

muili hiuaesn, s.pl. see mu:rliun, 

milioun, -inn, -ean, see muileann & builionn. 

ie pe sing. of moll. 2 Arran for oun, 
chi 

muill, ua. Prepare, get realy. 

muille, s.f. see muileid. 

muille, Arran for m'uinichill. 

ach,** Ach s.m. Pudd!». 

an, -ein, -an, s.m. Husk, particle of chaff. 

2 l'russ of thrashed hay or straw. [DU hag 

h?arlia precocious youth describe the puffs 

Out of a smoker's mouth as ‘ muilleanan."] 3 

Little bell. 

wach, -aiche,a. Husky,chaffy. 2 Abound- 
ing in bundles or trusses of straw. 

muillear, -eir, -an, s. m. Miller. 
m -cardaidh, a carding-miller. 
m.-lin, a ftaz-miller. 
m.-luadnaidh, æ fuller of cloth. 
m.-mine, @ meal-miller. 

-——achd, s. f. Business of a miller. 
Grinding, 

muil-leathann,** æ. Flat-headed. 

muilleid, see muileid. 

muillion, -an, s.m. Million. [Followed by a 
noun in the gen. pl. unaspirated.] Muillion- 
an de shluagn an fheòir, millions of the ten- 
ants of the grass. 

muillnean, -ein, -an, see muillean. 

muilneach,tt a. Of, or pertaining to, a mill. 

muilnear, see muillear. 

muilt, gen.sing. & m. pl. of mult. 

zag, -eig, prov. for muileag. 

2an, -ein, -an, s.m. dim. of mult. Little 
wether or ram. 

muilteanach,tt @ Abounding in little wethers 
or rams. 

mniltein, (car a mh —,) s.m. Somersault. 

muilt-fheoil, -fhedia, s.f. Mutton. 

muilt-fneolach.tL a Abounliaz in mutton. 

muim, -àcaau, s.f.ind. Nurse, 2 3pep-nxooher: 























2 


muime 4 678 muirbhrinn 
3 Godmother. 4 Midwifa. Fhuair i m., she | mninlo,(CPR) see muinichill, 
got a nurse. nmiiiim eur, -ir, San see minmbhear, 
ach, -eicho, a. NovereaL m iiu-na-mnà-mine § s. f. Cloudberry, (lit, the 
-—— Chicho, 8,/. Wet-nurse. gentlewomau's vine,) see oizoreaz, 
-altram,** et Dry-nurse, muinn, see muin. ; 
mùin, gen.siny. of mua. muinne, -achan, sf. Tallow tripe. 2¢tStomach 
wun, 8m.ind, Making water. — Argyll. 
muin, v.g, Teach, instruct, educate. 2 Show. | muiunidh, -e, -ean, s.f. prov. for muing. 
point oub. 8 Rear. 4* Instruct ia lesson of | muinninn, see muinighin. 
politenass or good-breeding. Mulinlear, -ir, -an, ssm. see muillear. 
muin, s.f.int, The back, bacx part of the neck. | muiunte, æ. see muinte. 
2 Fat adhering to the entrail3 of an animal, | muinnteachd, s.f. Disposition, prov. 
3**¥ountain. +4 The vine, see crann-fiona. h, pl. -aich, simolv a genitive of 











> 





5 Gaelic name of the letter M. 6 Thorn,| muinntir, although given in dictionaries asa 

bramble. "nog eair à mh. an laoch, he rais-| nominative, see muinntireacn. 

ei the hero on his back ; air m. a chéile, on , €. see muinntiir. Ach. 

each other's backs, upon each other ; air m. a’ d, see muinatireachi. 

mhonaidh, on the top of the hill; chaidh e|muinntearas, see muinntirens. 

air à m., he had carnal connection with her. muinntir, -e & -treach, s.f.coll. & sing. Peo^le, 
mùin, v æ. Mi turat?, make water. men. 2 Inhabitants. 3 Parents. 4 Relation, 
ruuine »,** s.f. Collar. 5 Family, household. 6 Tribe, clan. 7 Ser- 
muincieall, see muinichill. vants. 8 Farm-hands. Cha do ghabh a ma. 
-—————.—ach, see muinichilleach. féin ris, Ais own (relations) did not receive him; 
muinchill, -ean, see muninichill. m. a’ bhaile seo, the people of this town; Dm 
muinchiile, see muinichill. an taighe seo, the inhabitants of this nous ; 
ach, -eiche, a. see muinichilleach. do mh., your people, your relations ; do m't 
muinchinn,** em Headland. 2 Sea-coast. chéile, your spowse's people; 'sann de m» 
muine, WW. of Ress for muinne. Uidhist a tha e, he is a native of Uist, or his ^^ 
Tonne, s./, Whore. 2 Mountain, 3 Thorn. 4| lations are. Uist people; m. do dhùthcha, Ca 

Bramble. 5 Une redding. countrymn. In som? places they say “ a’ mh, 
muineach,ttf a. Learned, educated, taught. 2| bheag is a’ mh. mhór " for an fheadhainn 

Of, or belonging to. the neck, necked, 3**| bheag is an fheadhainn mhòr,” the big ong 

Strong-necked, 4** horny. A mhare ghlas- andl the little ones. [hese nouns are not pl. 

mh., his grey strong-neck-d horse—so given by | so the adjectives must be sing., but the pro- 

** but ghlas-mnuingeaeh, grey-maned, is no| nouns would be ail 

doubt what is meant. muinntireach, -eiche, a. Having a numerous 
m iincach, -e'che, a. see muiiigeach. household. 2 Of, or belonging to, a house- 

—ath,** -aidh, s.m. Laking possession, | holl. 3**Kind, friendly. 

2 Possession. -——, -eich, s.m. Servant, hireling. 2* 
mainead, -eid, s.m. Collar. 2 Necklace. Acquaintance, 3 Follower,  4**Establish- 
miineadb, -eidh, see munadh. ment of servants, household. Rùn a muinn- 
muineal, -eil, -an, s. m. The neck of a person, tireach, the love of her household ; sean mhb., 

(amhach, of a b ast.) 2 The breast. 3**Jaws. an old a^quaintance. 

M. ua là inh», the wrist—given by **is a jo- —— ——4À,* s.f.ind. Acquaintance, deal- 

calar expression. ings correspondence. Sean mh., old acquaint» 
muin-alaca, -aiche, a. Necked. 2 Long-necked. | asce. 

3 Havinglarga jaws. mui intireas, -als, $.f. Service, servitude, office 
mitinean-Muire.§ Parsley, see pearsal. of a servant. 2* Correspondence, dealing, 
m incar, -eir, -un, son, Teacher instructor, communication. 3(AC) Covenant. 4tfInden- 
mie, gen.8:/mg. of muineal. tureship. 5**Kiudness. 
mn, -e, -ean, s.f. Mane of a horse. muiuntir Fhionnlaidh, s.pl. The fairies— Lewis. 
miitge,** s. Carcanet. 2 Collar. muin-sheud, s.m. Carcanet, onch. 

- —ach, -eiche, a. Maned. 2 Of or belong- | muinte, past pt. of muin. Taught, instructed, 
ing toa mane. 3 Having a long or thiek msne,| educated. 2 Polite, well-bred. 3 Beauteous, 
m iinghiall, -a, -an, s.f. Headstail of a halter or | muinteachd, s.f. Disposition. 














= o e 


























pridle. inuintear -eir, -an, see muinear. 
-—ach, -aiche, @ Having a headstall, | muin-theud, sem. Collar. 
as n bridle or halter. muir, -e, SE, prov. for müire. 
m i ghin, -e, -eau, see muinizhin. muir, gpn. mara, dat. muir, voc. à mhnir ! pr. 
———--— each, -eiche, a. see muinighineaenh. inaranüamn, s.m. & f. The sea, 2 Sea, ocean, - 
mainicheall, -ean, see muinichall. 3 Wave. 4 pl. Large billows. Tram in Bad- 
——--——_—— ach, see mitinichilleach. enoch. In Lewis the mom, is f., and the gv. 
muinichill, -ean, san. Sleeve, is m —A’ mhnir, ceann a’ mhara.| Lean mi 
—each, a Sieevel, 2** Having long| thar m. thu, / followed the» over the sea; air 
sleeves, mur 's air tir, by sea and by land; a min, 


m inighin;-e, -ean, s.f. Hope, trust, confidence. mhór. the ocean ; a’ Mh, Dubh, the Blak Sea; 
2 Assurance. 3 Stay, dependence. 4 Security. a’ Mh. Bhuidhe, the Yellow Sea; M.-na- 
A* Port, fortress. 6**Reliane>, Am m. a mea lhon-tire, the Mediterranean Sea; airm 
chosnaidh,denendiny on his daily labour ; is tu mara, @ navy. 
mo mh. threun, thou art my chi f confidence ; | mur(AH) s.f. Worry, discomnosure, mental 
In, uA ainm-san, trust in his name. sueri g. Nach ann air a tha a’ mimir an 

———each, -eiche, @ Hoping, trusting,; dingo! how troubled he ixto-dau !tha m. ort 

confident, relying. 2 Hopeful, sanguine. 3| an‘tiush,a Daomnhnuill, you are in the dolour& 











secure, to-day, Donald. 
——— each4,** s.f. Confidence. 2 Hope-|moirbhà eachith, -ai ih, s.m, Amazemont. 
fulness, sang iineness, mirbhleasz.** s.m. Stuvidity, 2 Amazement, 
muiainn, $.f. see inuinighin., muirbhriun, s.pl. Scarecruws. 2 Termaganus. 


| 
FH 
LI 
rn 
| 

L 
T1 

] 

|| 
4i 
L 

L 

I 
>E 

[ 
L. 

L 


 muir-bhrüchd,-an, &. m. High tide. 


^ — — oM 


mulr-bhrüchd 
2 (MM) 


Sea-ware on a large scale. 
mnir-bhuachaill,fT s.m. Great northern diver — 


colymbus glacialis. 2 Red-throated diver, see 


learea mhór. 
muir-chabblach,** -aich, s.7. Squadron, fleet. 
muircheartach,** sm. Expert. 
PACA &.f. Wave. 

plunder 
muircinn, (CR) s.f. Ankle—Suth’d. 

case the correct nom. is muirceann.] 
muir-dhealbbadh, see muir-eolas. 
muir-dhbealbhair, s.m. í!vdrographer. 


2 Piracy, sea- 


[Oblique 





519. Muir-dhroighinn. 
EES e s.m. Agrimony—agrimonia eu- 


Tote, 
müire, s.f. Leprosy. 2* Hurry. 3**Earth. 4 
Mortar. 5 Dry scab. 6 Scurvy. 

i1müireach, -eiche, a. Leprous. 

-—, -eich, s.m. Leper. 

muireach, +*+ eich, s. m. Sovereign. 
mariner, marine. [** says f.]. 

müireach, a. Scabious. 

muireach, -eiche, a. Marine. 

mnireachan, -ain, 3.m. Bulwark. 

muireadh, -eidh, see müire. ` 

muireadh, see muirgheadh. 

imuirean, Lë -ein, s.m. Woman. 2 Young wo- 
man, [** gives f.) 

DOM. -inn, -an, s.m. Fish-spear. 2 Spear, 

art 

muireannach, o Like a spear or dart. 

muireardach, s.f. Female fighter or champion. 
2 Undaunted female— Sàr-Obair. 

muireil, a. Naval, maritime. 2 Like a sea. 

mair-eólas, -ais, sm. Hydrography. ` 

muir-fheachd, ** st Fleet, squadron. 





2 Sailor 


muir-ghobhal, ** ail, s.m. Arm of the sea. 


g,** eig, sf . Firth, narrow sea. 
dér: WT gg -an & -ghean, (VID (Kee 
dent, fish-spear. 


‘muir-zheadh, -ghedidh, s.m. Bean-goose—anser 


segetum. [** gives anas anser.] 
Tmuir-gheilt, s.f. Mermaid. 
muir-ghedidh, pl. of muir-gheadh. 
muirzhin-muire, see maighdean-mhara. 
muirghin-na-tuinne, see maighdean-mhara. 


‘muirghineach, -eiche, a, Dull, stupid, 





—- s.f.ind. Dulness, stupidity. 
muir-ghinneach, see muirighinneach. 


muirgineas,** eis, s.m. Dulness, stupidity. 


muirghe, see muirgheadh. 


muirgrim, $.f. Naval engagement, 


‘muirichinn, see muirighinn. 


679 


RE 


muir-spuinnearachd 


throng, ill-provided for family. Màthair na 
muirichinn, the mother of the family. 

muirichiuneach, -eiche, g. Having a numerous 
offspring. 2 Bardeusome, bringing much care. 
3*Hurried. 4* H ard-prossed. 

muirichlinn,* see muirlinn. 

muirighean, (MS) s.m. Generation. 2 After ages, 

muirighinn,** s. f. Noise. 2 Burden, heavy 
charge. 3 Family. 

——- each,** œ. Burdensome. 2 Having a 
heavy charge. 3 Poor. 4 Numerous, as a 
family. 





' muirineach,§ s.m. Sea-maram, sea-matweed— 


ammophila arenaria & psaanma erenaria. see 
muran. ; 

muirirean,§ s. Badderlocks, hen-ware, see mir- 
cean. 

muir-làn, -àin, s.m. High-tide, high-water, 

muirlinn,* s.f. Birses, kind of edible sea-weed. 

muir- mhaighistir ,S| s.m. Large white gull, glau- 
cous, see faoileag mhór. 

mùirn, -e, s. f. Cheerfulness, joy. 2 Delicate- 
ness, tenderness, nicety. 3 Natural affection, 
love, fondness, regard. 4 Respect. 65 Hospi- 
tatity. 6**Caressing, caress. 7ttGrandeur, 
pomp. 8ttPoliteness, 9** Troop, company. 
10* Entertainment with excessive tenderness 
. or fondling, as of children. 
"S aun rompa a bha a mh.,hkow hospitably they 
were received ; le furbhailt is m., with compia- 
cency end hospita lity ; taigh na rmuime, te 
home of hospitality ; a 'thaobh nm. , by reason of 
hospital! y ; le m., on account of delicacy. 

mùirneach, -eiche, a. Cheerful, joyful. 2 Deli- 
cate, tender. 3 Dear, beloved, fond. 4 (AC) 
Precious, endearing, prepossessing. 5 Res- 
pectful, showing respect, pohte. 6* Hospita- 
ble. 7 Spoilt, as a child. 8ffGrand, pomp- 
ous, 9**Spirited. 10 **Pleasant, exhilara- 
ting. Mac m., a dearly-beloved son ; m. uime, 
caressing him ; an dùrdail mh., the pleasant 
murmur ; each mor- -mh., @ high-spirited horse, 

muirneachd, gé Daintiness. 

müirneadh, -aidh, s. m.. Fondling, caressing, 
daudling. 

müirneag, -eig, -an, s. f. Cheerful woman or 
girl. 2 Tender or delieate woman. 3 Dar- 
ling, beloved woman,  4tfCivil or polite fe- 
male. 5 Affectionate girl. 

-—————ach,** q. Cheerful. 2 Fond, affection, 
ate, as a girl. 

muirnealachd, s.f.ind. Nicety. 

tmuirneamh,** -imh, s.m. Overseer. 

muirnean, -ein, -an, s.m. Dearly-beloved per- 
son, darling. 2 Petulant person. 3 Minion. 
4tf Polite man. 6ttPompous man. 6**Cheer- 
ful young person. 7**Affectionate young per- 
son. 


ach,** g. Affectionate. 2 Cheerful. 3 
Beloved, fond. 4 Caressing. 
muirnear, (MS) s.m. Cheerer. 
müirnich, v. a. ** Burden, load. 2 Caress, 


fondle, dandle. 3 (MS) Joy. 
muirnin, v.a. Caress, fondle, dandle, 
muir-reubaun, -ainn, s.m. Piracy. 
muir-seilche,(AF) s.f. Tortoise. 2 Turtle. 
muir-sgian, -sgein & -iain, pl. -an, s. m. Spout- 

fish, razor-fish. 

— ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in spout- 

fish. 2 Like a spout-fish. 
muir-sgriobhadh, -aidh, s.m. Hydrography. 
muir-spüinne,** s.f. Piracy. 
— ——— —-——-adair, see muir-spüinnear. 
muir-spuinneadh, -eidh, -eidhean, s. m, Piracy. 





muirichinn, s.pl. Children, family. 2 Burden, | muir-spuianear, -eir, -an, 8. 7n. Pirate, sea-rob- 


Gäre, 3* Hurry-burry. 4 Inmates oroccu-| ber. 
_ pants of one house—Sar-Obair, 5* Young —achd, 8.f.ind. Piracy,sea-robbery. 








Original from 
'ERSITY OF ILLINOIS 
URBANA-CHAMPAIOG ^h 


UN b 


Digitized by 


INTERNEF ARCHIVE 


muirt 6 


Tinuirt, et, Riches. 

muirteachd, s. m. General term for the genus 
medusa of naturalists, vulgarly called ** sea- 
blubber.” 2 Unnavigable sea. [muirtéachd 
— W. coast of Ross.) 

muir-thacar, -air, -an, $.n. Sea-spoil, what- 
ever goods are found on the sea-shore. 2 
Sea-chance, (aiso tàcar-mara.) 

muir-theud, -éid, an. s.m. Cable. 

muir- -thoradh, i -aidh, s.m. Product of the sea. 

muir-thuil, -tean, s.m. High tide. 2 Inundation 
by the sea. 

muirtis,** Gaelic spelling of mortice, 

muir-titheachd, * see muirteachd. 

muir-tinghachd, see muirteachd. 

muir-traigh, 8. 7. Low-water. 

muisde, Gairloch for muidse, 

miiseaeh,** a, Surly. 

muiseadh, -eidh, -eidhean, s.m. see mùiseag. 

mùiseag, -eig, -an, $.f. Threat, threatening. CA 
Fear, terror. 3 **Severe treatment. 
e disquaieted (lit, under verser salo, 

aech, -aiche, a, Threatening. 2 Fearful, 
terrified. 3**Prome to threaten. 

—————-adh,**-aidh, s.m.Threatening. 2 Threat, 

muiseal -eil -àn, s. m. Muzzle, curb, cheek. 2 
Muzzle of a plough. 

——— ach, -aiche, a, Having a muzzle or curb. 
2 Likea muzzle or curb. 

muisean, ein, -an, s.m. Mean or sordid fellow. 
2 Ramscallion. 8 The devil. 


/ 7, 


J RE a E, 


VP Ze 





550, Méeisean. 
müisean,$-ein, -an, s.m. Cowslip, palsywort— 
primula veris. 2 Primrose. 
ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in cowslips or 
primroses. 2 Like a cowslip or primrose. 
Tne -aiche, a. Low, sordid, mean,dirty, 


geet g &.f. Meanness. 

muvisgean, s.m. Spout-fish— A rran. 

mluisginn, -e, -ean, $.f. Gaelic spelling of mutch- 
kin (pint,) see bodach. 

muisigich, v.a. Snub. 

1muite, a. Dumb, mute. 

muùiteach, -eiche, a. Changeable, changing, ir- 
resolute, fickle, unsteady, giddy, volatile, vari- 
able. 2 Feverish. 

——-——d, s,f.ind. Changeableness, fickleness, 
variableness, inconstancy. 

müithteach, see muiteach. 

muitse, Gaelic spelling of mutch (headdress.) 
see muidse. 

mul,-uil, an, s.m. Conical heap, mound. 2 
Bank or heap of sand. 3 Pebbly or shingly 





D í E) 
Lé L 
Lop——— mE — am = ës " 
1 IA Pi i i lj 
` LE IET i =! i 
d Lt P I h V 


80 mullach 


beach. 4 Axle-tree, 5 Axis. 6**Multitude. 
mul,(MS) s.m. The pole. 
mulabhar,§ Air, 8.m. Dwart elder, see fliodh-a’- 
D. 
wee -aich, 6. m. see mullach. 2 (AF) see 


EE Sg ‘aich, 8.55. Puddle, water, dirt. 2 


mulachag, -aig, An, s.f. A cheese, the lump, a 
kenpo Giùlain a a’ mhulachaig, Ges" 


-—ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in cheeses. 
2 Shaped like cheeses. 

Bieren. -ain, pi. -an [ & -ain**,] s.m. see mul. 
ac 

mulad, -aid,-an, & m. Sadness, melancholy, 
grief, dejeetion. Thig math à m., good comes 
out of sadness. 

muladach, -aiche, a. Sad,sorrowful,melancholy, 
enduring . M. a ghnàth, for 

ever sad ; is m. an gnothach e, i£ is a mel- 

ankey business ; naidheachd mh., distressing 


Foot) ** s.f. Affiictedness. 2 Pensiveness. 
3 Piteousmess. 4 **Distressing nature or cir- 
cumstances of a case. 

muladaich, tt v.a. Aggrieve, ve 

mulag,** -aig, 8.f. de ua ` 2 see muileid, 
3 Little heap, knoll. 

——ach,** a. Hilly, knolly. 

mulaid, gen.sing. of mulad. 

mulaideach, * see muladach. 

mu-laimh, adv. Indifferently. 

mulan, -ain, an, & m. Small stack orrick of 
corn. 2 Little hill, hillock, knoll. 3 Conical 
hillock. 4 Large conical wave or billow. 5 





Little fietd, 6(MS) Knob. M. tomaiiteach, 
bulky stacks of corn. [* d “ never applied 
to AM roe eos ona .] 


mulanach, -aiche, A in smaH ricks 
or staeks, full Ay peres 2 Full of lumps. 3 
Hilly, abounding in s, knolly. 

mulard,** -aird, e see ( ) 

mulart,§ -airt, -an, 3.m. Dwarf-elder, see fiiodh- 


muIbhaeh,(AF) &.m. Sea-calf, seal. 2 Porpoise. 
mulc, glo pre a” v.a. Push, butt with 
ead, as a calf or ram. 
pours asa pig. 3*Dive, duck. 
mule,* muile, -an, s.m. Lump, shapeless umpe: 


E Duck, dive. 
-aiche, a. Pushing with the horns or 

head, butting. 2 Digging with the snout. 3 
J ostling. 4** Apt to push or butt. 

mulcadh, -aidh, s.m. Butting, act of butting. 2 
Digging, act of digging with the snout. 3tt 
Stutt, ram down. 4 Shoving. jostling. 5 Push, 
shove, jostle. A’ m-—, pr. pt. of mulc. 

mulcan, see mulchan. 

mulcha, see mulbhach. 

mulehan,** s.m. Long-eared owl, see comhagis 
ag-adhareach. | 

mul-cheann, -inn, s.m. The pole. 

muüul-chü, s.m. The pole. 

mul- dhorn, ** sg. Fist. 

mulghart, Wé -airt, s. The pole. 

mull, see maol. 

mullach, -aich, -aichean, s.m. The bor summit, 


or upper extremity of ‘anything. 2 Height, 
hill, eminence. 3 Height. 4 Roof. 5 Apex, 
ridge. 6*Essence. 7 Puddle, water. 8 Owl. 
9 see mulbhach. 10 see mu!chan. 11 Main 


dorsal, portion of plough-beam. M. na beinn- 
e, the ridge of the hill ; air mullach an taighe, 
on the root of the house ; m. an t-slaoightire, 
a most complete rogue ; m. liath, lom, a grey, 
bleak eminence; na m., in her top; m. nan 


[ig "Ra IQ » vs E 


"4 
a 


s i + d 
pid ar NE no Re) th te da 


» 
e 


im EE, 


TF 


EXE WERE 


E 


; 
` j 





mullach 


681 


murlag 





rionnag, the height of the stars. 
mullachail, -e, a. Coronal. 


mung, 8. -an, see muing. 
munzach,(AC) a. Shutiling. 


mullach-lubh,$ -aich-dhuibh, -ean-dubha, s.m. | mungach-mear,(AC) s.m. Hemlock—Lochaber. 


Knanweed—cen aurea nigra, 
dubh. 

mullachd, an, Suth’d for mallac'id, 

mulla-chlach, ert Pebble, Mu mhulla-chlach- 
au »' ehaolaich, abou’ the water-worn stones 
of the beach—Sgeulawhe-nan-caol, p. 106, 

mullaih, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Mouid for cast- 
ing. 

mullaz, -aig, -an, s.f. Cover of a chalice,patine, 

mullaid, see muileid. 

mullait, a. Wicked. 

innllan,** -ain, s.m. Mole, 
vessel. 

mullard,(AF) s.m. see malard (appendix.) 

mulldair, -ean, see molltair. 

mul-mhagan,** -ain, s.m. Kind of large toad, 
(var. of muile-mhag.) 

mul-mhogag, s.f. W. of Ross for muile-mhag. 

mulp,** a, s.m. Lump. 2 Knot. 3 Hump. 

-——ach,** @ Lumpy. 2 Knotty, 3 Gnarled, 
knagsy. 

--——an,** .ain, s.m. Little lump. 2 Little knot. 
3 Knag. 

-——anach,** o Full of little knots, 

-——anachd,tf s.f.ind. Knobbiness. 

Inul-sneamnh, ** am, see maol-saeimh. 


p MORAN } a. see maol-suéimheil. 


muit, -uilt, gan, Wether (sheep.) 

rasult-eró, s,m. Harvest-home after potatoes 
have been secured—Arran. 

mult-réithe, s.m. Tup. 

mn’m, Du, prep. conjoined with art., poss. 
or rel, pron., dc About the, their, my, 
whom, which. 2 Concerning the, their, my, 
whom, which. 113 adv. Lest. 4 Before, ere. 

mum, conj. d adv, see mu’ m. 

mu 'n, conj. & adv. see mu 'm. 
Me 'n d’ thubhairt iad, of whom they asserted. 
[also used instead of ** mar a thubhairt iad,'' 
as they said.) 

man, con), d: adv. 

mada, €, sce mùin. 

mun,* 0. see muin. 

wan, -&in, s.m. Urine. Galar mùin, the gravel. 

mima-bhuachaill,(AF) s.m. Allan-hawk. 2 Cor- 
morant. 3 Diver. 

münaeh,** a. Incontinent of urine; 

mnunachas, (AC) s.m. Prosperity. 

münadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of making water. A’ 
m—, pr.pt. of mùin, 

munadh, -aidh, s. m. see monadh. 2**Ednca- 
tion, instruction. 3 Admonition, discipline. 
oo munaidh, the ornament of educa- 
ion. 

munadh, -aidh, sm. Teaching, instruction. 2 
Act of teaching or instructing. 3 Act of show- 
ing or pointing out. 4**Affability. 65 Good 
behaviour, 6 Education. A’ m—, pr. pt. of 
muin. 

munar, -air, -an, s.m. Trifle. 2 Trifling person. 
3 Fact, deed. 

munaran,** o Insignificant, trifling. 

2— — ——, 8.1n., dim. of munar. 

fmunata, s.m. Champion. 

mu’n cuairt, prep. Around, about. Mu'n cuairt 
domh, about me, around me ; mu m’ chuairt, 
around me; mu d' chuairt, around thee ; mu 
'chuairt, around him ; mun cuairt da,around 


see cnapan- 


2 Kind of milking 











see mu 'm. 


— him ; w ar caairt, around us ; mu'n cuairt 


duinn, around us ` m’ ur cuairt, arovnd you; 
mu'n cuairt duibh, around you ; m’ an cuairt, 
EUM them ;. mun cuairt daibh, around 

teM 


— E E EE EE a e 


munganach,(AH) s. m. Blustering, noisy, over- 
bearing fellow. 

munganachd, s.f.ind. Bullying. 
mwun-gouain,(DU) san, Sma) painful tumour. 
muniaichte,** æ. Be-pissed, be-mired. 
münloch, -oich, -an, 8. m. Puddle, foul water, 
mire, 

munmnhur, -uir, -an, see monmhar, 

munmhor, see monmbar. 

munnla, see muinte, 

mun-aidh, af, Pam, knave of clubs at loo. 
mu'nseach, see mu 

mur, conj. If not, except, unless, M. dean thu, 
except you do ; m. dean sibhse aithreacuas ez- 
cept ye repent ; m. bhitheadh gu'n do thog e a 
chùis, were it not that he had avpealed ; w. 
bhith, unless, 

mur, for mar, 

mur, ùir, pl. -ùir & -ùirean, s,m Wall. 2 Bul- 
wark, rampart. 3 Fortified place. 4 House. 
5 Hill. 6 Palace. 7 Countless number, as of 
insects. 8 see müire. A’ caoidh "oa mhùr, 
wailing in the hall ; gach gregh pha 'pn ar m., 
every dog in eur house; m.-ollama, an aca- 
demy. 

mur, v.a. Wallin. 2 Fortify. 

mura-bhith,* s. f. Excuse, pretence, exception, 
Gun mh. sam bith, without any *xception. 
mura-bhuachaill,* see muir-bhuaehaill. 
mürach,* .aich, -aichean, g.m. Down, sand-hill 
on the sea-shore, 3 (DMC) Digging, sea 
muleadh, Feadh nam muraichean, among 
the downs. 

murach,** a. Walled. 

inur&chan (AC) sm. Wealth. M. 
wealth of the sea. 

murach dubh,** s.m. Blackmoor, 
inuradh,** sm, Bent. 

ach,** s,m. Siren, 
murag,(AF) st Murex, purple-fish. 2(DO)Any:- 
thing cast ashore by the sea —Uíst. 

— ——àn, soe moireag. 

wuran, -ain, s. m, Sea-maram, sea mat-weed, 
sea-bent, see muirineach. 2$ Carrot, sea 
curran. 3 Sea-reel—Colonsay. 4 Rope of 
grass, plaited or woven in horse-collar. Bra 
Rents. 

ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in sea-bent, 1 
Like sea-benb, 

murasgz,**.aisg, 8. m. Sea-shore. 2 Marsh. 3 
Sea-marsh. 4 Quicksand. 
mur-bhuachaill,** -ean, s.m. see muir-bhuach. 
aill. 

mur biodh,** v. cond. neg. Were it not, had it 
not been, 2 Were it not, had it not that, 
murcach, -aiche, @. Sad, sorrowful. 2t+Dark, 
muddy. 3 Gloomy. 

murean, ain, an, sm. Lump-fi:h. 

murcas, -ais, s.m. Sadness, sorrow. 2 Gloomi- 
ness. 3ttMuddiness. 

murdachan,(AF) s.m. Mermaid. 
mur-dhroighinn, see muir-dhroighinn. 

i -üirle, -an, s.m. Coat-of-mail 2 Oonical 
creel. 

murlach, -aich, -aichean, s. 7. The bird king. 
fisher. 2 Woman having an ugly head of hah, 
—Islay. 3**Dog-fish. $(AF) Halcyon. 6 sea 
mürlag. 

mürlag, -aig & -aige, -aigean, 8.7. Canoe-shaped 
basket to hold the uncombed wool fot tha 
comber—the creel holds the rolagan of com). 
ed wool, The basket is sometimes egg-shaped, 
with a bole at the top to admit the hand, and 
is also called '' ciarachan,”’ a Ww 


‘na mara, the 





murlaich 


murlaich,(OR) see murthail. 

murlainn, see mürlag. (Scots, merlin.) 

iurlan,*-ain, s.m. Ugly or rough head of hair. 
2 Dirty, matted hair. 3**Rough head or top. 

murlaoch, (AF) 8. Dog-fish, see mürla:h., 

murloeh, (AF) s.m. Dog-fish, see mürlach. 

rourloinn, see mürlag. 

murn,(AC) &.m. Daring, 2 Maiden,damsel girl. 

murrach, -aich, a. Able, capable. 2 Efficacious. 
3t Rich. 4 Adequate, Tha mi m. air a dhean- 
amh, J amabie t» do it ; ciod an ni a’s murr- 
aiche P what is more able } 

ear gigni (MS) a. Adequate. Gu m., adegua- 
tely. 

murrachas, -ais, $. m. Ability, capability. 2 
cogency, adequateness, 3 Superiority, sufi- 
ciency. 

murrachd,* et (MS) Solvency. 2 see murra- 
chas. 

finar-radhaeh, -aieh, a.m. Orator. 2 Babbler. 

n:iurraichd,* s.f. Handsome preseut, 2 Spoil on 
the sea-shore. 

murraich», comp. of murrach. More or most 
capable, 

murraiche,** sp, Ability, capability, power, 
sufficiency. 

mursaig,(AF) s.f. Razor-fish. 

¢mursanach, -aich, e an. Subject. 

inursanta,** q. Servile, 

——— — —chd, s.f.ind. Subjection. 

murt, see mort, 

achail,** a, Murderoas, massaering. 

murtachd, et ind. Sultry heat, sultriness. 2 
Weaiiness or dulness produced by heat, 

murtadh, -aidh, see mortadh. 

murtaidh, -e, a. Sultry, suffocatinx. 2 Languid 

, or Wow E from excessive heat. 3 Murderous, 
cruel, 

murtair, -ean, see mortair. 

— ————eachd. see moztaireachd. 

murthail,(CR) s.f. Grumbling —Perthshire. 

fmurtill,** æ. Dull. 

murusg, -uisg, s.m. Sea-shore. 2 Sea-marsh. 

mus, (mò 's or motha 's) a. Too much, exceed- 
ing. 2 Exhorbitant. M. làn, teo fell. 

mus, conj. (i.e. mus an) see mu'm, mu'n, Ere, 
before. Mus fhaillinneadh aran, ere bread 
should fa:i—Suth'd. ; mus tàinig an dil’ o 
neam, before the deluge came from heaven— 

t 3, 5 

*mus, a Pleasant, agreeable. 2 Handsome. 

musach, -aiche, a. see mosach. 

musag, see Mosag. 

musaiche, 8.f. see mosaiche. 

nn prov. comp. of mosach. 

musaidh, -ean, s.m. Dirty or nasty fellow. 
Mean, vile fellow. 

musal,(CR) s.m. Evil threat, 

muscata, s.m. Nutmeg. 

mu seach, adv. Alternately, by turns. 2 Laid 
by. 3** In return, 4**To and fro, Uair mu 
seach, time ahovt;deanaibh mu seach e, do 
(ye) it alternatly ; an uachdar mu seach, al- 
ternately up and down , fear mu seach, one by 
one; tha 'obair dol mu seach air, his work 
accumulates on his hands ; airgiod mu seach, 
money laid by. 

musg, -uisg,-an, 8.f. Musket. 

musz,** v.n. Grow mouldy or musty. 

miusg, -üisg, -an, s.m. Kyerheum, 2 Ugly eye. 
3 Gore of tho eyes, — 

-——ach, -aiche, a. Rheumy. 2 Mouldy, musty. 
3 Ehoum-eyed. 

muszach,-aiche, @. Armed with muskets 2 
Of, or belonging to, muskets. 3 Like a mus- 
ket. 4 Full of muskets. 

inüsgachd, ¢.f/.ind. Blegrodnoss. 





2 


682 


Mussel. 

gain. 
— ———Ach,-aiche, a. Abounding in hose-fish, 
musganach, -aiche, @ see mosganach, 


mu thimehioll 


| musgadair,** s.m. Musketeer. 
musgaid, sf. see mu-g. 

muszail, sse mosgail, 

musgain, see mo-gain. 

mu-sgalach, see moszaiach, 
musgaltaeh, see mosgalach. 
—d,** s.f, see mosgalachd, 
musgan, -ain, 8.7n. see mosgan. 


mùsgan, -ain, -an, $.3n. Hose-fish, gaper. 





2(AF) 
3 (AF) Large razor-tish, 4 see mos- 


musganachd, ses mo-ganachd. 

mu sgaoil, adv. Abroad, at large. Chaidh a leig- 
eil mu sgaoil, he was set free. 

musgladh, -aidh, see mosgladh. 

mustar,** -air, s.m. Self-sufficiency. 2 Muster. 

mustar-mhaighstir,** 5, m. Muster-inas£er. 

inàsuinn, -5, -ean, SE Confusion, 
burly. [** gives f.] 

pre. AU short thing. 

mutach, -aicha, a. Short, thick and blun 

mütach,** a. Moul o p: 

mutag, see miotag. 

mutaiche, s./. Moulliness, mustiuess, 

mütaire,(AH) s.m. Fellow who likes to act on > 
the sly. 2 Smuggier. 

ach, s.f. Concealed or hidden deeds. 2 
Smuzelin». 

mütain, gem. sing. & n.pl. of mùtan. 

mùtan, -ain, -an, s.m. Muff (article of dress.) 
2 Thick glove. 3 Old rag or anything worn 
by time or disease, 4 Fingerless glove. 5tf 
Small leather covering. 6**Cover for a gun. 
7* Stamp of a Singer. 8 see müdan. 

mùth, v.a. & n. Change, alter. 2 in to 1 
decay, deteriorate. 3 Kill, destroy. 4**Give 
in exchange. 5** Shift, turn. 6 Diversify. 
Mh. e mo thuarasdal, he changed my wages. 

mùth, s.m. Change, alteration, diference. 
Vicissitude. 3 Novelty. 4 Decaying. 5 Small 
money in exchange for larger piec.s. 

mùtha, see mùthadh. 

muthach, v. see mùch. 

muthach, -aich, -aichean, s.m. Herd, herdsman. 
2 Cowherd. 3ttMilk contractor. Caillear bò 
an droch mhuthaich seachd bliadhna roimh 
am mithich, the bad herdsman's cow is lost 
seven years before the time, 

muthach,a. Changing, changeable, 

muthachadh, -aidh, see mùthadh. 

muthaehd,(M3) s. f. Fustiness, 

müthadh, -aidh, s.m. Changing, act of chang- 
ing, shifting or altering. 2 Alteration,change, 
difference, vicissitude, transition. 3 Novelty. 
4 Change in money. 5 Killing, act of killing 
or destroying. 6 Destruction, perdition. 7** 
Decaying. A’ m—, pr. pt. of mith. Tha m. 
air, he is changed ` thoir dhomh m, crùin, give 
me change for a crown ( five shillings) ; théid 
a dhreach ain m., its fashion shall perish ; a' 
dol am m., perishing, decaying ; do bhrathair 
lag a m., thy weak brother perishing ; air mh. 
dòigh, in a different manner. 

muthaidh, (MS) g. Fusty. 

mùthaidh, fut. ajf. a. of mùth. 

muthairn, -e, ean, prov. for mughairn. 
Little mother, dear little mother. 


tumult,burly- 


de, musty. 





rot 


2 (AC) 


—————-each, -eiche, æ. see mughairmeach. 

muthalach, -aiche, æ. see müiteach. 

——_——-—d, &. see müiteachd. 

mnuthan.** -ain, s.m. see maothan, 

müthar, fut.pass. of mùth. Shail be changed. 

mu thimchioll, prep. About, around, coacern- 
ing Mu m’ thiomchioll, avout me ; mu d' 
th., about thee ; mau "Eh. about Aim; m’ a b., 

- «na * 


P nl 


mu thimchioll 


about her; m' ar t., about us ; m' ur t., aout 
us ; m’ an t., about them. 

mu theinn, gin, Busy—Arran, A phrase in 
constant use, e.g. tha thu mu theinn, you are 
busy ; tha na madaidh mu theinn, (Ae dogs are 
busy {bark ny.) 

müth-ionada-h, -aiche, a. Inverse, 

muthtach, -aiche, see indifearch. 

-—_————d, s. see müiteachd, 

muthteachas, see mù:teachd. 

mu thuaiream, prev. About (in estimate.) Mu 
thuaiream fichead là, about twenty days ; dh’ 
fhàg mi mu thua:ream seo e, I left it here- 
abouts. 





N 


m, nuin, the ash-tree ; the twelfth letter of the 
Gaclic alphabet at present in use. N, when 
immediacely preceded by i, sounds like n in 
English win ; nn, when immediately preceded 
by i, sounds like gn in French guigne, or n 
in English singe When preceded and followed 
by broad vowels, nn has a particularly deep 
and broad sound, which has no equivalent 
in English. The monosyllable an, when the 
next word begins with or g, sounds like any, 
as, an cu, the dog. The letter n when aspira- 
ted is not foilowed by h in writing, and a 
distinction between the plain and aspirated 
sounds is not generally male in Northern 
Gaelic, although there is an appreciable dif- 
ference between then in, nigh do chasan, 
wash your fet, which is plain, anl that in, 
migh ea chasan, he washed his feet, which is 
PARU de when they are correctly prononnc- 
ed. | 

*n, cont. for an, arf, Dh’ ol iad de’n fhìon, they 
drank of the win’. 

*n, cont. for an, rel.pron. Mu ’n d'thubhairt iad, 
of whom they asserted, 

*n, cont. for an, poss.pron. Le’n lamhan’s le 'n 
casan, with their hands and feet. 

*n, cont, for an, ’N taigh, ina house, 

^n, cont, for an ? interr. particle, 'N d’ fhàg thu 
mi? have you left me ? 

*n, cont. for an, particle A chionn gu 'n robh 
eagal orra, because they were afraid, 

D-,is placed between tho possessive pronouns 
ar, eur, and bhur, your, and the noua follow- 
ing when it begins with a vowel. Mar sin 
rinn bhur n-aithrichean, so did your forcfath- 
ers. 

na, gen.sing.fem. of art. an. Fo ghruaim na h- 
oidhche, under the gloom of the night. 

ma, nom.é dat. pl. of art. an. Air na beanntaibh, 
on the mountains. 

Bee Than. WNa/’s fhearr na sin, better than 
that. 

ma, pron. fulfilling the function of an antece- 
dent and relative in English (~an do, con- 
tracted.) That which, what, those who, those 
which. Muna thubhairt ’s na rin" thu, con- 
cerning what thou hast said a :d don»; na thàin- 
iv, those that came; na 's urrainn mi, that 
which | can; na dh’ fhanas, thos? that re 
main, that which remains. 

ma, adv. Not, let not, Na tig an seo, do not 
come here. 

na, prov. for do'n. Chaidh e na bhaile, Ae went 
to (into) the town—Badenoch, «c. 

tna, conj. for no. 

ma, particle, Used before preterites of verbs 
(i.e. an do.) Far na thiodhlaic sinn an triùir, 
where we have buried the tiree, 


ER 


F 


633 


nà'mhdealas 


'n a, conf. for ana. Fanaibh gach duine 'n 4 
dite féin, abide ye every man in his own place; 
*na cho'greach, he being a stranger. 

"Dä, before a poss. pron. for an & ann, prep. Am 
bheil tha 'nad shlainte ? are you in heal h ? 
tha iad ’nam fianui-ibh "man aghaidh féin, 
they are witnesses against themelues. 

na, adv. (i.e. o'n a) Since that, whereas, foras- 
much as, 

nabachail, -e, v. Neighbourly. 

nabachis, -ais, s.m. Neighbourhood, vicinity. 2 
Neighbourliness. 

nabachd, prov. for nabaidheachd. 

nàbaidh, -ean, s. m. Neizhbour. [* says “a 
neighbour" in the North, and “a North 
Highlander "' in the West.] 

eachas, see nàbaidheachd, 

eachd, 8.f.ind. Neighbourhood, vicinity. 
2 Neighbourliness. 

nàbuidh, see nabaidh. 

nach, pron. ini. Who not, which not, whom 
not, that not.  Ant-aon nach tig, the one 
that will not come; suinn nach bed, heroes 
that are not living. 

nach. adv. & conj. That not, not, A chionn n. 
'eil an righ a’ toirt fògaraich air an ais,because 
the king does not restore fugitives, 

nach ? ng.interr.particle, Nach el fhios agad 
fnathast P knowest thou not yet ? n. truagh mi 
leat ? ain I not to be pitied with you ? n. math 
e? is i£ not good ? n. tig thu ? will you not 
com» 2 

nad,** s.m. The posteriors. 

'n ad, cont. for an ad (an do.) 'Nad chridhe, in 
thy heart. 

fna!a, s. Nothing. 

bailar, air, -airean, see nàdur. 

rach, -aiche, see nàdurra. 

nràdlmnhorrach, a. see nàdurra. 

nàdur, -uir, -uirean, s.m. Nature, constitution 
of tie material world. 2 Constitution of any 
particular thing. 3 Disposition, temper, mind. 
4 Nature, constilution or fitness of things. 5 
Sinful or depraved nature of man, in a spirit- 
ual sense. 6 Bent, inclination, instinct, na- 
turalness. Obair naduir, the work of nature ; 
do dhroch n., your bal temper. 

ra, @ Natural, according to nature. 2 

Good-natured, of a good natural disposition. 

3 Affectionate. 4 In a state of nature, unre- 

newed by divine grace. 5**Humane. Nigh- 

ean n. an affectionate daughter ; deagh-n., er 
math-n., good-tempered. 

rach. -aichs, @ see nadurra, 

racud,* s.f.in’, see nàdur. 

rail, -e, @., prov. for nàdurra. 

nagair,** a. Com?ly, handsome. 

fuaibh,** sf. Ship. 

t——-—eag,** -eig. s. ^, Little ship. 

uaid, -e, -ean, s.f. Lamprey. 2**Husband. 

naidneachd, ¢.find. News, tilings. Dé do n.? 
what news have you ? droch n. dnuit-se, bad 
intelligence for you, 

fnail,** a. Another. 

naiil-bheul,** bheòil, s.m. Bridle-bit. (an ai!l- 
bheul.) 

nàile, int. Indecd, truly. Emphatically, nàile 
féin ! a common form of asseveration, N. féin 
hend mi dhachaidh, by my sooth I shali ga 
Lome. 

fnàim,** s.f. Bargain, covenant. 

nàiuh. gen.sing. & n.pl. of nàmh. 

nàimhde, pl. of nàmhaid. 

naimhdeach, -eiche, a. see nàimhdeil. 

na:mbdealach, see nàimhdeil. 

———— d, 8.f. see nàimhdeas. 

nàimhdlealas,-ais, see nàimhdeas. 


KE 


























nàimhdean 


nràimhdean, pl. of nàmhaid. 

-—as, see nàimhdeas. 

nàimhdeas, -eis, s.m. (3.f. in Badenoch.) Enmity, 
hostility, malice. 2**Viciousness, rancour. 3 
Keenness, eagerness, vehemence., 4* Vindic- 
tiveness, resentment. 

fnaindean,** -ein, s. m. Valour, chivalry. 
Hero. . 

t- ach, a. Valorous, chivalrous, 

t- ach,** s.m. Valorous person. 

nàimhdeil, -e, a. Hostile, warlike, like an en- 
emy. 2 Malicious, 38**Rancorous, vicious. 
4 Keen, vehement, eager. 

fnaing,** s.f. Mother. 

t -mhór, -mhóir, s.f. Grandmother. 

nàir, -e, see naire. 

^n àird, adv. Aloft, up, upward. 2 From below. 
3 On bigh. Chaidh e 'n àird, he went aloft. 

1naire,** a. Clean, neat, trim, tidy. 

Laire, $.f./nd. Shaine, di:grace, iguominy. 2 The 
feeling of shame, 3 Bashfuiness, modesty. 
Mo n. ! for shame ! fy ! gabn n., feel ashamed; 
gun n, gun athadh, without shame or confu- 
sion of jace; fo n., ashamed ; air bheag n., 
Shameless. 

inaireach,** a. Brave. 2 Generous. 

Bàireach, -eiche,@ Shameful, disgraceful. 2 
Bashful, modest, shamefaced, sheepish.  3* 
Easily abashed. Ni n., an ignom nious thing ; 
tha ’n duine n., the man s bashful. 

Baireachath, -aidh, s. m. Ashamiag, act of a- 
shaming or causing shame. 2*Abashing, dis- 
gracing. A’ n—, pt. pt. of nàirich. Tha mi 
ar mo n.,/ am ashamed, 

ni reachd, sr see naire. 

LÀrich, v.g. Shame, affront, make ashamed, 
browbeat, insult. l 

ear, fut.pass. of nairich, 

idh, fut.aj. a. of nàirich. 

te, past pt. of nàirich. Ashamed, made 
ashamed, affronted. 

nairne,** s.f. Purity, chastity, modesty. 

nais,*" s.f. Furnace, 2 Fire-hearth in a forge. 

maiscir,(Ail) sf. Old inhabitants of a conntry. 

naisg, pr.pl. a nasgadh, v.a. bini, make fast, 
2 seal. 3 *Deposit, money, pledge. Naisg- 
eadh cach le càirdeas, let the rest ve bound by 
Friendship. 

fiuise, -e, -ean, $.f. Ring, seal. 

nai gear, -eir, s.m. Conjunction in grammar. 

—————,** fut.nass. of naisg. Shall be bound. 

naisgidh, fut.aff.a. of naisg. 

naisgte, past pt. of naisg. Bound, made fast, 
secured. 2 Sealed. 

naisich, v.g. Embellish, 

niisinn,* see nàistinn. [* gives, Deep and over- 
delicate sense of duty, excessive sense of gra- 
titude, particularly in matters of hospitality 
that puts to inconvenience.] 

tnaisir,** s. Old inhabitants of a country. 

màisneach, -eiche, @ see naistinneach, 

nàisneacnadh,9* s.m. Decoration. 

nàisneachd, see nàistiuneachd. 

naisuich,** v.a. Decorate, embellish. 

nàistinn, -e, s.f. Care, wariness, attention, vigi- 
jauce. 2** Circumspection, modesty. 3 Na- 
tive. 4(AH) Sense of duty, as in a servant 
towards his master’s interests. 5 (DMC) Na- 
tion, tribe. Na bitheadh n. sam bith ort 
air mo shon-sa, don’t put yourself to any in- 
convenience on my account; is beag n. a th’ 
orm air a shon sin, IZ do not feel any excessive 
sense of propriety to return that favour, n. an 
àite, a native of the place; lan nàstiun, full 
of circumspection. 

nàistiuneach, -ciche, a. Careful, wary, attentive. 
vijilant. 2 Modest, sham.faced. SEI Natiee, 

















Di tized m. 


eed A, Bai ue AN 
WIERNET ARCHIVE 


034 


naoi-deng 


Continent, sober, temperate. 4**Cosm«tic. 
5* Feeling a deep sense of obligation. 6*Per- 
seyeringly at work from a sense of duty (toa 


fault.) 7 Showing exces ive hospitality and. 


decency to à stranger from a-delicate sense of 
the laws of such. 


2 | nàistinneachd, s. f. ind. Modesty, shametace.l. 


ness, 2**Cuontinence,soberness,temperateness. 
8* Deep sense of duty or propriety of the obe 
servance of hospitality. 4% Too much keeu- 
ness at work froma the same feeling. 

Le n. agus stunim, with S: ameracedness and šos 
briety ; ’gan sgeadachailb téin le n., ador ag 
themselves with shame ced ness, 


Naitheas, -eis, -an, s.m. Harna, injury, mischief, . 


hurt. 
ach, -aiche, @ Harmful, mischievous, 
injurious, i 
]nall, s.m. Brille. ; f 
nall, (i.e. a nall} adv. To this sile, hither, toe 
wards us, from the other sile. A nuan ’s a 
nall, thither and hither » thigeadh e a nall, 
let him come over. 
fnallod, se allod. 


‘tnalius, see fallus. 
na 'm (i. e. natam, particle) conj. If. 


Na.'m 
bitheadh, if At were; na 'm bitheadh mə 
chliu-sa cho mairvann, were my praise so læst- 
ing. [Used before verbs beginning with a 
labial. | 

nam, g^n.pl. of art. an. Glac nam beann, the 
gorge of the hills. | [Used before a labial] 

"nam, cont. for an am, in (heir, ’Nam meadh- 
on, in their midst. 

'nam, cont, for an mo, in my. "Nam fhearann, 
in my land. [Followed by aspirate. ] 

nàmh, -aimh, see nàmhaid. 

nàmhach, -aich, s.m. see nàmhaid. Mar dha 
n., like two enemics. 

, aiche, a. see nàimhdeil. 

—ail, -e, d. see nàimhdeil. 

—— — ——AS, -als, s.m. see nàimhdeas. 

nàmhad, gen.sing. of nàmhaid. 

namiadaci, -aiche, @ see nàimhdeil. 

namhailas,** -ais, sm. Fierceness, 2 Kanity. 

nàmhaid, gen.siny. nàmhad, pl. nainhdear [& 
namhailean] s.m. Enemy. 2 Antagonist, 
each, -eiche, a. see naimodeil, 
nàmhaidealachd, sf.ind. see na whdeas, 
nàmhaileas, -eis, see nàimhdeas. 

namhaideil, -e, a, see nàimnd.il. 

nan, gen.pi. of an. 

na'n, conj. If. [Used before verbs beginning 
with a vowel or lingual. | 

"naa, cont. for an an, in their. 

'n aun, ? cont, for an ann P is it? 'N ano mar 
sin a tha e? is it like that ?'n ann mar sin a 
dh’ aithn midhuic? is it so that 1 command- 
ed you ? 

Inaochad, g. Ninety. 

fuaochadamdh, a, Ninetieth. 





naodn, see naoi. 
tnaolhamh, a. Ninth. (naothamh) 
naodhan,** -ain, s.m. Well, foun ain, d 


naogad,** a. Ninety. N. fear, ninety men. 

amh,** œ. Ninetieth. 

tnaoi, s.f. Hip. 2 Man, person. 

naoi; œ. Nine, An ceann n. mìosan, at the eg- 
piration: of nine months. 

naoi-bhaisteach, Ach, s.m. Pee.lobaptist, 

naoi-deug, @ Nineteen. N. fir dheag, nineteen 
men ; naoi fir dheug thar fhichead, thirty-nine 
men, [These words are really numerals amd 
neither nouns nor adjectives, although gene- 
terined.one or the other. ] à 

—— -, $& m. Ninueteen, Seo maoi-deug, 

here Gie nineteen. 








Original from 
A 


Y OF ILEINOISĄA 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


LI ken bet e 


T 


| 
‘| 
| 


- -— — i -fF `E 


BRE oat us 


- 


na: 7 

naoidh, see naoi. 

naoidhe, see naoidhean. 

nucidheach,** a. Infantile, like a babe or suck- 
ling. 





ail, -e, a. Infantile. 
aM, -Aln, -am, 8./^. 
Young child. 

-—dach, -aich, a. Chief. principal. 
naoidhean, -ein, -am, e. m. Infant, babe, suck- 
ling. 2 Bantling, urchin. 38*’ ravery. 

—ach, -aiche, a. see na iiihsanta,. 

—achd, see naoidheantachd. 

—ta,a. Childish, child-hke infantile. 

—tachd, s.f.ind. Infancy, childhood. 

** Childishness, 

tas, -ais, s.m. see naoidheantachd. 

` paoidh-mhort, -a, s.n. Infanticile. 
—air, s.m. Slayer of infants. 
naoimh, gen.sing. & n.pl. of naomh, s. 
.mnaoimhios,** s.m. November. 
* @ -—— —— —dadh, -aidh, s.m. Sanctuary, 
fnao!neal, -il, s.m. Prowess, chivalry. 
naoinear, s.m.coll, Nine persons, [Followed by 
genitive pl. ] 

naoisg, see naosga. 

maoitheamh,* see naothamh. 

naomh, -aoimh, s.m. Saint. Na naoimh, th’ 
saints, Air son nan naomh, oa account of the 
sain’s. 

naomh, -Aoimhe, pl. naomha, a. Holy, pious. 2 
Divine, 3 Saered, consecrated. 

a, @ see naomh, 

naomhachadh, -aidh, sm. 
sanctifying or consecrating, sanct fication, 
consecration, A’ n—, pr.pt. of naombaich. 

maomhachail,** -e, a. Sanctificatory, adorable. 








9 








Infant, babe, 











9 








-— 











 mnaomhachd, 8. f. ind. Holiness, sanctity. 2 
Sanctification. 
pa mhadh,** -aidh, s.m. Sanctifying. 2 Sancti- 
fication. 


naomhag,** -aig, s.f. Coble, see p. 78. 

naomhaich, pr.pt. a’ naomhachadh, v.a. Hal- 
low, sanctify, consecrate. 2 Canonize. Gwa 
naomhaichear t' ainm, thy name be hallowed ; 
n. e, he sanctified. 

-—te, past pt. of naomhaich. Sanct fied, 
consecrated. 

naomh-aithis, -e, -ean, s.f. Blasphemy. 2 Blas- 
phemy against saints, or 3,ayainst holy thiags. 

—-——, v.a. Blaspheme. 

-——each, -eiche, a. Blasphemous, 

naomh-cheannachd, s.f.ind. Simony, purchasing 
of holy things with money. 

maomh-chiste,** 8.f. Sacristy. 

naomh-chleachdas, -ais, s.m. Pious habit. 

naomh-choisrig, rg see coisrig. 

—  —— —eah, -ıdh, s. see coisrigeadh. 

te, see coisrigte, 

naomh-dhean,** v.g. Canonize, deify, sanctify. 

——— —— amh, -aiuih, s.m. Canonizing, dei- 
fying, canonization. 

naomh-dhéirc, -e. -ean, s.f. Pious gift, deodand. 
2 Colleetion made for the poor at church. 

naomh-dhion, -a, -an s.m, Sanctuary, asylum. 

naomh-dhion,** v.a. Give refuge in à sanctuary. 
2** ake refuge in à sanctuary. 

—— ———-achd, s. f. Protection afforded by 

/ a sanctuary. 
naomh-dhionta, past pt. Protected in a sanctu- 

















-—— —— 


ary. 
naomh-dhiontach,** a. Affording au asylum. 2 
Having the privilege of protecting, as à sanc- 
tuary. 
naomh-ghnaths, -àis, s m. Habitual piety. 
naonih-ghoid, -e, s.f. Sacrilege. Am bheil thu 
ri n.? dast thou commit sacrilege ? 
———— ——-each, eiche, @. Sacrilegious, 


Diditized by 
m A lf A ES S J 
it d E H n l = H | V 


N TE 


$85 


—- 
' 


Sanctifying, act of | 


na's 

naomh-ghoidiche,** s.m. Sacrilegious person, 

naomh- uhallachadh. -aidh, s.m. Blasphemy. 2 
Blasph ming, profane swearing. 3 Excome 
munication 2^»a/hema. A’ n—, pr. pt. .* 
naoioh-mh iu uch, 

navmh-mh :!lachair, -ean, s.m. Blasphemer, pro- 

| fane swearer. 

| naoimmh-mbhallachd, -an, s.f.ind. Blasphemy. 2 

Excoumunication, anathema. 

naomh-mhallaich, v.a. Blaspheme. 
municate, anathemĘatize. 

-—te, past pt. Excommunicated. 

naomh-oigh,** s.f. The Virgin Mary. 2 Nun. 

naomh-oran, -ain, pl. -an & -ain, s.m. Anthem, 
hymn, psalm. 

|naomh:reachd, an, 8. m. The holy or divine 
law, the canon law. 

naomh-riaghailt,** s.f. The canon, 

naomh-shluagh, -uaigh, s. f. coll. Holy people, 
saints. 

naomh-:hònrachadh, -aidh, s.m. Ordination, 

uaomh-thaisg,** s.f. Sacristy, vestry. 

naomh-thréig, pr. pt. a’ naomh-thréigsinn, pe, 
Apostatize. 


tizing. 








2 Excom- 


— -- 





each, -eiche, a. Apostate, aposta- 


—each, -eich, s.m. Backslider. 
naomh-thréiziche, -an,s.m. Apostate, renegade, 
niomh-thréigire,* see naowh-threigiche. 
naomh-thréigsinn, -e, 8.f. Apostacy, secession, 
2 Act of apostatizing. 3* Hypocrisy. 4* Inf- 
delity, A’ n—, pr.pt. of naomh-threig. 
aaounh-thuisleachadh,** sm. Apostacy. 
naomh-thuisleachair,** 8.2». Apostate. 

Inaon, a. Certain, assured. 

naonar, -&ir, see naoinear. 

naontach.* -aich. s.f. Ninety. 

naosg, -aol:g, s.m. Snipe. 

naosga, s.m. Snipe, see gobhar-athair, 

naosg wh,** uch, s.m. Snipe. 

naosgach, -aiche, a. Abounding in snipes. 
Like a snipe. Coire n., @ deii abounding 
Enip’. 

naosgair,** -ean, s.m. Inconstant man. 

each 1,** ert Fickleness, inconstancy. 

naosgamh, -aimh, s.m. see naosga, 

naoth, see naoi. 

naothadh, see naothamh. 

naothamh, a. The ninth. An naothamh bliadh- 
na, the ninth year. 

naothamh-deug, a. The nineteenth. An naoth- 
amh fear deug, the nineteenth man. 

nar, adv. Not, may not, let not. Nar leigeadh 
Dia God forbid ! 

‘nar, cont. for an ar, tn our. ’Nar cadal, in our 
sleep ;'nar meadhon, in the midst of us; tha 
sinn ’nar luighe, we are in bed. 

'nar, adv., prov. for 'nuair. 

‘nar, (an bhur) see 'nur. 

nar, -àir, s.f. see nàir. 

nàr,** -àire, @. Ashamed. 2 Shameful, dis- 
graceful, 3 Feeling atronted. Is n. an gnoth- 
ach e, it ts ashameful business. 

¢nar,** a, Good. 2 Happy. 

nàrach, -aiche, @ see nàireach. 

narachadh, -aidh, see naireachadh, 

nàrachaic,** s.m. Affronter. 

nara h tts f Bashfulness. 

uaraich, v.a. see nairich. 

——————ear, see nairichear, 

naraichith, see nàirichidh. 

naraichte, see nàirichte. 

nurd,** s.m. Science, skill, knowledge, 

narrach,** a. Cross, ill-tempered. 

fnas, -ais, s.m. Anniversary. 2 Band, tie (nasg.) 
3 Death. 4 Assembly. 

na's, comparative particle, Than. Cha b’ ure 


2 
in 











rainn da na's fhearr a dheanam', he could not 
do better ; tha Dòmhnall na’s àirde na Neu- 
mas, Donald is talier than James. 

Fras, -ais, -an, $,f. see neas. Z(AC) Worth, 

Da ach, see nò acii. 

na-ach, see neasach. 

Tnasach, a. Noble. 2 Famous, noted. 

fuasadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Fair, 2 Assem- 
biy. 3 Fame, reputation, report. 

nàsag, -aig, -an, St Empty shell. 

nasce, AF) s.m. Chained dog, see nasg. 

nasg, DO See naisg. 

nasg, naisg, -an, $. m. [s. f. in Badenoch.] Tie- 
bind, wooden collar for a cow, formerly made 
of plaited or twisted birch or other twigs. 2 
Seal. 3 Deposit, pledge. 4 Store, provision. 
5 Chain. 6 Ring. 7(AF) Chained dog. 8 
(M3) Air. 9(DMCO) Wooden ring of a sieve 
or fan. 10(DM0O) Film. Tha 'n t-airgiod an 
n.,(he money is left in pledge, is deposited us se- 
curity. 

Dasyach, -aiche, æ. Having collars. 2 Like col- 
jars or tie-bands. 3 Bining, that binds. 4 
Ob.igatory. 5 **Chained. 6 ** Full of rings. 

nasgadh, -ailh, s.m. Biadiag, as with a collar, 
2 Collar. 3 Chaining. 4 Covenant, treaty. 
5 Tie, bond. 6**Ovligiug, obligation. 7**seal- 
ing. 8* Pledging, depositing. A’ n—, pr. pt. 
of uaisg. Còir ort le n. a’ enléir, @ right to 
thee by the binding af a clergyman—wedlock, 

nasgaich,* see nasgai lh. 

Dain, (i.e. a nasgaidh) adv. phrase, Freely, 
wichout price, gratis, as & pledge, deposit, 
or gift. Fhuair mi a n. e, I received it free; a 
n. fhuair sibh, a n. thugaibh bhuaibh, Freely 
ye iav- received, freely geor; thug e dhoma a nu, 
e, he gave it to me a@s a græturty. 

nasgaidh,** s.f. Treasure, gift. 

.«-—————eachd,* 8./.ind. Frecness, uncondition- 
al freeness, gratuity, gratuitousness. 

naszair,"* s.m. Surety. 

nasgar,** -air, 3.m. Surety, 2 Defence, fortifi- 
cation. 

nasg-chu,(AF) s.m. Chained dog. 

Datar, -air, s.m, Nitre. 

taath, s.m. Science, knowledge. 

Tuathach, og, Learned. 2 Dark, grey, gloomy. 

nathair, nathrach, -thraichean, s.f. Serpent, vi- 
per, snake, adder. Mheallan n. mi, the ser- 
pnt beguiled me; n. challiuinn, a Aarinless 
snake. 

nathaireach, see nathaireil. 

navhaireag, -eig, -an, s.f. Little serpent. 

nothaireil, -e, a. Viperine. 

nathair-ghainmheach,(W C) s. f. Sand-serpent, 
found in the sand on sea-shore. 
nathair-gun-phuiunsean, (AF) s.f. Snake. 

Dnathair-lus,$ s.m, Ground-ivy, see iadh-shlat- 
talmhainn, 

nathair-nhara, (DMC) s.f. Sea-serpent. 

uath uir-nimhe, s.f. Cockatrice. 2 Poisonous 
serpent, adder, asp. 

nauhair-thràghad,(AF) 8. J. Small sand-fish or 
eel. 7 Snore- or sea-serpent, 

nathair-sgiathach, (AF) s.f. Dragon. 

nithair-umha, s.f. Brazen serpeut, 
nathair-uisge,(AF) s.f. Hydrus, 

*nathan, a. Noble. 2 Famous, ` 

pathrach, gen.siny. of nathair. 

nathraichean, n.pl. of nathair. 

ne, emphat. particle, A certain emphatic ad- 
jection to the poss.pron. ar, our ; placed after 
the noun with which the poss. pron. is asso- 
ciated. Ar n-athair-ne (better, an t-athair ag- 
uinne) our own father. 

'n dé dh, adv. After, behind. 

"a è? cont. for an e P ls it P? is it he ? Cha 'n e, 


na's 686 


neamhann 


|. 5, not he. 

fueabhailh,** s.m. Enemy. 

neabhan,(AF) s.n. Royston erow, raven. 

neacadair,** -ean, s.m. Nectar ne, Crann n., @ 
nectarin? tree. 

—each,** a. Abounding in nectarines, 
2 Like a nectaring. 

neach, s. m. ind. Person, any person, one, some- 
one. 2**Apparition. N. sam bith, n. air bit.i, 
anyone; n. elle, another person ` gach n., 
every one; n. éigin, someone; n. no n. éig:n, 
801neon or other. 

fneachd,** s.f, Tribe, family. 2 Pledge. 

Tneachlachd,** sf. Neutrality. 

neachdair,$ s.m. Nectariue (kind of peach)— 
amygralus persica nectarina. 

fneachdar, adv. Neither. 2 Qutwardly, wich. 
out. 

tneachdlarach,** o Neutral. 

nead, nid, s.m. [ 7. in Argylishire.] Nest. 2 
Circular hollow. 

neadach, -aiche, œ. Abounding in nests, 

adh, -aidh, sam, Nestling, acc of nest- 
ling. 2 Act of mating or building a nest, 3 
(DU) metaphorically, Settling down, making 
at home. A’ n—, pr. pt. of ueadaich, CA’ n. 
‘nam fneoil, imbedding in my flesh. 

neadaich, pr. pt. a’ neadachadh, v. oe Nestle, 
house, lie, asin a nest, 2 Build or make a 
nest. 3* Bed, imbed. 

-——_——te, past pt. of neadaich. Housed or 
lodged, as in a nest, nestled, 

neadan, -ain, -an, s. m., din. of nead, Little 
nest. A n. creachta, her little nest ptun tered. 

— — —Ach,-aiche, a. Abounding in little aests, 

'n eadh ? v. Isit? 

nead-thogalach,tt @ Building nests, 

neag, see eag. 

——ach, see eagach. 

——aich, see eagaich. 

——aid,* s.f. Little sob or sigh oft repeated, as 
@ person before or after weeping. 2 Suppress- 
ed sighiug or sobbing. 

tneal, o Noble. 

neal,(DMu) s.m. £ f. Term of endearment. An 
gabh thu seo, neal ? will you take this, my 
dear !* —Suth'd. 

neal, see neul, 

neallair,** -ean, s.m. Rogue, ramscallion, 

—eachd,** s.f. Roguery, rascality. 

neal-mhagag,(CR) s.f. Frog —5kye. 

nèamh, nèimh & néimhe, pl. -an, s.m. Heaven, 
firmament, the skies. 2 The abode of bliss, 
Driüchd néimh, the dew of heaven. 

neamh, see neimh. 12 see neo. 

néamaach, a see nèamhaidh. 

néamhach, -aich, s.m. Heavenly being, angel. 

d, sf. Heavenliness,heavenly minced 
ness, holiness, solemnity, blessedness, angeli- 
calness. 

néamhaich,** v.a. Deify, glorify. 

neamuaidh,-e, a. Heavenly, divine. 2**Celes- 
tial. 

-— —each,** Ach, see néamhach. 

-——eachd, see néamhachd, 

neaiuhail, see neimheil. 2** Angelic. 

neamhain, -mhna, -ean, s. f. see neamhnuid,. 
2**Impetuosity, violence. 3 Activity. A 
cheann-bheart clochara neamhain, Ais head- 
piece set with stones and pearls. 

,** a. Made of pearl. 

—— — —-—each, -eiche, a. see neamhnuideach 

neamhaird,** sr. Remissness. 

neamhalachd, see neimheileachd, 

néamhalachd,** sf. Augelicalness, 

neamuan,** -ain, s.m. Raven, crow. 
neamnann,(MS) s. Margarite. 














———— 














neamhnad 


neamhuad, see s)enmn"nan, 

neamhangan,tr -ain, 8. f. Stye on the eye. 

neamhnaid, see neimhaui 1. Á 

neamhnuid, -e,-ean, s.f. Pearl. N. nan ioma- 
daiih buadh, a pearl of many virtues, — 

neamhnuideach, -eiche, a. Pearly, abounding 
in pearls. 2 Like a pearl. 

néamhuidh, -e, see nèamhaidh. 

tnean,** s.m. Inch. 2 Span. 3 Wave. 

neanaidh, s.f. Fond name for a grandmother. 

neanntag, -aig, see deanntag. 

neanntagach, -aich, s. see deanntag. j 

nèapaiciu, -e, -ean, $. f. Napkin, handkerchief. 
N. pòca, a pocket handkerchie/ ; n. amhaich, a 


neckerchief, ` , 
neapaigin, see nerpalcin. 
near,** a. Boorish. 
+near,** s.m. Wild boar. 
"near, cont. for au ear, 
néarach, a. Happy, fortunate. 2 Prosperous. 

Is n. au duin» à smachdaicheas Dia, fortun- 

ate is the man whom God correcteth., ` 

naarachd.+t s.f.ind. Luck. 2 Happiness. 3 
Prosperity. > 

néóarachd,** &. see néarach. 

nearag, -aig, -an, sf. Daughter. 1 

near-aite,**s.m. Place frequented by wild boars. 

S cont. for an earar. | 

nate LAO} 3. Means. Beannaich dhomh mo n. 
^s mo ni, bless to me my means and my cattle. 

qnearnadh,** -aidh, s.m. Likening, comparing. 

2 Likeness, comparison. ; 
neart, neirt, s. m. Strength, power, might, en- 

ergy, pith, force, vigour, 2 Plenty, abund- 

ance, many, number. $**The greater part of 
anything. 4** Valour, 4**rarely Miracle, 

Le t’ uile n.g with al/ your might ; cuir do n. 
ris, apply to it your whole vigour ; n. air- 

gid, a ves! quantity ef money ; n. buntàta, a 

greal quantity of potatoes ; n. éisg, an abun- 

dance of fish ; cha’n 'eil n. aige air son sin, he 
has not strength enough to do that ; bha neart 
dhiubh marbh, the greater part of them were 
dead ` neart a chuim, the valour of his breast; 

n. nan dàn, the strength of sony. 
neartachadh, -aidh, s.m. Strengthening, act of 

strengthening. 2 Conüruing, ratifying. A’ 

n—, or.pt. of neartaich. 
neartaich, pr at, a’ neartacha:h, v.a. Strength- 

en, fortify, invigorate. 2**Actuate. 3"*Con- 

firm, ratify, establish. 

neartaichear, fut.pass. of neartaich. 

neartaichte, past pt. of neartaich. Strengthen- 

ed, fortified, re-inforced, 2**Actuated. 3** 

Confirmed, 4 Ammsted, 
neartail,-e, a. Emphatic in gram. 2 see neart- 

mhor. 

neartalachd,* see neartmhorachd. 

neartar,** see neartimhor. 

neartmhor, -oire, a. Strong, powerful, able. 2 

Robust, vigorous. 

. pnenrtmhorachd, 8. f. ind. Strength, might, 
powerfulness. 2 Pithiness, energy of charac 
Ler, vivorousness, 

neartor,** see neartmhor, 

Íneas,** a. Noble, generous, magnanimous. 

neas, nise, SI Weasel. z Nioat. S**Ferret. 4 
**Hurt, wound. 5**Fortified bill. [tf gives 
g^n.s1"g. neasa. | 

neas, adv. While, whilst Neas i» bed mi, while 

. 4 live: n. a bha e air falbh, while he was away; 

n. & chì mi, while 1 #7, |for an fhsadh s] 
treas, s.m. Isthmus., 2 Promontory, headland. 
be&3,** an, Tool for maing curthen pots. 
peas-abhag,** nie, -an, rnm. Ferret. 
neasachd,** sf. Proximity, nearness, 

,"* 6. Ferreter, 


2 Water, river. 


687 





neo-àdhmhor 


treasan, -ain, $m. Next or nearest place, 

neas-bheag, 4.f. Stoat. 

noasg,-a E nelsg, an, see neacgaid. 2** Tia. 
bond. 3S**3:a'l. 

neasgaid, -e, -ean, 8.7. Boil, ulcerous sore, pus 
tuious sore, 2 Carbuncle. , 

ueasgail-chloich, 8.f. Stone bile. 

—— -——?acn,-eiche, a Mull of boils, ulcerous 
2 Causing boils or ulcers. 

neasgai'l-fhola,$ ert Hæmorrhoid. 

neasgaid-ghobhail,# s.f. Heemorrhoid. 

neas-gheal,(AF)s.f. Stoat, ermine, white weasel. 

neas-mhór, 8,7. Weasel. 

neas-nam-fuar-thirean,(AF) sf. Ermine, Arme- 
nian rat. d 

1neasta,** a. Just, honest, 

neath,** sm. Wound. 

tneatha, a. Wounding, inflicting wounds, 

tneathas, -ais, ssm. Manslaughter. 

neich,** a. Good, noble, excellent, 

neid,** s. Battle. 2 Wound received in battle; 

néil, gen.sinj. of neul. [generally neoil.] 

néilean, -ain, -àn,dim.of neul.s.m. Little eloud. 

nèimh, g^n.8/n3. of nèamh, 

neimh, -e, s.m. Poison. 2 Bitterness, malice, 
anbnosity. [generally nimh,} 

—— —,** -c, S.E Brightness, splendour. 2 Stain. 

neimh,** v.a. & n. Corrupt, soil. 

neimheach,** a. Glittering, shining, splendid, 
bright. 

neimheacha- n-iar, (AH) adv. In a confused 
hurry,tumnituously, helter-skelter. 

neimhea‘!,** -eid, s. m. Consecrated ground. 2 
Glebe laid. 

fneimheadn, -idh, s.m. Poem. 2 Science. 

neimhealachd, see neimheileachd. 

neimheil, -ala, æ. Poisonous, baneful, viperous, 
Venomous, malicious, bitter, malignant, 2 
Passionate. 3* Venomously cold. 4*Keenly 
wicked. 

ue'mbeileachd,** 3.7, Painfulness,sonrness,mal- 
ignity, venomousness. 2 Passionateness. 3 
*Greediness iu wiekeduess 4* Piercing cold- 
ness, 

fneimhi, s.pl. Ants’ eggs. 

neimhieh, pa Poison. | generally nimhich.] 

tneimhidh, s. Church-land. | 

neimhneach, -eiche, @ see neimheil. 2** Sore, 
painful. 

neimhneachan, -ain, s.m. 

neimnhneachas, -ais, 8. m. Soreness, 
ousness, 3 Passionateness, 

neimhaeactid, s.f.ind. Poisonousness, virulence, 
banefulness. 2 Animosity, bitterness. 

tneiraneime,( AF) s, Non-exempt cattle. 

néip, pl, -eau & ca, s.m, 'Turnip— brassica rapa, 

——each, -eichs,@, Abounding in turnips. 4 
Like a turnip. 

neirt, gen.sing. of neart. ` 

néip-fiadhain.$ s.m. Wild navew—bra;sica cam- 
pestris. (illust. on p. 688.) 

tueith, s. Fight, engagemens. 

neo, con'. oi neinhidh. occuring in place-names, 

neo-, priv. prefix. Prefix implying the negation 
or absence of the quality expressed by tho ad- 
jective or worditseif. Glic, wise; neo-ghiic, 
unwise, r 

neo tt adv, Otherwise, else. N, is truagh mo 
cCuàradh, else poor ts my condition ; air n., other- 
wise, or else; n. teichidh mi, otherwise I wil! 
d^camp ; n. théid mi dhachaidh, otherwise 4 
will go home, 

neo-àbhaist, sf. Rare occurrence, 

———— —-—— cach, à. Unusual, 

neo-abaioh, -e, a, Uuripe, premature, abortive, 

neo-athartach, a. Idle, 

uev-Adhmhor, -vize, a, Unsuceasstul, unfortum- 


Rheumatism. 
2 Venom- 


Le neo-àdhmhor 





551. Nein-fiadhain. 

ate, hapless, 2**Inglorious. 3**Joyless. 

~-——-——-—achd,** SE, Unsuccessfulness. 2 
Ingloriousness. 

neo-aghmhor, see neo-adhmhor. 

neo-aimsireil, -e, a, Uaseasonable. 

neo-ainmeach,** o Anonymous. 

neo-ainmneach, see neo-ainmeach. 

neo-ainmichte, a. Anonymous, 

neo-air-chàs, $.m. Carelessness. 

neo-aire, s.f.ind. Heedlessness, inattention, in- 
advertence, unguardedness. 2 Absence of 
mind. 3(MS) Aspernation. 

neo-aireach, -eiche, a. Heedless, inattentive, 
careless, forgetful. 2 Inadvertent. 3 Absent 
in mind. 

neo-aireachail, -e, a. see neo-aireach. 2 (DMC) 
Unsympathetic, unfeeling, callous. 

neo-aireil, -ala, @ see neo-aireach. 

neo- aireileachd, s.f.ind. Inconsiderateness, 

neo-àireamhach, (MS) a. Innumerable, 

neo-àireamhchail,(MS) Innumerable. 

neo-airidh, e a. Unworthy, undeserving, worth- 
less. N. air peanas, unworthy of punishment. 

neo-airidheach, -eiche, a. Indign. 

neo-air-thoirt,(WC) s.m. Carelessness, indiffer- 
ence, 

neo-airtnealach, -aiche, a. Not sorrowful,cheer- 
ful, joyful. Ag éirigh dhuinn n., when we ros? 
joyful. 

meo-aithnichte, a. Unknown, undiscovered. 2 
Unrecognized. Rìoghachdan n., unknown 
kingdoms. 

neo-aithreach, -eiche, a. Impenitent, not con- 
trite, oblurate. 2**Not curious. 

neo-aithreachail, e, a. Impenitent, obdurate. 

neo-aithreachas, -ais, s.m. Impenitence, obdur- 
acy, hardness of heart. 

neo-altmhor,(MS) a. Horae-bred. 

neo-àluinn, -e, @ Ordinary. 

n?o-àiuinneachd, s.f. Inelegance, 

neo-amaAisgeal,(WC) o Elusive. 

neo-amhalach,* -aiche, o Slily and without 
drawing attention. Gu n., wnawares, slily ; 
thainig ea stigh gu n., hecam in unawares. 

neo-amharus, -uis, s.m., Unsuspiciousness, want 
of suspicion. 

neo-amharusach, -aiche, a. Unsuspicious, iu- 
dubitable, unquestionable. 

neo-amharusachd,** s.f. Unsuspiciousness, in- 
dubitableness. 

neo-amhluidh, -e, a. Unlike, dissimilar. 

neo-amhluidbeachd, s.f.ind. V ulikeness. 

neo-aobharach, a. Uncaused, unprovoked. 

meo-aobharachd,(Ms) sf. Groundlessness. 


| 
ITI 
] | 
ITI 
| 
i ` 
n. = 
T 
I 


neo-bhog _ 


neo-aogasach, -aiche, a. Unseemly. 2 Ofa for- 
bidding appearance, unbecoming. 


neo-aogasachd, s.7.ind. Unseemliness. 2 Pad ot ` 


forbidding appearance. 

neo-aoibheil,* o Cheerless. 

neo-aoibhinn, -e, see neo-aoibhineach. 

nec aoibhneach, -eiche, a. Not joyful, sorrow- 
ful, sad, joyless, downeast, cheerless, surly. 

neo-aoibhneas, -eis, s.m. Sadness,sorrow,gloom. 

neo-aoidhealachd, s. f. ind. Unpleasantness of 
appearance, 2 Churlishness, 

neo aoidheil, e, o, Unpleasant, having a sour 
look, 2 Churlish. 

neo-aonachd, s.f. Opposition. 

neo aon-fhlaitheach,** a. Anti-monarchical, 

neo-aon-fhlaitheachail, æ. Anti-monarcnica!. 

neo-aon-fhlaitheachd,** s. f. Anti-monarchical- 
ness. 

neo-aontachadh,** -aidh, s.m. Disagreeing, dis- 
union, dissentience, 2 Act of dissgreeing. 

neo-aontachail, e a. Adverse,averse, disinclin- 
ed. 2 Disagreeing, discordant, dissentient, 
disunited. 

neo-aontachas, -ais, s.m. Incongruity. 

neo-aontachd, s.f. Incougruity. 

neo-arta,** a, Untilled. 

neo-ar-thaing, o [ndspendent. 
rium, every bit as bad as [ am. 

nedear-thaingeil (WC) a. Unthankful. 

neo-ascaoin, -e, v. Friendly. 2 Humane, 

ueo-aslaichte,(MS) æ. Iuexorable. 

neo-athach,( DMO) a. Daring, desperate. 

neo-athachd, s.f. Desperatenass. 

neo-atharrachail, -e, a, Indeclinable, 

neo-atrusach.(MS) a. Hard-hearted. 

neo-bhacta, og Arbitrary. 

neo-bhàigheach, -eiche, see neo-bhàigheil. 

neo-bhàishea!aehd, 3.f.ind. Uumkindness, harsh- 
ness, cruelty, inclemency. 

neo-bhàigheil, -e, a. Unkind, harsb, merciless, 
cruel, not sparing, uufeeling. Gu m., merci- 
i^ssty. 

neo-bhallsgail,** o ilome-bred. 

neo-bhaodhalach, æ. Unprecarious, 

neo-bhàsmhoire, comp. of neo-bhàsmhor. 

neo-bnàsmhoireachil, see neo-bhàsmhorachd. 

neo-bhàsmhor, -aire, dg. Immortal. 

neo-bhasmhorachd;** s.f. Immortality. 

neo-bheachdmhor, æ. Unobservant. 

neo-bheachdmhorachd, s.f.ind. Inconsiderable 
ness. 

neo-bheairteach, see nso-bheartach. 

neo-bheartach, -aiche, @. Not rich. 

neo-bhear:aichte,** past pt. Unharnessed, une 
yoked. 

neo-bheathachail, e a. Inalimental. 

neo boktam -e, @. Lifeless, spiritless, inani- 
mate. 

neo-bheathalachd, s. f. ind. Lifelessness, want 
of spirit or animation. 

neo-bheothail, -e, a. Lifeless, spiritless, inani- 
mate. 

neo-bheudar, -aire, a. Tfarmless. 2 Inoftensive. 

neo-bheus,ft s.m. Immodesty, indecency. 2 Lu 
morality. 

neo-bheusach,** o, Immodest, indecent. 9 
Immoral, 

neo-bhinn, a, Absonant. 

neo-bhith, -e, s. J. Non-existence. 2 Non-en- 


N. cho dona 


tity. 

ise a M -aisde, a Tasteless, insipid. 2 Une 
savoury. j 

—— chd, s.f. ind. Tastelessness, insipid- 
itv. 2 Unsavouriness. 

neo-bhloigheach, a. Indivi ible. 


ueo-bhog, -bhuige, œ. Hard, Gem, 2 Hardy. 8 


Courageous, not soft, not vilemluate, 


- 


1 
d 


(a 


P » 
LI 
E | 


Im o 


—— 


neo-bhogaichte 


neo-bhogaichte, a. Infusible. 

neo-bhoidheach, -eiche, a. Not pretty, unhand- 
some, unseemly. 

neo-bhratharail, -e, see neo-bhràthaireil. 

neo-bhràthairealachd, s.f..nd. Unbrotherliness. 

neo-bhràthaireil, -e, a. Unbrotherly. Giulan 
n., unbrotherly conduct. 

neo-bhrathrail, -e, see neo-bhràthaireil. 

neo-bhrigh, e, s. f. Insignificance, unimport- 
ance. 2 Contempt. 3 Inefficacy. 4 Want of 
substance. Chuir sibh an n.aithne Dhé, you 
have made the command of God of no effect. 

neo-bhrigheach, -eiche, a. Insipid. 

neo-bhrighichte,** a. Cancelled. 

neo-bhrighmhor, a. Unsubstantial, 2 Unnutri- 
cious. 

neo-bhruailleanach, æ. Gentle, 

——d,(MS) 3f. Rest. 

neo-bhuaireasach, -aiche, a. Inoffensive. 

neo-bhuairte, a. Undisturbed, untroubled. 2** 
Untempted, unprovoked, 

neo-bhuan, -uaine, a. Not lasting, not durable, 
transitory, evanescent, 

neo-bhuanach, a. Gainless, unprofitable, 

neo-bhuanachd,"* s.f. T'ransitoriness, moment- 
&riness, evanescence, 2 Gainlessness. 

ail, -e, a. Fruitless. 

neo-bhuidheach, -eiche, à. Unthankful, discon- 
tented. 

neo-bhuileachaidh, a. Inalienable. 

neo-bhunailteach, see neo-bhunaiteach. 

——-— d, see neo-bhunaiteachd. 

neo-bhunailteas, see neo-bhunaiteas. 

neo-bhunaiteach, -eiche, o Unsteady, unfixed, 
changeable. 2 Groundless. 3 Not well found- 


ed. 
—— —~—d,** s.f. Unsteadiness. 2 Want 
of sure foundation. 
neo-bhunaiteas, eis, s.m. Want of steadiness, 
instability. 
neo-bhuinnigeach, a. Gainless, 
neo-bhuinuigeachd, s.f. Gainlessness, 
neo-bhuntuinneach,** a. Disinterested, 
neo-bhuintinneach,( MS) a. Impalpable. 
neo-chadalach, -aiche, œ. Sleepless. 
neo-chail, -e, s. Inappetence. 
neo-chairdeach,(MS) a. Alien. 
neo-chairdealachd, s.f.ind. Coolness, 
neo-chàirdeil,-e, a. Unfriendly. Gu n., in an 
unfriendly manner. 
neo-chaldachail, a. Untameable. 
neo-chaochlaideach, -eiche, a. Unchangeable. 
neo-chaochlaideachd, a f. Unchangeableness, 








= 











immutability. 

neo-chaochlaidheach, -eiche, see neo-chaoch- 
laideach. 

neo-chaochlaidheachd, see neo-chaochlaid- 
eachd. 


neo-chaochluidheach, see neo-chaochlaideach. 

neo-chao:nhantach, -aiche, œ. Unthrifty. 

neo-charach, -aiche, a. Designiess., 

neo-charachadh,(MS) s.m. Indolence. 

neo-charamh, s.m. State of not being put up, as 
hair—Wm,. Ross. 

neo-charas, -ais, s.m. Impassibility. 

neo-charaichte, a. Unmoved, unstirred. 

neo-charaidheach, -eiche, a. Immovable, fixed, 
steady. 

neo-charaidheachd, $.f.ind. Immobility, steadi- 
ness, fixedness. 

neo-charraideach, -eiche, a. Not quarrelsome, 
peaceful, peaceable, quiet, without toil. 

neo-charuichte, see neo-charaichte. 

neo-charthannach, -aich, a, Uncharitable, un- 
an achd 

neo-charthann , &f.ind, Uncharitableness 
uníriendliness. | ° 


689 


neo-chléir 


neo-charthannas, -ais, $.m. see ueo-chartiam 
achd. 

neochdair,$ see neachdair. 

neo-cheadaich,* v.a. Prohibit. 

neo-cheadaichte, a. Illicit, unlawful, illeza. 
prohibited, not permitted. 

neo-chealgach, -aiche, a. Sincere,undesigning 
upright, unfeigned, candid, not cunning. 

neo-chealgachd, s./.ind. Sincerity, uprightness 
unfeignedness, candour, fairness, unaffected 
ness. 

neo-cheanalta, -ailte, a, Unhandsome, up be 
coming, inelegant. 2 Indelicate. 

neo-cheanaltachd, s.f. Unhandsomeness, unbo 
comingness. 

neo-cheangail,* v.g. Untie. [ 

neo-cheangailte, a. Unbound, disengaged, fren, 
at liberty 2 Absolute, 3(M5) Incoherent, 

neo-cheangailteachd,"* $.f. Absoluteness. 
(MS) Incoherence. [ 

neo-cheangaltachd, see neo-cheangailteachd, 

neo-cheanvaltas,-ais, s. m. Freedom, liberuy, 
unconstraint. 9(M3) Absoluteness, 

neo-cheannsachaidh, a. Bateless, 

neo cheannsaichte, y, Untamed, unconquerahla 
unrestrained, unyuelled, unappeased, unsub 
ducd, 2 Absolute, 3 Dissolute. 

neo-chearbach, -aiene, a. Tidy, neat, trim. 4 
Accurate, exact. 3*i/ficient. 

neo-chearbaiche, s.f.ind. Lidiness, neatness, 

neo-chearmanta,** a. Bo'ehy. 

—— ———ehd,** s,7. Clumsiness. 

neo-cheart, -eirte, a. Not true, not r'ght unfair, 
ill-founded. 2 Unhandsome, unjust, 

neo-cheartachi, s.f. Le correctiiess. 

neo-ch2artaichte, a. Uncorrected, unadjusted, 

neo-chedimhor, -oire, a. Tunoless. 

neo-chiallach, -aiche, og foolish, 
2 Mad. 3 Unmeaning. 

neo-chinnte, $.f. Same meanings as neo-chinnt» 
each.l. 

neo-chinnteach, -eiche, a. Uncertain, doubtful, 
fickle, indecisive, precarious, equivocal, pro 
blematical. 2 Precarious. 

neo-chinnteachd, s.f. Uncertainty, whimsicab 
ity, fickleness, incertitude, in lecisiveness. 

neo-chinntealas,** -ais, s.in. Apocrypha: ness, 

neo-chionnsaichte, see neo-cheannsaichte. 

neo-chiont, see neo-chiontachd. 

neo-chionta, s.m. see n^o-chiontachd. 

nzo-chiontach, -aiche, a. Innocezt,unblameable, 
harmless, spotless, simple. 

neo-chiontach,** ech, s.m. Innocent person. 

neo-chiontachd, s.f.imd. Innocence, integrity, 
harmlessness, guiltlessness, uprightness, spot- 
lessness. 

neo-chiontas, -ais, s.m. Harmlessness, spotless- 
ness. 

neo-chiosnaichte,** past pt. Untamed, unquell- 
ed. unconquered, unvppeaset. 

neo-chirte,** past pt. Uncombet. 

neo-chlaimheinich, (MS) v.a. Un!ateh. 

neo-chlaon, -aoine, @ Straight, not awry, nof 
squinting. 2 Upright, impartial, just. 

neo-chiaonachi, s.f ind. lin»artialiov. 

neo-chlaon-bireitheach, -eiche, @. Judging im. 
partially. 

neo-chlaon-bhreitheachd, s. f. Impartiality of 
judgment. 

neo-chleachd,** v.a. Abrogate, discontinue the 
practice of. 

neo-chleachdach. -aiche, a. Unusual, un wont. 

neo-chleachdainn,* s.f. Abrogation, discontinu- 
ing the practics of. 

neo-chleachdta, a. Unaceustomed, not inured, 
unpractised, unhabituated, 

neo-childir,** sy. The laity. 





imprudent, 


neo-chléireach 


neo-chléireach,** -ich, 8 m. Layman. 

n?o-chli, a. Not awkward, expert, dexterous, 2 
hol Weak, active. 

neo-chnuasachd,** st Tndi«estion. 

neo-chnnasaichte, a. Undigested, unchewed, 

neo eüogach, -aicbe, a. Immartial. 

rico-cho*uiseach, -eiche, a. Ínconscionable, 

nco-choiseaitach, -aiche,a. Unthrifty, profuse. 

neo-cholpilt, a. see neo-choigilteach, 

——each,** a. Unthrifty, profuse. 

neo-cho.greach. (MS) a, Home-born. 

neo-choigreachail, a. Domestic. 

neo-choimeasach,** a. Incomparable. 

neo-choimeasachd, s.f. Peerlessness. 

neo-choimeasgach, -aiche, a. Immiscible, 

ueo-choimeasgta, a Unmixed, 

neo-choimheach, -eiche, a. Kind, affectionate. 
2 Affable, not surly, not stingy, free, not shy, 
not strange, easy of access, frank, generous. 
3(MS) Home-born. 

-— —— ——a8&8, see neo-choimhicheas, 

neo-choimheartach. a. Incomparable. 

neo-choimhicheas,-eis, s.m. Kindness, affection. 
2 Affability, condescension. 3 Freedom. 4 
Complacency, want of shyness, 5* Making 
oneself at home. 

neo-chommhlionta, @ Incomplete. 2 Half-strain- 
ed. 

neo-choimhliontachd, s.f. Incompleteness, 

neo-choinghealiach, -aiche, a. Ill-natured, un- 
accommodating, disobliging. 2 Perfidious. 

neo-choireach, -eiche, a. Biameless, not blam- 
able, innocent, inculpable, 

12e0-choireachd,* sf. Blamelessness, innocence, 
guiltlessness. 

neo-choisrigte, a. Unhallowed, not consecrated. 
9 Not dedicated. 

nco-choitcheannachd, sf. Anomalousness, 

neo-chomarach,(MS) g. Aidless, 

neo-chomaraich, s.f. The state of being free 
from obligation or favour, non-protection. 

neo-chomas, -ais, s. m. Inability, impotence. 2 





** Debility. 

neo-chomasach, -aiche, a. Unable, impotent. 2 
Impossible. 

neo-chomasachd, s. f. ind. Incapability. 2 Im- 
possibility. 


neo-chomhairle, s.y.ind. Irresolution, 

neo-chomhairlichte, a. Unadvised. 2**Unresolv- 
ed. 

neo-chomharraichte, o. Undistinguished. 3 In- 
definite in gra»»mar. 

meo-chomhnard,** a. Uneven on the surface, not 
level, not plain. 

neo-chómhnuidheach, -eiche, a. Non-resident. 

meo-chomhnardachi, s.f.ind. Asperity. 

neo-chompanta, -ainte, &. Unsociable, uncom- 
panionable, 

neo-chompantas,* -ais, $. m. 
unamiableness. 

neo-chomraich, 8.f. see neo-chomaraich. 

neo-chomunnach, -aiche, a, Uscumwmunicating, 
incommunicable. 

neo-chordach,*? a. Discordant. 

neo-chórdachd, s.f.ind, Inconstancy. 

meo-chordadh,** -aidh, s.m. Disagreement, dis- 
cordance, dissonance, 

r o-chorporra, a. Spiritual. 

neo-ehorporrachd, s.f.ind. Immateriality 

neo-choslach, -aiche, see neo-chosimhuil. 

neo-choslachd, see neo-chosmhuileachi. 

neo-chosnihail, see neo-chosmhuil. 

neo-chosmhalachd, see nec-chosmhuileachd. 

neo-chosmabuil, -e, @ Unlike, dissimilar. 2 
Unlikely, improbable. | 

neo-chosmhuileachd, $&.f.ind. Unlikelihood. 2 
Dissimiiarity. 3 Improbability. 


Unsociableness, 


690 


neo-chulach 


neo-chosaeh, -aiche, a. Lmporous. 

neo-chothrom, om, s.m. Disadvantage, want 
of opportunity. 2 Unfairness, injustice. 3 
Disproportion. 

neo-chothromach, -aiche, a. Disadvantageous. 
2 Unfair, unjust. 3 Uneven, rough. 4 [ncon- 
Make, not opportune, 6 (DMC) Improvi- 
dent, 

neo-chrabhach, -aiche, a.Irreligious, 2 Profane. 
3 Lmpious. 4 Not hypocritical. 5* Not aus- 
tere in religious matters. 

neo-chrathaidh, a. Inconcussible. 

neo-chreideach, -aiche, a. see neo-chreidmheach. 

— — — —4, see neo-chreidihbeach(d. 

neo Reip. 8.f.ind. lncredibility. 2 íncred- 
ulity. 

neo-chreidmheach, eich, s.m. Unbeliever, infi- 
del, sce; tic. 

neo-chreidmheach, -eiche, o, Unbelieving, inf- 
del, unholy, atheistical, 

neo-chreidmüeachd, sr. ad, Atheisticalness, in- 
fidelity, scepticism. 

neo-chreidsinnzach, -eiche, a. Improbable. 

neo-cbriathairte, @ Unsifted. 

neo-chrìochnach, -aiche, a. Endless, infinite, 
everlastinz, unlimited. 

neo-chriochnachaidh, a. Illiinitable. 

neo-chriochnachail, e, a. Il'imitable. 

ae een &.m. Llimitedness, indefini- 
ude. 

neo-chriochnachd,** s.f.in1. Doundlessness, 

neo-chriochuaichte, e. Unfinished, unlimited, 
endless, undone, incomplete. 

ire ni ere oe -eiche, see neo-chrioch- 
nac 

neo-chriochnuidheachd, s.f. Infinitude, endless- 
ness. 

neo-chrion,-a, @. Generous, liberal, magnani- 
mous. 

neo-chriomna, o. Injudicious. 

neo-chrionndachd, s.f. Imprudence, 

neo-chronail, -e, a. Harmless. 

neo-chruadal, -ail, s.m. Impatience. 

neo-chruadalach, -aiche, a. Not hardy. 2 Want- 
ing energy, impatient ef fatigue or hardship, 
soit, effeminate, 3* Lubberly. 4 Not cruel, 
not hard-h~arted. 

neo-chruinn,** a. Not round. 2 Not sane, 

neo-chruinneil,** a. Awkward. 

neo-chruinnichte, a. Uncoliected, scattered, an- 
gathered, unassem)led. 

neo-chruthaichte, a. Unocreated, unformed, 

neo-chubhaidh, e, o Unseemiy, anmeet, fm- 
propos unbecoming, unfit. 2 Unmerited. 3j 

ot hereditary. 

neo-chubhaidheachd, s.f. Inexpedience. 

neo-ebübhraidneachd, sf. Unsavouriness. 

neo-chuid,** s.f. Poverty. 

neo-chuideach,** a. Poor, indigent. 2 L[:mprovi 
dent. 

neo-chuideamach, a. Immatena!, 

neo-chuimh.ie, s. f. Forgetfulness, neglig:nce. 
9 Carelessness, heedlessness. 

neo-chuimnhiücach, -aiche, a. 
neachail 

neo-chuimnneachail, -e, @ Forgetful 2 Heed- 
less, careless. 

neo-chuimir,** a. Awkward, 

neo-chaimseach, -eiche, &. Not aiming well. 2 
Excessive, im'noderate, intemperabe, exhor- 
bitant. 3 Infinite, 4 Unsuitable, 6 Dispro- 
portionate. 

neo-chuimseach(d, s.f Disproportion. 2 Immo- 
deration. 

neo-chuimsich, v.a. Disproportion. 

neo-chüirteil,-e, a. Uncourüly, uncourteous, 

nev-chulach, -aicbe, &. Lean. 2 Silly. 


see neo-chuimnh- 





neo-chumachd 


neo-chuiuachd, s.7.ind. Informity. 
——ail, -e, a. Infurmous. 
neo-chumadail, a. Unshapely, untidy. 
neo-chuinadh,(MS) s.m. Asymmetry. 
nco-chumaireachd,* s.f. Deformity. 
neo-chumaltach, -aiche, a. Irretentive. 
neo-chumanta, -ainte, a. Uncommon, unusual. 
- chd, s.f.ind. U ncommonness, rare- 
ness, novelty 
neo-chümhnantach, ai be, a. Unconditional, 
admitting of no conditions. 
neo-chuybhalach, -aiche, a. Capricous,change- 
abie, inconstant, deciduous, variable, 
——————,.0MS8) sin. Fugivive 
—————4, s.f. Capriciousness, 
neo-chunbhalas, s.m. 1ncoustaucy. 
neo-churaidh,** a, Gentile, 
neo-churam, -aim, s.m, Negiigence. carelessness, 
neglect, inditterence, inatten'iveness, 2 ** 
Security. 
— ach, -aiche. a. Neglizent, inatten- 
tive, inadvertent, indifferent, careless. 2 
Prodigal. 3(DMC) Irreligious. 
—achd, s. f. ind. Lne msilerateness, 
2 Desperateness. 
meo-churanta, -ainte, a. Unwarlike. 
neo-dhàichealachd, s.f./md. Unhandsomoness, 
want of gentility. 2 Improbability, uulileli- 
hood, absurdity. 
neo-dhàicheil, -e, a. Unhandsome, ungenteel. 2 
Improbable, absurd, un ikely. 
neo-dhaimh, e, s.f. Inconnexion, 
neo-dhaimheach,(MS) a. Alien. 
neo-dhaimheil, a. Alien. 
neo-dhaingneachd, s.f.ind. Laxness, 
neo-dhaiugnichte, v. Unbound, unfixed. 2 Un- 
ratified, unconfirmed. $31lDisengaged, unen- 
gaged. 4 Unsatisfied. : 
neo-dhaonnach, -aiche, a. Inhuman, unkind, 2 
**Inhospitable. 
neo-dhaonnachd, gt Inhumanity, unkindness. 
neo-dhealbh, -eilbh, s.m,  Informity. 
neo-dhealachaidh, a. Inalienable. 
neo-dhean,** v.n. Annul, undo. 
neo-dhearbhachd, s.f.ind. Inconsequence. 
neo-dhearcach, -aiche, a. Inattentive. 
d, s.f. [nattentiveness. 
neo-dhearbha,(MS) a. Precarious, unreliable. 
neo-dheas,** a. Not active. 2 Not neat, 
—achd, s.f. Inconcoction, 
neo-dheisealachd, s.f. Disaccommodation. 
neo-dheithichte, a. Unsmoked, 
neo-dheothasach,** a. Cool. 
neo-dhiadbaidh, e, a. Ungodly, impious,unholy, 
profane, irreligious. 
neo-dhiadhaidheachd, s. f. Ungodliness, irreli- 
gion, impiety, atheism. 
neo-dhiadhuidh, see neo-dhiadhaidh. 
neo-dhibireach, a. Accurate, 
meo-dhileas, -dhilse, a. Faithless, 
‘disloyal, undutiful. 2**Unrelated, 
neo-dhilse, see neo-dhilseachd. 
neo-dhilseachd, s.f.ind. Faithlessness, unfaith- 
fulness, disloyalty, unfriendliness. 2** Non- 
relationship. 
neo-dhioclaideach,(MS) a, Indeclinable. 
neo-dhioghaltachd,(Ms) et Pardonableness. 
neo-dhioghaltas, -ais, s.m. Impunity. 
neo-dhivlta,** past pt. Unpaid, unrewarded, 2 
Unrequited, unrevenged, 
neo-dhiougmhalta, -ailte, a. Insufficient, 2 
Not firm. 3 Not firmly bound or fixed.  4* 
‘Precarious, uncertain. 
-———— ——— ——chd, $5. f. Insufficiency. 2 
Want of firmness, insecurity, uncertainty. 3 
Not bound or fixed. 4 Want of mental firm- 
ness, 
































unfaithful, 


C91 


neo-fhaolismuaiaeach 





neo-dhiongmhaltas, s.m. Insufficiency, 

neo-dhleasdanach, -aiche, see nev-dhleasnach. 

neo-(ihleasnach, -aiche, œ.  Disobedieut to pa- 
rents, undutiful, irreverent. 

neo-dhleasnas, -ais,s.m. Disobedience to parents, 
undutifulness, irreverentness. 

neo-dáh'igheach, -eiche, a. Undutiful. 2 Lawless, 
unlawrur, tilegittmate. 3 Not hereditary. 4 
ItUnnaturalL 6* Undue. Do dhaoine n., te 
laivless mmer. 

neo-dhlizheachas, ais, s.m. T'iegality.? 

ueu-dhoizheil, -e, a. Disorderly, 

neo-dnreachinhor, -vire, a. Implausiblo. 

ncoo-dhuine, pl. -ihaoine, s.m. Insignificant or 
unmanly fellow, ninay. a nobody. 2*Decrep- 
id person, useless person. 

neo~ihuinealachd, s.f. see neo-dhuinealas. 

neo-dhuinealas, -àis, s.m. Unmantiness, soft. 
ness, eff :minateness, effeminacy, cowardice. 

neo-dhuineil,-e, a. Cowacdiy, uamauiy, etem- 
inate, 

neo-dhürachd, s.f. Negligence, heedlessness. 2 
lnsiucerity. 3 Irresoiuceness, 

—ach, -eiche, a. Negligent, careless. 
2 Insincere, 3 Irresolute. Gu n,, n^,ügently. 

nco-eagalaeh, -aiche, @. Fearless, bolt, not 








fearful, unappalled. 2 Causing uo fear, 3** 
Not skittish, 
neo-eagnaidh, eg Inexact, inaccurate. 2 Ig- 


norant, unlearned. 3 Foolish, imprudent. 

neo-eaguaidheachd, s.f.ir«l, Foily, imprudence. 
2 Ignorance. 3 Indistinction. 

neo-ealanta, -ainte, a. Unartiticial. 2 Artless, 
unlearned, unskilful, inexpert. 3 Inelegant, 
4 (M5) Homely. Gun., inartifciallu. 

neo-ealantaehd, s.f. Inexpertness,unskiifulness. 
2 Unlcarnedness, 3*Awkwardness. 

neo-éil, v.a. Disarray, unclothe, strip. 

neo-é;feachd, s.f. Inefficacy, inefficiency, insuf- 
ficiency. 2 Incapacity. 

neo-éifeachdach, -aiche, a. Inefficacious, inef- 
fectua), inefficient, incapable. Gu n., ine/- 
fectually. 

neo-eignuidheachd, s.f. see neo-eagnaidheachd. 

neo-ciseamealachd, s.f. Indifference. 2 (DMC) 
Outspokenness, 

neo-eisimealach, (MS) a. Hardy. 2 Plain, out- 
spoken. — 

neo-éisleanach, -aiche, a. Healthy, sound. 4 
** Spirited, 

neo-éisleanachd, s. f. Healthiness, soundness, 
freedom from disease. 2 Spiritedness. 

neo-éithichte, (MS) o Unperjured. 

neo-eólach, -aiche, a. lgnorant, unacquainted. 
2 Not expert, not cunuing. 

neo-eugasach, -aiehe, a. Unpromising, (also neo- 
aogasach.) 

neo-fhàbharach, -aiche, a. Unfavourable. 2 
Unkind, not favouring. 3 Not fair, unfair, 
averse, as wiad. Gu,n., unfavourably. 

neo-fhaicinneach see neo-fhaicsimneach. 

——— ——4l, see neo-fhaiesinneaend, 

neo-fhaicsinneach, -eiche, a. Invi-isle. 

neo-fhaicsinneachd, s.f. Invisibleness, 

neo-fhailneach, -eiche, a. Iudefntigable, 

neo-fhàilneachd, s.f. Indefatigability. 

neo-fhalamhaichte, o Inexhauste:. 

neo-fhallaineach41, s.f. Unsoundness, unhealthi- 
ness 2 Uuwholesomeness, 

neo-fhallan, -aine, a. Unsound, unhealthy, not 
in good health. 2 Not healthful, unwhole- 
some, Biadh n., «nwholesome food. 

neo-fhallsa, a. Not false, sincere, fair, real, un- 
feigned, candid. 

neo-fhallsall, -e, a. see neo-fhallsa., 

neo-fhaoilidh,** a. Cold (indifferent.) 

neo-fhaoinsmuaineach, o, Unspeculatiye., 


neo-fhasanta 





mon, old-fashioned. Gu n., unfashionably. 
neo-fhasantachd, s. f. Oddness, unfashionable- 
ness, rarenessg, 
neo-fhearantas,** s.m. Enervation. 
neo fiiéin-chuiseach,** a. Disinterested. 
neo-fhéineaiachd, s.f. Disinterestedness. 
neo-fhé neil, -e, a. Disinterested, unselfish. 
neo-fheumail, -e, a. Needless, unnecessary, su- 
perfluous. 2 Unavailing,useless. Is n. sgriobh- 
ach, it is superfluous to write. 
nco-fhiachail,** œ. Valueless. 2 Trifling. 
neo-fhiachalach 1,** s.f. Baseness. 
neo-fhinealtachd,** s.f. Coarseness. 
nedfhior, -a, a Untrue, false. 
neo-fiiios, -a, S. M., Ignorance. 
formation. 
neo-fhiosrach, -aiche, a. Ignorant. 2 Uncon- 
scious, not aware, uvacquainted, 3 Not in- 
telligent. Gu n., unconsciously. 
neo-fhireannach, see neo-fhirean'ach. 
————— ———-d, see neo-fhireantachd. 
neo-fhireantach, -aiche, œ. Unrighteous, un- 
just, wicked, not faithful. 2 Disingenuous. 
neo-fhireantachd, s.f. Wickedness, unrighteous- 
ness, sinfulness, 2 Insincerity, faithlessness. 
3 Disingenuousness. An n., in unrighteous- 
hess. 
neo-fnirinneach, -aiche, æ. see neo-fhireantach. 
neo-fhirinneachd, see neo-fhireantachd. 
neo-füjiüghail, d. Unworthy. 
neo-fhiüghalachd, s.f. Base-mindedness. 
neo-fhlauhaileactd, s.f. Illibera!ity. 
neo-fhoghainteach, -eiche, a. Infirm, not stout, 
not strong. 2*Ineffectual, inefficacious. 3* 
Cowardly. 
neo-fhoghluimte, œ. Ignorant, unlearned,rude, 
untaught. N. an cainnt, rude in speech. 
neo-fhoghiuimteachd, s.f. Illiteracy. 
nvo-fnoghlumachd,s.f.see neo-fhoghluimteachd. 
neo-fhoighidinn, -e, s.f. Impatience, 
neo-fhoillealachd,(Ms) s.f. Plainness, 
neo-fhoillsichte, a. Unrevealed, undiscovered. 


2**Want of in- 


neo-fhoirbhidh, æ. see neo-fhoirfe. 2* In non- 
age. 

neo-fhoirfe, a. Imperfect, incomplete, insuffici- 
ent. 


neo-fhoirfeachd, s.f. Imperfection, incomplete- 
ness, insufficiency. 

vneo-fnoirfidh, see neo-fhoirfe. 

neo-ihoirfidheachd, see neo-fhoirfeachd, 

vevu-fhoiseil, see neo-fhoisneach. 

3eo-f£hoisneach, -eiche, @ Restless, impatient, 
fidgety. 2 iurbulent. 3 Disturbed, uncom- 
fortable, uneasy, uuquieb, 

neo-fhoisneachd, s. f. Restles-ness, uneasiness, 
impatience. 2**furbulence. 3 Uncomfort- 
ableness 4* Disquietude, disturbance. 

avo-fhonn, -fnuinn, s.f. Discord of sound. 

neo-fhounmhor, -oire, @ Not tuneful, unhar- 
monious, discordant, unmusical. 2 Dejected, 
not in humour. 

nev-fhounmhorachd, ef Discordance, want of 
harmony, disso: auce, 2 Dejectedness. 

neo-fnortanach,** a. Unfortunate, unlucky. 

ueo-fnreagurrach, -aiche, a. Inapplicaile, unfit, 


un-uitable, unanswerable, not fitting, mot 


corresponding. 


neo-fhreagarrachd, s. f. Unfitness, unsuitable- 


ness, unanswerableness. Zz Contrariety. 


uco-fhreasdilach, -aiche, d, Improvident, unfa- 


vourable, dificult. 2* Inattentive, careless. 
(iu n., improvidently. 


noo-fhreasdalachd, s.fiind. Improvidence, care- i 


| ssness. 2 **Unfavourableness. 
neo-fhuaighealaich, v.a, Unstitch. 
neo fhulangas, -ais, s,m. Lmpassibility, 


mr 


- De 
A De VIE 
e A - H M = 


NTERNET 


692 


neo-fhasanta, -ainte, œ. Unfashionable, uncom- | neo-fliuras, -ais, ssm: Impatience. 






















neo-fhurasach, -aiche, a. Iimpatient, uneasy. 
neo-fhurasda, -aisde, a. 


neo-ghaisgeanta, -einte, a. Immartial. 
ueo-ghaothar,(M3) a. Windless. 

neo-gharail, -e, a. Incommodious, inconvenient, 
neo-ghealtach, -aiche, œ. Not timid, bold, un 
neo-ghealtachd, s.f. Boidness, intrepidity, fear 


neo-gheamanta, a. Single-minded. 
neo-gheanmnaidh, -e, v. Incontinent, unchaste, 


neo-gheaumnailheachd, s.f. Incontinence, un- 
neo-ghean, -a, s.m. Disaffection, bad humour, 
neo-gheanail, -e, @. Qut of humour, peevish, 


neo-gheanaiachd, s.f. Infestivity. 
neo-gheaumath,** -aith, s. m. Dissatisfaction, 


neo-ghéillear, o. Unyielding, 
neo-gheimnidh, see neo-zheanmnaidh. T 
neo-gheimnidheachd, s.f. see neo-gheanmnaidh- —— 


neo-gheur, -a, @ Blunt on edge or point. 2 Dull, 
neo-zheuraichte, a. Not sharpened, 2 Unfer- 


neo-ghleaihracb, a, Hushed. 
neo-ghlaine, com». of neo-ghlan. 
neo-ghlaiue, s.f. Abom nableness, uncleanness, 


neo-ghlainte, æ. Not subiimated by heat. 
neo-ghlan, -aine, a. Impure, abominable, un- 


neo-ghlic, -e, a. Foolish unwise, witless,thought- ` 


neo-zhliocas, -ais, s.m. Insipiency. 
neo-ghloicealacbd, s.f. Wisdom, prudence. 
neo-ghloiceil, -e, a. Wise, prudent. 


neo-ghloine, 8.f. see neo-gh!aine, 





- "- TN -— y 


neo-ghoirt 


2 Ditfecult™. 


—, ad. See neo-fhurasda. 


of pee ees 


Difficult, hard, no} 
easy. 2**Not patient. ` 





appalled, intrepid, fearless. 


le:sness. 


2 Intemperate. Luchd n., intemperate people. 


T 
vate 
» A 


chasteness, 2**Intemperance. 
hatred, dislike, enmity. 


morose, infestive. | 


disapprobation. 2 Disaffection. 


eachd. 


stupid, simple, blunt in comprehension. 3 
(MS) Anti-acid. 4* Not sour. 


mented, unleayened, 3 Not soured, Aran n., 
uneavened bread. 


filthiness, impurity. 2 Pollution. 


clean. 2 Puliuted. Cairbh spréidn neo-ghlain, 
the carcase of unclean cattle. 

less. Anamain chrine nan gnìomh n.,thou At: ` 
tle soul of unwise deeds ! 


n-o-yhloidhcealachd, see neo gnloicealachd, 
co-ghloidhceil, see neo-ghloiceil. 





neo-ghluaisneach, @ Hush. A 
neo-ghluaisneachd,(MS) s. f. Rest. "Zaeeneg 
ghiuasadachd. 3 
neo-ghluaiste, æ. Unmoved, unagitated, unruf- 
fled. KÉ 
neo-ghluasadach, -aiche, a. Immovable, undise ` 
turbed, unrutHed. Gu m., inovably. xo 
noo-ghluasadachd, s. f. lmmovableness, 2 ` 
Stagnation, KE 
neo-ghlutail, -e, d. Abstemious. 
neo-ghnaithte,* a. Unaccustomed, unpractised, - 
abrogated, unusual. 
neo-gonàthaen, -aiche, a. 
usual, strange, exuraordinary. | 
n2o-ghnàthaenaidh,** a. Impraeticab!^. ` t 
neo-zhnàbhaicute, a. Unattempted, unpractised, oe 
unperforimed. 2 Extraord nary, uncommon, ` 
neo-zimniomhach, -aiche, æ. Lile, negligent, in- 
dolent. iA 
neo-ghuioinhachas, -ais, s.m. Inactivity. e 
neo-zghoireasach, -aiche, @. Inconvenient, unfit, 
2 Unfavourable. 3 Immoderate, excessive, 
intemperate, 4* Unnecessary. ` , 
neo-ghoireasachd, s./. Inconyenience. 9 
muoderateness, excess. 
neo-ghoirt, a Not sour. 2 Not sore. 3 (M5, 















a. Not customary, un: j 


2** (dle. 


, Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS Am 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


neo-ghoirt 


Antacid, 

neo-ghoirteachadh,** -aidh, s,m. Process of 
taking away the acid from any substance. 2 
Not fermenting. 3 Not souring, sweetening. 

neo-ghoirtich,** v.a. Take off sourness, sweet- 
en. 2 Unacidulate. 

neo-ghoirtichte, a. Unfermented, unleavened. 
2 Unacidulated. 3 Sweetened. 

neo-ghrad, -aile, a. Not quick, not sudden, 
slow, sluggish, dilatory, unapt. Is n. e, 
he is slow, sluygish. ; 

neo-ghrad-charach, -aiche, @ Lazy, sluggish, 
in lolent. 

neo-ghramail,-e, y. Flabby. 

neo-ghrasmhor, -oire, a. Unmerciful,ungracious. 
2 Graceiess, without grace. Gu n., ungraci- 
ously. 
2o-ghrasmhorachd, s.f. Unmercifulness, un- 
graciousness. 2 Gracelessness. 

neu-zhreanntachd, st Clummsiness, 

neo-ghrinn, -e, a, Inelegant, untidy, awkward, 
f Not showy. 38*Coarse, unmannerly. 4*Un- 

ind, 

neo-ghrinneas, -is, s.m. Inelegance, untidiness, 
awkwardness. 2* Unkindness. 3**Lack of 
finery. 

neoil,"* a. Strony. 2 Stout, thick. 3 Penu- 

rious, scanty. 4 Wicked. 

neci l,** sf. Wounl. 

neòil, gen, (ag. & n. pl. of neul. 

neo-inoh,*-e, @ see neo-inbheach. 

neo-in' heach, -eiche, a, Abortive, unripe, not 
come to maturity, premature, 
3* Underage. ‘Torraichead n.. a premature 
conception ; tha en, he is not of age, he is a 
minor. 

neo-in':heachd,® s.f. Prematurity, abortiveness, 
non-age. | 

neo-inbheach,** a. Unripe, untimely, not com^ 
to maturity, not come to full growth. Gin n.. 
an untimely birth. 


(4 





ee _ 552. Neóinean. d 
neòinean, -cin, -an, s.m, Daisy— bellis perennis. 
n-oineanach, -aiche, a. Abounding in daisies, 


daisied. 2 Ofor like a daisy. 
neoinean-cladaich,$ s.m. Thrift, sea-pink, see 
tonn-a’-chladaich. 
neoinean-gréine, s.m. Sunflower. 
 neóinean-mór,$ s.m, Ox-eye—chrysanthemum 
leucanthemum. 
neóinean-puinn ein, s.m. Sun-spurge— Colonsay. 
neo-innleachd,** s. f. Want of ingenuity, unin- 
—  ventiveness, non-contrivance. 
 meo-innleachdach, -aiche, a. Not ingenious, un- 
inventive, not contrivant, artless, unskilled, 
inexpert, 
. neo-inntinneach, -eiche, a. Insipid. 
Reoinntleachd, see neo-innleachd. 


693 


2 ttInferior. | 


neo-liomhta 


ueo-inntleachdach, see neo-innleachdach. 

neo-iochdmhoire, comp. of neo-iochdmhor. 

neo-iochdmhor, -vire, a. Pitiless, cruel, unfeel. 
ing, inhuman, merciless. 

———— achd, s.f.ind. Cruelty, unfeeling- 
ness, inhumanity, mercilessness, pitilessaess. 

neo-iochdranach, -aiche, æ. Disobedient, dis- 
loyal, unbecoming a subject, insubordinate. 

————- —d, s.f.ind. Disobedience, insub- 
ordination, disloyalty. 

neo-iogarra, a. Haughty, arrogant. 
haughtily. 

-——chi, s.f in 1. Haughtiness, arrogance. 

neo-iomaguineach, -eiche, a. Careless, heedless. 

neo-iomallach, -aiche, a. Interminable. 

neo-iomcbuilh, -e, a. Improper, unmeet, unfit, 
unbecoming, inconvenient, unqualified, not 
commodious. 

— -eachd, s.f.ind. Impropriety, un- 
meetness, unfitness, unbecomingness. 

neo-iomlan, -aine, a. Imperfect, incomplete, un- 
furnished, 

—achd, s.f.ind. Imperfection, incom- 
pleteness, incompletion. 

neo-lompaichte, a. Unconverted, unchanged, 

neo-iompaidnteach, a. Inconvertible. 

neo-lomrallach, o Inerrable, accurate. 

— d, s.f. Inerrability, inerrancy. 

neo-iovann, a. Dissiimilar, unequal, unlike, 
differing. Is m. dhuit e, he is unlike you. 

-——achi, s.f.ind. Inequality, dissimilar- 
ity. 2* Unlikelihood. 

—— — — -—48, -ais, -ais,s.m. see neo-ionannachd. 

neo-ionmhuinn, e, y. Unbeloved. 2 Unlovely, 
unamiable, morose. 

neo-ionmhuinneachd, s.f.ind. The state of not 
being beloved. 2 Moroseness, unloveliness. 

neo-ionnsuichte, a. Illiterate, iznorant,unlearn- 
ed, untaught, rude, untrained, unskilful, in- 
expert. 

neo-iotmhorachd, s.f.ind. Insitiency. 

neo-iteagach, -aiche, a. Displumed, 

neo-iulmhor, -oire, @. Ignorant, unskilful, un- 
taught. 

neo-laghail, -e, a. legitimate, unlawful, 
Gnìomh n., an illegitimate action, 

neo-laghalachd, s.f ind. Illegality, unlawful- 
ness, illegitimacy, illegitimateness. | 

neo-làmhach, -aiche, à. see neo-lamhchair. 

— — — —— d, 8.f.ind. Inability. 

neo-lamhchair, e, 4. Awkward, unskilful, in- 
expert, clumsy-handed. 2 Handless. 

i eachd,**s.f.see neo-làmhcharachd. 

neo-làmhcharachd, s.f. Awkwardness, unskil- 
fulness, inexpertness, clumsiness. 2**Hand- 
lessness, 

neo-làn, a. Lank. 

neo-lapach, a. Unbenumbed. 2 Unenfeebled, 
3 Unfaltering. ^ Gur neo-lapach do dhreach 
'us d' fhonn, unfaltering are thy appearance 
aud habits (or mood.) —Duanaire, 101. 

neo-lasanta, -ainte, a. Incombaustible. 

neo-lasta,** a. Uninflamei. 2 Unlizhted, 

neo-làthaireach, s.m. Absentee. 

neo-lathaireach, -eiche, a. Absent, invisible, 2 
Apt te be absent. 

d, s.f.ind. Absence of person. 2 
Invisibility. 3 Contrariety. 

neo-leabhrach, -aiche, æ. Bookless. 

n o-leanabaidh, -e, a. Not childish, manly. 

-—_—_——eachd, s.f. Manliness. 

neo-leasaichte, a. Uncorrected, unimproved. 2 
Unmanured, undunged. 3 Unamended. 

neo-leigheasach, -aiche,@ Imiedicable, incur- 








Gu n., 


























= 





able. d 
neo-leithbhreitheachd, s.f.in?. Impartiality. 
neo-liomhta, a. Unpolished. 2(DMC) Blunt 


neo-liotach 


no »-liotach, -aiche, a. Not stammering, having 


no staminer. 2 Easily pronounced, of easy 
accent. 

neo-loch lach, -aiche, og Harmless, inofensiy>. 
2 Blameless, unblemished, spotless, unspot- 
ted, faultless, sinless, uncontaminaned. 
Naomh agus n., holy and unblemished. 

neo-loinnel!, -e, @ Deformed. 

neo-loisgeach, -eiche, a. Incombustible, not 
burning, uncaustical, asbestive. 2 Not hasty, 
keen or passionate. 3**Not corrosive. 

d, s.f. Incombustibility. 

neo-'oisgeantach, a. Deformed. 3 Uninflam- 
mable, incombustible. 

noo-loissear, s.m. Asbestos. 

neo-lom, a. Gnarled. 

neo-luachmhorachd, s.f. Worthlessness. 

neo-luaiueach, -eiche, a. Steady, constant. 
Sedate. 








2 





—as, -ais, s.m. Steadiness, constan- 





cy. 
neo-lübadh, -aidh, s. m. Inconformity, unbend- 
ingness, unyieldingness, 
neo-luchdaich, v.a. Disburden, unload, unship, 
lighten. 
te, past pt. of neo-luchdaich. Dis- 
burdened, unloaded, lightened. 
neo-luchdmhoireacnd, s.f. Incapaciousness. 
neo-;uzhdachaidh, o Bateless. . 
neo-luthach, -aiche, da. Nerveless. 
neo-mhairsinneachd, $./. Discontinuance. 
neo-mhaitheach, -eiche, a. Ufiforgiving, un- 
relenting. 2(DU) Inlifferent to publie or 
other o»inion,unconveational. z((A H) Straight- 
forward, outspoken, downright, blunt, unflat- 
tering. : 
neo-mhaitheanasach,(MS) a. Unpardoning. 
neo-mhaithteach, see neo-inhaitheach., 
neo-mharbhach, see neo-mharbntach. 
——— d, see neo-inharbhtachd. 
neo-mharbhtach, -aiche, a. Not killing, not 
deadly, not mortal, immortal. 2 Not sang- 
uinary. 











———— d,** s.f. Immortality. 

neo-niheadhona-h, -aiche, a. Immediate, with- 
out intermediate cause. 2* Not central, out 
of piace, eccentric. 3* Awkward in point of 
situation. 

—d, s.f. Immediateness, 2 Ec- 





centricity. 

neo-mheadhonaireachd, s.f. Immediacy. 

neo-miealitach, -aiche, a@.;Not deceiving, hon- 
est, sincere, candid, undisguised, undissemb- 
ling. fair. 

neo-mheangail, -e, d. " Unblemished, 
healthy, whole. 

neo-mhearachdach, -aiche, a. Unerring, infal- 
lible, true. 2* Wise. 

neo-mhearach:lail, see neo-mhearachdach. 

neo-mhearachdalachd, s.f. Inerrability. 

neo-mheas, A, s.m. Disrespect, contempt, 

——ail, -e, a. Disrespected. 2 Contempt- 
ible, aweless. 3* Disrespectful. 

neo-mheasárra, à. Intemperate, immoderate, 
debauched. 2 Excessive, beyond measure. 
Gràdh n., intemperate love, whoredom. 

-— —— —chd, s.f. Intemperance, immod- 
eration, debauchery, excess, glut. 2 Immense- 
ness, 

neo-mheasgach,** a. Incommiscible, 

neo-mheasgta, a. Unmixed, unmingled, uncom- 
pounded. 

neo-mheata, a. Bold, daring, fearless. 2 Stout, 

chd, s.f.ind. Boldness, daring, fear- 
lessness. 2 Resoluteness. 

neo-mhiann, -a, s.m. Inappetence. 

neo-mbin,** o, Rough-grained, unsmooth. 


sound, 














694 


neo-onora ch 


neo-mhiniente, a. Unpolixhed. 

n20-mhiosail,** see neo-mheasail. l 

nən-mhisgeach, -eiche, a. sober, not addicted ` 
to drunkenness or tippling. | ea" 

neo-mhisgealaend,* $.f. Sob. iety. 

neo-mhisgeil,* o see neo-m i g^ach. 

n2o-mhodhail, -e, a. Rude, unculcured. 

nso-mhodhalachd, s.f, Insens: bility. 

neo-mhothacha‘th, -ailh, s.m. Insensibility, un- 
feelingness, apathy, stupor, callousness, 2 


Stupidity. 

neo-mhothachail, e, &. Insensible, unfeeling, 
calious, torpid, unfeeling. 2 Stupid. 3(AH) 
Unmannerly, impolite, 

neo leech A s.f. see neo-mhothach- 
adh, 

neo-mhothucha:th, see noo-mhothichadh. : 

neo-mhüchalach, o U qu-ncehable. E 

-————— i, s f. Un ,u nchableuesse 
neo-mhùigheach,(MS) a. indulgent. 

neo-mhurrachas, -ais, 8m. Inoomoetency., 4 

neo-mhüthach, -aiche,a.Certain, unchangeable, 

neònach, -aiche, @, Curious, surprising, droll, 
eccentric, amusing, strange, whimsical, novel, 
rare, capricious, unusuad, 3ftLrifling. Nin, - 
a novel or curious thing; duine n., a droll fel- — 
low ; is n. leam, Z am surprised ; is n. leis, he — 
thinks it strange. 

— — ——a35, -ais, s.m. Curiosity, surprisingness, 
drollness, eccentricity, strangeness, whim iÈ- 
calness, surprise, wonder, 2**Droll person, 
N. an ni seo, the strangeness of this thing tha | 
n. orm, / wn surprised. j 

nconacid,** st Admirableness, 2ttOddity. | 

neonad, see sleamhnan & ncamhnagan. 3 

neonagan, -ain,s.m.Stye on the eye, see sleamh- — 
Le & neamhnagan. [In Gairloch leónad-— — 

neònaiche, comp. of neònach. 

neonaid, see neamhnuid. id 

neonan, see neòinean. 

ath, see neòineanach. 

nednasahd,** s.f. Ađmirab.iily. 

neo-nvaci,**s.m.Insigniticant person, a nobody, 
2 (DC; Lmbecile—Skye. 

neo-neart,** -neirt, s.m. 
ness, 








— 


4 





Pithlessness, feeble- | 





—ar, see n2o-neartmhor. r^ 
—mhor, -oire, a. Not forcible, feeble, — 
infirm. 2 Unwarlike. e 
neo-neulach, -aiche, o. Cloudless. d 
neoni, s.f.ind. Nothing, nonen'ity. 2 Chans% — 
3 Trifle. 4* Ninny. Thig ial gu neoni, th-y ` 
shall com? to nothing; 'nuair a chuala neo- 
ni guth a bheoil, when chaos heard the voice — 
of his mouth.. i 
neoinich,** v. a. Annihilate, aunhl, neutralize, | 
bring to nothing. see neonithich. , 
neonitheach, -eiche, a. trifling, insignificant, ` 
valueless, inconsi lerab!e. 2 Abortive. 
——adh, s.m. Annulment, annulling. - 
— d, s f. Triflingness, nothingness, 1: —— 
significance, inconsiderableness. 2 **Abor. ` 
tiveness. 3 Nothing. Em — 
ne nithich, (MS) v.a. Abolish blank, annihil- ` 
ate. A 
n20-oileanach,(MS) a. Bumpkinly, presumpta- — 
ous, ) 
neo-oileanaichte, o Untauzht, illiterate, un- — 
mannerly, impatient, ill-ored. Gs ` 
n.0-oireamhnach, æ. Incompatible, unbecoming 
inadequate, improper. 
— d, sf. Impropriety. 
neo-omhailleach, see n»o-uuhailleach. 
neo-onoireach, see neo-oiorach, ME d 
neo-onoraeh, -aiche, «a. Dishonest, thievish. 4 — 
Ignoble, mean. A 


















a * wes, 


«o 


bi 


f 


neo-phairteachd 695 neo-shoilleir 


- 


neo-phàirteachd, s.f. Neutrality. — ` i Disconformity, PN 
neo-phàirtidheachd, gt, Incommunicability, neoshannt, -a, sm. Want of desire, indifer-. 
neo-pheacach, -aiche, a. Impeccable. ence. 2**Lack of ambition, 3 Loathing, 
neo-phearsanta, see neo-phearsantail. squeamispness. 
neo-phearsantachd, et, Impersonality. neoshanntach, -aiche, «. Not covetous, unself- 
neo-phearsantail, e, a. Impersonal. ish. 2 Unambatious, indifferent, 3 Loatb- 
neo-phoitearachd, s.f. Abstemiousness in drink-| ing. l í 

Ing or diet, sobriety, temperance. neo-saanntaich,(MS) v.a. Blunt the desire, ap- 


petite or craving. 

neo-shaothrach, a. idle. | 

neo-sharachaidh, -e, æ. Unconquerable, inde- 
fatigable, keen, 

neo-shàrachail,* -e, a. see neo-sharachailh. 

neo-snaraichte, y. Unoppressed, unconquered, 
2 Unfatizued, unharassed, 

neo-sheachach, -aiche, æ. Imarcinable. 

neo-sheachanta, -ainte, æ. Indispensable, 

-———chd, s.f. Indispeasability. 

EEN -aiche, œ. Avoidless, unavoid- 
a Die, 

neo-sheachranach,(M3) a. Inerrahle, infallible, 

neo-sheadhachail, -e, a. Insignificative. 

neo-sheadhail,(DMCO) a. [nsizuificant. 

eachd, s.f. Insignificance. 

neo-sheadhair,** a. Cold (indifferent. ) 

neo-shealbhach, -aiche, a, lil-starred, unlueky, 
2 Averse. | 

neo-shealbharra, see neo-shealbhach. 

neo-sheamhsar, -a, à. Hapless. 

neo-sheannsail, @ see n2o-sheannsar. 

neo-sheaunsar,** a. Unlucky, ominous. 'S neo- 
sheanasar a. chulaidh,” (speaking of the new 
objectionable trousers imposed on the Gael) 
ominous is the article of apparel—Donn. Ban, 
p. 128. 
nousness, 

neo-sheargach,** æ. Unblasting, unscorching, 2 
That does not wither, unwithering, undecay- 
ing. 

eo tete (MS) a. Asbestino. 

neo-sheargaichte, see neo-sheargta. 

neo-sheargaidheachd, (MS) $.f. Incorruptibility. 

neo-sheargta, «. Unwithered, undecayed, um 
scorched, unblasted. 

neo-sheasach,* -aiche, see neo-sheasmhach. 

neo-sheasmhach, -aiche, æ. Unsteady, unstable, 
fleeting, not durable, inconstant. 2(M%) La- 
coherent, 3 (DMO) Unreliable. N, mar uisze, 
unstable as water. 

——d, s. f. Iustalilitv, unsteadi- 

ness, fleetingness, want of durability,unqu: t- 

ness, restlessness, uncomfortableness, stile of 

not being firmly placed. 2 Transientness. 3 


neo-phóiteil, -e, a. Sober, abstemious, temper- 
&te, not given to excess in eating or drinking. 

neo-phris, -e, $.f. Want of value, uselessness. 2 
Disrespect, contemptibleness, contempt, Na 
cuir an n., do not despise, 

——-—eil, a. Abject. 

neo-phronntach, -aiche, a. Immalleable. 

neo-phurpail,o** a. Inaccurate. 2(DMy) Non- 
sensical. 

neo-rag, -raige, a. Flaccid, docile, 

E Een, -aiche, @ Incommunic- 
able. 




















d, s.f. Incommunicableness. 

neo-ranntach, -aiche, a. Blank. 

neor-eisiomail, s.f, Independence, not being in 
one’s reverence. 

neo-réiteach, -eiche, a. Irreconcilable. 

——as, -ais, s.m. Irreconciliation. 

neo-reusanta, @ Unreasonable, 

neo-riaghailt, -e, -ean, s.f. Incongruity. 

-——each, -eiche, æ. Irregular, anoma- 

lous, 2 Turbulent, quarrelsome, heteroclite. 

eachd,* s.f. Irregularity, anomaly. 
2 Turbulence, 

neo-rianail, a. Unruly, disorderly. 

neo-rianalachil,** $.f. Contrariety. 

EE (DMU) &. Needless, uncalled 
or. 

neo-riatanach, (MS) a. Needless. 

neo-rioehdail, -e, a. Inelezant. 

neo-roinnteach, æ. Indivisible, 

neo-roinntealachd, s.f. Indivisibility. 

neorra-tha, phrase, Indeed itis—Arran. 

neorra-thaing, see neo-ar-thaing. 

neo-sgailich, v.a, Unveil. 

neo-sgairte, a. Inseparable, not to be divided 
or parted. 

-——il, -e, a. Dull, spiritless, inactive. 

neo-sgarail,-e, a. see neo-sgairte. 

neo-sgàthach, -aichs, o. Fearless, undaunted, 
unappalled, not timid. 

neo-sgàthachas, s.m. Fearlessness, 

neo-sgeadaich, v.g. Undress, disrobe, disarray, 
divest, unalorn. 

—  ——te, past pt. of neo-sgeadaich, Un- 

. dressed, disrobed, stripped, unadorned. 























achd,** ert Unluckiness, omi- 














neo-sgiobalta, a. Awkward, clumsy. (MS) Repugaance. 
neo-sgith, a. Unwearied, unfatigued, willinz. neo-shea:mhuidheachd, $. f. Levity, discons 
——-—eil, a. Unwearied. gruity. 


neo-sheircealachd, s.f. Intoleration. 
neo-sheolta, (MS) a. Artless, 

neo-sheoltachi, s.f. Immethodicalness. 
neo-shiolmhorachd, s.f. Fruitlessness, infertil- 


ity. 
neo-shithealachd,(MS) s.f. Intranquility. 
Be &. Dad in health, unaealthy, 
fitful. 
neo-shlamanach,( M3) oe Incoazulable. 
neo-shlannach, -aiche, @ Antacid. 
neo-shnasmnhor, -oire,a. Ill-finished, iacompact, 
inelegant, untidy, unpolished. 
neo-shocair, -e, @. Uneasy, unsettled, restless. 
-—, $. Uneasiness, unsettledness, resb- 
lessness. 
neo-shocrach, -aiche, o Restless, unquiet, un- 
easy, uncomfortable, 2 Hard, dificult. 3 
Not firmly placed, unsteady. 
neo-shocrachd,* s.f. see neo-shocair. 
noo-shoilleir,-e; o, Indistinct, not clear, not 


———-—ichte, a. Unwearied, unfatigued, un- 
tired. 2 Ceaseless. 
neo-sgoinnealachd, s.f. Frivolousness. 2 (DMC) 
Slugzishness. 
mneo-sgoinnear, -a, a. Heedless, inattentive, 
neo-sgoinneil, -e, a. Flimsy. 2 Drabbish. 8 
Idie. 4 (DU) Lackingin bodily vigour. 5 
(DMC) Sluggish. 
neo-sgonnar, see neo-sgoinnear, 
neo-sgrubach,( DMK) a. Unserupulous, not hesi- 
tating, not niggardly. 
neo-shaidealta, a. Unshamed. 
chd, sf. Boldness. 
aa a. Unsalted, unseasoned. 2**In- 
=- i 
neo-shalach, -aiche, a. Undefiled, unpolluted, 
clean, cleanly, An leabaidh n., the bed unde. 


i néo-shaltraichte, @. Untravelled, untrampled. 
meo-shambluidheachd, et Matchlessness. 24 











neo-shoilleir 


transparent, not bright, dark, gloomy, unin- 
telligible. 

neo-shoilleireachd,** se f. Indistinctness, ab- 
senee of light, unintelligibleness, state of 
being dark or not bright. 

néo-shoirbheachadh, -aidh, s.m. Unsuccessful- 

: mess, state of not succeeding or prospering. 

neo-shoirbheachail, -e, o Unsuccessful, un- 
prosperous, unfortunate. 

neo-shoirbheachalachd,* s. f. 
eachadh. 

aeo-sholarach, -riche, æ. Improvident, shiftless. 
Gu n., ànprovidently. 

üeo-sholaraeh,** -aich, s. m. Improvident per- 

“gon. 

neo-shdlasach, -aiche, a. Joyless, mournful,sad, 
uncomfortable, delightless. 

Meo-shona, a. Luckless, unlucky, hapless, un- 
haopy. An tir n. seo, this unlucky land. 

neo-shónruichte, o Indefinite, undetermined, 
unresolved. 2 Not remarkable. 

aeo-shrianach, -aiche, œ. Bitless, unbridled, un- 

' eurbed, unrestrained, uncontrolled. 2 (DMy) 
stripeless, without stripes. 

neo-shuaimhneach, -eiche, a. Restless. 

neo-shrarach, -aiche, @ Not insignificant, not 
valueless. 

neo-shubhach, -aiche, a Joyless, comfortless. 
2 (DU) Unsatisfied. Gun coaraid, n., without 
a friend, joyless. 

neo-shudhar,( MS) a. Unessential. 

meo-shughar, see neo-shüghmhor. 

neo-shüghmbhor, æ. Juiczless, sapless, arid. 2 
(DMy) Without strength. 

neo-shuidhichte, a. Unsettled, unsteady, dis- 
composed, unplanted, 

neo-shuidhichteachd, s.f. Levity. 

neo-shuigeartach, o, Heavy. 

neo--huilbhir, -e, æ. Morose, not merry or cheer- 
ful, peevish, gloomy, cheerless, unobliging. 

neo-shuime,** s. f. Carelessness, indifference, 
neglgenae, Na cuir an n. despise not. 

neo-shuimea!achd, $.f. Inattention, negligence, 
indifference. ü 

neo-shuimeil, -e, a. Negligent, indifferent, inat- 
tenti ve. 

neo-shulchair,** a. Distant. 

reo-shunnd,(DMO) s.m. Dulness, spiritlessness. 

ueo-shunndach, -aiche, a. Dispirited, dejected, 


see neo-shoirbh- 


melancholy, spiritless, morose. 2 In bad 
health. 3 Backward. 4*Drowsy. Gun., de- 
jectedly. 


neo-shusbainteach, æ. Frivolous, unsubstantial, 
without substance, inefficient, 
neo--niorail, -e, a. Spiritless, dull. Daoine n., 
spiritlegs mn. 
neo-sm oralachd, s.f. Spiritlessness, dulness. 
meo-stavaintealachd, s.f. Inconsiderateness, 
neo-sparragach, -aiche, see neo-shrianach, 
neo-s| éiseach, (MS) a. Favourless. 
neo-sréiseil, -e, a. Underrating, undervaluine. 
2 fleedless, vareless, inattentive, 3*Unloving. 
neo-speisichte, a. "Unregarded. 
neo-shioradachds(Ms) s.f. Corporeity. 
, neo-spioradail, €. Abject. 2 (DMy) Unspirit- 
ual. 
neo-sporsail, -e, @. Not merry, not inclined to 
merriment. 2 Humble, not proud, not scorn- 
ful. 3 Not prone to deride. 
neo-spraiceil,* see neo-siniorail. 
neo-stáàthach, -aiche, @ Null, bootless, 
neo-stéidneachd, s.f. Ludetermination. 
neo-stolda, æ. Incomposed, restless, 
| —chi,(DMC) s.f. Restlessness. 
neo-straicealachd, s.f. Want of pride or conceit 
modesty. 
nivo-straiceil, -e, a, Not conceited, unassuming, 





Digitized by 
at op Ad E Me 
WTERNET ARCHIV 


696 


neo-thoileachadh 


modest, not forward. 
neo-striochdail,** o 
Unyielding. 
neo-struidheil, -e, a. 
neotair, a. Neuter, , 
neo-thabhach, ** o Futile, pithless, weak, 
impotent, unimportant, immaterial, ineffect- 
ual, unprofitable, unavailaule. 
— — —: ——4d, s.f. Insufficiency, futility, pith- 
lessness, weakness, unimportance, impotence, 
ineffectualness, 


Disobedient. 2 (DMK) 
Not extravagant, frugal. 


————- —-dach, -aiche, a. Ineffectual, futile, 
pithless, unsubstantial,impotent, immaterial, 
unprofitable, 

— — —-—-—daehd,if s.f. Imbecility. 

neo-thabhairteach, -eiche, a. Stingy, niggardly, 
not inclined to give. 

neo-thacmhor,(Ms) a. Aidless. 

neo-thagairte, o. Uncontroverted, unclaimed, 
uupleaded. 

neo-thairbhe, s.f.ind. Unprofitableness, unpro- 
ductiveness,unfruitfulness,unsubstantialness, 
unserviceableness. 

neo-thaise,(M*) s. Apathy. 

neo-thaisichte, œ.  Infusible, 

neo-thaitinn, v.n. Displease, dissatisfy, disagree. 
TM disapprove. N. iris, she did not satisfy 

um. c 

neo-thaitneach, -eiche, a. Disagreeable, unac- ` 7 
ceptable, unwelcome, displeasing, unsatisfac- 
tory, unpleasant. 

neo-thàiuhaiche, e, s.m. & f. Non-resident. 

ueo-thayaidheachd, s.f. Inability. 

neo-tharbhach, -aiche, a. Unfruitful,unproduct- 
ive, unprofitable, unsubstantial, gainless, 
abortive, unfruitful, unavailable, unservice- 
able. Fearann n., «nproductive land ; ri oib- 
ribh n., with fruitless works. 
neo-tharbhachas, see neo-thairbhe, 
neo-tharbhachd, see neo-thairbhe. 
neo-tharbhachdach,(MS) a. Slight. 
neo-tharbhaiche, s.f. see neo-thairbhe. 

———— , comp. of neo-tharbhach, More 
or most unproductive or uusubstantial. 

neo-theagaisgte, a. Untaught, unlearned. 

neo-theagamhach,(MS) a. Assured, undoubted, 
unperplexed. 

neo-theayamhachd, s.f. Assuredness. 

neo-theagmhaidheachd,(Ms) s.f. Assurance. 

neo-theanntachd, $.f. Laxness, 
neo-thearbach, a. Inseparable. 

neo-thearbaidheachd, st Inseparability. d 

neo-théaruinte, @ Insecure, unsafe, unprotect- - 
ed, unsaved. 

neo-théaruinteach, see neo-théaruinte, 

———— — ———4d, s.f. Insecurity, want of 
safety, unprotectedness,  2* [ncautiousness, — 

neo-theoma, @ Unskilful, inexpert, iguorant, - 
2 Infirm, weakly. 3 Awkward. | 

neo-theomadh, see neo-theoma. 
neo-theth,** a. Not hot, cool, not zealous. 
neo-thimchioll-ghearr, v.a, Uucireumcise. ` 
neo-thimchioll-ghearradh, -aidn, s.m. Uncir- - 
cumcision. à | 
neo-thimchioll-gheàrrta, a. Uncircumcised. 
neo-thìmeil, -e, a. Abortive, untimely. 
neo-thlusail, -e, @ Incompassiouate. 
neo-thlusvlachd, sr, Lucompassionateness. 
neo-thogarrach, -aiche, @ Disinclined, averse, 
passiouless, amort. 2 Reluctant, as à person. 
3 Uninviting, as weatber, ; 
neo-thoil, -e, s.f. Disinelination, aversion, un- 
willingness, backwardaess, reluctance, noli- 


tion. 
En 


neo-thoileach,-eiche, æ. Disinelined, unwillin 
neo-thoileachadh, -aidh, s.m. Dissatisfying, act 


















averse, backward, reluctant. 


Grigi 


UNIVERSIT 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


| 
U 
St 1 E 


al from 


à d CN, E 
I LI 


E Jy. | c A ^ 
ILLI d LA 3 uu 


neo-thoileachadh 


of dissatisfying or displeasing. A’ n—, pr. pt: 
of neo-thoilich. 
neo-choileachas-inntinn, 8, m. 


Dissatisfaction, 
discontent, 


neo-theileachd,** s f. Stubbornness,reluctance. 


perverseness, disiaclination, 2 Disgust. 
neo-thoilealaehd, €. f. Stubbornness, aversion, 
reluctance, disgust. 


neo-vboilich, v.a. Dissatisfy, displease. 

te, past pt. of neo-thoilich. Dissatis- 
fied, displeased, discontented, averse. Iochd- 
aran n., @ malcontent, 








neo-th.illteannas, -ais, s.m. Unworthiness, de- 


merit, bad desert, undeservedness. 
neo-biivilteanach, see neo-thoilltinneach. 
neo-thoilltiuneach, -eiche, a. Undeserving, un- 
worthy, unmeriting. 

neo-thoinisgeach, -eiche, a. see neo-thoinisgeil. 

neo-thoinisyeil, -e, a. Foolish, senseless, stupid, 
unintelligent, 2 (MC) Inconsiderate. 

meo-tivirt, -e, s.f. Indifference, negiigence, dis- 
iuclination, 2 Contempt. 
heo-thoirtealachd,** st Negligence, indiffer- 
ence, carelessness. 2 Harmiessness. 
neo-thoirteil, -e, æ. Indifferent, negiigeat, care- 
less, inattentive. 2 Causing no narm or loss. 
neo-tholltach, -aiche, a. Imperforated. 
neo-thoirt-fainear,** s. Inattentiveness. 
neo-thomhaiseach,(Ms) a Fathomless. 
neo-thorach, -aiche, a. Unfruitful, unproduct- 
ive, barren, 2 Not pregnant (of women only.) 
3 Past chi d-bearing. Ris a’ mhnaoi neo- 
thora:en, to the barren woman. 
meo-thorachas, -ais, s.m. see neo-thoraichead. 
neo-thorachd, * s.f. sce neo-thoraichead. 
neo-thoraiche, comp. of neo-thorach. 

,8.f. Unfruitfuiness, unproduct- 
iveuess, barrenness. M. do chuim, the bar- 
renness of thy womb. 

meo-thoraichead, st, Degree of unfruitfulness, 
barrenuess, abortiveness, or infecundity. 2 

. Female barrenness., 

neo-thoraicheas, s.m. see neo-thoraichead. 

neo-thràigheach, -eiche, a. Inexhaustible, infi- 
nite, that cannot be drained. 

mao-thrài:hte, e Unexhausted, undrained. 
neo-thravighte, see neo-thràighte. 
neo-thrathail, -e, a. Late. 2 Unseasonab!e, un- 
timely. | | 
meo-thrathalachd, st Unseasonableness. 
neo-thréigsinneach, -eiche, a. Indefcctible. 








meo-threorach, -aiche æ. Invalid, week, aidless. 


e EC Ee, a. Undirected, unguided, not 

ed. 

meo-throcaireach, -eiche, a. Pitiless, unmerci- 
ful, cruel, relentless, callous, 

sd, s/f. Cruelty, relentlessness, 
pitilessness. 

meo-thruacanta, -ainte, a. Pitiless, unfeeling, 
une ma sionate, uumerciful, cruel, [sn a 
ghnùis, pitiless is his aspect. 





passionateness, unna-rcifulness, 
neo-tnruacantas, see neo-thiusalachd. 
neo-thruaillichte, a. Unadulterated, undefiled, 

uncorruoted, unsoiled, uumarred, uuvio ated. 
neo-thruaillidh, -e, a. Incorruptibls, liberal, 

uncorrupted, undefiled, unadulterated. 

— eachd, s.f. Incorruptiou, undefil- 

edness. 2**I[ncorruptible purity. 
neo-tnruasail, -e, see neo-thlusail. 

— meo-turuasaichte,(MS) a. Unpitied. 
neo-thruasalachd, see neo-thlusalachd. 
neo-thuairpeach, o, Hurtless. ?(h13) Placid. 

3 Peac:able, not pugnacious. 
 Meo-cluairpeachd, s.f. Ludisturbance, 








697 





| neo-wrramach,** o, Aweless. 


- — ——-chd, s.f. Unfeelingness, uncom- 





n^ul 


neo-thuasai leach, -eiene, a. Not quarrelsom*, 

nvo-thu gio, s.f ind. Want of senso, stuvidity, 
fatuity, senselessness, aosurdity, lac« of judg- 
GEI 

-——ach, -eiche a. Senseless, foolith, stu- 

pid, unintelligent, irra:ional. Cinusach n., & 

Zoo 18^ nation. 








| neo-thuigsinueachd,(M3) s.f. Incomprehensibi- 
meo-thoileil,** e Stubborn, reluctant, perverse. | D i 
| neo-thùirseach, -eiche, a. Not sal, not mourn- 


lity. 


ful. 2**Not causing sadness. 

neo-thuisleach, -eiche, a. Infallible, stable, es- 
tabiished, not liable to stumbie. 

neo-thuisleachd, e f. Infalliviiity, 
firmness. 

neo-thuiteamach, -aiche, a. In‘allible,unerring, 
indecituous, unstum) ling, steady, sure. 

———— —d, s.f.ind. Infallibieness, firm- 
ness, infallibiiity. 

neo-thurail, -e, a. Injudicious. 2 (DMK) Un- 
inventive, unintelligent. 3 (DMC) senseless. 

neo-ua3isle, s.f.ind. Illiberality. 

neo-uallach, -aiche, o Humble, uot vain, not 
conceited, not proud, unambitiou :, 

neo-uasal, -uaisle, a. Ignoble, mean, uuassert- 
ive of rank, not proud. 

neo-uidheam, -eim, 8.f. Dishabille, undress. 2 
Want of preparation, unprepareduess. 

—————--—-aichte, a, Unprepared, undressed, 
aot ready. 

neo-uireasach, see neo-uireasbhui lheach. 

neo-uireasbhuidh, -ean, s, m, Independence, 
easiness of cireumstanees,absence of poverty. 

neo-uireasbnuidheach, -eicne, a. In lepeudent, 
easy in circumstances, not poor, not needy, 
not destitute. 2(MS) Aceurate. 


stability, 





| neo-uisgidh,(CR) æ. Hardy, capable of bearing 


exposure to wet—W. of Ross-shire. 2 (DU) 
Potentially bold, applied to one who would 
** take the bull by the horns." 

neo-ullamh, -aimhe, @. Unprepared, not ready, 
not dune. Gu’m faigh iad sibh n., that they 
shall find you unprepared, 


neo-ullamhachd, s.f. Unpreparedness, unreadi- 


ess. 

neo-umhailleach, -eiche, a. Heedless, careless, 
listless, inconsiderate, inatbentive, secure, 
guirdless, without care or thought. Gu R., 
heedlessly. 

neo-uraireach, st, Brackishness. 

neo-urcüaideach, -eiche, a. Quiet, inoffensive, 


harmless. 2 Nafe, comfortable. 3**Not trou- 
blesome. 4 Inuocent. 5**Tame. 

neo-urrainntach, -eiche, @ Incapable. 2 In- 
effectual. 


neo-urrainneachd, s.f. Incapability. 

2 Abject. 

neo-urrurach, -aiche, a. Oscitant. 

neul, gen.neóil, pl. neòil, neulta & neulan, ëmm. 
Cloud, 2 Hue, complexion. 3 Swoon, faint- 
ing-fit. 4 4franee. 5 Star. 6 Blemish, stig- 
ma. 7 Napor wink of sleep, 8 Sight. 9 
G.impse of light. 
Mar a’ ghrian agus n. 'ga sgaileadh, as the sum 
and a cloud overshadowing it ; cha d'fauair mi 
n. calail, / did mot get @ wink of sleep ; neul 
bainne, a slight tinge of the colour of miik ; tha 
n. deoch air, ke has a blight appearance of 
drink ; chaidh e an'n., he went into @ trance, 
he fanted ; a müthadh nau n., changing in 
colour of the complexion; cha d'fauair mi na 
euuireadn neul bhàrr cait, Z did not gt as 
much as would relieve a cat’s faintness —sai l 
after a visit to an. inhospitable house ; neoil 
dhubha na Càisge, the dark clouds of East-r— 
the name for a period a week before Kaster: 
thàinig neul 'uam cheaan, J Aw? giddy— 

2 X 


Caithness ; mar neul rüiteacb, like @ ruddy 
cloud ; air enal neòil, behind a cloud. 

neulach, -aiche, a. Cloudy, dark, obscure. 
Ghostly, pale. 3 Coloured. 

neulachas, -ais, s.m. Mistiness, 

neulachil, et  Mistiness, 

neuladair, -e, -ean, S.M. 
trologer, 

neuladaireachd, s.f.. Meteorology. 2 Astrology. 
3 Astronomy. 4**Sneaking and gazing about. 

neulaich, pa f n. Obscure, darken, cuver as 
wih a cloud. 2 Become cloudy. 3 Become 
pallid. 4**Colour, gloss. 5** Assume a col- 
our. N. paircean agus miodair gu bas, parks 
and meadows took on the hu» of decay. 

neular, -aire, a. Well-:oloured, having a good 
colour, well-complexioned, well-favoured. 

neul-dubh, see under neul. 

Tneul-fhurtadh,** -ailh, s.m, Slumbering. 

neulmhor, -oire, a. Cloudy, cloud-bearing. 

neul-siila, s.m. Cataract (of the eye.) 

neulta, pl. of neul. 

neultach, -aiche, a. Cloady, misty, dark. Là n., 
a clouily day. 

—d, s.f. Cloudiness, mistiness. 2 Gloomi- 
ness. 

neup, -a, -an, see nóip. Neupais, éurnips—**. 

meupach, -aiche, @ see néipeach. 

ni, adv. Not. Ni h-eadh, no, it is not. Also used 
for cha. Ni'n guth mio neul, Z am not the 
voice from a cloud. 

ni, pl. nithe,nithean & nitheana, s.m.ind. Thing, 
circumstance, affair,business, deed, fact,sub- 
stance. Nisam, bith (or ni air bith), anything; 
nie.gin, something ; beag nithe, a small quan- 
tity ; air bheag nithe,a/:nost,to a small degree ; 
an Ni Math, God ; air ghaol Ni Math, for the 
love of God. 

EX, s. pl. ind. Cattle, neat, nowt. Applied to 
flocks and hers of ail kinds. 2tfGoods. 

ni, fut.aff.a. of dean. Shallor wil do. Nie'n 
gnothach, tt will do. 

'ni? (for ani?) Is it she ? Chant, it ts not she. 

Tnia,** s.m. Sister’s son. 

Piiach, -a, -an, $.3n. Champion, hero, 

Bivih,** @. Strong. 

—,** s.m. Honour, veneration. 12 Champion. 

niadhachd, s.f. Bravery, chivalry. 

tuiadhas, -ais, s.m. Valour, bravery. 

niadh-chus, see niadhas, 

niag,* s.f. Squint-eye. 

niazach,* -aiche, a. Surly. 2 Squint-eyed. 

nial, -a & neoil, see neul, 

tuial, s. Letter. 

nialach, -aiche, @ see neulach. 

nialadair, -ean, see neuladair. 

nial-eide,** s.f. Mantle of clouds. 
nial-eide, the cloud-covered shore, 

nial-mhagain, Suth’d for mialanhàgain (toad.) 

niamh,** s.m. Brightness, 2 Colour or appear- 
ance of anything. 

niamh,** a. Beautiful. 

niainh,** v.g. Gild, cover over, gloss. 

niamhachd,** s.f. Brightness. 2 Pleasantness. 

niamhail,** a. Bright. ? Pleasant. 

niamh-ghaire,** s.f. Smile. 

niamh-ghlas,** o Greenish. 

"niar, 8.f., cont, for (au) iar. 

niar,** a. Boarish. 

niarach, (AC) Envy. Mo niarach neach aig am 
bi thu, I envy whosoever has thee. [Dialectic 
form of néarachd. ] 

piarachd, a. Happy—Dain I. Ghovha. 2 Lucky. 
Am foiune mu’n iath a’ ghlaic, is n, mac air 
am bi e, wart on palin is luck to lad, 

nianradh,(CR) a. Grinliug. Clach n., @ grind- 
ing.stone. 


2 


Meteorologist. 2 As- 








Tràigh nau 


Digitized by 


NTER NET AR C HIV 


eos 


ni h-è 





nias, see neas. 

Tuiat,** see niata. 

niata, @ Brave, courageous. 
Inexorable —U ist. 

chd, sf. Bravery, valour, 

niatal, -ail,-an, s.m. Reet 

ni b fnaile, odp Longer, further. 
fhaide. Y 

ni-vheil, Not, no. The Irish 
form of pres. neg. of the v. bi. 

nic, contr. of mirheau. Used with female pate | 
ronymic:, as, Lain MaeDnómhnuill or Doma- 
nullach, bat Sine NicDhomhnuill or Dhonh- | 
nullach, which literally translated are John | 
Donaldson aud Jane Donalisdo uter. Tie 
Gaelic nie really ** grand-daugnoer,” stands 
for inghean mhic or né mhic. We have retord- 
ed in 1566, Nc VeKenze(McebLeod Caarters)—$. 

nic-cridhe ! int. Term of end»arinsat to a fe- 
male, My dear lassie (Lit. dauguter of my 
heart. ) 

nichean,(CR) pl. nicheanan.s.m. Used often in 
emph isis for ni. The -an has not the sound 
of the diminutive -an; so it may represent 
nitheann —Perthshire Prouounced nichins 
in Gairloch—DU. 

tnid, ep, Manslaughter. 

ni 'd, (for mi iad) They shall do. 

nil, gen.sing. & n.pl. of nead. 

fnidhe, & ‘Time. 

Tnigh, e, s.f. Daughter. 2 Niece. 

nigh, pr. pt. a’ nigheadh, oe Wash, cleanse, 
SC 2 Bathe. N. do chasan,wash your 
eet. 

nigh-aite,** s.f. Bathing-place, bath. 

nigheachan, -ain, -an, 8. m. Washing of linen, 
Bean nigneachain, @ iGundress ; taigh nigh- 
eachain, à /auniry. 

nignea lair, -ean, s.m. 
es, cleanser. 3 

nigheadaireachd, s.f.inil. Washing, business or ` 
process of washing linen. 2 Bathiug. 3° - 
Cleansing. 

nigheadh, -eidh, s.m. Washing, act of washing, 
cleansing, purifying or bataing. A’ n—, pr. 
pt. of nigh. 

nighean, gn.def. na h-ighue, (& nighinne) dat. 
njghinn, pl. nighneaunin, sf. Daughter. 2- 
Dams2l, maiden. 3 (CR)Unmarried woman. 
Applied to an unmarried woman all her lifa — 
iu W. of Ross-shire. | [Uorruption of inghzan ` 


21t Fierce. 3 (DC) 


Ls A. au ab^ 





(for nab © 
and past literary 


















Washer, one who wash- — 


—— 
e 


nigheanag, -aig, -an, S.f., dim. of nighean. Lib- 
tle daughter. 2 Little girl, young girl. 3 Lit- |. 
tle washer. N. bheag a’ bhròin, the sorrow- ` 
Jul little washer—this is the naiad or waters | 
nymph who presides over those about to die, | 
aml washes their shrouds on the edge of a — 
lake, &c. = 

nighean-céile,** sf. Daughter-in-law, E 

nighean-Iomhair, s.f. (Lit. Ivor's daughter) Sor- | 
pent, probably an error for *' an ni:nair ” (AU) 

| nighinne,** gen.sing. of nighean. E 

nighneag, see nigheanag. » 

uighte, pent pt. of Dun, Washed, cleansed, | 

purified. 2 Bathed. A gruaidh D. le deòir, 
her cheek washed by tears. 1 

ach, -eiche, a. Abluent. 

tnightean, ein, s.m, Soap 2 Mixture of dun 
aud urine for washing linen. 

nighidh, et, Robin, see brù- lnearg. 

ni ‘gin, (for ni eigiun) Something, 

nigir,** @ Sore. 2 Sick. 3 Bitter. 

ni bann, No, not, nay, not so, it is not so, 
Ni n-ann mar tre aon duine, not as through 
one man, CH 

ni h-è, No, not, it is not so. Reubaibh bhus 





Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS SS 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN A 


Lut o 
SC OE 
mo, see nòdh. 


ni h-è 


ridhe agus ni h-è bhur n-aodach, read your | 
hearts and not your zarm mts. 

ni h-eadh, Nay not. not so, it is not so. 

ni'm, (for nimi) I will do or make. 2 (for ni 
am) Not. Ni’m faigh mi, I will not get. 

mim, -e, wm. see Reimh. 

nimh, s.f. Drop. 

nimhe, (AF) s. Exempt cattle. 

tnimheach, see neimhneach, 

nimhnealachd, see neimhneachd. 
nimhei!. -e, & see neunheil. 

'nimh-fhozrach,** a. Alexipharmio. 

nimhich, see neimhich. 

nimnir(AC) s. Venom. 2 Serpent. 

nimhneach, -eiche, a. see neimheil. 
shùil n., his eye is ban ful. 

nimhneachan, -ain, see nermhneachan.. 
nimhnueachd, see neimhneachd, 

ni'nn, for nighinne, 

ninneach,** a. Pleasant. 

tniogharach,** a. Constant. 

nioghnag, see nigheanaz. 

Niomhach,** a. Bright, shining. 

niomhas,** -ais, & m. Brightness, clearness, 
transparency. 

niomsa, (for ni mise) I shall or will do. 

tvion,** s.m. Wave. 2 Letter. 

nionach,** c..Plcasant. 2 Speckled, 3 Fork- 
ed. 4 Catching. 

fnionadh, -aidh, s.m. Prev, booty, plunder. 

nionadh,** -aidh, s.m. Child-bearing. 

nionag, see nigheanag. 

niopag, -aig, s. f. Gaelic spelling of nippock, 
diminutive of nip. 

‘nior, a/v. Not, never. Nior chualas, 7 have not 
heard ; 'anam nior thog, who never lifted his 
soul, [Used with past tense only.] 

nios, adv. (a nios) From beiow, up (towards 
the speaker.) Thoir a nios, bring up ; à sìos 
agus a nios, to the bottom and to th» ton, down 
and up ; thig a nios, come up (but falba suas, 
go up.) 

nios, see neas. 

nios,* s.m. Top, summit. 

niosgaid, -e, -ean, s.f. s-e neacgaid. 

each, see neasgaileach. 

ni's, (for na is or niis.) Usually precedes an adj. 
to express the comp. degree. (see na’s.) 

nis, adv. (à nis) Now, ab this timo. 2 Now, 
therefore. A nis, bha «^o mar sin, now, this 
was that way; thig a nis, com? along now; a 
nis 's a rithis, now and aya@in; nis, 's fheudar 
dhomh ìnnseadh dhuit, now £ must plainly 
tell you. 

ni’s, cont. for ni, $., & is, v.,—(i.e, ni's.) 

nise, gen.sing. of neas. 

nisean, Suth’d for nis, now. 

niste, Moidart & other parts of W. coast for nis, 
now, 

nitear, see nitnear. 

bith, see ni.  'Nuair 'thi»inn dachaidh o 'n 

.. mith, when I would come home from the cat- 

~ tle— Duanaire., 155. | 

_. *^nith, sr, Slaughter, battle. 2 Manslaughter. 

 niihe, n.»l. of ni, a thiny. 

(o nitheach,** a. Warlike, 

nitheannan, n.pl. of ni, a ‘hing. 

. mnitnear, fut pass. of dean. 

— niüc, -a, -an, s.f. Gazic spelling of nauk. 

` niücach, -aiche.@. Abonadliag in noo& s. 

niugh, corrvption of an diugh by ectipsis. 

a.[?] (AC) s.f. Dawa. 





Tha a 





. no, conj. Or. 2 Nor, neither. 3 Otherwise, 
else, if not. Cua tov sinn taigh no taigh, we 
will not build a hous? at all (it. a house nor 
2$ house.) 


Digitized by 


NTERNMET ARCHIV 
| ^ E LP EL CA LX W 


699 


no lh 


nobha, see nuadh., 

t#nobi1i ih, s.f. Tıme, season. 

noch, sve nasih. 

nochd, æ. see nochdaidh. 

nochd, s.f.ind. Nakednes:, Chòmhdaich iad n. 
an athar, they coverel troir father’s naked- 
ness; mon. is mo naira! my nairedn-së and 
my shame ! 

nochd, [pl. na nuichd—Jslvs—not good Gaelic] 
8. Naked person 

nochd, adv. (anm^chd) To-night, this night. 
An ti« e an nochd ? wiil h- com? to-night? In 
the Bible an nachd (this nizht,) is applied to 
What is now called ia English /ast night, asia 
1 Sam. xv. 15. ** what the Lord said unto mo 
this night.” This is like the custom in Hebraw 
— ''* anl the evening and the morning 
were the first day,” the evening before being 
counted as belouging to the day, and not the 
evening after, as istne present Bnglish usage. 

nochd, v a. Show, reveal, disclose, discover. 3 
Present, ofer. 3 Sirio. make naked, 4 Pol, 
N. an t-airgiol, show the money ; nochilaith 
mi dhuit, J will show you ; ni math có à nocud- 
as dhuinn a nis? who will now show us any 
good thing ? 

nochdach, -aiche, @. see nochhdaidh, 

—adh, see nochdadh. 

—d, see nochdaidheachd. 

nochdadh, -aidh, s.m. Showing, act of showing 
revealing, disclosing, discovering. 2 Pressne 
ing, act of presenting or offering. 3 Strip- 
ping, making bare. 4ffTExemplificatioa. rt 
Manifesto. 6(DMC) View. A’ n—, pr. pt. 
of nochd. 

nochdaicn, pr. pt. a’ nochdachadh, see nochd. 

nochdaichidh, fut. af. a. of nochd. 

nochdaichte, past part. of nochdaich, 
nochdte, 

nochdaidh, -e, a. Naked, bare, exposed. 
solate, bleak. 3 Revealing. 4 Stripping. 
(DMC) Visible, apparent. 

———— —, fut.af.a. of nochd. 

—, gen.sing. of nochdadh. 

—eachd,** s.f. Nakedness. 

nochdam, Ist. sing.im». of nocht. Tiet m» dise 
close. 2 for nochdaidh mi, I shall 156.053. 

nochdar, fut.pass. of nueal. Shall b? disclosed, 

nochd-larach,** -aich, ssm. Laying waste, deso- 
lation. 2 Place that is laid waste. Chum 
an deanamh 'nan n.,toimake them a dra inh. 

nochdte, past. pt. of noch l. Shown, reveals, JS 
closed, discovered. 2 Presenied, offered. 3 
Bare. 4 Shabby, ill-dressed. 5 (DMO) Zasilly 
seen. 

nochduidh, see nochdaidh. 

tnod, s.m. Abbreviation, 2 Difficulty. 3 Emor- 
gency, need. 

nod, -obl, s.m. Note. 2 see nòdh. 

tnod, v.a. Understand. 

nodaecuadh,** s.m. Grafbiag. 
nodaen. 

nodachair,** s.m. Grafter. 








sss 


2 De- 
6 





A’ n—, pr.pt. of 


nodadn, -aidh, -aidhean, s m. Suggastion, wink, 


nol. 2 see noth. 3 (DU) Botily growth. 
Cha d’ thàinig n. air, he hasn't grown an inci, 
nódaich,** pr.p!. a’ nodachadh, v. a. Graft. 2 


Knot. 

—te, past pt. Grafted. 2 Knotted, 
nodair,** -ean, s.m. Grafter. 2 Abridger. 
see nótair, 
eacad,** sf. Circumstances of abritging. 

2 Use of abbreviations, 3 see ndtaireacad. 
nodan,* -ain, s m. Short sleep. 
nó.Ih,( AC) s. Knowledge, inteilirence, informa- 
tion, Cna'n'eii nódn agam aic,4 have no kivid- 
ledje of hàm. 
" 2X2 





3 





“nodh 


nodh,** a. Noble, excellent. 


nodha, see nuadh. Ur nodha, quite new. 

nogan, see noigean, 

moibhiseach,** -ich, 
novice. 

noig, -e, -ean, s.f. The anus. 
face. 8 Nock (Scots for clock.) 

noigean, -ein, -an, s.m. Cup. 
Nog-in (measure oi 7 pint.) 4(DMC) Short, 
stout fellow. 

noigeanach, a. 


8. Th. 


Snuffy. 


noigean-creadha, -ein-, -an-, s.m. Earthenware 


jug. 
noigeasach,* -aiche, a. Snuffy. : 
mòin, s.m.ind. Noon, m d-day. Is éasgaidhe n. 


ni maduinn, noon is more lively than morn- 


inj. [Most people are more lively after dinner 
than before.) In Welsh it is applied to noon, 
but in Manx to evening. *''Trath nóine 
bhreagha, @ fine evening," is quite a custom- 
ary salutation in Ireland. Biadh n., dinner ; 
trà n., noontide. 

nóin-dhorchadh,** -aidh, s.m. Eclipse of the sun. 

noinean, -ein, -an, 8.?n. see neòinean. 

—ach, -aiche, a. see nedineanach. 

Tnóin reult,** s.m. Evening star, 

noir, s.m.ind. see ear, 

nois,** a. Excellent. 2 Noble. 

nois,** -e, adv. see nis. (Lrish.) 

nois,** gen.sing. of nos. 

noisean, Gaelic form of notions. 8.pl. Trifles, bag- 
atelles—Dain I. Ghobha. 

fnoit, s. Church. 2 Congregation. 

tinoitheach, a, Noble. 

nolla,(?) (AC) &. Greatness. 

Nollaig, -e, -ean, &f. Christmas. 
Christmas Day. 

Nollaig bheag, -e-bige, -ean-beaga, 
Year's Day. 

Nollaig mhór, -e-móire, -ean-móra, $.f. Christ- 
mas. 

nomha, see nuadh. 

nonn, see nunn. 

norra,] s.m. Wink of sleep, nap. 

norradaich,(MS) s.f. Sleepiness, dozing. 

norradh, SES 

norrag, 

norp,** s.m. House-leek. 

nos, -ôis, -An, 3.7m. Custom, manner, habit. 
Cha bu n. do Dhiarmad eagal, D. was not 
wont to fear. 

nos,** -ois, s.m. Knowledge. 

nos, -lis, $. m. Cows first milk after calving, 
chyle, beastings. 2 First of anything. Bheir 
e nos a mhàthar as a shròn, he will mate the 
chyle drop from his nos? ; bainne nùis, beasty 
mi k —Argyll. 

1n10s, a. White, milk-white, 2 Pure, 

nosach, -aiche, a. Usual, customary. 2 Cere- 
monious, adhering to customs, habitual,fash- 
ionable. 

nosachd, s. f. ind. Customariness, adhering to 
custom, habitude, 

nosadh, -aidh, s.m. Liking, approving. 

nosaich,** v.g. Enact. 2 Approve. 3 Practice, 
make customary. 

nòsail, -e, a. see nòsach. 

nosalachd,** s.f. Formality. 

nosar, -aire, a. Juicy, sappy. 2 White. 3 see 
nòsach. 

nosara, see nosar, 

nosarachd,** s.f. Custom, mo:ishness. 

Seis Be of nos. Laws. 

nos-luinge,(A TP 

nós-luingeis,** ) 1 $8.7. Ship-dock, 

mosmhor,** a. Modish, 

achd,** sf. Modishness. 





Là Nollaig, 


8. f. New 





&ITITPARITT AD P 
, — A KU CH A - W 


700 


Gaelic spelling of 
2* Old-fashioned 





2 Wooden cup. 3 


nuadh-thionnsgantair,** s.m. Innovator. 


jnuail, ge, Roar, howl. 


nuallach 


not,** s.m. Gaelic spelling of (bank-)note. 

nótachan, soi, Notes. 

notair, ean, ëm. Notary. T. 

eachd, er Business of a notary. / 

nothaist, -e, -ean, 8. m. d& f. Foolish perso 
idiot, half-witted person. 

—each, -eiche, a. Foolish, idiotical, 

— ———eachd, s.f. Idiotism. 

nothaistealachd, see nothaisteachd. 

nuachallachd,** sr Astonishment. 

fnuachar, -air, ean, s.m. &f. Companion. @ 
Bridegroom. 3 Bride. 

nuadarra, œ. Surly, angry, gloomy, sulky. 

nuadarrach, see nuadarra. | 

d, s.f. Surliness, gloominess, sulki- - 
ness, angriness, 

nuadh, -ua:dae, a. New, fresh, recent, modern, 
unfamiliar. 

———achadh,-aidh, s.m. Renewing, act of Bea 
newing renovating. 2 Renovation A’ n—, 
pr.pt. of nuadhaich. 

nuaidhachd, s.f. Newness, freshness, recentness, 
modernness, novelty, renovation, 

nuadhaich, v.a. Renew, renovate. d 

—— ——-—te, past pt.of nuadhaich. Renewed, — 
renovated, bet 


nuadhalaehd,(MS) s.f, Recentness. 

nuadharra, see nuadarra, 

chd, see nuadarrachd; i 

nuadhas,** -ais, 8. m, see nòs., 

nuadh-bheath,** st Reformed life, new life, 
amended life., 

nuadh-bhreith,$.m. Regeneration, new birth. 

nuadh-bhrigh, s.m Transubatantiation. 

———— —— —eachadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of brana — 

UN A’ n—, pr.pt. of nuadh-bhrijh- | 


ich. 
nuadh-bhrighich, v.a. Transubstantiate. 
nuadh-bhriogh, see nuadnh-bhrigh. 
nusdh-chreidmheach, -eich, sm, Novice, young 
convert, proselyte, , 
nuadh-mbilidh, -ean, 8s. t. Recruit, antrained - 
soldier. E 
nuacih-theanngsnair,** s.m. Innovacor. 
each4,** sf. innovation., 














| 


























ra 


nuadh-thionnsgaach, æ. Lynovating, fond of ibe 
novation. an 
nonadh-thioonsgnadh,** -aidh, 8:. Innovation. 
nu^g,* -aige, -an, s.f. Sunk eye. 
nuagach,* -aiche, œ. Sunk-eyed. 2 Surly.. 
nuaidhe, comp. of nna th. | 
nuaitheachd, see n idüeachd. 2** Tidiness. | 
Droch m ort ! woe betide you ` fear-n., d news. 
monger ` paipear-n., @ newspaper. 
[nuail, Gan, see nual! & nuallan. 


nuaimhneach,** a. Fearful. ^ 
'nuair, adv. (an nair) When, at the ti 
that, (Lit. the hour.) | 
nuall, -a, -an, s.m. Lamentation. 2 Roaring, — 
howling. 3 Lowing of cattle. 4 Loud and soft 


m2, seeing ` 


sound. 5°*Murmur, 6 Shriek. 7 Screech of © 
the owl. SO iaion. 9 Freak, 10(AC) Incan- - 


tation, hail. 11 Louldrawliag bowl, as of a 
lion or wild cat. N. Nollaig, a. Cartstinas | 
hail; n, gun ghaoid, @ true saying. 
nuall, -aill, gan, Praise. | 
nuall,** a. Noble. 2 Famous. E 
nuallach, -aiche, a. Howling, roaring, 2 Low. ` 
ing. 8 Makieg aloul and soft sound. 4*9 - 
Wailing. 5**sLrill 6**Freaki-h. 
nuallach,$-aich, s.m. Germander speed well, 
angels’ eyes, birds’ eyes, God's aye—uoeronicd ` 
chumedrys: A small trailing plant with. & 
bright blue flower scarcely A iach indiampcerm — 
Gust. 503 om p. 701.) 


Original from 
UNIVERSITY-OF IELINOIS M 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


— 


= 


nualladh 





553 Nuallach d 
nualladh, -aidh, s.m. Howling, wailing, roar- 


ing. 

nuallaich,** s.f. Howling, yelling. howl, bel. 
lowing, yell. A’ n—, pr.pt. of nuallaich. 

Ken e pr.pt. 9’ nuallaich, v.n. Howl, roar, 

ell, 

Mée, -ain, -an, s.m. see nuall. N. thonn, the 
murmur of waves ; n. na pìoba, the sound of 
the bagpipes. 

ach,see nuallach. Pìob n., æ loud-sound- 





ing pipe. 

nuallanaich s.f. Continued howling,roaring.low- 
ing o" shrieking. N. spréidhe, the lowing of 
cattle. ! 

nuallair,( AC) -ean, s.m, (lit. rejoicers) Waits or 
carol-singers who went about singing at 
Christmas, New Year, &c. 

nuallartach, a. Howling, roaring. 
3 Shrieking, wailing loudly. i 

nuallartaich, s.f. An exaggerated howling, see 
nuallanaicb. 

nuall-ghuth, -a, -an, s. m. 
voice. 2 Roar, howl. 

—— ach, -aiche, 
lowing. 

nuallsan,** a. Noble, generous. 

nualraich,** s.f. Howling, roaring, 

nuamhanair,** s. Embroidery. 

tnuar, int, Alas! woe 's me. 

Muar, -air, £.. Woe, gloom. 2 Frown. 

nuar ! int. Alas! alack-a-day ! Mo nuar ! alas ! 

nuarranta, -ainte,a. Woeful, sad 2 Sour. surly. 
3 Wild. A mhios nuarranta, garbh-forasach ! 
O tempestnous heavy-rainy month !—Oran a’ 
Gheamhraidh, v. 13. 

ee ——d, s.f. Woefulness, sadness 2 
Sourness, surliness, gloomiuess. 3|t Wild- 
ness. 

nuas, adv. (a nuas,) Down, downward (towards 
the speaker.) Thig a nuas, come down (but 
falbh sìos, go down.) 

nuas,* s.f. Bottom, ground. 

*nuathaigh, s, Heaven. 

nuathar, -air, s.m. Wedding, 

nuatharra,tf a. Surly, gloomy. 2 Fierce. 

nuichd, gen. sing. & 2.pl. of nochd, (naked per- 


2 Lowing. 


Howling or loud 


a. Howling, roaring, 








son.)—Isles., 
nuidh, v.n. Acquiesce. [With prep. lei 2 (D 
MC) Move. N.a db’ ionnsuidh, propend. 


nüidheadh,(MS) s.m. Acquiescence. 2 Declina- 
tion, inclination. 3 Bias, 4(DMO) Motion, 
movement. 

nuidheil (gu), adv. (MS) Acc»ssorily. 

nuig, prep. & ado. (gu nuig is the correct form, 
but gu ruig the usual one.) To, unio, as far 
as. 2 Till, until. 

nuimhir, -e, -ean, s, Number. 

—each,** g, Nuinerous. 2 Numerical. 

—each,** eich, s.m. Accountant, arith- 
mmefician, calculator. 

nuimhreachadh,** -aidh, s.m. Calculation. 2** 
Numbering, computing. 

nuimiireachail,** a, Arithmetical. 








nuimhrich,"* v, Calculate. 2 Number, compute, 


LITCORICT ADS Qr 
d E D J [- La D L iT] E 


701 
| tnuin, et The ash-tree, 


| touinean,** -ein, $.75. 
|'n uiridh, adv. 


nunn, adv. (a nunn) Thither, to the other side, 





obadh 


2 Old Gaelic name of 

the letter N. 

Dwarf. 

(an uiridh) see uiridh, 

null, adv. (à null) see a nunn. 

nuallach,(A F) s.m. Germander goose, (it. roar- 
er or howler,) 

nuna,** sm.  llunger, 


beyond, over. 'lheirig à n'un, go over ; æ 
nunn 'aà nall, hither and thither ; dh’ eubh e 
oirre a nunn ri 'thaobh, Ae called her over to 
his side, Nunn is the correct word, null is 
merely the northern erroneous dialectic forma 
analagous to nall. 

"pur, gin, see nuair. 

‘nur, contr. for ann bhur. 

fired) n Mor an uiridh, see uiridh. 

nùs, -üis, SI. See nos. 





© 


O, onn, gorse, the 13th, letter of the Gaelic al- 

Phabet now in use. 
Ó, with a grave accent sounds long and open, 
likeo in lord : as corr, excellent ; or, gold; 
toc, a smell ;.and short, like oin for, as, cor, 
condition, TIt also has a sound like o in colé ; 
long, as, mor, great ; and short, as sodan, 
gladness. O, followed by gh, has a sound, 
to which there is none similar in the English 
language ; short as, roghainn, choice ; long as, 
roghnaich, choose. 

O! int. Ol oh! Alas! An exclamation of 
varied signification, 21f Expression of wish 
or desire, as, O gu’n tigeadh e a mach! O 
that he would come forth ! 

o, adv. Since, from that time. O thàinig e as a’ 
bholg, since he was born, 

o, prep. From. O làimh mo bhrathar, o laimh 
Esau, from my brother’s hand, from the hand 
of Esa. Combined with. the personal pro- 
nouns thus :— uam, from me ; uat, from Lee: 
uaidh, from him ; uaipe, from her; uainn, 
from us * uaibh, from you ; uapa, from them. 
[ Aspirates consonants following it, except l, 
n e r, and these are affected in pronuncia- 
tion. 

0, conj. Because, seeing that, for. 

To, s. Ear. í 

ob, (AC) gen.oib & oibe, pl. ob, s. Spell, charm, 
incantation, Biosi ris na h-ob, she practises 
spells ; tha na h-ob a’ dolas, spells are going 
out of uae. 

ob, -A, -an, &.m, 2(DU) 
Shallow pool. 

tob, aam. Hop-plant. 2 Fruit of the hop. 

ob, pr.pt. ag obadh, v.a, & n. Refuse, deny, re- 
ject. 2 Shun, avoid. 3 Fail, faint, give over. 
4 Abnegate. 5 Except. Na ith 's na ob cuid 
an leinibh bhig,newther eat nor reject the child's 
food ; am bodach ruadh nach obadh dubhan, 
the codling that ne'er refuses hook—the codling 
and cod are, as a rule, keen on any bait, even 
stones being' often found in their stomachs. 

oba, see ob, (spell.) : 

obach,fl-aiche. a. Negative. 2**Denying. 3 
**Refusing, rejecting. 4**Shunning. 

—,** -aich, s.m. One who refuses or shuns, 

obadh. -aidh, s.m. Refusing, act of refusing, 
denying, rejecting. 2 Refusal, denial, reject. 
lon. 3 Shununing, act of shunning, avoiding, 


© 


Bay, creek, harbour. 





obadh 


4 State of failing, faintiag or giviag over. 
eu EE 6** force. 
OI, 

Obasz,-aig, -an, sf. Hurry. 2 Abruptness. 3 
Confusion, 4see gormag. 5 (DU) lna pl. = 
Convulsions. Anus na h-obagan deireannach, 
suffering the fina! convulsions. 

obag (åF) -an, s.f. Witch. 2 dim. of ob, spell. 
8 (AF) Hobby falcon. 

Obaza-h, -aiche,a. Hurried, abrupt. 2 Confused. 
3 Causing hurry. 

óbagag, dim. of obag. 

Obagaich,** sr Flurry, confused anxiety. 2 
Abruptness. 

Obagan, (pl of obag.) Witchcraft, charms, 
spelis. 

obaidh, see ubag 

obaig,(MS) a. Abrupt. 

obaiz,** s.f. Hurry, Hurry, confusion 2 Abrupt- 
ness. 

obaigeachd, s.f. Suddenness, rashness. 

Obain, e a. see obann 

obain, gen.siny. & n pl. of oban. 

obainn,** @ see obann. 

obaiane, s.f.ind. Sudd:uness, hastiness, quick- 
ness, rashbuess. 2 frowardness. 3 Nanbleness. 

obainne, comp. of obann. 
achd, see ovanuachd. 
al, see obainne, 
Obair, oibre, pl. obraichean & oibrichean, st 
Work, labour, process of working, 2 Work, 
work performed. 3 Intermeddliag. 4 Work- 
manship. 5 Fuss. +6 Confluence. O. do 
mheuran fhéin, the work of your own hands ; 
a dh’ aon o., purposely, intentionally, chafing: 
car o, & turn of work, performunce ; obair is 
ath o., idle rep?tition of labour, (doing work 
SO carelessly that it has to be done over 
again.) 
0.-chéardaeh, smithy-work.. 
o.-coeardail, emie, machinery, work done by 
machinery. 

0.-cireadha,** porcelain, china-work, earthen- 
ware, telf, pottery. 

0.-chum:a, a fast. 

0.-dhion,* œ ramnart, bulwark. 

o.-ghloine, glass-iwork. 

0.-ghréis, arras, emoroidery. 

0.-jaruninn, foundry. 

o.-inntinn, a theory. 

Q.-la, day's work ; 2 a, name in Skye for a pot- 
hanger amd chain. 

0.-làimmhe, handiwork ; 2 work done by hand in 
contradistinction to that done by muchinery. 

o.-lionain, network, chequer- work. 

o.-lin, network, chequer-work. 

o.-shlabhruidh, chain-work. 

o.-shnaidhte, hewn work. 

o-shnathaid, medlework, embroidery. 

o.-tharsuinn, network. 

o.-theine, firework ; 2 steam-engine. 

o.-thrailleil, servile work. 

0.-uaireadair, clockwork. 

o.-uchd, breast-plat» ; 2 parapet, breastwork. 

o.-uisge, waterwork ;2 jet. 

óbairt,(ATI) sf. Retchiag, involuntary act of 
trying to vomit. Generally used with ** dio- 
bhairt” or * car à mach," as, ò. dio chairt. 

obam, Ist.sing. imp. of ob. Let m» refuse. 

oban,(AC) pl. obann, s.m. Wizard. 

òban, s.m. dim. of òb. Creek, little bay. 

- »—ach, a. Abounding in bays or harbours, 
obann, -ainne, a. Sudden, unexpected. 2 Quick, 

nimble, agile, 3 Rash, hasty, 4* Peri, med- 





Ag 0—, pr. pt. of 








dling. Eagalo., sudden fear; o. le *bheul, 
gash with his mouth; gu h-o., suddenly, 
quickly. 
Digitiz ed py 

INTERNET ARCHIVE 


702 
5 | obiunach i, s.f Suddenuess, unexnectedness, 


ochdamnach 


qa Hi 
Quickness, nimbleness. 3 Rashaess, fieriness, 
4 Abruptness. —5**Hastiness of temper. 6 * 
Pertness, impertinence. 7° Readiness con. 
cerning things not your own. 
obar,** air, s.m. Refusal, denial. 
obar, fut.pass. of ob. Shall bə refused or de —— 
nied. Cha'n o. leis an gàbhadh, he shall nog | 
reject the situation of danger. 1 
tobh, see abh. 
obhan, -ain, s.m. see omhan, 
Tobhainn, see abhainn. 
obhanach. -aiche, see omhanach, 
fobhann,** -ainn, see u3nn nn. 1 
o bhàrr, prep. Of, from the top. 3 
obhnaig,(CR) v.a. Touca, maddie with—Perth- —— 
shire, (Scots, own.) | i 
obh obh! int.. Expression of wonder, derision, 
pain or grief. Och ay! 
ob-obagail,* s.f. Flutter. | 
obnraig, CR) s.f. Church collection— Perthshire, — ` 
Gaelic spelling of ofering. ` ` 
obi, see ob (spell.) 
obraichean, n.pl. of obair. 
obta, past pt. & a. Unaccepted. 
obuig,** a. Abrupt, suiden. 2 Rash. 
obuinn, -e, d. see obann. 
2,** s. f, Ra-huess,. 2 Suddenness. 
obuinneachd, see obannachd. 
obunn, see obann. 
Toc, s.m. Poet. 
tocad, -aid, s.m. Permission, 
Occasion, business, 
focaid, s. see orad. 
ocaileach,(DMy) a. Duiae o., a good-for-nothing 
fel/ow, œ '* wont-work.” 
Oocairear, Am, S.M. see ocarair. 
ocairiche, -ean, s.m. Lender of money. E 
ocar, -air, s.m. Ínterest on money. 2 Usury,ex. — 
tortion. Airgiod air o., money lent on usury. 
ocarach,** o Usurious, extortive in money © 
matters. 2 Of, or belonging to, usury. E 
ocarach.** -aich, s.m. see ocarair. | L 
ocarachd,** s.f. Usurioitsne-s, practice of usury. ` 
Ocarair, -ean, s.m. Usurer, extortioner. , 
oearas, -ais, s.m. see acras. 2 Practice of usury. — 
ach, see ocara^h. » 
ocar-fhear, s.m. see ocarair. 
ocas,** -ais, sm. Interest, usury. 
rent. 
och tint. Alas! ah ! Och is och eile! 
science thrice over ! 
och, -an, s.m. Sigh. 
lo chach,** adv. Aarb, 
|l ochain ! see ochan ! 
ochaia nan och! int. Alas tand alack-a-day. 
ochal,** -ail, sm. Moan, howl, wail. 2 Moan: ` 
ing, howling, wailing. 3 
ochan ! int. Alas ! 
ochan, -ain, s.m. Sigh. 2 Lamentation, 
| ochanaich, -e, s.f. Signing, sobbing. 
ochan-i ! int. Woe 's inel —ÁArran. 
toch v3,** -ais, s.m. Itch, see tachas. 
ochas,** -ais, s.m. Mallows. 
ochd, -an, s.m. see uchd. 
och.l, a. Hight. | 
och lach,** -aich, s. m. Good key of voice, 2 - 
Octav. pon b- 
ochlal,* a. Eighty. O. fhear, 
ochdail (zu h-o—) HKighthly. 
och lainh, a. Eighth. Air aa o. bliadhna, on the 
eighth yar. E 
ochdamh,-aimh, s. m. Four pennylands, an 
eighth of a daroch —a measure of land, E 
ich,* -aiche, a. Octangular. j 
ach,*-aich, s. m.. Octagon, figure o: 
eight sites, d 





pleasure, will. 2 — 





2 Annual : 


my com: 










eighty men, 








Original from s 
UNIVERSITY OF-AELINOIS v0 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN SS 


- fodh.** oidh, s.m. Music. 2 Point of a spear, 


ochd-bhallach 


och- hillach(AF) sim. Octopus, 

oc'.d-) h'islhnach tt a. Octennial, 

ochd-bhileach tt €. Octopetalous, 

och l-chearnseh.ft -aich, s.m. Octagon. 

ochd-deug, a. Eiznteen, Ochd bliauhua deng a 
‘th’ aois, eighteen years of aye. 

echd-dhuiileach,tf see ochd-bhileach. 

ochdmhad, 3. Eightieth, 

*oendü-mhios, -a, s.m. October (lit. 8th. month.) 

ochdnar, s Eight (of persons only.) (Followed 
by the gen.pl.] 

ochl-ràmbhach, s.m. Eight-oared galley. 

ochd-roiuneach, s.m. Gyrony-of-eight, 

ocud-oisneach, -eiche. œ. Octangular. 

ochd-oisneag, -eig, s.f. Octagon. 

ochd-shlisneach, -eiche, #. Octagonal, - 
h'iving eight sides, 

ovhd-shlisneach, eich, s.m. Gun having 
an octagonal barrel. 

ochd--filisneag, ft s.f. Octagon, 

ochd-shuileach, a. Octonoeular. "T 

o cheann, adv. Some time ago, long ago, since. 
[Always followed by a noun of time.] 

æ cheann treis, adv. A while ago. 

o chian, adv. Of old. 

© ch'an nan cian, adv. From time immemorial. 

o chionn, adv. see o cheann. 

O chionn treis, see o cheann treis. 

och r^ cbe nan och éire ! Interjection of deep 
grief. 

och nan ochain ! izt. Alas ! woe of woes ! 

ochòin ! int. Oh! alas! 

ochòin fhéiu ! int. Ah me! woe’s mei 

*ochra, s.pl. Shoes. 

ochras, -ais, s.m. Gill of a fish, 

ochthon, see ochòin ! 

ócrach, Gairloch for otrach. 

ocrach, -aiche, @ see acrach, 

ocras, -ais, s.m. Gill of a fish. 2 rarely Bosom. 
3 see acras. 

ach, -aiche, @. see acrach. 

ocrasail, -ain, -an, See acrasan, 

el ! int. Tut! not ay! 

od, s. see oda. 

od, see ud. 

© d’ (contr. foro+do.) From thy. O d’ cheann, 
from thy head ; o d' sheanair, from your 
grandfather. 

oda,(AC) s. Race, 2 Racecourse. These great 
aunual race-meetings were once very popular. 
‘the last one was held in Barra in 1328, in 
S. Uist in 1820, in Benbecula in 1830, in N. 
Vist in 1866, and in Harris in 1818, 

odaidh, see oda, 

odan, Lewis for rùdan, knuckle. 





3 Sharp end of anything. 
odha, -ichean, gan. see ogha. 
odhail,(DMy) e.f. Bustle. Ciod an o. ath’ ort? 

why do you bustle so? 
todhall,** a. Deaf. 
odhan,-ain, see omhan. 
ach, -aiche, see omhanach. 
achd, see omhanachd. 
odhaun, -ainn, see aghann. 
odhar, -air & uidhre, a. Dun, dun-coloured, 

pale, sallow, drab, dapple, yellowish, 
ach-mhullach,$ odharaich-mhullaich, [s. 
m. in McL & D., f. in **.j Devil's bit scabious, 
see utr a-bhallach. 
ag, sf. see orag. 2 Young of the eormor- 














‘ant. 





aich, æ. see odhraich. 
aidh,(AH) aq. Dark, swarthy. 
an, -ain, -an, s. m, Cow-parsnip—heracle- 
am =spqniylium. 
edhar-bhàn,** a. Sallow. 








703 





og ghnàths 





554. Odharan. 


colour. 

odhar-chóà,(AF) s.m. Otter—Suth’d. 2 Wolf, 

odhar-liath, a. Dapple-coloured. 

odh-mheas,** s.m. Homage, great respect. 

odh-mheasach,** a. Respectful, dutiful. 

odh-mheasail,** a. Respectable,much respected, 

odhraich, pe, dén. Make dun, pale or sallow. 
2 Become dun, ‘pale or sallow. 

— — te, past pt. of odhraich. Made dun, pale 
or sallow. 

odhra-sgàirneach, s. m. Young chat or cormo- 
rant. 

foe,(AF) s.f. Sheep. 

ofhaich, (CH) s. f. Use, worth—Blair Athole. 
Am bheil o, ann ? is it of any use or value ? 

ofhaich,(CR) Bustle, fuss. Ciod e an o. a th’ 
ort P what are you in such @ bustle about $— 
H. of Ross-shire. 

ofhaichear,(CR) s.m. Officer. 

ofraideach,** -aich, s. m. Offerer, as of a sacri» 
fice, 2 Druidical priest. 

ofrail, -e, -ean, &.f. Offering, sacrifice. 

ofrail,tt pr. pt. ag ofraladh, v. a. Offer, sacri- 
fice. 

og, dig, -an, s.m. Youth, young man. 2 Young 
child. 

og, òige, a. Young, youthful. Bean og, a young 
wife; mar sin bha mi òg, so was I when yonng. 

ógachd, see ogalachd. 

ogail,-e, @. Youthful, young. 2 Of youthful 
appearance. 38 (MS) Tiny. 

ógain, gen.sing. of ògan. 

ogair, -ean, see òigear. 

ogalachd, s.f. Youthfulness, youth. 2 Conduct 
of youth. 3 Season of youth. 

ogan,(CR) Suth’d for sogan. 

ogan, -ain, -an, see òganach. 2 Young branch, 
3 Twig, tendril. 4 Seedling. 5(MS) Germ, 
Barr an ógain, the top of the branch ; ceud òg- 
an aobhach, a hundred joyous young men. 

òganach, -aich, s, m. Youngman, youth. 2 

Stripling. 3 Minor. 4 Bough, branch, twig, 

Marbhar an oganaich, their youths shall be 

@/ain. 

oganachd, see ogalachd. 

og-nvoiseach, ft o, Non-aged, 

og-bhean,** -mhua, (&c. as bean) e, m. Young 

woman, 2 Young wife, newly-imarried wus 


man. 

óg-bhó, (-bhoin &c. as bó) s. f. Young cow, 
heifer, 

og-chullach,** -aich, s.m. Young boar, griea. 

og-finaillean. (MS) s.m. Layer. 

óg-fhonn. -fhuinn, see ó:-zhnàths, 


2 Of a darkisb white | 05-5hnà.hs, St, Juvenility. 


ogh 


ogh, One of the names of the letter o. 

¢ozh,** -a, SE Virgin. G 

togh, a. Pure. 2Sincere. 3 Whole, entire. 

ogha, pl. -chan & -ichean, $.m. Gran child. 2 
Nephew. Is iad oghachan peathar is brathar, 
they are second cousins. 

óghachd,** s.f. Virginity. 

oghan, see omhan. 

ach, see omhanach. 

oghar, see odhar. 





foghum, -uim, s.m. The occult manner of writ- | 


ing used by the ancient Gael; polygraphy. 
The ogham alphabet was formed on « proto- 
telegraphic system by so many strokes for 
each letter, above, through or below a stem 
line, which was often formed by the angle of 
a stone monument thus :— 


HDTC Aa 
Til 





M.G.NG. 






ne fi! 
DL FS N. 


Se oi ut an ^ 


AOU.E.! 





2* Occult sciences. 
òglach, -aich, s. m. Lad, youth, stripling. 2 
Man-servant. 3 Soldier. 4**Vassal. 5 Young 
hero. Ban-oglach, a handmaid,maid-servan'. 
as, -ais, s.m. Farm-service. 2 Servitucle, 
slavery, vassalage. 3** Fourth stage of hu- 
man life, from 34 to 54 years of age. 
oxlachas,** -ais, s.m. Kind of Gaelic verse. 
og-losgapn, -ainn, -an, $. m. ‘Tadpole, young 
frog, little frog. 
ogluichd, see ogiuidheachd. 
ogiuidh, e, a. Awful, gloomy, dismal. 2 Afraid, 
awe-struck. 3 Bashful. 4 Peevish. 5ttiVild. 
6(DMy) Unsteady. Tha ’m bata o., the boat is 
unsteady. 
eachd, - e.f.îind. Fear, dread, terror. 2 
Gloom. 3 Fearfulness, awfuln2ss. 4 Bash- 
fulness, 5 Wildness. 6 Peevish»ess. 7. DMy) 
Squeamishness, as when a person is ready to 
voinit with sea- or other sickness. Lan o., full 
of gioom ; là 0., & day of gloominess. 
ye hs, og-mhaidne, s.f. Early morn, the 
awn, 








———— each, a. Early in the morning. 

óg-mhaise,"* s.f. Youthful beanty. 2 Youth- 
fulness. 3 Handsomeness, Co seo "nä oP 
who is this in his youth ful beauty ? 

6o-mhart, -mhairt, s.m. Young cow. 

óg-mbeur,** -mheoir, s.m. Young branch. 2 by 
a figure of speech, Young person. Air barr nan 
o. samhraidh, on the top of the young summer 
branches, 
g-mhios, -a, $m. [Preceded by the 
article an t-. | 

óg-mhnaoi, dat.sing. of óg-bhean. [Erroneously 
given by ** as an alternative form of the nom.) 

óg-mhoirear, s.m. Young lord, son of a chief. 

og-narach,** a. Bashful, as youth. 

ocra'dh, see digridh. 

ég-thighearna, -n, &m. Young lord, son of a 
chief. 

toi, see ai. 

oibeag, -an, s.7. dim. of ob, (a spell) see ubag. 

toibid, sr, Submission, obedience. 

oibne, s.f. Quickness, suddenness, (syncopated 
obainne.) 

ach,** -aiche, a. Sudden, quick. 

oibre, gen.sin). of obair. 

oibreach, a. Industrious. 

adh, -aidh, 

working. 2 Labour. 

fermenting, fermentation. 4 Mixing up, act 





June. 








zt l 
L — p mE —— — * op. vs J 
u 1 n Fi 1 i 
YNTERNET ARCHIV 


704 






s. m. Working, act of 
3 Fermenting, state of 


oidheas 


of mixing together. 5 Agi ation. Ag o—, pr- 
pt. of oibrich. An caochan ag o., th? wasi fr 
menting :'gao., mixéag it ; is goirt a tha e 
air'o. ! how hard he is worked ! 

oibreachail,** a. Effective, effectual, operative. 
2ttMechanical. 3ttLaborious. 4 Industrious. 

oibrich, pr.pt. ag oibreachadh, v.a. & n. Work, 

|^ operate, labour. 2 Mix, work to a consisten- 

CN, Aa lime or clay. 3 Fcrinent. 4 Effect by 

labour. 
e, -an, &m. Worker, workman, labour- 1 

O. ealanta, an (ug nivus wo» nen, 
te, past pt. of oiorich. Wrought, accom- 
plished, effected. 2 Operated. 3 Mixed or 
wrou-ht iuto à e?riain eonsistency. 4 Fer- 
menie@. O. le obair guréis, wrought with 
needlework, 

oich ! n*. Expression of bodily pain. 

oich,** s, Post in the army. see oifhich. 

oiche, see oidüche. 

oiche,** am, s.m. Counting-house. 

oich ! oich ! int. Expression of bodily pain. 

.oid'-altruim, s.m. Foster-father. 

oide, -an, s.m, Foster-father. 2 Stepfather. $ 
Godfaiher. 4 Teacher. 5 rarely Grandfather. 

——achadh, -aidh, s.m. Instructing. 

oideachas, -ais, see oideachd. 

-——aend, s.f.ind. Instruction, counsel, tuition. 
2* (nstruction from evil or familiar spirits, oc» 
cult science. 

toideadh, s.m. Massacre, death. 

oideag,-an, s.f. Fillet. 

oidean,** -ein, 6 am. Degree of nobility. 2 Love, 
tenderness. 3 Generosity. 

oideas, -eis, s.m. see oideachd. Beul-oideas, 


er. 


EE RANTAA e FR o ad Y 


TS Le MT. i 
a Lp adio NE 


E 


et 


oral instruction. a 
oile-baistidh, s.m. Godfather. i 
oide-ciuil, s.m. Music-master. è 
oide-danusaidh, s.m. Dancinz-master. 4 
vide-fughiuim, s.m. Instruetor, preceptor. AP — — 

n-o., our schoolmaster. 3 
oile-muinte, s.m. Instructor, preceptor. S 
oide-«goile, s.m. Schoolmaster. 
oidhche, -annan, -an & -achan, 3-7. Night, eve- 3 

ning. 2 Darkness, Beul na h-oidhehe, the 

evening; an o. nochd (generally an nochd) 
to-night ; ’san o. dhuibh dhuirch, in tne | 
pitch-dark night ; ré na b-oidhche, @/l night a — 
là'sa dh’ o., by day and night; air feadh na 
h-o.,during the night ; meadhon-o., midnight ; | 


meadhon na h-o., the middle of tae night; 
marbb na h-o., the dead of midnight; Ge 
mhath dhuit, good night to thee. 

oidhcheach, -eiche, a. Nightly. 

oidhcheil, -e, a. Nightly. . - i 

vidnche-mhéirleach,** s.m. Night-thief, night- 
robber. d 

oidhche-nam-bannag,( MM cD) s.f. Christmas-eve 
— Lewis. | 

toidhe, see aoigh. 

oidheachd, see aoidheachd. 

foidheadh, -eidh, s.m. Tragical death. 

oidheam, -eim, -ean, s.m. Book. 2 Secret meane 
ing, inference, idea. 3 Slight degree of know- 
ledge. 4 Hint. 5ffSensation, feeling. 'Nuair 
a dh'fhosgail e an t-oidheam, when he expound- 
ed the meantag ; ise sin an t-o. a thug mise 
as, that is the inference I diew from it ; gnoth- 
ach gun o., @ thing without meaning ; có is 
urrainn o sam bith a thoirt as? who can 
make any sense of it ? 

ey -aiche, o Tractable. 2 Ideal 3 

ttSensitive. 

oidhearp, see oidheirp. . 

—  —— —Ach, -aiche, see oidheirpeach. 

oidheas,** -eis,s.m.Instruction, counsel. 2 Freee 
stone. 


E 
NW 
P 
ka 
1 
> ( 
A 
v 
A 
j 
d 





oidheirp 


oidheirp, -e, -ean, 8. f. Attempt, endeavour, 
undertaking, trial. Dean o., or thoir o..,?nake 
an att^m»t ; thug e o. air, he tried it. 
each, -eiche, a. Endeavouring, attempt- 
ing. 2 Inlustrious, diligent, persevering. 
eacnadh, -aidh, s.m. Attempting, act of 
attempting, endeayouring. Ag o—, pr. pt. 
of oidheirpich. 
ich, pr. pt. ag oidheirpeachadh, v.a. At- 
tempt, endeavour, 
iche, -4n, sn. Attempter. 
oilhirp, see oidheirp. 
eachadh, see oidheirpeachadh, 
oidhre, s.f. see eig ire. 
oidhre, -achan, s.m. see oighre. 
oidhreachd, see oighreachd. 
oidich, MS) v.a. Rear. 
oid-ionnsachaidh,* e m. Familiar spirit. 2 In- 
structor in occult sciences, 
oi l’-ionnsaich,** s.m. Instructor, 2 Guile. O. 
a h-òige, the guide of her youth. 
oifhich, -e, s.f. Office. 2 Post in the army. 
toifhiche, s.f. Water. 
oitig, -e, -ean, s. f. Office, situation, post, em- 
ployment. Glacadh neacn 'oifiz, let one seize 
his office. 
—each, -ich, s.n. Officer, official. 
—each,** a. Oificial, pertaining to office. 2 
Fond of office. . 
—eil,** a. Oficial. 
oifrionn, -inn, see aifrionn. 
oig, g2n.sing. of òg. 
foiz,** s.m. Champion, 
toize, s.f. see eige. 
dige, 8.f.ind. Youth, season of youth. 2 Youth- 
fulness, Cha tuig o. aimbeart, youth thinks 
not of want. 
òige, comp. of òg. 
ach, 
colt. 
oigead, -eid, s.m. Degree of youth. 
oizealachd,* sf. see dize. 
oizean, -ein, -an, sun. Lad. 
oigeil,* e a. see ògail. 
òigear, -eir, ëm. Youth, young man. Rogh- 
adh òigeir, a choice young man. 
oi:-fhear, see òigear. 
oigh, see aigh. 
òigh, -e, -ean, s.f. Virgin, maiden. 2 Young wo- 
man. 3 rarely Stag. 
òigh-cheòl, -chiüil, s.m. The musical voice of a 
virgin, 2 Virginal. Na's ceòlmhoire na ò., 
more musical than a virginal. 
foizhe, s.f. Fulness, entireness, 
oighe, see eighe. 
22 al a. Like a virgin. 2 Modest, bash- 
ul. 

















Younger, youngest. 
-eich, s.m. Stallion, young horse or 








-——d,s.f.in?. Virginity. 2 Virgin modesty. 
A’ caoidh air son m’ o, bewailing my virginity. 
oigheam, -eim, s.m. Obedience, homage. 


. òighean, n.pl. of òigh. 


oigheann,** oighne, see aghann. 

-————ach, -aich, s.f. Thistle. 

oigheil, -e, a. Maiden-like, modest. 

oichidh,** s.m. Guest. 

oighionnach, -aich, s.f. see oigheannach. 

dizh-mhara, s.f. Mermaid, sea-nymph , nereid. 

oigh-nàir,** s.f. Virgin modesty, virgin bash- 
fulness. 

digh-narach. -aiche, a. see òigheil. 

oighneach,** a. Liberal, generous. 


— 0izh-nighean, -ighne, -an, s.f. Virgin-daughter, 


. Oighre, -achan, s.m. Heir, heiress. 


unmarried daughter. 
oighre, s.f. see deigh (ice.) | 
Beiridh bean 
mac, ach 's e Dia a ni 0., a woman inay bear @ 
son, but it is Gol that makes the heir. 


[D 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


705 


oilean 


oighreachail, -e, a. Inheritable, hereditary. 

oighreach:l, -an, s.f. Heirship. 2 Luheritance. à 
Possession, fre-hoid estate, landed provervy, 
4 (MS) Barony. Am bheil o, againn ? have we 
an inheritance ? 

oigureag, -eig -an. s. f. Cloud- 
berry, moun-*ain-strawberry— 


rubus china rus. DA f. 
ach, -aiche, o. Abound- /\-s\- 
or belonging to 





ing in, of, 
cloudberries. 
oigimh,** s.m. Stranger. 

oig're, see oigridh. 

òigridh, s.f.coll. Children, youth, 
young folks. 2 Body of young 
men. ‘Tha’n o. a’ crathadh 
an sleagh, the youth are bran- 
dishiny their spears. 

oil, see ol. 556. Owhreay. 

oil, oo Rear, educate, nurse, instruct in po- 
liteness. Mar a lh’ oil i a clann, as she rear- 
ed her children. 

oil, s. f. ind. Vexation, grief, pain. 2 Offence, 
annoyance, regret. 3 Spite. Ge b’ oil leis, 
(leithe, leinn, leibh, leo) in spite of him (her, 
us, you, them) ; cha’n o. leam geda bhith- 
eadh tu air do chrochadh, it were no offence to 
me though you were hanged; 'áé a chuir gu 'm 
b' oil leam-sa ? why should it offend me ? ma’s 
o. leat sin, na dean a rithis e, if that be an 
offence to you,don't do it again ; tha siod agam- 
sa ge D oil leis na madaidh aig am bheii am 
fodar, I possess that in spite of the dogs that 
have the straw —Skye ` mharbh thu mo thri 
nigheanan,mharbh uia 's o. leat, you have kill- 
ed my three daughters, evn though you do not 
like it. 

oil, see saoil. 

oil,** s.f. Learning, education, tuition. 
thaigh, @ schoolhouse. 

toil, -e,-ean, s.f. Stone. 2 Rock. 3 Reproach, 

infamy. 4 Offence. 5 Stumbling-biock. 6** 
Frightful precipice. 

oil-athair,** -athar, -atbraichean, s.m. Foster- 
father, 

oilbheum, -eim, -an, s. m. Offence, stumbling- 
block, reproach, scandal, 2 Disobligation. 3 
Stumble. 4ttBlasphemy. Carraig oilbheim, 
a rock of offence. 

-————-ach, -aiche, a. Reproachful, offensive. 
2 Causing reproach or oifence. 3 Shameful, 
disgraceful, scandalous. 

-— — ——Achd, s.f.ind. Reproachfulness. 2 Scans 
dalizing, scandalousness. 3ffBlasphemy. 

oilbheumaich,ft v.a. Offend. 2 Blama. 

oilbheuinaiche, comp. of oilbheumach., 
oilbhiast, see uile-bheisd. 

toilbhreo, s.m. Funeral fire. 

fo:Icheas, -chis, s.m. Doubt, hesitation. 

ach, d. Doubtful, hesitating. 
pulous, 

Toile, see eile. 

oileabhan,(AF) s.m. Elephant. 

oileadair,* -ean, s.m. Professor. 

oileav,( DMy) an, s.f. Flat stone, larger than a 
pebble, for throwing at horses, cattle, &c. 

oileamhach, s.f. University. 

oileamhaid,* s.f. University. 

oileamhain, -e, 8.7. see oilean. 

oileamhnach, -aich, -ean, see oileanach. 

oileamhnaich, v. see oileanaich. 

oilean, -ein, -nan, s.m, see eilean. 

oilean, -ein, -an, s.m. Education, instruction. 2 
Household instruction, breeding. 3 Nurture, 
food. 4** Aisle of a church. 5** Honey- 
suckle. Droch oilean, bad breeding ; gu bràth 

cha dealaich o. riut, breeding shall never 


Oil- 


2 Scrus 


oilean 





forsake thee. 
oileanach, -aiche, a. Educating, training, in- 
structing. 2 Nourishing. 323 Welkbred. 4 
Educated, trained, polite, civil. à see eil- 
eanach, 
oileanach, -aich, pl. -aich & -aichean, s.m. Stu- 
deut, pupil, scholar, academician. 
adh, -aidh, s.m. Instructing, act of 
instructing or teaching. Ag o—, pr.pt. of oil- 
eanaich 
—— ———— —d,** s.f. Doctrine, teaching. 2tf Cur- 
ing. 3ttDrilling. 
Dia aich,® s.m. Scholar, student, pupil. 
oileanaich, v.a. Instruct, teach. 2 Rear. 3łł 
Cure, remedy. 4ffDrill. 
—te, past pt. of oileanaich. Reared, 
brought up, nourished, 2 Instructed,taught. 
3 Well-bred, polite. 
oileanda, -ainde, see oileanaichte. 
olleanta, -ainte, see oileanaichte, 
oileantachd, (MS) s.f. Scholarship. 
oilear, -eir, -ean, for eilthire. 
———ach, -aich, see eilthireach. 2 Nursery. 
adh, -aidh, s.m. see eilthireachd. 
oileas,** -ais, s.m. Custom, use, habit, usage. 
t- ach, v. Frequent, usual, customary. 
oileid,* s.f. College. 
oilich,** v.a. Frighten. 
ollire,* s.m. Professor. 
oillbhastair,** s.m. Alabaster. 
oillbheint,** s. Elephant. 
oilleabhaint,** s, Elephant. 
oillmheidh,** -eau, s.7% Balance, weight. 
ci!lt, -e, -ean, s.f. Terror, dread, horror, detest- 
ation, disgust. Dluth-chrith air gach cnàimh 
le h-o., every bone shaking with horror. 
oillt-chrith, -e, s.f. l'rembling from fear or ter- 
ror. 2 Horror. 
—— ——-.—each, -eiche, a. Trembling from fear. 
2 Causing to tremble from fear. 
oiliteachadh, -aidh, s.m. Trembling, act of trem- 
bling. 2 Dreading, detestation, horror, Ag 
0—, pr.pt. of oilltich. Tha mi air m’ o ris, 
[ am shocked at him. 
oilltealachd, s.f.ind. Terribleness, horribleness, 
dreadfulness. 2 Ugliness. 3**Detestableness. 
olitveil, -e, a. Terrific, dreadful, terrible, horri- 
le. 2 Ugly, disgusting in the highest degree. 
3** Fearful. 
oilithaigh, see oil-thaigh. 
oilltheud,** -théid, -an, s.m. see oil-theud. 
oilltich, v.a. én, Frighten, terrify. 2 Bea- 
fraid, be horrified. 3 Tremble from fear. 4 
Regard with horror, shudder with horror, de- 
test. Dh’ o. mi ris, I detest him, L am hor- 
rified at him. 
te, past pt. Afraid. 
oilltioil, -e, a. see oillteil. 
oilphaint,** s. Behemoth. 
oil! oil ! inf. Form of address to an infant. 2 
Expression of derision at finery. 
oil-thaigh, -ean, s.m. School, seminary, college, 
academy. 
—each, see oil-thaigheil. 
-—— — ——eil,** a. Academical. 
oiltheireich l, see eilthireachd. 
fuil-theud,** -chéid, s.m. Cable, rope, 
vi'-thire, s.f. see eilthir. 
ach, -eiche, æ. see eilthireach, a. 
oil-thireach, Ach, s. see eilthireach, s. 
—d, see eilthireachd. 
oil-threubhach,** a, Valiant, truly brave. 
———— ——-—l, s.f. Transcendant valour, 
2 The thing lent. 




















——— 


toin, -e, -ean, S.f. Loan. 
oin,* s.f. Death-agouy. 


oineach, -ich, s. m. Liberality, generosity. 2 
4**Merciful person. 5 


Clemency. 3[iliuce. 


NTERNET ARCHIVE 


706 


oingeal, eil, -an, s.f. see aingeal. 
oin. ch,(J M) W. Isles for àinich. 
òinid, -e, -ean, $.f. Fool, idiot. 2 Foolish woe 
-——-each, -eiche, a. 


oinidn,** e, a. Generous, liberal, magnani- 
oiuizh,** s.f. Prostitute. Air gràdh na h-o. na 
—— —each,** a, Whorish, like a harlot. 

——  —eachd,** s.f.ind. Whorishness, prostitu- 
oinmnuid, -e, -ean, s.f. òinid. 

Olumhidh,** see òinid. 

oinmhideach, à. see oinideach. 


oinnean, -in, -an, s.m. see uinnean. 


òinseach, Ach, -ichean, s.f. Foolish woman. 2 


oinseachail, -e, a. Foolish, idiotieal, 


oinseachd,** s.f. Whoredom. 
oinsealachd, s.f.ind. Foolishness, stupidity. 
oinseaun, for craobh-uinnsinn, 
oir, conj. For, because that. 


oir, v. 
toir, a. Fit, becoming, proper. d 
oir, -e, -ean, s.m. Border, edge, margin, hem, 






oirbh 


_**Liberal person. 
oineach, -eiche, a. Merciful, compassionate. 2 
Liberal, bountiful. 


g d,** s.f. Mercy, mercifulness. 2 Liber, 
alicy 





Panting, espe- 
cially when struggling hard with an enemy, 
or to get out of a difficulty, 


d'Ee ët EE a 


man, silly person, stupid person. ` 

Foolisu, idiotical, of, or 
pertaining to an idiot, 2 Absurd. 

eachd, s.f. Foolishness, folly, simpleness. 





mous, 


I 
3 
^ 


tog trod, do not raise a quarrel for a harlot's 
saie, 


tion. 


—d, see òinideachd. 
j 2** Pebble, 
ach, see uinnearach. 


Harlot. 3**ldiot. 4 Bagpipe. Cha leannan 
oinsich e, he is not a fool's choice. 
2 Like a 


Gu h-o., fool- 





foolish woman. 3**Whorish. 
ishly. 
oinseachas, see dinsealachd. 


Oir chuimhnich - 
iad, for they remembered ; oir is fhèarr leam, ` 
because thal I prefer. Oir a b' annas an leith- 
id 'san fhonn, for their like were scarce in the 
land—Rob Donn. 

loir, prep. see air. 

i Befit, become. 


selvidge, boundary, limit, coast. Oir an aod- 
aich, the hem of the cloth ; oir an t-sruthain, 
the margin of the brook ; gun o., without & 
border ; air leth oir, sideways. 
toir, -e, -ean, s.f. Furze, whins, gorse, 2 Old 
Gaelic name for the letter O. a, 
oir, $.m.ind, see ear. ~ H 
dir, gen.sing. of or. 





557. Oir. j 
oir,§ s.f. The spindle-tree -exonymus europæns. ` 
oirbü, prep. pron. On you, 2 Owed by you. 3 

The matter with you. 4 You under the neces- 


sity. Bheir mi o., I will force you ; beiridh mi 
oirbh, Z will catch you ; cniribh o. e, put item — 
you ; tha e o. à dheanamh, you are obliged te ` 
do it ; ciod a tha ‘cur oirbh ? what aiis ypu? 


Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS. AS 


RBANA-CHAMPAIGN 
LI AN L4 1 ! A ar HA (NIE Ka . L3 Ei 


—— 


-—-—— —Aàchd, s.f.ind. Charitableness. 


oirbh 


707 


oirnne 


am bbeil dad aig’ oirbh ? has he any claim on | foireachdan, s.pl. Statutes, ordinances. 


you ? do you owe him anything ? na gabhaibh 
oirbh e, take it not on you, take no heed of him 
(or it.) [emphacic, oirbh-se.] see air. 

oirbheart, -eirt, -an, s m. Good deed or action, 
exploit. Bu o dhuit a dheanamh, it were an 
act of charity n you to do it; cha’n o, sam 
bith dhuit a leithid a dheanamh, tt would be 
no act of charity in you to do Lhe like. 

e————- ach, -aiche,a Performing good deeds 
or actions. 2 Charitable. 3 Great, noble, 4 
Gracious, 


oirbbeirteach, see oirbheartach. 


oirbhidinn,** s.f. Honour, respect, veneration. 

oirbneas * see oirbheart, 

erer a. Honoured, respected, vene- 
rate 

oirbhir,** sf Reproach. 2 Curse. 3 Armful. 

oirbh-se, emphatic of oirbh. 

4oirc,11 s. Lapdog. 2 Lapwing, see adharcan- 
juachrach, 

oirceadal, -ail. s.m. Instruction. 2 Doctrine. 

oircean,(CR) s.m. Horizon, heavens, only used 
in rr tha stoirm air an oircean," said when a 
storm or squall is seen approaching—Arran. 

oircean, -eiD, -an, see uircean. 

oirceart,** -eirt, s.m. Hurt, bruise, wound. 

Oirceas, -eis, s.m. Mess. 

6u-cheard, -eirl, -an, see or-cheard. 

oircheas, eis, -an, s.m. Pity, mercy, clemency. 
2 Kindness, 3 Act of charity. 4 Fitness, 
propriety. 

ach, -aiche, a. 

Charitable, benevolent. 

Needy, in want. 





Pitying, merciful, 2 
3 Kiad, generous, 4 

5 Fit, proper. 
2 Need, 


necessity, poverty, waut. 3 Fitness, propriety. 
4 see oircheas. 5** rarely Mess. 


——— —aich,( MS) v.a. Aid. 
ir-chiabh, -a, -an, s.m. Yellow or golden lock or 


ringlet. 

——ach, -aiche, a, Having yellow or gold- 
en locks or ringlets. 

oirchill, -e, -ean. s.f. Provision reserved for the 
absent. 2 Reward. 3 Concealment, ambush 

foirehill, v.a. Carry, bear. 

oirchilleach,** v. Bearine, carrying. 

oirchiud,** s.f. Providence. | 

oircuios,** -chise, à. Proper, meet. 

oirchios, -a & -ise, see oireneas, 

—ach, -aiche, a. see oircheasach. 

achd, see oircheasachd, 

*oir-chisd, for or-chist. 

t——-— ear, -cir, -an, s.m. Treasurer. 

dir-chisdearachd, s.f. Bursary. 

Oir-chisdear-ardszoil, s.m. Bursar. 

oir-chneas, -eis, -an, s.m. The foreskin. 

oir-chriadh,** e China. 

dir-chrios, -a,-an, s.m. Studded belt. 2 Orna 
ment, such as a necklace. 3**Gold necklace. 

Ojrene, see oirc. 











girde, pl. -an [& **oirdnean,] s.f. Piece or lump 


of anything. 2**Splinter, 3** Order. 
Improvement. O.fhiodha, a log of wood. 

òirdhearc, v.n. Flourish, 2 Re famous. 

oirdheirc, -e, a. Famous, illustrious, noble, ex- 
cellent, honourable, superb, worthy, glorious. 

òirdheirceas, -eis, s. m. Excellency, nobleness, 
honourableness, worthiness, 2 Spleudour, 
bri:htness, suverbness, lustre. 3t+Renown. 
4* Pre-eminence. Ò. cumhachd, the excellence 
"eng ,;0.aàn eòlais, the excellence of know- 
eitge. 


4** 


-eirdueadh,** -idh, s.m. Ordination. 


oirdnean, s.pl. Splinters. 


oireach, į} -eielie, a. Marginal. 





aS, 313, 3.25, Pre-eminence, superiority. 


NTERNET ARCHIV 


oireachdas, -ais, see eireachdas. 

Toiread, ed, see uiread. 

cireadh, -idh, s.m. Befitting, becoming. 

oireag.$ see oighreag. 

Toircagai!, s,f. Habitation. 
deserted house, 

oireamhan,** -an, s. m. Concord, agreement, 
union. 

oireamhnacbh,** .aiche, a, Genuine. 2 Meet, 
proper, expedient. 3 Accommodated. 

——-—4, s.f. Genuineness. 

oire»mhuin,** gs. Pertinence. 
Fitness. 

-——each,** a. Pertinent. 

oirean, s.m. Selviige, (borders.) 

oirear,** a. Pleasant, agreeable. 2 Comely, be- 
cominz. 

oireil,** a. Meet, proper, becoming, seemly, 
comely, handsome, 

oirfcid, -ean, s.m. Music, melody. Na uile o. 
na Criosdachd, than the whole melody of 
Christendom ; o. eagarach, well-arranged mu- 
sic. 

—-—each, -eich, s.m. Musician. 

———each, -eiche, a. Musical, melodious, har- 
monious. 2 Unanimous. 

—  —eachd, s.f.ind. Harmony, melody, music, 
musicalness, 

oir-fheadhnach,** d. Having excellent leaders, 
as an army. 

oirfideachd,f{ see oirfeideachd, 

oirgheadh,** -eidh, s.m. Destroying. 

oirghean,** -ein, s.m, Destruction. 

oirghios,** s, Cheer. 2 Mess. 

oir-gzhreus, -zhréis, s.m. Embroidery, tapestry, 
needlework, tambouring, ornament. 

oir-ghreugach,** 7 Kmbroidered, 

oir-zhreusaichbe,** s.m. Embroiderer. 

oiridh,** see airidh. 

diridh,** s.pl. Devices wrought in gold, 

Toirior, s. m. Day-after-to-morrow. (see ear- 
ar, enr-thrath.) 

oiris, sf. Chronicle. 2 Delay, hinderance, 

fto,rle, -an, s.f. Piece, fragmeut. > 

òirleach, -ich, s.f. Inch. 2**Nlaug¢hter, masta- 
cre, Is treasa aon ò. de’a giile na dà o. 
de 'n nighinn, one inch of the boy is stronger 
than two inches of the girl (i.e. when growiug.) 

oirleachail tf -e, a. Inched. | 

oirlizh, AF) s. Eagle, see iolair. 

oirlioch,** s. Havoc. 

oir-lion,** v.a. Increase. 

oóiriils, Kinture for òrrais. 

óir-mhiannu,** s.m. Avarice, covetousness. 

ach,** a. Avaricious, covetous. 

oirmhid** s.f. Decency. 2 Credit, respect. 

foirn, v.a. Appoint, constitute, set, ordain, put 
in authority. 

foirne.dh, -idh. s.m. Appointing, constituting, 
ordaining. ordination. Ag o—, pr. pt. of oirn. 

oirnealta,** a. Elegant, neat, ornamental, 
beautiful. 2 Having an imposing exterior. 

—chd,** s.f. Elegance, neatness, hand- 
someness, ornament, 

dirneimh,** v.a. Shine with gold. 

oirneis, see airneis. 

oiran, prep.nron. On us, upon us. 2 Owed by 
us. 3 Matter with us. Bheir e 0. à dhean- 
amh, he will make us do it, tha e o. a dhean- 
amn, we must do it, it is our duty to doit; 
tugamaid o., lef us bestir ourselves, let us be 
moving ; na gabhamaid o. e, let us not heed 
him, let us take no nolice of hiin ; thairis o., 
ovr us ; a l'hishearsa seall oirnn, Lord leok 
Upon Us. 

oirnne, emphatic )orm of oirnn, 


2** Assem biy. 


2 Waste house, 





2 Influence. 3 











oirp 


708 


ole 





oirp, see oidheirp. 

oirp,$ e House-leek, see lus-nan-cluas. 

Oirpe, -an, see oidheirp. 

oirre, prep.pron. On her, upon her. 2 Owed by 
her. 3 Matter with her. 4 Over her. "Dé 
a th’ oirre ? what is the matter with her ? tha 
e 0, à dheanamh, she ıs bound or obliged to do 
it: 'dé tha 'cur o. ? what ails her ? ‘de a th’ 
agad oirre P how much does she owe you ? cha 
'n eil eagal oirre, she 1s not afraid ; moran 
uachdaran 0., many rulers over her ; chaidh 
e o., he had carnal connection with her ; dh’ 
éirich eo, he belabowred her ; togadh 1 0., let 
her bestir herself, let her be off. 

oirsceart,**'s. The East. 

oirthir, -e, -ean, s. f. Coast, shore, beach. 2 
Border, frontier. 3 see ear (east.) 4 The 
Eastern world. O. ghaineimh, a sandy shore, 
a sandbank ; bàthadh mor aig o, wrecks are 
frequent near a shore. 

each, -eiche, o Of, or belonging to, a 

coast, border or frontier, 2 Maritime, bor- 





dering on shore. 3 Terminal 4 Eastern, 
oriental. 
oisbheas,** an, s.m. Epicycle. 
ach,** a. Like an epicycle, 2 Of, or be- 


longing to, an epicycle. 
foisbhreug,** an. s. Hyperbole. 
ois-cheum,** s.m. Eminence, superiority. 
ois-chreideamh,** -imh, 8.7. Superstition. 

Tois-chreideimh, -e, s.f. Superstition. 

oiseach, Ach, -ichean, s.f. see òinseach, 

ail, -e, a. see oinseachail. 

oisealachd, see dinsealachd. 

oiseann, see oisiun. [** gives gen. oisinn.] 

0132, -e, -ean, S.f. see othaisg. 2 see oisinn. 

oisgealachd, see othaisgealachd. 

òisgean, for othaisgeaao, n.p. of othaisg. 

oisneach, s. Rifle—Sar-Obair. (isneach.) 

oiszeil, see othaisgeil. 

orin,** v.a. Lie with the face upwards, 

oisinn, oisne, oisnean, sf. Corner, angle. 2 
Nook. 3 Bevel. Na h-oisnean, the temples ; 
o. an taighe, the corner of the house. 

-——-each, -eiche, a. Cornered, angled, angu- 
lar. Roth o., @ bevel wheel; oibreach o., 
bevel-gearing. 

d, s.f. Angularity. 

—-—-——eag, -eig, -an, s. f. dim. of oisinn. Little 
corner, angle, or nook. 2 Angular figure. 
Tri-o., æ triangle ; ceithir-o., a AEA A 

Bp pium je -àiche, a. Having little corners 
or angles. 

oisinnich, v.a. Bevel. 

Toisionair,**.s.m. Tabard, habit formerly worn 
over à gown. 

otsir, -e, -ean, sf. see eisir. 

oislin,** s.pl. Charms. 

ois-sgriobhadh,** -aidh, s.m. Superscription. 

oistein, $.f. see eisir. 

Toistir, s.m. Door. see Clann-an-oistir. 

oistric, -e, -ean, £. f. Gaelic spelling of ostrich. 

oit ! oit | int. Exclamation used to express a sud- 
den sense of heat or burning. Oit mo chróig, 
alas my hand ! 

oiteag, ig, -an, s.f. Breeze of wind, light squall 
or blast. ?1ÍZephyr. | 

ach, -aiche, a. Breezy, squally, windy. 
Gaoth o, @ wind that comes im gusts or 
squalls. 

oitir, -e, -ean, $.f. Bank or ridge in the sea. 2 
Shoal, shallow. 3 Low promontory juttin 
into the sea, rock projecting into the sea. 4 
Tn 5 Headland, O. ghaineimh, @ sand- 

ank. 

oitreach, a. Innavigable. 

òl, pr.pt, ag ol, v.a. & n, Drink, perform the act 








of drinking. 2 Sup. 8 Ahsorb. Dh'óladh tu 
's cha phàigheadh tu, you would drink aud 
not pay ; ag òl brochain, $upping porridge. 

ol, oil, ëm, Drinking, act of drinking. 2 Ha- 
bit of drinking intoxicating liquors. 3 Drunk- 
enuess, inebriation. 2 snpping. 3 Absorbing, 
Ag o—, pr.pt. of ol. Tha e trom air an ol, he is 
a hard drinker ;'se ant-ol a chuir an dun- 
aidh ort, it is drink that played the mischief 
with you ; an t-òl, drinking diabetes. 

tol, v.def. Quoth, said. Dh’ ol Fioun, F. said. 

ola, s. f. ind. Oil 2 Ointment. 3**Olive. [° 
says never lamp-oil. which is ùilleadh, but 
ola is always used in Gairloch, Lewis, £c. for 
er and ** gives ola chum soluis, oil for 
light, 

Ola-bais, s,f. Extreme unction. 

olabhar,** -air, 8.?n. Great army. 

olach, s, Rauk grass growing near steadings 
where manure abounds, see fóshlach. 

olach, -aiche, a. Oily. 2 Greasy. 3 Balsamic. 

òlach, -aiche, a. Hospitable. 2 see olar. 

òlach, -aich, s.m. Hospitable person, one liberal 
of his own. 2 Beanvtifal person, 3 Term fa- 
miliarly used in addressing or speaking of a. 
person of low rank. 4 Eunuch. 5 Fumbler— 
Sàr-Obair. Gr Odd fellow. 7* One castrated 
for committing adultery. 8 (DMy) Champion, 
hero, giant. Có dhiubh a th’ annad, o. a tha 'g 
iarraidh gleachd no còmhraig, no ò. a tha ’g 
iarraidh maighstir P? which are you, a (ad that 
wants to wrestle or fight ora lad that wants a 
master ; o. tapaidh, æ kind and brave man, @ 
commendable man ; nach b' e an t-o. e | what 
a hero he ts! mar a dh’ iobras ólach, as @ 
hero gives way. 

olachau,** -ain, s.m. Immoderate drinking. 2 
Drioking-mateh. 3 Carousal. 

dlachas, -ais, s.m, Hospitality, kindness, bounty. 

olachd, s.f. see dlachas,  2* Castration for a- 
dultery. 

ola-chroinn-ola, $8.7. Olive-oil. 

oladh, -aidh, s.f. see ola. Corn olaidh, a cruse 
of oil ; measgte le h-oladh, mized with oil, 

oladh-céireach,** s.f. Cerate. 

oladh-ungaidh, 8.f. Anointing-oil, 

ola-fhrois-lin, s.f. Linseed-oil. 

ola-ghuail, sf. Paraffin. ` 

olaidh, gen.sing, of oladh. 

olainn, see olann. 

———each,** a. see olla, a. 

olair, Gan, s.m. Imbiber. 


ola-leighis, Sr, Balsam. 
ola-muüilis, SL Sweet oil ; 
ola-nan-creag, $. f. '' Rock-oil," an ointment 


made from a thin film obtained on rocks by 
the sea, and used as a relief for burns and 
scalds. f 

ola-nan-trosg, s.f. Cod-liver oil. 

olann, -ainn, s.f. Wool. [sheep. 

olann-mharbhchainn, s. f. Wool from a dead 

olar, fut.pass. of ol. Shall be drunk, 

——, -aire, d. Given to drunkenness, drunken, 
sottish, bioulous. 2**Absorbent. 

—achd, s.find. Habitual drunkenness, 

ola-roia, 8.f. Seal-oil. 

olart,** -airt, -an, s.n. Hone, 

-——ach,** a. Pertaiuing to the office of a hone, 
2 Like a hone, 

tolartar,** .air, s.m. Bad smell. 

olastair,** -ean, s. Carbine, 2 Holster, 

iche,** s.m. Carbineer. 

olc, uile, s.m. Mischief, evil, wickedness. 2 Ap- 
parition,  31f Hurt, loss, damage, harm. 
Chaidh e chun an uilc,he went to the mischief; 
seachain an t-olc agus seachnaidh an t-ole thu, 
avoid evil and evil will avoid you; ole aa 





ES 4221-21 


1 
ze mi 
a = 





et Pee  $- ul et tt 


f ol 


cùis 
last ; 's fhéarr au t-ole eòlich na ’n t-olc ain- 
eolach, the known evil is beiter than the un- 
known evil —one is better prepared to meet it; 
cha bhi olc an aona bhliadhna fada ‘dol 
seachad, one year's grievance will soon pass 
away. 

ole, adv. (gu h-olc) Ill, badly, wickedly. Is o. 
a fhuaradk tu, you behaved very badly ; is ole 
an airidh e, it is a pity; is tric fhuair rs olc-an- 
airidh "7 car, often '''tis a pity" has been 
crossed. 

olc, g^n.$/ng. wilce, a. Bad, evil, wicked 2 
Evil, untoward, unfortuuate, 3 Bad, incom- 
prete, not good of its kiad. 4**Mischieyous, 
uine olo, an evil man; béisd olc, a wicked 
beast, a wicked person; leann olc, bad ae; 
olc air mhath le cach e, whether the others 

(be it or not ; gu h-olc, sick, very badly. 

1st. comp. miosa, 2nd. comp. misde, 3rd.comp. 

miosad. 

olcad, -aid, st Degree of badness. 

olcadan, (AF) s.m. Owl. 

olcas, -ais, 3. m. Naughtiness, wickedness. 2 
Badness. 3 Sickness. 4**Mischief. Air o 
'sam bheil e, let him be ever so bad; chual 
thu 'olcas, you have heard its mischief. 

olc-dheanadach, -aiche, a. Maleficent. 

olchobhair,** s.f, Pleasure. 2 Avarice. 

oleth mo chüil, phrase, Coming towards me 
from behind my back. 

foll, -a, a. Great, grand, high. 





olla, o, Woollen, made of wool, Aodach olla, 
woollen garments. 
olla, -idhean, see ollamh. 2 see olann. 


olla, a. Woollen. (Though called and translated 
as an adj. by some, this word, which 1s for 
olna or ollna, like uillne from uileann (elbow,) 
is gen. of olann.] 
Ollabhar, air, s.m. Great army, great host. 
ollach, -aiche, a. Woolly, fleecy. 
——--ail,** a. Rabbinical. 2 Lettered, literary. 
olladh, a. see olla. 
olladh, -ailh, -sidhean, see ollamh, 
. ——-—aich, v. see ollamhaich. 
Olladhaichte, see ollamhaichte. 
olla*, -aig, -an, s.f. Offal, refuse. 2 see ullag. 
ollaidh, ven, sn, of olladh. 
Ollaig, Badenoch for Nollaig. 
ollain, for olainn, 
ollamh, -aimh, -an, s.m. Doctor, physician. 2 
Apothecary. 3 Learned man. 4 Chief bard. 
ollamh-diadhaehd, a doctor of divinity, 
ollamh Iùdhach, a Rabbi, 
ollamh lagha, a doctor of lames. 
ollamh leighis, a doctor of medicine, 
ollamh arsaidheachd, Amntiquary. 
llamh, -aimhe, a. see ullamh. 
eliamhachd, a € God Doctorship. 
-ollamhaich,** on. Graduate. 2 Take the đe- 
gree of doctor. 3 Teach. 
. oliamhaichte, past pt. Graduated. 
. oliamhain, s.pl. The learned, 
—, -e, s.f. Instruction. 
—, gen.sing. d nom.p!, of ollamhan. 
ellamhan,** -ain, s.m. Doctor, medical man. 2 
Learned man. 3 Bard of the first order. O, 
ri diadhachd, a doctor of divinity (D.D.); o. ri 
lagha, a doctor of laws (LL.D.) ; 0. ri leighis, 
a doctor of medicine ( M.D.) 








— -—— — ——tà, -ainte, a. Learned. 





—tas, -ais, s.m. Professorship. 2 Doc- 
torship. 3 Superiority. 

ollamhnachadh, -aidh, s. m. Instructing, act of 
instructing, instruction. Ag o—, pr.pt. of oll- 
amhnaich. 

ellamhnachd, s.f. Superiority. 2 Preparation. 


Digitized by 
NTERNET ARCHIVE 


709 
UU" ——————————————M 
gu deireadh, put off th’ evil part to the | ollamhnaich. v.a. Instruct, teach. 2 solemnize. 


onacaid 


——te, past pt. of ollamhnaich. In- 

structed, taught. 

ollamhrachd, s.f.ind. Professorship. 2 Super, 
iority. 

ollanach, -aiche, a. Lanigerous. 

ollanachadh, -aidh, s.m. Preparing, act of the 
prepariog of the dead. 2 Burial. 3 see oil- 
eanacha«dh. 

Ollanachd, s.f.ind. Preparing of the dead for in- 
terment. 2 Burial, funeral 3 oileanachd. 
ollanaich, v.a. Prepare, make ready for burial. 
2 Bury, entomb. 3 Solemunize. 4 see oileau- 

ach A Dhia, o. féin mi, God, teach thou 
me thyself. 

de te, past pt. of ollanaich. Prepared, 
made ready, % Buried. 3 Solemnized. 4 svc 

. oileanaichte. 

ollaodach,* -aich, s.m. Woollen cloth. 

ollas,** .ais, s.m. Boast. 

oll-drag, see oll-dreag. 

oll-dréag, -eig,-an, s.f. Funeral pile. 2**Bon- 
fire. 3**Ignis fatuus. 

oll-ghaireach, Ach, s.m. Dane. i 

foll-ghiór, -oir & Aire, sm. Bombast, fustian 
language. 

toll-mhaitheas, -eis, s.m. Great riches. 

oll-thuath,** -thuaidh, s. f. Large axe. 2 Battles 
axe, 

olmhor, -oire, a. see dlar. 

achd, s. see olarachd. 

Tolom,** a. Crop-eared. 

oludh,(AF) s. Sucking ewe. 

toluidh,** s.f. Cow. 

oluinn, gen.sing. of olunn. 

olunn, -uinn, see olann. 

o m', for o and mo. 

omar, -air, s.m. Amber. 2 see amar. 

-——ach, a. Amber, made of amber. 

-——aich, v.g, Amber. 

ombra, &.m. see omar, 

tomh, a. Lonesome, unfrequented, solitary. 

omhai!, -e, s.f. see umhail. 2 Act of saying 
'' omh,” to express a doubt or disagreement, 
or to indicate discomfort. 'Dé an o. a th’ ort ? 
what are you grunting about ? 

omhaill, s.f. Heed, attention. 9 Care. Gabh 
0., pay attention ; ciod ano. ath’ ann? what 
mailers it? ciod an o. a. th’ agad? what do 
you care ? | 

omhailleach,** a, Heedful, attentive! 2 Careful. 

tomhan, -ain, sm. Fear. 

omhan, -ain, sm. Froth of milk or whey, espe- 
ciaily the thicker whey pressed out of curus. 
[* gives omnar.] 

—ach, -aiche, œ. Frothy, abounding in froth 
of milk or whey. 

—-—achil,** s.f, Frothiness, foaminess. 

tomhnach, a. Terrible. 2 Frothy. 

rTomhnear, -eir, s.m. Embryo. 

tomna, s.m. Oak. 2 Lance. 

fomoid, v.a. Obey. 

omoideach, @ Obedient. 

omraunun, -ainn, $.f. Share, division. 

o 'n, con). see o. 

op (o+an) O 'ntaigh, from home, abroad ; is 
fhada o 'n là, it is long sincet he day broke; ig 
fhada o’n da là sin, it is long since we met be- 
fore ; o'n aithrichibh, from their fathers. 

lon, oin, s.m. Advantage, profit. 2 Loan. 3 
Thing lent. 4 Cause, reason. 5 Blemish. 
stain, blot, fault. 6 Reproach. 7 Sloth, lazi- 
ness, 8 Anger, rage. 

fon, -a, a. Excellent, noble, good. 2 Advanta. 
geous, 

onadh, see onfhadh. 

ouagaid,t sy. Confusion, row, disturbance, 


. 





3 Spear. 


onaid 


on-id, see oinid. 
orsideachd,( is) see oinideachd, 
onair, «2e onoir. 
Guairieh, see onoraich. 
te, see onoraichte. 
ónar,see aonar. 
——-a8ich, see ouoraich. 
—— an, see aonaran, 
on.chü,(AF) Wolf. 2 Otter. 
ones, sm. Stenlock—Arran. 
(3da,** a. Simole, silly. 
ondhreag, -eig, 3. f. Meteor. 
terrible meteor. 
onfha, see onfhadh. 
enfhadh, -fnailh, -fuaidhean, s.m. Biast. storm. 
2 Raging of the sea. 3** Furious billow. 4 
Rage, fury. 511Noiseof the waves. 6**Storm 
at sea. 7 (DU) Raging bunger. 
ach, -aiche, a. Stormy, tempestuous. 
. Cuan o, a stormy sed. 
ong, t.a. see ung. À | 
Tong. sm. Tribuiation. 2 €hastisement. 3 Di- 
sease. 4 Restraint. 
tong, s.m. Sorrow. 2 Sigh, groan. 
4 Fire, 5 Hearth. 
tony, a. Clean, 2 Clear, bright, 
ongadh, -aidh, see ungadh. 
tonvalar, see ong, $. 
onial,** s, Corner. 
tonn, -a, -an, s.m. Stone. 2 Entire horse, stall. 
ion. 8 Furze, gorse. 4 Name of the letter O 
[** gives oinn as gen.sing. of 1 & 2] 
onnenon, -oin, -an, san. Ensign, standard, 
onuehu (AF )s.m. Leopard., 
onoid,(MS) s.f. Sot. 
onoir, -e,-ean, St Honour, magnanimity. 2 
Respect, esteem, reverence. 3 Fame, re- 
nown. 4 High rank or place, dignity. 5 Hon- 
esty, integrity. Na bitheadh m’ o.-sa air a h- 
aonadh, let mot mine honour be united; gun 
o. without honour. 
onoirich, v. see onoraich. 
te, see onoraichte. 
onorach, -a/che, a. Honourable, honest. 2 Dis- 
tinguished, exalted, famed.  $*'Honorary. 
Ball o, an honorary m^nber ; duine o., an 
honest man ; gu h-o., honourably. 
adh, -aidh, s.n. Honouring, act of hon- 
ouring or reverencing. Ag 0—, pr. pt. of on- 
oraich. 
onoraich, pr. pt. ag onorachadh, v.a. Honour, 
reverence, respect, revere. 
-— —— ——te, past pt. of onoraich. Honoured, res- 
pected. 
onrac, Arran for aonrachd (solitude.) 
onrachd, see aonrachd. 
— ————aàch, see aonrach. 
an, see aonrachdan. 
anach, see aonrachdanach. 
op,** 3. Hop, see lus-an-leanna, 
òpar, (CR) Gaelic spelling of hopver (of a mill.) 
opar, (MMeL) s.m. Mark of travel. Tha ò. air, 
he is travel-stain-d. 
or, -òir, s.m. Gold. 
or, pr.pt. ag òradh, v.g. Bedeck. 
or, v.a. Gild. 
Or, s.f. See orra. 
or, ora, pl. ora, orthachan, orrachan E orthann- 
an, (AC) s, Prayer, rhymed prayer, hymn, 
supplication, petition, incantation. Domh- 
nall beag nan o., litile Donald of the supplica- 
tions. Or and ob are now used indiscrimin- 
ately. 
or bhàis, death-epell, 
or bhalbh, charm to silence an opponent. | 
or ghlas ghuib, spell to lock an enemy's mouth. 
-Or ghonaidh, wounding incantation. 





O. uamharra, a 


3 Healing. 





Frae 


oranaiche 


or ghrislaireachd, spell to spoil anothers ` 
brewing. 
or na h-Aona, the Friday spell. i 
or sheamlachais, charm to induce one cow to 
take to the calf of another. 
or stoirm, spell to raise a storm todrown a foe, 
tor, sun. see oir, 2 Mouth. 3 Voice. 4 Sound, 
ora, see or & drag. 

ora, @ see drach & òrail. 

orabhar,** a. Bushy, as hair. 

orach,ft em Enchantment 

drach, -aich, a. Abounding in gold, golden, aur- 
iferous. 

an, -ain, pl. -an & oraichean, s. m. Jewel, 
ornament. . 

d,* s. f. ind. Fictitious ornament, fantasies, 
fantastic dress, 2* Hoarding gold. Tuillidh 
's à choir de orachdan, too many fantastic ore 
naments or assumed ars. ' 

oracuil, s.f. Gaelic spelling of oracle. 

Oradair,(MS) s.m. Gilder. 

òradh, -aidh, s.m, Gilding, act of gilding. 2 ` 
Burnishing. 3 Reflection of the sun’s rays, Ag 
0—, pr.nt. of ór k 

oradh, -aidh, s.m Chanting incantations, 2 ` 


ua bi E ae ee RR a 


























558. Orafoirt. 


559. Oragan. 
orafvirt.§ s. White horehound—merrudium 
vulyare. 


orag, -aig, -an, sf. Sherf of corn set up to drys — 
2 Young of birds in the downy stage, especial- — 
ly the swan, shag and cormorant. 

—— £n, -ain, -an, s.m. Marjoram, organy—ori- 
ganum snarjorana d origantem vulgare. — [ill. 
559 represents o. vulgare. | 

oragan, -ain, -AN, 8,59. see orgain.’ e. 

òraxanach, -aiche, a. Abounding in, or like, ` 
marjoram or organy. 

òraid, -e, -ean, sf, Speech, harangne, oration, ` 
essay, prayer. Rinn eò., ke made & speech. 

-——each, -eiche, a. Of, or beiorging to, speech- 
es or harangues, oratorial. E 

-——— each, -eich. s.m, Speaker,orator, declaimer. 

-——ear, -ir, s.m. Orator, declaimer. f 

-—— ch, v.n. Declaiin, harangue, speechify. 

-——iche, s.m. Haranguer, orator, declarmer. 

òrail, -e, @ Gold, golden. 2 Gilt. x 

Oran, gn.sing. & nol, of òran. x. 

òran, -a.n, -an, &m. Song. 2 Poem. Cha dean . 
sinn ò. dheth, we will not make a song of H. 
d.-Luachaill,** Eclogue. | 
6.-lnadhaidh, ** s.m. Catch, waulking-song. ` 
d.-péambaidh, s.m. Hallelujah. c 

—ach, -aiche, a, Of sougs. 2 Fond of singing — 


AA 


sonzs, tuneful. 
—achadh, aidh, s.m. Cantation., 
— zich, v.a. Berhyine. . 
——Aaiche,-an, s.m. Singer, sonzster, 2 Bal. — 
lad singer, 3  Blue-throated warbler, see ` 
ceileiricho. Deagh ò., @ good singer. 


orair 





orair, -ean, s.m. Porch. 

drais, -e, -ean, $.f Tumultuous noise. 

óraisd, -ean, s f. Orange. 

each, a. Full of oranges, 2 Like an orange. 

óraisg, v.n. Vomit—Arran, 

oran-nan-car, s.m. Cantata. 

orban,** -ain, s.m. Patrimony. 

orbhaire,** s.f. Mercy, goodness. 

ór-bhann, -ainn & -oiun, -an, s.m, Gold lace. 2 
Hinge or band of gold. 

ach, -aiche, @ Having gold lace. 2 
Having gold hinges or bands. 

ór-bnàrr, a. Having yellow hair 2 Having à 
yellow top, tipped with gold. Falt o., golden 
hair. 

_ ór-bheart, -eirt, -an, $.f. Noble deed, feat. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Performing illustrious 
or noble deeds. 2 Magnanimous, 

ór-bhonn, -bhuinn, s.m. Gold piece or coin. 

ór-bhuadhach, -aiche, a. Noble, illustrious. 2 
Victorious, triumphant. 

ór-bhuidhe, a. Yellow, of a golden colour, au- 
burn. Nighean ò., a golden-harred girl. 

ór-bhuidheacn,** -ich, s. m. Or or topaz in 
heraldry. 2 The pure yellow in arms of an 
earl or lord, or sol in that of a king or prince. 

orc,* see uircean. 

orc (an), see forc. 

torc, oirc, -an, s.m. Collop. 2 Calf of the leg. 3 











Death. 4 Little hound. 5 Hen'segg. 6al- 
mon. 7 Whale. 8 Pig. 9 Cramp, numbness 
10 Prince. 11 Hero. 12 Prince's son.  153** 
Beagle. 

forc, v.a. Kill, murder, destroy. 

vita see oro, 


orcab, 
orcadh,** -aidh, s.m. Killing, massacring. 2 
Destroying, destruction. 
forcain, s.f. Murder, killing. 
orcan, see uircean & orc. 
ach, see uirceanach. 
ór-chainnt, s.f. Rhetoric. 
orchan,** -am, s.m. Incantation, 
or-chasach, a. Gold-hilted. 
or-cheannach, a. Gold-headed. 
ór-chéard, -chéird, s.m. Goldsmith, 2 Jeweller. 
ór-chiabh, A, -an, s,m. Golden lock, 2 Gold- 
en-coloured hair. 
«——_—_—ach, -aiche, a. Yellow-haired. 
ór-chleac, A. -an, s.f. see ór-chül. 
or-choilear, -eir, sm. Golden collar. 
necklace. 
ór-chradh, -aidh, s.m. Grief, sorrow. 
or-chul, -chüil, -an, s.m. Yellow or golden lock. 
orc-iasg, s.m. Torpedo (fish.) 2**Cramp-fish. 
ór-ghruag, -uaig, -an, see ór-chül. 
òrd, óird, óirdean,tt s.m. Log of wood, piece. 
òrd, ùird, s.m. Mountain of a round form and 
steep. t2 Death, manslaughter. 
*órd,^* a. Bold, valiant, 
òrd, ùird, pl. òrdan & ùird, [ùird in Gairloch, 
del s.m. Hammer. 2 Dog-head ofa gun, 
` the part of a gun-lock from which the flint 
strikes fire. 3 Piece,fragment, junk. 4 Stub. 
5 Mallet, mall. 6(MS) Cut, cutting. 7*Sledge- 
hammer. Mar fhuaim ùird, like the noise of & 
hammer ; ord éisg, a cut or slice of fish. 
$órd,-a,-an, s.m. Order, series. 
òrda, see ord. 
òrdachadh, see òrduchadh. 
órdag, -aig, -an, s.f. Thumb. 2 Great toe, Air 
— òrdaig an làimhe deise, on the thumb of their 
right hand ; air òrdaig an coise deise, on the 
great toe of their right foot ; an ó an aghaidh 
na glaic, the thumb against the palm, the thumb 
at strife with the palm ; o.-an-t-suic, see crann- 
man-gad (p. 263) ; thug ò. a choise sanas do 





2 Golden 


D | E Lit 


E pO == = = r g= 
d LLINMIL. dL LJ LIE 
d Si d = AR H VE 


711 


——— o_O —— ————————————————————————————À—— ———————————— 


P secu M DEM "A O á———— ebe 


orgain 
bhun a chluaise, th» to» of his foot gave a 
hint or whisper to ( struck) the root of his ear, 
a graphic picture of the violence of the throw 
—he was not only thrown on his back, bust 
his feet flew up in the air, and his heal so far 
rebounded that toe ani ear mat ; òrdag, sgol- 
bag, fionna-fada, Mac-an-aba, cuibhteag (the 
nimes of the fingers or toes among chiidren, 
beginning at the thumb or great toe.) An- 
other rhyme of these names in Arran is ‘‘0., 
calagag, fionna-fad, mac-an-ab is cuisteas,'' 
another, ** ò., corrag, meur-meadhon, màthair 
an ludain(or na ludaig,)’’&c. also, **seoan téa 
leagan sabhal, seo au té a ghoid an sil (not 
siol), seo an té a sheas ag amharc, seo an té 
a ruich air falbh, seo an té bheag a b’ fheudar 
dhith a phàigheadh air fad," the last being 
apparently only a Gaelic translation of the 
Scottish rhyme, this is the man that broke the 
barn, this is the man that stole the the corn, 
this is the man that stood and saw, this is the 
Sech that ran awa’, and wee peeriwinkie paid 
or oO, 

ordagach, -aiche, a. Having large thumbs or 
great toes. 2 Digital. 

ordagh, -aigh, -aighean, 

ordaich, see órduich. 
ordail, -e, @ Orderly, decent, regular. 
dinal. 

ordair,** s.m. Hammerer. 

ordan, -ain, -an, s.m,dim. of ord. Little ham- 
mer or mallet. 2 Small piece, fragment. 3 
Skye for òrdugh. 

ordan,** -aiu, s.m, Generosity. 2 Dignity. 3 
Solemnity. 4 Degree, gradation. 5 Music. 

ord-bhairnich, s.m. Limpet-chisel. 

òrdha, o Saturnian. 2 Golden. 3 Shining 
luke gold, golden. 4 Excellent, precious—Sar- 
Obair. 

òr-dhearg, s.m. Redness of gold. 

ord-laihrach, s.m. Claw-hammer. 

ord-lavch,** -laoich, s.m. Hero. 

or-dhuilleag, -eig, -an, s./. Gold-leaf. 

ordon,** see órdugh 

òrduchadh, -aidh, s m. Ordering, act of order» 
ing, ordaining, decreeing, commanding. 2 In- 
stitution, decree, command. 3 Appointment, 
ordination. 4 Arranging, arrangement. A’ 
pr.pt. of órduich. 

òrdugh, -uigh, -uighean, s. m. Order, decree, 
command. 2 Order, arrangement, array. 3 
Ordinance, rite, observance commanded. 4 
The Eucharist or Lord's Supper, celebration 
of that feast. [The pi. ‘‘ na h-òrduighean,” 
is very often used in the West of Ross to de- 
note not only the dispensation of the Lord'« 
Supper, but the accompanying services held 
on Thursday, Friday, Saturday and Monday.] 
Ò. o 'n Taigh-chuspaian, a decree from the Cus- 
tom House ; cuir an ò., put in order ; gun ò., 
without instruction or direction; an 0.-catha, 
in battle-array; 0.-blair, battle-erray. 

ail, ** a. see òrdail. 

òrduich, v.a. Order,ordain, appoint, decree,pre- 
scribe, assign, command. 2 Arrange, set in 
array, 3 Give instructions, issue orders. Dh' 
ò. Dia, God ordained. 

—— ———ear, /ut.pass. of òrduich. 

——te, past pt. of òrduich. Ordained, ap- 
pointed, We okend. assigned. 2 Arranged, seb 
in order. 3 Ordered, commanded, preseribed. 

orensin, Moladh Mòrag, 100. for ** orange-an,’’ 
oranges,in ** Phoebus 'dath nan tonn air famh 
órensin." 

org id,** s. f. Organ. 

iche,** em. Organist. 

orgain,** & f. Slaughter. 2 Organ, 





see ordugh. 


2 Or- 








organ 


organ, see oragan. 

organaiche,(Ms) s.m. Organist. 

or-ghruag, -aig, -an, see ór-chul. 

—— — — —ach, -aich, s.f. Yellow-haired maid. 

————— —ach, a. Yellow-haired. 

torgun, s.m. Death. 

orlachadh, -aidh, s. m. Bespewing. 

ér-lasta, laiste, a. Shining or burnished like 
go!d. 

——————il,-e a. see ór-lasta. 

or-leathair,** sm. Paternal uncle. 

ór-loinneach, -eiche, a. Highly elegant, beauti- 
ful, becoming. 

d, s.f. Extreme elegance. 

orm, prep.pron. (air+mi) On me, upon me. 
Owed by me. 3 Wrong with me. 
possession. 








112 


9 U 
4 In my | orrthannan,(Ms) pl. of or. 
"Dé a th’ aig’ orm ? what do I owe | orruidh, -e, a. 


oscar 


lorrais, -e, -ean, s.f. Squeamishness, nausea. 2 
Water-brash. Chuireadh tu o. air mathe - 
ghamhuinn, your conduct would make a bear 
squeamish ; tha ’n ò. ri m’ fhiacail fad an la, 
Heri Se annoying me the live-long day. see 

raAlsg. d 

——each, -eiche, a. Squeamish, qualmish, 2 

Fastidious. 

eachd, see òrrais. 

-thilgidh, see òrrais. 

orrar, see orair. 
orra-san, emphat-c form of orra. 
orrlain, see eórlain. 

|forrtha, Sam, Music, melody. 

voice. 8 Bewitchery. 











» 
å 





2 Melodious 


Enchantment. 
see òrbhui:lhe. 


him ? ’dé a th’ orm ? what is wrong with me ? | or-sgiathach, -aiche, a. Having golden wings. 


a cur orm, dressing myself ; tha e orm a 
dheanamh, I am obliged to do it ; théid aig’ 
orm, Ae will get the better of me ; fuirich orm, 
socair orm, softly, leisurely ! 
óranhaduinn, -mhaidne, -ean, S.f. The break of 
day, morning. 
òr-mheas, s.m. Orange. 
ór-mheiun, -e,-ean, &. f. Gold ore. 
mine, 
—each, -eiche, q. 
having gold ore. 
orm sa, emphatic of orm.” 
Torn, -a, s.f. [m.**] Slaughter, 
orna, see eòrna. 
wrnaich, v.a. Adorn. 
ornail,** s.f. Ornament. 
each, æ. Ornamental. 
ornail,** s.f. Upper part of a door-case. 
Ornaileis, s.f. Tissue. , 
oruais, $f. Nauseousness, qualm, 
orp.§ s.m. Orpine, house-leek— 
selum telephium. 
Orr, s. see orra. 
orra, prep. pron. (air+iad) On 
them, upon them. 2 Owed bv 
them. 3 Wrong with them. 4** 
In their possession. Cuir o. e, 
put it on them ; cha'n 'eil ni 
agam orra,th^y owe m» nothing; 
cha’n "eil sgillinn o., they have 
aot one penny in their possess- 
ion ; bheir mise orra a dhean- 
aia, Z will make them do it; 
ciod a th’ orra ? what ts wrong 
with them! 2 how much do they 
. owe ? 3 how are they dressed ? 
orra,* -chan, St Amulet, enchantment, charm, 
incantation, O.-an-donais, an amulet to send 
on» to themischies ; orra-bhalbh, on» to pre- 
vent one’s agent muking à defence in court ; 0.- 
chomais, on to deprive a man of his virility, 
especially on the marriaye-night ; o.-ghràidh, 
one to prevoke unlawful love; o -sheamlich- 
nis, on» to make one cow allow another's calf 
to suck her, chnir thu ano.-sheamlachais orm, 
vou have duped me—hence imposture of any 
iud ; o. na h-avine,an am lot 'o drown a foe; 
o. an donais, one to send one’s foe to the mis- 
chief. see also or. 
órracudan, Ain. -an, see aonraoh lan. 
orradh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Shift. 2łł Ex- 
ertion, endeavour. 3** Superstitious charm, 
Leagh an cridhe "am chlivbh le cuid orrach- 
an, my heart melted within me through her 
spells ; tha mi air m’ o. an dràsd, Z am be- 
witched at present, 
-——, prep. pron. see orra. 
orrai lheachd,** at, Superstitious ceremouies, 
charms, enchaniments. 


2 Gold 


Abounding in, or 


— 








560. Orp. 


= 


= ER G Ire N En a uu 
d I-E NIE rh T A Jj 
ITERNET ARCHIV 


2 ifaviug golden shields, 
shielded people. 
or-sheud, -a, -an, s.m. Jewel of gold. 
ort, prep. pron. (air+thu) On thee, upon thee. 
2 Owed by thee, 3 Wrong with thee. 'Dé a 
th’ aig’ ort ? how much do you owe him! ro 
mhath an airidh cach ort, others well deserve 
you—R. 66 ; cuir o. e, put it on thee; nach © 
cluinn mi o. P shall I not hear of thee! ciod 
tha 'cur ort ? what ails thee ? tha eort a dhean- 
amh, vou are bound to do it. ! 
fort, s. Killing, death. | 
orta,* a. see ordha. 3 
[ona see or (prayer.) 
or thaigh,* -ean, sm. Treasury. 
ort-sa, emphatic form of ort. 
dr-ubhal,§ ail, -bhlan, s.m. Orange—citrus ate 
ranthiwun. 
| ornin,? s. Beech —O" Reilly, see craobh fhaidh- 
| bhile. 2 Ash—-Bidble, see uinnsean. 
os, prep. Above, over. Os do cheann, superior — 
to thee (lit. above thy head) ; os (as). do sheas- — 
wunh.on tre spot (Lit. on thy standing)—Daim I. 
Ghobha. 
us, -a & ois, pl. -an, s.m. £ f. Elk, deer, stag. ` 
Leau thns’ an os bhallach, follow thou the — 
spotted 3'7. 
ó2, -&, -an, s.m. Mouth or outlet of a river, prov, 
& Bar or saudbank in à harbour. 
c3, v.def, see arsa. 
osa nh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. see fosadh. 
osag, -aig,-an, s.f. Blast, breeze, gust, wind, — 
O. a’ bhàis, the blast of death. = 
ach, -aiche, a. Breezy, squally, gusty. 
—an, n.pl, of osag. E 
os-àird, adv. Openly, publicly. 2 Loudly. | 
os-alluidh,(AF) sm, Eik, deer, stag. ; 
osan, ain, pl. -ain & -an, s.in. Hose, stocking, — 
the leg of trousers, 2 (DMy) Headless stock- ` 
ing. | 
fend $ -aiche, a. Wearing hose, of hose. Gu ` 
brògach, o., having shoes and stockings on. 
Se 4 ^ pg xi 
osanaiche, -an, 59. Hosier. E 
osann, -ainn, s.m. Deep sigh or sob. [In Gaire ` 
loch, osna—DU.] MA : 
aich,* s.f. Continuous sighing or sobbing. | 
2 Heavy blasts or gusts of sind, ` WK 
osan preasach,** s.m. Very long plaited stock- | 
ing, once worn by the women in Breadalbane | 
when giier dress. E. 
osar, a, Younger. 
dues pes A Burden, pack. 2 Preferment. 
exaltation. : Ki 
——aiche,** s.m. Porter, carrier. L 
os barr, Besides, moreover, over and above. . — 
oscach, -aiche, a. Eminent, superior, excellent. 
oscar,** -air, s.m. Leap, bound, 2 Guest, tra 
veller. 3 Ruinous fall, 4 Champion. 5 Mo- 


Dream ò., @ golden- 


















4 à 
Lj LI 
i 





Griginal from 


» = E Ra Kal Vë bs E 


Lü i 
v ho A 


PTESVTANKEA ud s ALE ALR 
ik EN L b L - I L È _ Li I - i 
L VEHI d Ch a H Ch d P1 (3 | 


A 


oscar 
tion of the hands in swimming. 


oscarach, -aiche, o Bold, intr pid, encrgatic. ` 
4*#ibjsree. 5, 


2 Renowned, famous, 3 Loud. 


Masculine, axa female.  6* ludelicate. 7**! 
Emphatical. 
Ooscarachd,  s.f.'n?. Boldness, intrepidity. 2 


4 Fierceness. — 5* 


Loudness, 3 Emphasis. 
67 Indelicacy. 


Masculineness, as in a female. 
7** Energy. 

oscaradh, -aidh, see oscarach, 

Hehe i \ see oseanrach. 

—chd, see oscarachd, 

oscarra, see oscarach. 

oscarra-lann,** -iainn, s.m. Hospital, 

os ceann, adv. Over, above. 

os-cheumachadh,** -aidh, s.m, Superiority, pre- 
eminence. excelling. 

os-cheumnaich, v.a. Excel, exceed, 

os-chrabhach,** æ. Superstitious. 2 Hypocriti- 





cal, 

os-chrabhadh,** -aidh, $.m. Superstition, 2 
Hypocrisy. 

OS cionn, see os ceann, 

fos-crabhacdh, -aidh, s.m. Superstition. 

esd, see òsda. 

òsda, -n, (taigh-òsda) s. m. Inn, ale-house. 2 
(DU)Right to sell excisable liquors. A’ bhean- 
òsda, the “ lady ” of the inn. 

ósla,tt a. Pertaining to an inn. 

qd -ean, s.m. Innkeeper, host. 
òsd. 


also fear- 


eachd, s.f.ind. Office or occupation of an 

innkeeper. 

sdadh, see osda. 

osdag, -aig, -an, s.f. Hostess, female innkeeper. 

os l-fhear, see òsdair, 

osd-thaigh, see taigh-òsda. 

tosgail, see fosgail. 

te, see fosgailte. 

osgalan, see fosgalan, 

ósgan,-ain, s.m. see othaisgean, 

osgarach,** a. Frail. 2 Brittle. 

osgarra,** a. Audible, distinct. 2 Emphatic. 3 

see oscarach. 

chd,** $.f. Audibleness, 
3 Emphasis. 

osgriobhan,** s.m. see os-sgriobhadh. 

os iosal, Softly, privately, quietly, underhand, 
secretly, covertly. 

oslabhairt, s.f.ind. Hyperbole. 

 osmafg, -aig, $.f. Sigh, sob, see ospag. 

ach,** a. Sighing, sobbing. z Panting. 

see ospagach. 

ail,** s. f. Sigh, sighing. 2 Anhelation, 

panting. see ospagail. 

sna, -ai, s.f. Sigh, sob, groan. 2 Breeze,blast. 

osnach, -aiche, a. Sighing, groaning. 2 Blus- 

tering, as wind. 3 Blubbering, as a person. 4 
Tioubled. 

4 , -aich, s.f. Carrion. 2 (MS) Blore, vio- 

lent gust of wind. 

' P. -e, @ Sighing, groaning. 2 Troubled, 
sad. 

osnadh, -aidh, -ailhean, s.m. Sigh,sob. 2 Blast, 
breeze. 3**Hair of the head. 4**Groan. 

- osnaich, -e, -ean, $.f. Sighing, act of sighing or 
groaning, continued sobbing or blubbering. 2 
pl. Sighs, groans. 3 pl. Blasts of wind. 

osnaich, pr, pt. ag osnachadh, v.a. Sigh, moan. 
osnaichean, n.pl. of osnaich, 

=~ osnaigh, for osnaidh, n.pl. of osnadh, 

os n-iosal, see os ìosal. 
_osp,* v. see ospag. 

"Xospag, -aig, -an, S.E Sigh, sob, gasp. quick deep 
sob, 2 Pang,throe. Ospagan a’ bhiis, the 
pangs of death ; an o. dheireannach, the last 








2 Augustness. 














[i 


NTERNET ARCHIVE 


713 


pabadh 


gasp. 

———, v.a. Gasp, sob quickly. 

———ach, -aiche,a@. Sighing, sobbing. 2 Deg, 
terica!, pron» to sob, 

—  —Aich, -e, 8.f. see ospagail. 

— — —ail. -e, s.f. Signing, act of sighing or sob- 
bing. 2 Apt to sigh or sob, 

ospairu, see ospaz. 2**sirugzle, 

— —— ich, see ospagail & osnaich. 

tos-sgriovhadh, -aidh, AL Dean, sm. Epigram. 
2 Superscription. 

fosrau, -ain, s.m. Peace. 

òsta, see òsda, 

òstag, see òsdag. 

òstair, see òsdair. 

ostal, -ail, see abstol. 

osunn, -uinn, -an, 8.f. see osnadh, osann & osag, 

otar, ** -air, s.m. Labour. 

oth,* s.m. Water, large body of water. 

othag,tt -aig Au, s.f. AMatus. 

othail, -e, -ean, s.f. Hurry. 2 Confusion, hub- 
bub, tumult. 3 Delight. 

othainn,* s.f. River, see abhainn. (* says o. is 
used to denote the largest kind of rivers, and 
abhainn a secondary river.] 

othaisg, -e, -ean, s. f. Sheep,one-year-old ewe, 
dry ewe, ewe teg. 2** in derision, Bashful 
person, simpleton, 3* Soft, lubberly person. 

each,** a. Like a sheep or hog, abound- 
ing in hogs. 2 Bashful, sheepish. 
ealachd,** s. f. Sheepishness, foolish- 

ness. 

————-eijl,** a. Sheepish, silly. 

othan, -ain, s.m. see omhan. 

———ach, -aiche, @ see omhanach. 

othar, -air,-an, s.m. Abscess, ulcer, intumes- 


cence. 2 Aiiment. 
tothar, -air, -an, s.m. Wages, reward. 2 La- 
bour. 


f——-,-aire, a. Sick. 2 Wounded, mutilated. 
3 Maimed. 4 Weak. 

-——ach, -aiche, o, Ulcerous. 2 Wounded, 

othasg, see othaisg. 

othraich,(MS) v.a. Exulcerate. 

fothras, -ais, -an, s.m. Disease, disorder, ail- 
ment. 2 Ulcer. 3 Wound. 

fothrasach, -aiche, a. Sick, diseased. 2 Wound- 
ed. 3 see otnarach., 

—— — — — ** aich, s.in. Hospital, infirmary. 

dtrach, -aich, -aichean, s.m. Dunghill. 2 Dirt, 
filth, dung. 3 Drabbish, very fat female— 
Islay. 4 Term of contempt. |otrach in Gair- 

- loch, el : 1 

— — — ail, -e, a. Filthy, dirty, fcetid. 2 Drabbish. 
3r Full of dunghills. 

òtraich, g^n.sing. of otrach, 

— ———ibh, dat. pl. of otrach. 





P D 


P, the 14th. letter of the Gaelic alphabet’ now 
in use, called beith bhog (i.e. sofs b.) It 
sounds like p in English, and when aspirated, 
that is, when immediately followed by h, it 
sounds ike fin fool, or ph in pharmacy. 

pa, s.m.in/?. &int, Papa. 

pab, -aib, -an, s.m. Shag, rough woolly hair. 2 
Refuse of flax, oakum. 2 see babag. 

pab, v.a. Become shaggy. 2 Become matted or 
twisted together. 3tfBuffet. 

pabach, -aiche, a. Shaggy. 2 Full of the refusa 
of flux. 3 Nasty. 4 see babagach. 

pabadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Shaggingss, state 
of becoming shaggy. 2 VE EL, 


d pabadh 7M 


tangled or twisted together. 3 Overgrowth, 
luxuriance, as of grass. AT Butietti.g. A’ 
—, pr.pt. of pab. 
"D ,* see babag. 
ach,* -aiche, a. see babagach, 
pabar,* air, s.m. Crew. 
pab-cheaun, -chinn, s.m. Shaggy head. 
i —ach,ti a. Shaggy-headed, 
pabhail,* s.f. see pail-chlach, 
pac, pr.pt.a’ pacadh, v.a. Pack up. 3 Get out 
of the house. 
pac,(CR) s.m. The sheep that a shepherd is al- 
lowed to keep asa part of his remuneration 
—W. of Ross-shire. 
paca, -noan, s.m, Pack, wallet, knapsack. 2 
Budget. 3 Mob. A phaca ! ye vile crew ! dh’ 
ìobair e am paca, he sacrificed the pack. 
p -chairtean, a pack of playing-cards. 
, p-cloimhe, @ pack of wool, 
p -chon, a pack of hounds. 
p.-mhéirleach, æ gang of thieves. 
p.-mosach, a vite crew. 
pacach, -aiche, a. Having packs. 
adh, -aidh, s.m. & pr. pt. of pacaich. 
pacaih. 
—— cearr,(AF) s. Turbot, halibut, flounder. 
pacadh, -aidh, s.m. Packing, act of packing. 
A’ p—, pr.pt. of pac. 
pacaich, v.a. see pac. V. 
pacaid, -e,-ean, s. f. Packet. 
3* Female tell-tale or tattler. P. 
a packet of letters. 
each, -eiche, 
packets. 
pscaig, v.d. see pac, v. 
pacaigeadh, see pacadh. | 
p'cainn,** pr. pt. a’ pacainn, v.d. Pack up. 2 
Load. 3 Heap up. 
, $.f. Packing. 2 Loading. 3 Heaping 
wp. A’ p—, pr.pt. of pacainn. 
pacair, -ean, $. m. Packer, one that packs. 2 
Pedlar, packman. 3 Churl. 
-—— —eachd, s.f.ind. Pedling, business of a ped- 
lar, hawking. 
pacharan-chapuill, $.m. Marsh trefoil, see pon- 
air-chapuill. i 
pacarras, -ais, s.m. Mass of confusion, 
pachd, A, -an & -&nnan, see pac. 
aich, see pacaich. 
——— air, see pacair, 
paclach, -aich, -aichean, s. m. Armful, packed 
burden, the fill of both arms of hay, straw,&c. 
pacraidhe,** s.f. Baggage, luggage. 
padhach, -aiche, a. Thirsty. 
padhadh, -aidh, s.m. Thirst. Tha p. orm, 7 am 
thirsty ; am bheil p. ort ? are you thirsty ? 
p^dbal, -ail, s.m. Ewer, 2 Pail. 
pag, -àig, -an, s.f. see pog—Rob Donn. 
pàzach, -aiche, a. see pogach. 
pàganach, -aiche, a. Heathen, pagan. 
Gentile. 








see 





2 Packet-boat. 
litrichean, 


a. Of, or connected with, 








— 





Qe 


, -aich, s.m. Heathen, pagan. 
—d, s. f. ind. Heathenism, paganism. 
2**Gentilism. 
paganta, a. Heathenish. 
— chd, see pàganachd. 
paghadh, see padhadh. 
* 4paghuilleun, see pailliunn. 
paibhil,**s, Flooring. 
paid,* see paidir. 
paideag,** -eig, s.f. Torch, made of tallow 
lapped upon linen. 
paideal(AHF)s. Peacock. 








paidearan, s.m. Clustering body, as of berries 


or nuts, garlands. '*'Na paidearan lionmhor, 


cüirneanach, gu brìoghmhor, sùghmhor, sò- 


lasach, in numerous clusters, dewy, substan- 


E | ` a i 

ILL IG L 
L "Fe pm fen, 8. ee moms = IJ 
d 1 n i 1 kr 
V I-H nhNITPT Ln | Li 
= i = tai i y 


pailliunach 


tial, juicy. soothing. 

paideirean, sse paidirean. 

piiigheal, see paideal. 

pài ih, pr.pt. a’ pàidheadh, v.a. Pay. 2 Remus 
nerate. 3 Suffer for, atone, make amends, re- 
quire, Paidhidh tu sia fhathast, you shall 
suffer for that yet. 

pàidh, -ean, s.m. Same meanings as pàidheadh. 

pàidheadh, -idh, em, Pay, payment. 2 Pay- 
ing, act of paying wages. 3 Remuneratioa, 
requital. 

pàidhear, Ar, -irean, s.m. Payer, sufferer, 

paidhir,** v.a. Pair, couple. 

paidhir, -dhreach, -dhrichean, s.f. Pair, couple, 
brace. 

paidh-mhaighstir,** s.m. Paymaster. 

————————eaAchd, s.f. Paymastership, 

paidhneachadh,** -aidh, s.m. Punishing, fi iing, 

unishment, fine. 2 Bail, bailing, security. 3 

nsurance A’ p—. pr.pt. of paiihnicn. 

pàilhneachas, -ais, sm. Penalty. 2 Bail, se- 
curity, pledge. 3 Insurance, Ann am p 
fichead punnd Sasunuach, under the penalty 
of £20. 

painhnich, pr. pt. ai paidhneachadh,v.a. Punish, 
dem A Bail. 3 Insure. ED E ^ 

pàilhnichte, st pt. of pàidhnich. Punishe 
fined, ? Bailed. 3 Eo usd. a 

paidhreach, gen, sing. of paidhir. 

———-—aÌh, -aidh, s.m. Pairing, act ot pair- 
ing or coupling. A’ p—, pr. pt. of paidhrich. 

paidhrich, pr.pt. a paidhreachadh, v.a. Pair, 
couple, as birds, &c. 

——ean, pl. of paidhir. 

past pt. Paired. fed. 

paidhte, past pt. Paid. 2 Remunerated, reyuit- 

paidir, -e, -drichean, s.f. The Lord's prayer. 2 
Rosary, string of beads used by Roman Cath- 
olics. Tha tuilleadh 's a ph. age, he knows 
more than his beads. 

paidirean, -in, -inean, s.m. String of beads, ros« 
ary, necklace, 2 Bracelet. 3 Chaplet. 4 
Garlana of flowers. 5 Children’s naine for a 
string or ‘‘ sop "of daisy-heads. 6 Cluster, 7 
Dangling bunch. 8 (VC) Daisy. 9 (AH)Corn- 
marigold— A rgyll. 

paidireanach, -aiche, o Wearing a rosary or 
necklace. 2 Dangling in clusters. 3 Full of 
beads, 

paidreag, -eig, -an, s.f. Patch, clout. 

paidrean, see paidirean, 

paidrich,* v.a. String together. 

paidrichean, pl. of paidir, 

pàigh, see pàidh. 

pàigheadh,, see pàidheadh., 

pàighte, see paidhte. 

pàighteach, see pàiteach, 

pàighteachd, see pàiteachd, 

pail, see pabhail. 

pail-chlach, -chloiche, -chlachan, s. f. Stone» 
pavement, causeway. 2**Paving-stone. 

tpailin, -ean, s.m. Shroud, winding-sheet, 

pailios,* s.f. Gaelic spelling of palace. 

pailleart, -irt, -eartan, s.m. Box on the ear, 2 
Blow on the head. 3** Slap with the palm of 
the hand. 4* In Irish, a tune or air on the 
bagpipes. 

pailleartach, -aiche, a. Apt to strike with the 
hand, striking with the hand, ready to strike 
with the hand. 

paitda ene v.a. Slap with the palm of the 
hand. 

pàilliun, -iuin, -an s.m. Tent, tabernacle, pavil- 
jon. 2 Dwelling. 3 Booth, hut. 4**Palace. 
Dèanamaid tri pàilliunan, det us make three 
tabernacles. 

pàiliunach, -aicke, a. Abounding in tents or 





— — ——te, 


| 


I 
| 
b 
| 


K painnseachan,(MS) s.m. 


pailliunach 


tabernacles. 

pailm, -e, -ean s.f. Palm-tree (craobh -phailm.) 

puim-éhnuimh, s f Palmer-worm. 

pailmeach, -eiche, €. Paimy. 

pailm-sgath, -&ith, -an, ¢ Gourd. 

pailt, -e, a. Plentiful, abundant, full, 2 Capa- 

cious. 4 Copious. 4 Numerous, abounding. 
Tür p. le céill, a mind abounding in know- 
ledge ; beanna'ch sinn gu pailt, bless v8 avun- 
datly , tha e pailt cao ard rium-sa, he is fully 
as tall as I am. 

pailteachd, see pailteas, 

pailteas, -eis, sm. Plenty, enough, abundance, 

amplitude, Tha'm p. agam, L have enough, 
làn ph., quite enough. 

pailteasach, -aiche, o Plenteous. 

paimhleid,** s.f. Gaelic spelling of pamphlet. 

paimhlei liche, s.m. Pa'uphleteer, 

foain, s.f. Bread, cake, 

paind,* see d'en 

paindeaz,* s.f. Pebble. 

paindeal, .il, -an, s.m. Panther. 

pain lealach, -aich, s.m. Person laced up like a 

dandy. 2 Article of :lress too tight. 
pàineachadh, see pàidhneacha lh. 
paineachas, -ais, s.m. sea pai .üneachas, 
paineal, see painneal. 

pàinich,* v.g. see pàidhnich. 

m" te, see paidhnichte, 

| p*inneal, -il, sm. Pan:l, pieces of wood. 

painnse, -achan, s.f. Paunch, 2*, ripe, 

l'ripe, 

. painnsean,(M3) sm. Tripe. 
painnith ,** æ. Strong, furious, 

. pa nuteal,** eil, s.m. Snare, trap. gin, 9/DM:) 
Snare for catching cats, &c., form -1by a cord 
made fastjat one end to some fixed object 
while the other end terminates ta a running 
noose which is adjusted at the aperture 
through which th? animal to be caught 1s ex- 
pected to pass. * Panther. 
aluntear,-ir, pl. -an & -irean, s.m. Gin, snare. 
2**Panther. 

 paiantearach, -aiche, o see painntireach. 
painntearachd, see paiuntireachd. 
painntin,** s.f. Patten. 
painntir, see painntear, 
painatireach, -eiche, a. 
of snares. 
painntireach, -ich, 
person, beguiler. 
painntireachd, s.f. Ensnaring, entanglement. 
painntireadh, -idh, see painutreadh. 
painntirich, see painntrich. 
paiuntirichte, see painntrichte, 





Wily, ensnaring, full 


8, m. Ensnarer, insidious 
painntreadh, -eidh, s.m. Ensnaring, act of en- 
snariug, inveigling. A’ p—, pr. pt. of painn- 
trich. 
. painntrich, v.a. Ensnare, inveigle, trap, beguile. 
paiuntrichte, past pt. of painntrich. Ensnared, 
entangled, inveizled. 
painte,** s.f. Lace. 2 String to lace clothes. 
(Eng. point.] 
paintidh,( DM K) s.f. The clay of!which crockery 
is manufactured 2 Fragments of broken pot- 
tery —Caithness. 
paintir, s. see paiuntear. 
paipeau ban,tt s.m. White garden poppy—pa- 
paver album sativum. 
— paipean dubh} s.m. Black poppy—papever ni- 
gru sativum, 


T 


_ paipean ruadh,} s.m. Common red poppy, see 


b meilbheag. 


pàipear, -eir, -ean, $, m. Paper, a paper. 


9* 


715 
EEN, 


EE EE EE EE EE EE —M d 


paisd 
p -gias, brown paper, grey paper. 
p.-naidheachd, a newspaper. 
p.-Sgriobhaidh, writing-paper.. 
p.-sügharin, blotting-paper. 
pàipearach, -eiche, a. Paper, papere'. 
paipearachadh, -aidh, s.m, Paperin ;,^ct of coy. 
ering with paper, A’ p—, pr.pt. of paipearaich. 
paipearachd,tf s.f. Papering. 
paipearachd, s.f. Stationery. 
paipearaiche, s.m. Stationer.] 
paipearaich, pr. pt. a’ pàipearachadh, o e 
Paper, cover with paper. 
pupin, -ean, s.m. Poppy, see meilbheag. 
paire, v. see pàircich. 
pane -e, -ean, s.f. Park, enclosure, enclosed 
á 


pairceach, -eiche, @ Abounding in parks. 2 
Enclosed, asa park. 

pairceachadh, -aidh, s.m. Enclosing round, act 
of enclosing, making into a park, 2 Confining, 
act of confiniag in a park. 3** Forming into 
parks. A’ p—, pr.pt. of pàircich. 

paircich, pr.pt. a’ pàirceachadh, v. a. Enclose 
with a wall. 2 Park, form into parks. 3 Con- 
fine in @ park, 

paircichte, past pt. of paircich. Enclosed, form- 
ed into parks. 2 Confined ina park. 3 Wall- 
ed round, 

pairilis, s.f.ind. Palsy, paralysis. 

pirinn, -ean,** s.m. Paring of moss-turf, 

pairisleach, -ciche, «. Palsied. 

pairseil, (M3) s.f. Parsley. 

pàirt, -e, -ean, 3.f. Part, share, portion. 2 Com- 
nection, interest. 3 Relation, kin ired, reia- 
tion:h'p. 4**Confederacy. P. d eth, some of 
it, girbh ea ph., he took his part; cha bhi 
cull no p. agam dheth, 1 will have no connect- 
ton wiik it whatever, Pairt, with che possess- 
ive pronouns, corresponds in Ar-an to Eng 
lish mine, ours, &c., e.g. am bheil do làmhan- 
81 tioram ? tha mo phairt-sa fliuch, are your 
hanis dry ? mine are wet. 

pAirt-lhathach, -aiche, a, Parti-coloured. 

pàirteach, -eiche, &. Sharing, huving'a share. 
2 Communicating. 3 Generous, liberal. 4 
Divided into parts or shares. 5 Ready to 
share. 6{} Related. 

pàirteach, s. see pairtiche. 

pàirteachadh, -aidh, a am. Partnership. 2 Shar- 
ing, actof shariaz, dividing, act of dividing. 
3 Conimunication, act of communicating. A’ 
p—, pr.pt. of pairtich. 

pairteachail, -e, a. Divisible. 2 Sharing, ready 
to share, communicating, porbionabie. 

ee -à1S, S.M. Participatiou, partner- 
ship. 

pairteachd, s.f.ind, Bountifulness. 

pairteag, Gaelic spelling of partridge, 

pàirtean, pl. of pairt. 2 vulgarly, Abilities, 
powers, 

pàirtear,** -eir, -an, s.m. Sharer, partner, one 
who possesses or receives a part. 2  Partici- 
ple in grammar. 

pàirteil, -e, a. Favouring, kind. 3** Partial, 
3ttrParticipating. Iriosal p., humble and kind, 

pairt-fhear, -fhir, s.m. see pàirtear, 

pàirtich, v.a. Share, divide. 2 Communicate, 
impart, bestow. 2 Partake. 

pairtiche, -an, s. m. Partner. 2 Abettor. 3 
Distributer, sharer. 4 Accomplice. 5 Par- 
taker. 6 Associate. 

pairtidh, -ean, s. Gaelic spelling of party. 

pais, s. f. Slap, blow with the open üaud. 
Box on the ear—sar-Obair, 


2 


Advertisement. [McL & D., t, tt, and t+ give | tpais, -e, s.f. Passion, sufferin r. 


p.-craicinn, parchment. 
„donn, brown paper. 


Digitized by 


K ITTTEPEIEFEET A m a UJ 
rt ka ei i — EN MI m. i 
i Au DNK. T 


[ rà) peir. | pàisd, -e, -ean, 


s. m. & f. |in. in Radenoch} : 
Child, infant, babe. 2 Ia W. CH Roxs-shire 
ax 4 


pàisd 


this word is restricted to a femal» chi d, al- 
though the term '' pàisd nighinn" may be 
heard there—(CR) 

pàisdeachas, (MS) -ais, s.m. Boyhood, boyi:m. 

paisdealachd, s.f.ind. Childishness, puerility, 
babyism. | 

pàisdean, n.pl. of pàisd. i 

pàisdean, -in, -au, s.m., dim. of pàisd. 

pàisdeanach,it a, Childi:h. i 

pàisdeil, -e, a, Childish, puerile, babyish. 

paisean, -ein, -ean, s. m., Fainting fit, swoon. 
Cuiridh mi p. ort, I will knock you senseless ; 
p. bàis, a dea 1 faint. j 

paiseanach, -aiche, @ Swooning, subject to 
swoons or fainting fits. 

paiseanadh, see paisean. 

paisein, see paisean. 

paisg,-e, pl. -eaù & -eachan, s.f. Web or par- 
cel of cloth. 2 Anything folded up. 3 Fag- 
got. 4 Bunch, as of keys. P. iuchra'chean, a 
bunch of keys ; p. shlat, a faggot of twiys. 

. also pasg, 

fpaisg,** s.f. Severe cold. 

pai:z, v.a. Wrap, involve, fold in. 2 Wrap up, 
fold, roll together. 3 Imyly. 4** Swathe, 
swaddle, shroud. 5** Benumb with cold, 6 
Dismount anything. P. do shlat, take down 
and tie up your fishing ro! ; p. do ghunna, dis- 
mount your gun; ph. sii fóin, she wrapped 
herself; p. an t-aodach, fold up the cloth. 

paisgeach, -eiche, a. Of, or belonging to, par- 
ceis, as of folded cloth. 

paisgean,** -ein, s.m. Bundle, pack. 2 SinJon, 
wrapper, 

p^iszearra,** s.f. Midwife. 

paisgte, past pt. of paisg. 
swathed. 2 Folded. 
shrouded, swaddled. 

pàist, see pàisd. 

————ean, see pàisdean. 

pait, -e, pl. -ean & -eachan, see poit. 

pait, -e,-ean, s.f. Hump, lump, swelling. 2 
Thump. 3 Smart blow on the head. 5 (CR) 


Infant. 


Wrapped, wrapt up, 
3 Rolled together, 


Stepping-stones— W., of Ross-shire. 4 Ford. 
5 Protuberauce. 6,AF) Hare, 7(AF) Young 
of any animal. 

pàiteach, -eiche, o Thirsty. 2 Parched, 
droughty. 


paiteach, -eiche, o Humpy, hunchy, having a 
hump or bunch. 2 humorously, Phrenologi- 
cal. 3 Having protuberances. 

paiteachd, s.f.ind. Thirstiness, 

paiteag, eig, -an, s.f. Butter. 2 Small lump 
of butter. 3 Periwinkle (shell-fish.) 4 (AF) 
see pail 6 & 7. 

paitean, -ein, s.m. Gaelic spelling of patten. 

paitir,* -ean, s.m. humorously Phrenologist. 

eachd,* s.f.ind. Phrenology. 2 Thumping. 
paitrisg, s.f. Gaelic spelling of partridge. 
pàl,(DU) s.m, Old fish or one in poor condition. 
P. truisg, @ poor cod. 
pàlas, s. Gaelic spelling of 
palltag,** ag, s.f. Thump, 
palmadair, see falmadair. 
palmair, -ean, s.m. Rudder. 
pànair, see pònair. 
panaireach, see pónaireach. 
panna, Gaelic spelling of pan. 
pannag,** -aig, see bannag & bonnag. 
pannagan,** -ain, s.m. Pancake. 

pannal, see bannal. 

pənnan, see bannal. 

pantair, see pantraidh. 

pantraidh, Gaelic spelling of pantry. 

paoic, (CR) s.f. Piece, lump, as of butter, 
aoiteag, see boiteag. 

Papa, -n & -chan, s.m. Pope. 





iow. 


2 see falmadair. 


716 


partanachd 


papach, -aiche, a. Pontifical. 

BE £.f.ind. Popedom, papacy, papal dig- 
ni AN, 1 

pàpanach, -aiche, o Popish. | 

, "aMich, s.m. Papist, Roman Catholi 

Ran ph., a female Roman Catholic. 

as, -a3i3, s.m. Popery. 2 Popedom. 

— ———4Al, AË, Popery. 2 Popedom. 

pavanas, -ais, 3.m. see papanachas. 

pàpar, Ladenoch, Glenurquhart, de, for pAipzar, 

parabal, -ail, s.m. Gaelic spelling of paruvle, 

paracait,** art Paroquct. 2 Parrot. 

paracas, -ais, s.m. Rhapsoiy. 

paradh, -aidh, s.m. Pushing, act of pushing, 
2 Brandi:hing. 

Paraidh, (variation of Para, Pa rick, often er- 
roneously used for Peter) s. Storm;j-pevrel. 
—Lewis. | So called from its being aiways on 
the water, and the fact that St. Peter walk- 
ed on the water. also Peadaireach. 

paralais, see pairilis. 

paraius,** -uis, s.m. Parlour, room to entertain, 

para-nanu-ceare, s. Kite, gled. 

pàrant, em Parent. 
para-riabnaeh, Y s. Money-buzzard, see clamhe 
an riabhaeh. 

para-riabhach-nan-ceare,** s.m. Kite, gled. 

paras,** -ais, see parras. | 

pardag, -aig, -an, s.f. Pannier, hamper used ia 
mouutaiuous places for carrying things on 
both sides of horses or mules. 

parladh,** s.m. Parley. 

Pàrlamaid, e, -ean, s.7 Parliament. 

each, -eiche, a. Parliamentary. 

Tparn,** s.m. Whale. 

parr, see parra. 2 see para-riabhach. 

parra,(AF)s. Jay. 2 Woodpecker. 3 Jackdaw. 

parracait, s.f. see paracait. 

parrachan, s.m. Jackdaw. 

pirraist, -cau, &m. Gaelic spelling of parish, 

—acth, -viche, @ Parochial. 

—eah, -ich, s.m.  Parishioner. d 

Pàrras, -ais, 6m. Paradise, h avei. A chuid 
de Pn. dha! may he be en'oying his shure of 
Paradise !—a common terminacion to obiiuary 
not.ces. 

parrasail,** a, Elysian, 

partach, -aiche, @ see pàirteach. 

partan, -ain, -an, 8.m. Small etible sea-crab of 
a black colour ana 30r 4 in. long and 2 or 3 
in. broad. 2(CR) Crab smailer than erübag, 
with a dark shell reddish underneath and no 
used for food —W. of Ross-shire. 3(AF) Crab- 
louse. 4 The sign Cancer (99 ) in the zodiac. 
'S fnéarr am p.-buathal na bhi gun faear- 
taighe, better the unnatural erab than to be 
without a husband—a sarcastic phrase used 
when a woman consents to marry a diminue 
tive min—the partan always moves north. 
wise, or against the sun's course, [But pan 
tan-tuathal is applied to the hermit-crab in 
some parts, whicn would suggest a rich wife 
and a husband who was poor, and who, like 
the hermit-crab, occupies a house which is ` 
another’s,] N.G.P. explains the saying as fole 
lows :two women lived together, one of whom 
stole the other's meal out of her bag, the 
sufferer then put a live lobster (crab) in her 
bag, and the next time the thief put her hand 
in she was caught; she cried out ‘‘ tha ‘n 

















Donas 'nad phoca-sa," (the devil ’s in your ` 


bag,) ' tha,” said the other, ** 'nuair ’tha 

thus’ ann,” (yes, when you are there.) 
partanach, -aiche, a Abounding in, or like, © 

crabs or crab-lice. 9**Greedy, rapacious, ` 
—d,** s.f.ind. Rapaciousness, extreme 
greed, 





partan-tuathal 


partan-tuathal,(DC) Hermit-crab, 
pascart, see bascaid. 
pasg,*” -aisg, 6. f. 
Swaddling-cloth. 
pasg. v, dat see pag. 
pasgach, -aiche,a Wrapping, fokhng up co- 
vering, swaddling, swai mug 
Pat Wrapper. 
pasgadh, -aidh, s. m. Wrapping, act of wrap- 
piug, covering, or folding up 2 Envelope. 3 
Swathing, swaddling, binding up. A’ p-, pr. 
pt of paisg, Beagan pasgaidh nan làmh, a 
dittle folding of the hands. 
pasgairt, see pasgart. 
gan, -ain,-an, s. m. Bundle 2 Wallet. 3 
Little group or flock. 4 Volume of a book. 
pasganach, -aiche, a. Ip bundles, z in little 
groups or flocks. 
pasgar, fut. pass. of pasg, 
pasgart, -airt, -an, s.m. Basket, pannier., 
pasmunn, -uinn, An, s.m. Expiring pang. 
pastaghadh,(AF) s. Diver (bird.) 
pat, (MS) v.a. Dethump. 
pata.(A F) s. see poit. 2** Leveret. 
pataidh,(CR) Anything big of its kind—Arran. 
patan, Ain. sm. see pail. 2**Leveret.. 8 Cloth 
tied round the clieeks as for tuothache—CR. 
patantachd,** sf Thickness 
pataran, s.m. Gaelic spelling ot pallern, 
path, s.m. see padhadh. 
path«ch, see pàiteach, 
pathadh, see padharth. 
Tvasnido,] '* Leporinus.” 
| patraigeadh, (DMC) s.m. Batter. 
patran,** -ain, am. Patron. 
peabar, -brach, -aichean, s./. d m. 
Spicery. 
peavarach, -aiche, a. Peppered. 
bar-utsze, see lus-an-fnosaar, 
bh-cheare,** -chire, -chearcan, see peucag. 
peabh-choileaeh, see peubh-cnoileacn, 
peabh-eun, see peubh-eun. 
peabrach,tt a. Peppery. 
rach, gen.sing. of peabar, 
adh, -aidh, s.m. Act of seasoning with 
pepper or spices. 21] State ot receiving or ac- 
quiring taste for spice, pepper, &c. 5 (DMC) 
ege irritating. A’ p—, pr.pt. of peab- 


Wrapper. 2 Covering. 3 
see paisg 





Pepper. 2 


raich. 
peabraich, v.d. Seasen with pepper or spice. 
i , pl. of peabar. 
peabraichte, past pt. of peabraich. Peppered. 
2 Spiced, 
peabh-eun, -eóin, £. m.& f. see peucag & peubh- 
choileach. A’ giùlan pbeubh-eun, carrying 
peafowl, 
peac, see peacadh, 
fpéac, ic, -ean, s.f. Any long, sharp, pointed 
thing. 2 Germofa el abt 3 see peuc, 
peacach, -aiche, a. Sinful. 
péacach, see peucach. 
peacach, -aich, s.m. Sinner. 
peacachadh, -aidh, s.m. Sinning, act of sinning, 
erring. 2 Transgression. A’ p—, pr. pt. of 
peacaich. 
peacadh, -aidh, -aidhean, &,m. Sin. Ris a’ ph., 
sinning. 
p.-bais, mortal stn. 
p.-beag, a peccaditlo, 
p.-collaidh, incest. 
p.-gine, origina. sin. 
p.-gniomha, actual sin. 
p--leanainn, habitual sin, 
p.-sola, a verial sin. 
p.-so-laghadh, æ venial sin. 
peacag, see peucag. 
peacaich, pyr.pt. a’ peacachadh, og, Sin, trans- 


717 


peanasachail 


gress, offend, e 

peacaidheachd, see peacaireachd, 

peacail, -e, a. see peacach. 

peacair, -ean, m Sinner, 

eacud, 8.f.ini. Sinfulness, 2tfSinning, 

peacalachd, see peacaireachd. 

peacarach,(AF) s.m. Noxious animal (sinner,) 

peachdaitheachd, see peacaireachd. 

pea-cheare, see peucag. 

pea-choileach, see peubh-choileach, 

pea-choileach, see peubh-choileach 

peadaireach,(AC) Ach, s.m. Stormy petrel 

pealag, -aig, -an, s.f. Pelican. 

pealaid, -e, -ean, s.f. see peallaid. 

pealarach,(AF) $8.7. Stormy petrel, 

peall, pill, pl. -an & pillean, a m. Hairy skin, 
hide. 2 Couch, pallet. 3 Veil, covering, ca- 
verlet, 4 Bunch of matted hair. 5 Mat. t6 
Horse. 7(MMcL) Tarpaulin— Levis. 

peall, v.a. Cover. 2 Pull asunder, pluck, tear 
in pieces. 3 Clot, mat, as wool 4 Teaze. 

peallach, -aiche, o Shaggy, having rough or 
matted hair. 2 Having couches or pallets. 3 
Matted. 4 Covered with mats.  5* Paltry, 
trifling. 6 Teazing. 7Slatternly. 8 Having 
ragged harness A shine pheallaich ! thou 
shaygy old age ! 

peallach,(AF) gan, Porpoise. 

pealladh, -aidh, s.m. Covering, act of covering. 
2 Pulling, act of pulling or tearing asunder, 
3 Clotting, matting. A’ p—, pr. pt. of peall. 
Tha 'ghruag air pealladh, his hair is matted, 


| peallay, -aig, -an, s.f.dim. of peall, Shaggy hide 


or skin, 2 Little bunch of hair. 3 Clout. 4 
Little couch or pallet. 5 Little covering. 6 
Trollop, ill-dressed or ragged woman. "ht 
Little mat or rug. 8 Hassock. 9 Umbrella. 
10 Coarse harness, primitive or ill-Kept har- 
ness, 11 Cart-harness, 12 Inferior wool— 
Skye. 13* Mat of straw. 14* Bass, 15* Sort 
of under pack-saddle. 16**Coarse blanket. 

peallagach, -eiche, o see peallach. Na toir 
droch mneas air loth ph., do not despise a shag- 
y filly. 

geland, -e, -ean, s.f. Sheep-skin stripped of its 
wool or hair, 2 Liitle ball, pellet. 3 Fillip. 
4” Paltry female, 

peallaideach, -eiche, o Dressed in skins or 
hides 2 Abounding in sheep-skins. 

peallan, tt -ain, s.m. l'ar-mop. 

peallastair, -ean, s.m. see peilistear. 2(DMC) 
Impertinent or cheeky fellow. 

pealliag, -aig, -an, 8&.f. Patched cloak. 2 Pall. 

pealtag,** -aig, s.f. Clod. 

pean, see peanu. 

peana, (DU) pl. peanachan, Gairloch form of 
peann, 

peanachas, -ais, -an, see peanas., 

fpeanaid, see peanas. 

peanaideach, see peanasach. 

peanaisd, -ean, see peanas. 

peanaisdeachadh, -aidh, s.m. & pr.pt. of peane 
aisdich, see peanasachadth. 

peanaisdich, v. see pean&saich. 

peanaiste, past pt. Punished. 

peanaisteachadh, (MS) s.m. Tantalism. 

peanaistich, (MS) v.a. Avenge. 

peanar, -air, see peannar. 

peanas, -ais, -an, s.m. Punishment. 2 Penance, 
chastisement, correction. 

peanasach, -aich, @ Punishing. 2 Penal. $8 
Prone to punish. 4 Annoying. 5 Vengeful. 
6 Of. or relating to, punishment. 

peanasachadh, -aidh, s. m. Punishing, act of 
punisning, punisüment. <A’ p—, pr. pt. of 
peanasaich. 

peanasach«il, -e, d. see peanasail. 


peanasaich 718 peasantachd 


peanasaich, pr.pt. à poanasachadh, v.a. Pun” | pearsalach,** a. Abounding in, or like, parsley, 
ish. 2 Torture. 3 *Annoy. 4 Avenge, 6**| 2 Of parsley. 
Chastise, correct, tpearsan, -ain see pearsa. 
peanasaicne, -an, s.m. Punisher, chastiser. 2| pearsannan, pl. of pearsa. 
FK xeeutioner. peasranta, -ainte, a Personal, personable, of 
Ppernasaichte, past pt. of peanasaich. Punish-| good appearance, haud .:ome. portly, 
ed, chastised, corrected.  pearsanta,* adv (gu p—)  Personaily. 
peanasail, -e, d. Actiona le. 2 Penal, punish- į pearsaptachd, s fund. Handsomeaess, portlie 
able, 8f} Infiictive.  4** Deserving punish-| ness. 2 Personality. 
ment. péarsantail, -e, æ. Personal, 
poanas-cuirp, s.m. Corporal punishment. pearsluibh,** s.f. Parsley. 
sanasda,** a. Penal. pears-eaglais, -an-, sm, Clergyman, 
peanas-eaglais, s.m. Ecclesiastical punishment. | peartog, see cearc-thomain 
peang, -aing, -an, $.f. Tenon in joinery. peas,** ëm. Purse, P. ghadaiche, a evtnvrre, 
peann, -à, «tan, sm, Pen. P. iaruinn, on iron | peasair, peasrach, peasraicheau, 3. f Pease, 
pen. pulse, Eitean peasrach. a grain of pease. 
peannagan, -ain,-an, s.m. Pen-case. 2** Pen- | peasair-a'-maaadai ih-ruridh, s.f. Bird's-foot tree 
ner. foil—lotus cornicula us. 
peannaid,** s.f. Pain. -an-arbhair,} 8,7. Hairy vetch, common 
peannair, -ean, 8m. Penman. 2 Good writer.| tare—ovicia hirsuia. 
3**Pen-case. 
peannaireachd, er Penmanship. 
peannar, Air, see peaunair. 











peann-ite, s.m. Quill-pen. 
n-leac, s.m. Slate-pencil. / ace Lü 

peaun-luaidhe, s.m. Lead-pencil. WZ 19 
peannsair,** s.m. Fencer. 2 Paar of pincers, = v 
punc -àil,-an, 8. m. Gaelic spelling of T Me 

pencil, 
peanntach,tf a. Of, or belonging to pens, SON Za 

: - 3 - — 
peauntair, v.a. Scribble, scrawl. Ve" 

eachd,* s. f.ind. Scribbling, scrawling 7 ANIMA 

peanntan, pl. of peann. Date ag 


p3apag, -aig, -an, sf. Squash, pompion, 

peapog,see peapag. 

pearla,** s.m. Gein, precious stone. 2 Gaelic 
spelling of pearl. 

pearlach,** a. Abounding in gems or pearls. 2 
2 Iake a pearl. 3 Plaited, corrugated. 

péariaich, v.a. Bedeck with pearls or gems, 2 
Plait, corrugate. 

pearluinn, -e, -ean, 8. f. Fine linen, mustin, 
cambric, gauze., 

pèarluinneach, each, a. Of, or abounding in, 
fine linen, muslin, cambric or gauze. 2 Like 
fine linen, &c. 3 Made of fine linen, &c. 

fpears, see pearsa, 3, 

pearsa, -chan & -nnan, $.7n. & f. Person, any 
one 2 Person, bodily shape or appearance. 
t3 Gaelic spelling of purse, Do ph. dheas, 
ghrinn, thine active elegant form ; mile p., a} 
thousand persons. 

pearsachadh, -aidh, s.m. Personification, act of 
personifying. A p—. pr.pt. of pearsaich. 

pearsachan, pl. of pearsa, 

pearsaich, v.a. Personify, represent. 

pearsail, -e, a. Personal. 





568, Peasair-bhuidhe. 6564. Peasair-naon-preas. 
,——-— -bhuidhe,$s.f. Yellow vetchling—iathyru& 
pratensis. ) 

-chapuill,§ s.f. Vetch, see fiatghal, 
peasair-each, $.f. Bush-vetch. 
peasair-fiadhain,§ s./. Vetch, see fiatghal. 
/peasair-gheal, s.f. White pease. 
peasair-luchag, s.f. Tufted vetch. . 
peasair-nam-preas,§ sf Bush vetch,—vicia 86» 
P. "DESDE. 9 

peasair-nan-each, see peasair-each, 

















d SL Y 565. Peasair-nan-luch. T ! 
d N UNE peasair-nan-luch,§ s.f. Tufted vetch—vicia crags 
^ o hye ca. 2 Lentil, chick-pease 

| S r peasair-radain, see peasair-nan-luch. 
MN peasair-tuilbh,$ st, Heath-pease, see cairmeal, 
a c» m peasan, -ain, pl. -an [& -ain**], s.m. Petulant or 
r [54 : impudent person, varlet. 2 Sorry little fellow. 

3**Imp. brat, puppy. 4**Purse. 

| VN ach, -aiche, a. Petulant, impudent, qe 
Y troublesome, 2 Sorry, mean,little, 3 Imp- 

ish, barefaced. Gu p., impudently. 
561. Pearsal, 562. Peasair-an-arbhair. achd, s. f. ind. Petulance, impudence, 

pearsal, ail, $8. m., Parsley—petroselinum sa- pertness, barefacedness, impishness. 


peasan-leannain,tf s m. Amatorculist, 


tivum. 
———ta,* see peasanach. 


pearsal mär, s.m. Smallage, wild celery, see 








lus-na-smalaig. tachd, see peasanachd. KS. 
ESCH 
Digitized | UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
NTERNET ARCHIVE URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


peasar 


peasar, see peasair. ^ 

peasg, peisg, -an, s.f. Gash, notch, kihe,cranny 
2 Chap on the skin, incision, bursting of the 
skin, as with cold. 3 tdg RN woe Oe 
asg, . pt. a peasgadh, «c.a. n oteh, 

gend dh, 2 cose gashed or notched. 
chink. 3 Chap, as the hands, burst. as tbe 
skin with cold, 4ff Irritate, the skim as with 
salt water. 

peasgach, -aiche, a. Gashed, ent ? Abounding 
in gashes or notches. 3 Chapped. burst. as 
the skin with cold. 4 Causing gushes or 
notches. 5 Causing the skin tv burst with 
cold. 

peas-ghadaiche, -ean, 8. m. 


purse. 
Peasgadh, -aidh, s.m. Gashing. cutting, act of 
2 State ot be-. 


gashing, cutting or notching. 

. coming gashed or notched. 3**5hght incision 
4 Bursting of the skin. A’ p—, pr pt of peasg. 

peasgta, a. Chapped. 

peasrach,* gen.sing. of peasair, 

——— —— ,tt a. Pertaining to pulse or pease 

peasraichean, pl. of peasair, Kinds of pease, 
fields of pease. 

peata, pl. -n & -chan, ëm, Pet, tame animal 2” 
Spoiled child. 

peatach,tt a. Petted. 

peatadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. see peata. 

peatag,(AF) s.f. Piover— Dean of Lismore. 

peata-odhar,( AF) s.m. Cormorant— Dean of Lis- 
more. i 

peatarnachd,* s.f.ind. Fondling. 

peata-ruadh,S| sm Puffin. 

peathair, -e, -ean, s.m. see peithear & pei:hir. 

peathar,* gen. sing. of piuthar. 

peathiachas, ais, s.m. Sisterhood, 

peathraiche, (a ph— !) voc.pl. of piuthar. 

——an, n.pl. of piuthar, 

peath-shaileach,(AF) s. Pea-ben, see peucag. 

pecoc, see peucag. 

peghinn, see peighinn. 

peic, -e, -eannan, s. m. Peck (measure of two 
gallons. 

péic,** et, Long tail. (see peuc.) 

peiceag, -eig, -an, s.f.dim. of peic, Little peck. 





Cha'n fhaigh sinn p. bracha thogail, we can- 


not brew a peck of malt. 

péiceallach,** a. Having a long tail, 

peicein, s.m. see peiceag. 

peich, v.a. Sniff with anger, 

peichil,** s.f. Sniffing with anger. 2 One Leen: 
tieth part of à dayoch—A H. see note under 
dabhach. 

peighinn, -e, -ean, ¢.f. Penny Scots, one twelfth 
of a penny sterling. 2* Denomination of lan.l, 
E to a cóta-bàn, groat-land. 3 Round bit, 
like a coin. Cha'n'eil p. agom, I have not a 
penny ; na h-uile p., every coin; 'ga ghearradh 
’na pheighinnean, cutting it into round bits ; 

,ruadh, a penny sterling. 
The following note is from D.C. 

The system of land measure which prevail- 
ed in the Western Isles and then took root in 
Argyllshire, was neither Pictish nor Irish, 
but Norse, The unit was the '* ounce.” land, 
i.e. the extent of land which paid tho rent of 
an ounce of silver, The word was borrowed 
by Gaelic, and appears as unnsa, The land 
term was unga (e.g. Unganab in North Uist 
and in Tiree,) It appears in old charters as, 
teroun), teiroung, &. This extent was divi- 
ded into 20 parts—somatimos into only 18— 
such parts being called peighinn ; hence many 
pLice-names (e.g. Pennyinore, Peigninnchorn- 
non, Soli In some places the pannylan l was 
Bubdisided. Qu Lochfyueside we meet with 


Digitizet Dy 


719 


Pick-pocket, cut.; 


2 The vessel used for this measure, ` 





| peilear A 
Lephinmore. Lephincorrach, (the big half pen- 
nyiand and the rough balf pennyland) ; also 
an Fheoirling, (the fartbingland.) A con- 
ventional use of the term pewjhinn is met with 
in Skye—the crofting township of Elgol is 
separated by a march dyke trow the deer-for- 
est , each crofter is responsible for the upke 
of a specified length of ine dyke, and it is call- 
ed the peighinn ot bis croft. similarly the 
part of the shore allotted to each croft for 
seaware is calle! the peighinn of that croft. 
The full tractional divisiou of land was carried 
out in Islay thus :— 


be on 
pS M e RS 
^4 ka = rd | 
pæ om e e KE > 
be, Be wéi, 
ees TH j Swe & lw 
fe EC nS 
Stockh = O west I 2 
EEGEN) 23 
ep a E- Ms — 
Reo H oC 50 5 
4" en, m 
hag gna vl CR 
e? 
e ES 
4 "c 
S 23 
Géi ES 
CLD 
n, - CN dE AT E R UA z = 
ba Ec Ale - Et TE "9 ota 
Om wo dw d 4 CG Ze 
MO o SN A ei “ao 
"i TT : avy 
i. fod d d wë Er a 
SZ 3 
"3 Ce 
= eHa 
Eë oe As e T -H 
os D o S GE 
4 E = D 
E SS ei - BU 
EC ` M ' eo et Dm 
pio e AE a (aO 10 
Wi d! og pio 
i l ss 
T. 
x FER 
= à! ccn. 
LAC. - ES A - ed do 
"m . > = 
n DUS v9 
? ARBA BIB 
-Mc oT Be EB a O Gë 
S65 6 Ne ve) Ke 5 
C) -4 ` D» 
d r e ae 
Vi vcbi & x3 
= d E 
"3 
H GË 
Sa totes 2 AgS 
4 no r 
N 2.8 
o e PI e = a E 
EOR S£a 
O 
ENSE Az 
vA Meo ei ri — 2 


peighinneach, eich, a. Full of pence, rich, 
peighinneach, -eiche, «. Spotted, dappled asa 
horse, pock-marked. : ^ 
peighinnieh,* v.a. Make round biis, as coins, 
peizhinn-rioghail,$-e-, sf. Pen- 
nvroyal—m’ntħa pulegium. X 
2 
R 
ve 
ke dw 


p»izidh, sf. Herpes, shiagles. 
ae 
"ad : 1$ 


paile(CR) s. Large stomach, 
as of a cow that has eaten 
its fil! -Arran, 
peileng,** -eiz, ef. see péilig. 
2 Felt. 3 Any coarse cloth. 
of fslb, Mi SHA 
pei eagach, -aiche, a. Given to SCH 
chattering, 565, Prighiun-riog’ ait. 
peilear, op, Gm Ball, bullet, 
peobelbnreach, thrunderdale, 


ach,"** o Coarse, as 
planu, cartvuck ; 2 place where bale are piled 





cloth. 2 Like felt 8 Male 


peilear 





up. 
p.-mullaich, balloon, in architecture. 
p.-tairnich, t^underbo't. 
p.-tairneanaica, @ thunderbolt, 
peileasach, -aiche, a. Frivolous, 2 Troublesome, 
peileastair, sm. Quoit. 2tfsimal. fiig stone.) 


see peilistear. 
elieid, -e, -ean, s.f. Cod, husk. 2 Bag. 3 
Mangled sheep-skin. 4 Blow, slap om the 
cheek. 5* see péilig. 

———each, -eiche, a. Covered with acod or 
husk, 2 Furnished with bags. 3 Like a bag. 

peileir, see pailear. 

———eaeh, -eiche, a. Abound ng in balls or 
bullets. 2 Like à ball or builet. 

peil-ghuin,** et, Pang, torment, 

—each, -eiche, a. ‘hat tormenteth or 
giveth pain. 

péilig, -e, -ean, 3. f. Porpoise, sea-hog. 

peiliocan,** -ain, s.m. Pelican. 

peilistear, -eir, -eirean, s.m. Small flat stone 
used in place of a quoit, 2 Game of quoits. 

peilleag,** s.f. Felt. 

peillic, -e, -ean, s.f. Hut or booth built of earth 
and branches and roofed with skins. 2 Felt. 
3 Any very thick or coarse cloth. 4 Cove ing 
made of skins or coarse cloth. 65*Pit, 6(CR) 
Basket of untanned hide. 

each, iche, a. Clumsy. 2 Thick, 
coarse. 3 Like felt. 4 Made of felt.. 

peilliehd, see peillic. 

peilp,** a Futility, gabble. 

—each ** a, Futile, 

——eanta,** a. Communicating, gabbling. 2 
Hufífi-h. 3 Insolent. 

péin, gen.sina. of pian. 

péin, -e, $.f. Pain, punishment, torment, (pian.) 

péin-dlighe, -an, s.m. Penal law. 

péinealtach,tt a. l'yrannical. 2 Painful. 

———— — ——l,tt s.f. Tyranny. 2 Pain. 

péineil,tt a. Painful. 

-- teachd,tt s.f. Tyranny. 

péingilteach, -eiche, &. Rigorous, bare. 
rannical. 








+ Insolence. 





2 Ty- 


d, s.f. Rigour. 2 Tyranny, cruelty. 

Tpeinn, -e, -ean, $.f. see beinn, 

peinneag,* s.f. Chip of stone for filling crevices 
in a wall. 

peinnt,* see peinnteag. 

RE -eig, -an, s.7.-Small pretty shell or 

ebble. 

ee -eil, -an, s.m. Snare. 
confinement. 3* Mare. 

ach, -aiche, a. Of, or pertaining to, 

snares, snaring. 2 Straitening, compressing, 

9 Penurious, 

ach, -aich, s.m. Slender, tightly-laced, 

dandified person. 2 strait article of dress, as 

coat, trousers, &c. 

-—achd,** s.f. Penuriousness. 

peinntealadh, -aidh, s.m Cooping, compressing, 
straitening, cramping. 

peinntealta, -eilte, a. Straitened, compressed, 
2 Punctual, precise, prov. 3 (MS) Stiff. 

peiutealtachd,(MS) s.f. Rigour. 

peinntealtaicn, (MS) v.4. Refine. 

peintear,(MS) san, Mouse-trap. 

peirceall, -ili & -cle, pl. -an & -clean, s.m. Jaw. 
2 The jaw-bone. 3 Lower part of the face. 4 
Corner, nook, angle. 5 Abdomen. 6* Lantern 
jaw, lean, large, lank jaw. 

ach, -aiche, a. Lanx-jawed, lean. 2 

Having large jaws. 

**Chapless. 5 Thin-faced. 6 Manlib5u'ar. 





2 Straitening, 














3 Angled, cornered. 





person. 


peircle, gen.sing. of peirceall, 


l 
II 
Ij 
[TI 
Les 
"HH 
"E 
II) 


720 M 
| pzirelench, -eiche, see peirc»allach. 





; peubh-enn 


peirelean, p’. of peirceall. 

péire, yen, & pl. of peur, 2 The buttocks. 

peireadh,** -ilh, s.m. Rage, fury, 

tpeireayal, - vil, s.m. see peirigill. 

peirealais, for pairilis paralysis) Distraction, 
bewillerment. A’ cheann a chur ga p. aig 
eilid = Be.nne-dorain, his head bewi dered 
ahh gb the hind of Ben Doran.—Donn. Ban, 
p. 97. 

péirean, s.p}. The buttocks. 2 pl, of peur. 

peireid,* s.7. Ferret. 

peirigill, -^ & -gie, pl. -ean & -glean, s f. Dam- 
ger, peril, 2 Urgent necessity, prov 3 Awk- 
ward prelicament. 4* Agonies of Jah, 5* 
Excruciating mental tortures or torm:nt. 

peirigle, SCH d pl. of Sa e, 

— — —adh, see peirigiik, 2 (DMC) Swoo 3 
(DMC) Severe fe À d v 

an, pl. of peirigill. 


peirigleach, a. Periculous, im an awkward pro- 


' dicament, 2 Perilous, dangerous, 

peiriglicn,* po, Torture, torment. 

péiris,] s. Testiculi, 

péirlin, s.m. see péarluinn. 

tpéirse, -an, s.f. Row, rank. 2 Perch in length, 

——acn, -eiche, a. Formed into ranks, well 
ordered, 2 Divided, into perches, as land. 

peirseal.** s. Smallage. 


peirsill,** s.f. Parsley. 





-mhór, s.f. Smallage. 


peirteag,** -eig, -an, s.f.. Partridge. 





dhearg-chasach,(AF) s.f. Red-legged 

partri ge. | 

peirtealach,** a. Pert, impudent. 

———-—d,** s. E ind. Pertness, impudence, 
effrontery. 2 Huffishness. 

peirteil,** a. Pert, impudent. 2 Huffish, 

peisd,** s. f. Plague. 2 Loss. 3 Aiiment. A 
Pest. 

péisd, see béist. 

pei«g, £. see peasg. 

pei«lear,* -ean, s.m. Trifling person. 

peisceal,** eil, s.m. Pestle. 

peit,** s.m. Musician. 

tpeiteach, -ich, s.m. Music. 

peiteadh,** -idh, s.m. Music. 

peiteag, -eig, an. $.f. Waistcoat, short jacket, 
2 Doublet. 3 Woollen shirt, 

ach, -aiche, o Wearing a jacket or waiste 

coat. 2 Of, or belonging to, a vest. 

- -mhuinicheallaca, s.f. Jacket. | 

peitean, -ein, -an, s.m. see peiteag. [Peitean is 
used in Gairloch.) 

— ———-àaeh, -aich, @. see peiteagach. 

peitearlach,** -aich, sm. The Old Law or Tes- 
tament, 2 Sacred history. 

peicearlaichte,** æ. Versed in sacred history. 

tpeith-bhog, s.f. Gaelic name of the letter P. 

peithireachd,* s.f. Running of messages, 

peithear,(MS) s.m. Parker, 

peithir, -ean, & m. Forester. 2 Gamekeeper, 
3 Hunter. 4 Message-boy. 5ilThunlderbolt. 

peitirich,( AC) s.pl. see peadaireach. 

peitseag, -eig, s.f. Peach—amydalus persica. 

—— ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in peaches. 2 
Likea peach. 3 Of a peach. | 








peodar, -air, s.m. see feodar. 2** in ridicule, 


Harum-scarum. 
peodarach, see feddarach. 
peodarair, s.m. see feddarair. 
peothair, see peithir. 


4| peubar, v. & s. Gaelic spelling of pepper, 





ach,** o Peppery. 


ach,*s.m. Lean, lank, or lantern-jawed | peubh-chearc, -chire, -an, $.f. see peucag 
p ubh-choileach, -ich, s.m. Peacock, 


| peubh-eun,** -eoin, s.m Pea-fowl. 


eee 





peuc, seo peucag. . j 1 
Peuc,** s. Long tail, 2 Any sbarp-pointed 
thinz. 3 Sprouting germ of any vegetable. 
po -aiche, a. Gaudy, showy. 2}tLong- 

tailed. 
peucag, -aig, -an, s.f. Peahen. 2 Peacock. 3 
Beautiful woman. | 
ach, -aiche, a. Beautiful, asa peacock. 2 
Abounding in pea-hens, | 
peucail,* e a, l'riin, neat, cleanly. 
peuc-enoileach, s m. see peubh-choileach, 
peuchdag, see peucag. 
-— ————àch, see peucagach. 
Gaelic spelling of pail. 
Pear, 2 





peula,* s.m. Milk-pail. 
peur, -éire & -a, pl, -an & -éirean, 8.7. 
Buttock—Skye 
—ach, -aiche,@ Full of pears. 2 Like a pear. 
peurd, v.a. First card in carding wool. 
peurda, -an, son Tuft of wool off the cards in 
the first carding 2 Roll of carded wool. 
KK -aig,-an, $./, Partridge. 2 see peur- 
a, 3. 
ach,tt a. Abounding in partridges. 
peuriach,** a, Corrugant,corrugated,wrinkled. 
peurladh,** -aidb, s.in- Corrugation, wrinkle, 
peuriaich,** v Corrugate 
peurlaz.(AF) s.j. Partridge. 
peur-lann, $.m. Perry. 
peurs, v F—t drawhngly. - 
peursa,(DMO) s.m. Signal pole. 
peurtag, T s; Partridge, see cearc-thomain. 
-dnearg-chasach, T see cearc-thomain 
dhearg-chasach. 
peurtanan,(CR) Strathspey for feursann. 
h For words beginning with ph, see under 
; | 





—— —— 





Phairiseach, -eiche, a. Pharisaical. 
— —— —, -ich, s.m. Pnarisee, 
— — — — ail, -e, a. see Phairiseach, a. 
Phairisneach, see Phairiseach. 
Puarasach,tt a. Aids podes 
iaid, s.f. see pioghaid. 
E see Acer TERN 
pian, péin, Lan, s.f. Pain, pang, torture, tor- 
ment, anguish,trouble,sorrow. 2 Punisument. 
[** gives piantaidh also for pl.] 
pian, »r,p'. x’ pianadh, v.a. Torment, torture, 
pain. 2 Distress, aunoy. 3 Punish. Ph. e 
mi, he tor. ured me, 
pianadair, -eau, s. m. Tormenter, afflicter. 
Pun.sher. E^ 
pianadh, -aidh, s.m. Tormenting,act of torment- 
nz, 2 Torment, pain, affliction. 3 Annoying. 
4 Punishment, A’ p—, pr.pt. of pian, 
pianail, -e, a. Painful, causing pain or torment, 
pia'alachd, s.f.ind. Painfulness. 
pianas, see peanas. 
piannta,(DU) Gaelic spelling of pint. 
pianta, pl. of pian. 
piantach, -aiche, a. Tormenting,painful, excru- 
-  elatiag. 2**Annoying, vexatious. 
adh, -aidh, -aidh, see pianadh. 
ail,* see piantach. isher. 
air,** -ean, 3. m. Tormenter. Pun- 
piantaich, -ean, s.m. ` Pitiable object, over- 
wrought, ill-used or distressed person, 
, v.a. see pian. . 
———te, past pt. of piantaich. Pained, tor- 
mented, afHicted. 2 Annoyed. 3 Punished, 
piantaidh, s.pl. Pains, pangs, punishment. , 
piantail, see pianail. 
piantair, see pianadair. 
piantalachd, s.f.ind. Sorensss, 
piantan, n.pl. of pian. 
piartag, see cearc-thomain, 
piasgach,** a. Rough, shaggy, hairy. 
Piast, -an, see biast.. 


o 


~ 
4 





Ù 


NTERNET ARCHIV 


721 


— ` 


pilig 

| piastag, -aig, -an, see biaistag, 

piastaga, s.m. Vermicelli. 

piata, (DU) s.» Poor eater. Nach b e tu am 
p. !—said to a person who is not supposed to 
be taking an ordinary quantity of food. 

pib, -e, -ean, sf. see pìob. 

pibhinn, -e, -ean, EI Lapwing, see adharcan- 
luaciirach, 

— ——each, -eiche, a. Abounding in lapwings, 
2 Like a lapwing, 

tpie, -e, s.f. Disada in the tongue and throat 
of fowls, | 

pic, -e, -ean, $.f, Pike (weapon.) 2 Pick-axe. 3 
*Niggardliness, churlishness. 

pic, -e. -ean, &.f. Pitch. ` Cómhiaichidh tu a 
staigh "sa muigh le pic, thou shalt cover it 
within and without with pitch. 

pic, pr pt. a’ piceadh, v.a. Pitch, cover or daub 
with pitch. 

pic-catha. s.f Battle-axe, halberd. 

piceach, -e1che, a. Armed with ptkes. 2 High- 
peaked, as a ship. 3 Furnisued with pick- 
axes. 4 Like a pick-axe. 

piceach, -eiche, a. Abounding in pitch, pitchy. 
2 Like pitch. 4 Asphaltic. 

—adh, sm. Sama meauings as piceach. 

piceadh, -idh, s.m, Pitching, act of covering, 
laying or daubing with pitch. 2 see piocadh. 
AT p—, pr.pt. of pic. 

pic-chlach,** s.f, Asphalt, 

piceal, -il, -an, 8.7. Gaelic spelling o* pickle. 

picear, eir, $. ^n. Rogue, mean fellow. 2 Pil. 
ferer. 5 Avaricious person, piggard, churl, 

picear, -eir, -an, s.m, One armed with a pike, 2 
Pick-axe man. 

achd, s.f.ind. Digging with a pick-axe. 

picearachd, s.f,ind, Roguery, villany. 2 Pil. 
fering. 3 Avarice, avaricious practices. 

pichd, s. & v. see pic. 

Doch, pr.pt. a’ piceachadh, see pic, v. 

picil, -e, s.7. see piceal, 

——, v.a. Pickle. 

picillich, see picil, 

picleach,tt a. Pickled. 2 Abounding in pickles, 

picleadh, -idh, s.m. Pickling, act of pickling. 
A’ p—, pr.pt, of picil. 

picilte, past pt. of picil, Pickled. 

piclig, v.a. see picil. 

eadh, see picleadh. 

te, see picilte. 

pic-mheallach, s.f. Lochaber-axe. 

pic-thalmhuinn, s.f. Asphalt. 2**Mortar. 

pige, -achan, s.m, see pigeadh, 

——ach, a. Pertaining to earthenware jars or 
pitchers, 

—adair, -ean, s.m. Potter. 

——adaireachd,tf s.f. Pottery , business.) 

pigeadh, -idh, -idhean, 8. m. &aritisuwace jar, 
pitcher or pot. 

pigean, -ein, -ean, 8&. M., dim. of pize. Little 
earthen jar, pitcher or pob. 2 Small pail. X 
Fragment of earthenware. 4 Guibeliy, little 
gorbellied pervon, 

pigein, see pigean. 

pighe, see pizheana, 

pigheann, s.m. Pie, pastry 

| -—ach, .aiche, a. Abounding in pies, 

-—ailr,** s.m. Pastrycook, 

pighein, -e, -ean, see piognaid. 

— ————each,-eiche, 3G, see pioghai leach. 

pighinn,* see pigheann, 

pigidh, -ean, s.m. Robin, rob'n red-hreast. 
Sometimes used for pigeadh & pigean, 

pileagach, -aiche, a. Smart-touzuel, 

tpilear, -eir, -an, s.m. Gaelic spelling of pillar, 

pileistreadh,(MS) s.m. Ranviduess. 

pilig, v.a. Gaelic form of peeling, used to express 























2 


7 


pilig 





peel, 

pill, -e, -ean, &.f. Cloth or skin on wi ich corn is 
wiunowed. 2(1DC) Clump or patch of heath- 
er. An nead am p. fraoich, the nest in a patch 
of heather ; pill-bràthaiun, quern-cictA . pili- 
fhasgnaidh, 4rinmoicing-cover. 

pill, pr.pt. a’ pilltinn & a’ pilleadh, v a d n. 
Turn, cause to turn orreturn, 2*"Turn aside 
3 Turn, return, go back, come back. luli 
ris, he has got a relapse. 

pill-chur,s. /. Sheet holding seed-corn when sow: 


ing. 

pilleadh, -idh, s.m. Turning, act of turning or 
returning, return, <A’ p—, pr pt. of pill, 

-—, 3rd. ginu. & pl. ump. of pill 

pilleadh-facail, s.m. Contradiction, 

pilleag, s.f. see pillean & peallag. 

pilleam,** Ist. per. sing. mp. of pill. Let me re- 
turn 2 (for pillidh mi) I will return. 

pillean, -ein, -an, s.m. Pack-saddle. 2 Cloth 
put under a pannel, cushion, pad. 3 Hassock. 
4 pl. of peall. 's mi ’m pillein cobhrailb cùl 
ghorm fraoich, and 1 resting in a patch of 
heather, sweet-scented, purple.— Ross, p. 11 

pilleangch, -aiche, a. Of, or pertaining to, a 
pack-saddle. 

pillear,** fut. pass. of pill. 

pillin, -ean, see pillean. 

pillsear,*? -eir, s.m. Pilchard. 

pillteach,** a. Inclined to return. 
frequently. 

pilltinn, e, st, Returning, act of returning. 2 
Return, retrogression. A’ p—, pr. pt. of pill. 

pincean,** s.m. Gillyflower, 

pin-chrann,$ -chroinn, $. m. Pine—mnus 2 
Also applied to all the conifere. 

pincin,$ s. Stock, ** queen stock ” of the gar- 
den—matthiola incana. 2 
Wallfiower, leaved stock, 
gilly flower. 

pinn, pr.pt. a’ pinneadh, v.a 
see pinnich. 

pinn, gen. sing. & n. pl. of 
peann. 

pinne, pl. pinneachan & pin- 
neacha, e m. Pin, peg. 
spigot, 2 (DU) Steady flow 
of water from a small pipe 
or any circular orilice, 

pinneach,tt a. Abounding in 





2 Returning 





pegs. 567, Pinan. 

pinneachadh, -aidh, s.m. Fastening, act of fast- 
ne with pegs or pins. A’ p—, pr.pt. of pinn- 
ich. 

pinneadh, -aidh, s.m. Same meanings as pinn- 
eachadh. 2 Piercmg—Bewnn Doran. A’ p—, 
pr.pt. of pinn. 

pinnear,** -eir, sm. Ink-horn. 2 Pen-case. 

pinne-cluaisein, s.m. Drag-pin of a cart, 

piune-na-h-aisil, Sa Axle-pin of a cart 

pinne-na-garmain, s.m. The pin of the beam. 

pinnich, v.a. Pin, fasten with pins, ?ftt Pierce. 

te, past pt. of pina cn. Pinned, fasten- 
ed with pins. 

pinnt, -ean, s.m. Pint, imperial liquid measure, 
A pint Scots, Stop pinpt, v quart pot ; tri 
cheathrannan pinnt, three-quarters of a pint. 

e, see pinnichte, 

pinnteachadh, (DMC) -aidh, s.m. see binndeach- 
adh. 

pinntich, see binndich. 

pinteal,** v.a. Paint. 

ta,** past pt. Painted. 

pìob, -a, pl. -an & -achan, at Pipe, bagpipe. 2 
Pipe, tube, syphon. 3 figuratively, Smoke, 

PARTS OF A BAGPIPE :— 

1 Altan-gleusaidh, tuning-slides. 











T k f 
Lé L 
T Hm ' = Lj 
Lm | |' 
F i L1 LM N 


TJ 


3 


E eg 


EE —— —— — ——— 
` 


2 





E, w v 
Ae UK, e 
‘ot, 


568. A’ Phtwob-mhor, 
2 Bann, ferrule, 
3 Ciochag, ralv-, 
4 Cupan, cup inside ferrule at top of dron’s, 
5 Dos, pl. -an, drone, 
6 Feadan, Seannsair, chanter, 
7 Gacthaiche, mouth-piece. 
8 Mak. bag. 
9 Ribheid, reed, 

10 Stemair, drone. 

11 Sionnach, bellows in an Trish bagpipe. 

12 Stoc, stock, that part of each of the five pipes 
to which the baa is tied. Stoc an fneadaiu, 
the chanter-stock ; stoc an dos mhóir, the 
big drone-stock, &c. 

13 Bonn an fheadain, sole of chanter. i 

The bagpipes are spoken of in Gaelic in the 
singular—a' phiob. 

The use of the bagpipe can be traced to the 
most remote antiquity, although it seems, if 
not comparatively modern in connection with 
the Highlands, at least to have held a second 
place in comparison witb the harp in the es- 
timation of tne bulk of the people, until dur, 
ing tbe last few centuries. The Greek word 
sumphónía, which appears as an Ararm'^* 
loan-word in Daviel, iti, 5, is translated "bag- 
ppe ” by every competent translator. Thera 
is uo doubt that the verse relating the arri- 
val of ihe prouigal son's brother in the New 
Testament, should be rendered '* now his èl- 
der sen was in the field, and as he came and, 
drew nigh to the house, he heard bagpipes ant 
dancing,” — Expository Times, Jan. 1905. 

piob, od, & n. Pipe play on the p pos. 2 Squeak, 
piobaca, -aiche, a. Haring pipes. z Like a pips, 

3 Tubulous, tubular, fluted. 

— ———aàn, pl. of pìob. ; 
piobadair, -ean, s. m. Pipe-maker, 2 Bagpipe- 
maker. 
.—— ————eachd,** s.f. Pipe-making. 2 Bagpipe- 

making. 

piobadh, -aidh, s.m. Piping, act of piping. 2 
Squeaking. A’ p—, pr. pt. of piob 





piobagach,tf a. Abounding in sma.) 


ope 
piobair, -ean, sm, Piper, bagpiper. P. 


pìobag, -aig, -an, $.f., dim. of pìob. Small pipe. ` 


an aona 
phuirt, an indifferent piper Gu. a piper whe. 


E 


piobair 


can only play one tune.) 

piobaireachd, s.f.ind. Art of playing on the bag: 
pipe, piping. 2 Act of piping. 3 Business or 
oceupation of à piper. 4 Pipe-tnne. 5 Music 
peculiar to the bagpipe. [ Erroneous!y ap- 
plied by non-Gaelic speakers to mean ceòl mor 
only, but it means any pipe-inusic.] For a 
detailed account of the articulate music for- 
merly used by the MacCr:mmons and others 
in the pipers' colleges, see canntaireachd. 

Pioball, see Bioball. 

pioban, -ain, -an, s. Mm, dim. of piob. Small 
pipe. 2 Little flageolet. 3 Reed 4 Small 
tube. 5 Throat, gullet. 6 Pip m fowls, 

-———, n.pl. of piob. 

piobanach, -aiche, 
Fluted, 

probanta, -ainte, a, see piobanach. 

piobar, -air, sm. Badenoch for peavar. 

piob-cheol, -chiüil, sm, Pipe-musie. 

piob-fnuail, -an-, s.f, Catheter 

piobhar,** s. m. Searce, sieve. 2**Honeycomb. 

pe Vie pl. -an-, n Cock of a barrel. 3 

piob-mhàla. pl. -an-mala, sf. Bagpipe. [Mc 
& D. gives piob-mhaiaidh } iia i 

pìob-mhor, s,f. The great Highland bagpipe. 

pio^-müin,** s.f Catheter. 

piob-na-comb-sheirin, s.f The union pipes. 

piobraich, (MS) v.a. Enchafe. 2 Pepper. 

piob-siionnaich, pl. -an-sionnaich, s.f. Bellows- 
pipe, Irish bagpipe. 

piob-thaosgaidh, pl. -an-taosgaidh, s.f. Pump. 

piob-theannaich, pl. -an-teannaich, s.f. see piob- 
shionnaich. 

pìob-thombac, s.f. Tobacco-pipe. 

piob-uisge, pl. -an-uisge, s.f. Water-pipe, con- 
duit-pipe. 

Piobull, see Bìoball. 

pioc, pr.pt. a’ piocadh, v.a. Pick, nip, nibble, 
2 Pinch. 3 Dig wıth a pickaxe. P. an coimh- 
each, pinch the stranger ; p taingeadh, vick a 
thank. 

pioc, -a, -an, s.m. Crumb, small portion. 2 Nip, 
piech with the nails or teeth. 3**Pickaxe. 

piocach, -aiche, a. Pinching. 2 Nibbling. 3 
Pungent. 4**Taunting. 

piocach, -aich, s.m. The coal-fish in its third and 
fourth years— Argyll. 2 (DU) metaphorically, 
Small fellow. 

piocachadh, -aidh, s.m. Digging, act of digging 
or working with a pick-axe or mattock. A’ 
p—, pr.pt. of piocaich. 

der -ean, & m. Picker, nibbler, carper. 
pecker. 

piocadh, -aidh, s. m. Picking, act of picking, 
pinching, nibbling or nipping. 2 Digging with 
a mattock., 3 (DU) Pecking as a bird. A’ 

p—., pr.pt. of pioc. 

piocag, -aig, -an, 8f., dim. of pioc. Little crumb. 

.. 2 Slight pinch. 3 Pair of nippers or pincers. 

4 Small mattock. 5 Taunting female. 

piocagach, -aiche, a. In small crumbs. 2 Pinch- 
ing lightly. 3 Nibbling, 

piocaich, pr.pt. a’ piocachadh, v.a. Work or dig 


wi&h pick-axe or : 
Pick-axe. 2 Mattock. 8 


locaid, -e, Gan, 8./. 
Pincers. . 

-—————each,tt a. Having pieks, mattocks or 
pincers, 

piocaidh, fut.af.a. of pioc. 

piocair, -ean, s.m. One who works with a pick- 
axe or mattock. 2 Nibbler, 3 Pincher. 

piocair,** .ean, s.m. Pikeman, 2**Pioneer. 

piocaireachd, s.f. Working with a pick-axe, 
digging with a mattock. 2 Nibbling, 3 Pinch- 
n 


ing. 
piocaireachd, s. f. Business of a pikeman, or 2 


a. Tubular, tubulous 2 


723 


pionnsarachd 


of a pioneer. 

piocairean,(MS) s.pl. Nippers. 

piocais,(MS) 8. Nippers. 

piocas, -ais, s.m. Scabies, the itch [with art.am] 
2* Herpes, shingles. —Skye. 3 Magpie, 

pioch,* v.a. Whaeze. 

Doch, s.m. Croup (with art. am.) 

piochair,* v.a. Line, as cats, ?**Üaterwanl, 

pìochan, -ain, 8m. Wheezing in th» throat. 2 
One who wheezes in the throat. 

piochanach, -aiche, a. Wheezing, breathing with 
a noise in the throat, or with difne Ury, 

piochanaich, -e, s. f. Wheezing in the throat 
Ciod a’ ph. ath’ ort ? why do you wheeze so ? 

piochdach,** -aich, s.m. Plunderer. 

—— — —,** a. Given to plundering. 

piochradh,* ;-aidh, s.m. Lining, as cats. 
p—, pr.pt. of piochair. 

plogbaid, e, -ean, $.f. Magpie. XAF) Jackdaw. 
3(DU) Useless, talkative young woman. 4(D 
MC) Parrot. 

pioghaideach, -eiche, a. Abounding i; maxzpies. 
2 Like a magpie. 3 Garrulous, talkative, 4 
**Piebald, pied. 


A’ 





569. Pioghaid ghas. 
pioghaid ghlas, T -e-glaise, -an-z-, &.f. The great 
shrike or bu£cher-bird,ca!led buidsegrby Mac- 
Mhaighstir Alasdair—lanives exc biter. 
pioghaid thruisg,( AF) s.f. Partridge. 


p.ol, v. see spiol, 

piolachadh, -aidh, see spiolachadh. 

piolachair, see spiolachair. 

piolacha4n,** see spiolachan. 

piolaich, v. see spiolaich. 

piolaid, -e, -ean, sf. Pillory. 2 Palace, prince's 
palace, 


piolair,** s, Gaelic spelling of pillar. 
piollach, -aiche, a. Fretful. 2 Curions-looking. 
3 Neat, trim, tidy. 4** Hairy, see peallach. 


piollachas, -ais, s. m. Neatness, trimuess, tidi- 
ness. 2 Hairiness, 

piollachd, see piollachas. 

piollag, see peallag. 

piollair,** s.m. Pill. R 

piollaiste, -an, s.m. Trouble, vexation, annoy- 
ance. 

piollaisteach, -eiche, a, Troublesome, vexati- 
ous, vexing, annoyirg, teazing. 

pion, Gaelic aper of pine. 

pionach,* a. Pineal. 

pionail, ** a, Pineal. An fhàireag ph., the pin- 
eal gland. 

pionamhuil, see pionail. 

pionar, s, Pionafore. A’ faidhmeadh bhann is 
phionar an àm chur grinnis air gnréis, hern- 
ming straps and pinafores when doing orna- 
tal sewn work—Filidh, p. 4. 

pionas, see peanas, 

pion-chrann, see pin-chrann. 

tpionnsarach, ** o, Wily, cunning. 

tpionnsarachd, s.f. Wiliness 


pionsa 


pionsa,** -ai, s.m. Artifice, wile. 

pioradh,CAH) s.m. Fierce gust of wind. 

Pliora-ghiuag, -aig, -an, see piorbhwe, | 

piorail, -e, -ean, see biorraid, 2**Gaelic spell- 
inv of pirate. 3**Parrot, 

pioraidea^h, -eiche, a. see biorraideach. 
Pirat/cal. 3**Like a parrot. 

pioraruig tf see p:orbhuic, 

- each, see piorbhuiceach. 

piorbhnic, -e, -ean, $.f. Periwig, wig. 

piorbhuiceach, -viche, @ Wearing a periwig 
or wig, 

piorr, »..pt. Ai piorradh, v.a. Scrape, dig. 2 
Make a dash ab. 3 Pierve. 4 Purr. 

piorrabhaz, Uist for piorbhuic. 

piorral huic, see piorbhuic. 

prorradh, -aidh, s.m. Scraping, act of scraping 
or dig; ng. 2 Dashing at. 3 Stabbing quica- 
ly. 4 Piercing, A’ p—, pr. pt. of piorr. 

piorradh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Squall, blast, 2 
** Pear. 

piorraid, $.f. Parrot. 

pios, -a, -an, s.m. Gaelic spelling of piece. Piece, 
morsel, fragment. 2 Patch, bitofcloth. 3 
Coin, picce of money. | 

pios,v.a. Gaelic spelling of piece. Cut into shreds, 
tear, lacerate. 2 Patch. 

pios, -a, -an, $.f. Silver cup. 2**Fowling-piece. 
3 (DC) humorously, Wag—Argyll. 

piosach, -aiche, a. In pieces, morsels or frag- 
ments. 2 ln patches, patched. 3 IIavinz sil- 
ver cups. 4**Splintering. 

piosach, -aich, see piseach. 

piosadh, -aidh, s.m. Patching, act of patching 
orsewing together 2 Tearing. 3 (DU)Pinch- 
ing <A’ p—, pr. pt. of pios. 

piosag, -aig,-an, sf. Small bit. 

fpiosaga, s f. Witcherafe. 

piosagach, -aiche, œ Abounding in smal] bits, 

pìosan, -ain, -an, dim of pios. Small piece or 
patch. 2 Small coin. 

piosanach, -aiche, a. In small pieces, abound- 
ing in small pieces, fragments or small 
patches. 

piosarnach,** .aich, s.m. Whispering, 

piosarnachd, s.f. Whispering, 

tpiosarnaich, -e, s.f. Whispering. 

piostal, ail, an, s.m, Gaelic spelling of pistol. 

yostalach, o, Having pistols. 

piothaid, see pioghaid. 

piothann, see pigheann. 

piothannach, -aiche,a. see pigheannach, 

pireas,(CR) s.m. Appearance. Cha robh p. ann, 
—sail of a worthless thinz—W. of Ross ; brad 
p. barr, à good appearance of crop ; p. de 
chreutair, @ poor, puny creature, or mere ap- 
pearance of a creature—Suth'd & H. of Ross. 
[The Eng. word (ap)pearance.) 

piridh, -ean, s.f. Boy's top. 2 Whirligig. Scots, 
peerie. 

pischan, Given in Eng. part of McD & Dewar 
under whenever, evideutly meant for piochan. 

piseach, Ach, s. m. Increase. 2 Good fortune, 

rosperity, success. 3 Fate. 4 Blessing. 5 
i ea progeny. 6**Avail. 7 (MN) Improve- 
ment. 8 (MS) Augmentation. [** gives s.f.] 
P. air do ph. agus p. ann ad bhroinn ! may 

you see your offspring s offspring and have a 
young progeny yourself ! p. ort ! success to you ! 
am Li p. orra ? will they prosper ? le p. a bhil- 
ean sàsuichear e, by the increase of his lips he 
shall be filled ; dh’ òladh e a pheighinn ph., he 
would drink his last penny ; buaidh is p. leat ! 
success and prosperity be with yov! p. math 
orb ! I wish you good luck, 1 wish you @ good 
match ! cha do shaltair neach air a pn., no one 
ever prevented his fate, 


2** 


724 





— ——— MM  -———_—_—_—_-_- EE nr ————————— ———————————M EE 
m 


plabadaich 





p! acta -0, @ Fortunate, prosperous, 2 Pro- 
ific. 

piseachd, s f. Same meaaing3 as piseach. 

piseaz, -eig, -an, s.£., dim. ot pios. Patch, clout, 
raz, fragment of cloth, old or new. P. air 
toll is e sin an tairbha, ach p. air plseig 's e 
sin an lùireach, a pater on a hole 1s saving, 
bul a patch upon patch makes a ragaed cloak. 

p'seag, -eig, -eigean, sf. Kitten, young cat. 2 
Sorcery, witchersft, divination. 

pi-eagach, -aiche, a. Haviag kittens. 2 Like a 

kitten, 3 Superstitiows, like a wizard or sor- 

cerer. 

piseagach,** a. In rag», in pieces, as cloth. 2 

Ragged. 

pisvayaicie,** s.m. Enchanter, wizard. 2 Sue 

perstitious person, ` 

pissan,** -eiu, pl. -vin & -an, s. m. Tom *:itten.- 

Tplssariach, -aiche, @ Jugz'inz, coujuring. 4 
Superstition. | 

pisearaaeh, see plosarn wh. 

pisich.(MS) v.a, Increase. 

tpisreay, -eig, -an, $./. Sorcery. 2 Superstition. 

t- ach, a. Superstibious. 

pit, -e, -ean, 8.7. Hollow, pit. 2 Prefix in farm 

ani townland nanes in Pictland, ineaning A 

farm or portion. 

piteag, -eig, st, Effeminate person. 2(MS) Hen- 

peckxed man. : 

piteanta,** a Effeminate. 2 Lascivions, lewd. 

———chd,** s.f. Effeminacy. 2 Lascivious- 

ness, lew «ness. 

pithe, see pizheann. 

pithean, see pigheann. 

pitheannan, pl. of pishean (for pi :heannan.) 

p'üg, -iuig, -an, sf. Plaintive note, querulous 

voice. 2 Morry, mean appearance. 

piüsach, -aicha, a. Having a querulous voice, 2 

tiaviug a mean or sorry look, i 

piüirn,(CR)s.m. Bobbin, Gaelic spelling of pirn. 

p:uirneach,** a. Full oí piras, 2 Of, or rela- 

ting to a pirn. 

piuthair, dat. & voc.sing. of piuthar. 

piuthar, gen. $. peathar, dat. piuthair, voc. a 

phiuthair ! pl. peathraichean, voc.pl, a pheath- 

raiche ! s.f. Sister. ’S i mo ph. i, she is my 

sister ; clann do pheathar,thy sister’s children; 

ogùa peathar is bràthar, second Cousins. 

piuthaireil, see piutharail 

piutharag, see piùthrag. 

piutharail, -e, @. Sisterly. 

piutharalachd, s.f. Si:terliness. f 

piutbar-altrum, peathar-a, peathraichean-a, $. 

f. Foster-sister. 

piuthar-athar, peathar-a-, peathraichean-a-, s.f. 

Father’s sister, paternal aunt. Piuthar m’ 

athar, my paternal aunt, 

piuthar-chéile, peathar-ch-, athraichean-e-, 

[not -ch in pl. | s.f. Sister-in-law, Mo phiuth- 

ar-chéile. my sister-in-law. |. . 

piuthar-mathar, peathar-m., peathraichean-m., 

sf. Mother's sister, maternal aunt, Piuthar 

mo mhàthar, my materna! aunt. 

piuthar-seanamiar, peathar-s-, peathraichean- 

s-, s.f,Grandmother’s sister, grand aunt, Piu- 

thar mo sheanamuar,my grandinother!'g sister. 

piuthar-seanar, peathar-s-, peathraichean-s-, s. 

f. Grandfathber’s sister, grand aunt, Piuthar 

mo sheanar, my grandfather's sister, : 

p üthrag, -aig, -an. £f., dm. of piuthar. Little 

sister. 2 Confidential friend or gossip. 

piüthragach,* -aich, s.m. Gos-ip:ns. 

plab, V.se see plub. 

Jab, -a, -2aidhean, s.m. see plub. 2 Smut. 8 

Fillip. 4 Spot. - 

—ach, -aiche, a. see plubach, 

——adaich, see plabartaich, | 





plabadh 


pivbadh,-aidh,-aidhean,s.m.& pr.pt.see plubadh. 

plabair,** em, Babblor. 

plab»ireachd, $.*. Babbling, 

pla^arlaich, -e, $ f. Soft nois», as that caused 
by the motion of tie wiugs of a bir l, flappiny. 

plabarta'ch, e, 8.f. Continued soft sound, as of 
water gently beating the shore. 2 Unintelli- 
gible talk,rumbiing noise in speech, see plub- 
bartaicn, 

plabraich, -e, s. £. Flapping or fluttering noise. 
Ri p. mu curann-brataich, flapping about a 
ylag-staff. 

Lips -aic, 8 n. Mouthful, 

placaid, -e, -can, 8.f, Wooden dish, 2 Close tim- 
ee ar Fat, broad, good-natured fe- 
male, 

p'acair,** s.m. Chubby-faced fellow, 2 Glutton. 

p:acantach,** a. Coarse, rough. Gu p., roughly. 

—àd,** s.f. Coarseness, roughness. 

plàdar,(CR) s.m. Circular dish made of plaited 
straw, used for corn—Tiree. 2 Platter, 

pladh, -a, see plath. 

ach, -aiche, a. see plathach, 

———adh, -aidh, see plath, 

plagh, see plath. 

plaghadh, see plath, 

piaibean, -ein, -an, s.m. Lump of raw flesh. 
Fat, plump boy. 

fplaic, -e, -ean, sf. Fine, amercement. 

pl'ichea!,** s, Flagon. 

tplaichid, -e, -ean, sf. see plaichead. 

piaid, (MS) Await. 

pla d, -e, -ean, s.f. see plaid-luighe, 

p'aid,* v.a. Drill potatoes, 2 Lay out ground in 
plots. 3 Plant, as greens or colewort, 

plaid, (CR) s. f, Said ofa de faliiag his 
whole Iength on the ground, Fhuair e p, and 
nach q’ fauair e p.!— Aran. [splaid in Lorn.) 

Plaide, pl. -an & -acban, s./. Blanket. 2 Plaid, 
(not tartan-pla1id.) 3 Coarse ülannel. 4*Plot 
of ground, Cota plaide, an under-petticoat o^ 
coarse umet, 

——ach, -eiche, a. Having blankets or plaids. 

achan. pl. of plaide. 

plaideag, -vig, -an, s.f. Lí tle blanket or shawl. 

ach, -aiche, og Having small blankets 
or plaids, 

piarie-luighe, sf Lying in ambush, 








6 








^ Ambus- 





cade. Deanamaid plaidc-inighe, let us lie 
im wait. 

—ach,** a, Lying in wait. 2 Like an 
am^ush, 3 Fond of lying in wait, 4 Skulk- 


ing, treacherous, 

pla d«e, see splaidss, 

-Ach, @. see splaidseach. 

adh, see splaidseadh. 

plàigh, -e, -ean, +f. Fla:ue, pestilence. 

» dem c fever, 3 Troublesome person. 

p.aigh-choiszeach,** a, Antipestilential, 

pia gheach, -eiche, a. Plaguy, pestiferous, pes- 
tuential. 

pia ghealachd, s.f. Plaguiness, contagiousness. 

plàigheil, -e, @.  Pestiferous, pestilentiaL 2 
Contagious. 3:Infectious. 

p aigh-sgaviiteach, st Spreading plague. 

p aigh-shlat,(AP) s. Blind or slow-worm. | 

piàigh-uaine,** s.f. The yellow fever [With the 
art. a’ ph—. 

plais, pr.pt. a’ plaiseadh, v.a. Splash. 2 Daub 
with dirt or mire, 

p’aiseadh, -eidh, en, Splashing, act of splash- 
ing or daubing with mire or dirt. 

1p.aitean, -ein, s.m. Skull. 2 Little head, 

p-aitse, see splaidse, 

piaidseach, see splaidseach, 

plam,* a. Curdled, 

(o——— , "alm, -an, SLM, 








2 Epi- 


Anything curdled or clot- 


725 


plap 

ted. 2 Fat blubber cheek, 

plamacaidh, a. see plameaidh. 

plamach, -aiche, *. Curdled, thick, 2 Slimy. 3 
Of a dull or ple colour. 4* Fat-cheeked, fair- 
haired and pale-faced. 

plamaic,* v.a. Fumbie, mix, handle awkwardly. 

plameaidh, -e, a. Doughy, flabby. 

plamrachadh, -aidh, s. . Warming of milk for 
curdiing. 2 Grumousness. A’ p—, pr. pt. of 
plamr aich. x 

plamraich, pr.pt. a’ plamrachadh, v. a. Warm 
or prepare milk for curdling. 2tfMake a sofb5 
noise. 

planaid, -ean, s.f, Gaelic spelling of planet. 

plancaien,** v. Contabulate. 

plancaid, e, -ean, s.f. Gaelic spelling of blanket, 

—— —-each, a. Having blankets. 

plang, -ainz, -an & -annan, s.m. Plack (Scots 
coin) value 3d. (2 bodles,) 2**Gaelic speiling 
of plank, 3 (DMO) Any small coin. also 
planca. 

plangach,** a, Having planks. 2 Like a plank. 
3 Made of planks, 

plangaich,** v.g. Provide with planks, 

plangaid, -e, -ean, 3.f. Blanket. 

—— — -bhan, s.. White plaiding. 

-zhorm, 8 f. Blue plaiding, 

plangaidich, (MS) v.a, Blanket, 

pianuda, -n & -ichean, see pianata. 

— —— chadh, see planntachadh. 

planut, see planntaich. 

p:aunt,-a & plainnt, -aichean, s.m. Plant. 

p'anntachadh, -aidh, 5. m, Plantiag, act of 
planting. 2 Plantation, A’ p—, pr. pt. of 
planntaich, 

planntachair,** enn, 8 m. Planter. 

planntaieh, pr.pt. a' planntashadh, v.g, Plant 
Settle or establis a colony, 

—te, past pt. Planted. 

planntaig, see plannhaieh. 

—eadh, see planntachadh. 

plann:air, -ean, son. Plan*er. 








-— — ——eachd, s.f. Occupsiion of planting, 2 
Bnsiness of a planter. 

planntan, $.7n. Set. 

planntar,* -air, s.m, Choice corn for seed, 2 


Choice quality of cats. 

plaoisg, v.a. see plaosg. 2**Appear. 

ean, -ein, -an, sm, dim. of plaosg. Small 

or thin husk, 

eanach, -aiche, a. Having a thin husk. 

plaosg, pr.pt. a’ plaosgadh, v.a. & n. Peel, skin. 
2 Awake, open the eyes. 4 Opsn, burst, ua- 
cover, disclose. 2 Burst, as from the husk. 5 
Make a noise or sound, 

p'aosg,-aoisg, -an, s.m. Husk, shell. 2 Outer 
peel or skia of a vegetable. 3 Shell of an egg. 
4 Glimmer, glimpse. 5 Opening of the eyes 
from sleep. 6 Sound, sudden noise. Cnothan 
a’s taine p., the thinnest shelled nuts ; gus am 
P., to the husk ; p.-buntàta, a potato skin. 

ach, -aiche, a Husky, shelly. _ 2 Peeling, 
that peels or skins. 3 Having à rind. 4 Uu- 
covering. 5 Glimmering. 6 Making à noise 
or sudden sound, noisy. /* Capsular. 

———achd, s.f. Crustiness, j 

plaosgadh, -aidh, s.m. Peeling, act of peeling or 
skinning, taking off the husk or shell. 414 
Awakiug, act of awaking or opening the eyes, 
3 Bursting, act of bursting, as from the husk, 
4 Act of mvking a noise. 5 Sudden noise. 4 
Glimmering light, flash, blaze, 7** Appear: 
ing, discovering of one’s self. A’ p—, pr. pt. 
of plaosg. : 

plaosgaid,* e, -ean, $.f. Soft, stupid woman. 

plaosgair,*-ean, s,m, Soft, stupid fellow,dul'aed. 

plap, (DMC) s.m, Flapping of the w.ngs of a 











wie plap 
bird. 2 Sudden “ leap " of the heart through 
fright. 

Dam DMC) pr. pt. a’ plapail, v. Flutter with 
the wings. 

——ail, -e. s.f. Flutteriig with the wings, A’ 
p—, pr.nt. of plap. 

plapa th.(MS) s.m. Anh-^lation. 

plapraich, -e, see plabraich, 

plàsd, -a, ml. -an & -vidnean, s.m. Plaster. 
Daub, 3* Poultice. 

plasd, v.g. Plaster, daub, cover with lime or 
other :nb«stanee, 2* Spread awkwardly. 

tplasda,** a. Feiznetl. 

plasdach, -aiche, a. Plastering, that plasters. 
2 Having plasters 3 Using plasters. 4 Like 
a plaster. 5 Daub'ng. 

,** 84n. Plaster. 

-— Ah, -aidn, s.m. & pr.pt. see plasdaich. 

-—d,** s.f. Plastering, daubiug or smear- 
ing, covering with lime or clay. 

plasdadh, -aidh, s.m. Plastering, act of plaster- 
ing, smearing or daubing. A’ p—, pr. pt. of 
plasd. 

piasdaich, po see plàsd, 

——te, past pt. Plastered, daubed. 

plasdaidhean, pl. of plàsd, 

plàsdair, ean, s.m. Plasterer, 

—eachd, s.f. Business or occupation of a 
plasterer. ? Work performed by a plasterer. 
3**5mearing, dau bing, 

plasdrachadh, -aidh, s.m. & pr.pt. see plasdadh, 

plasdradh, see plasdadh. 

plasdraich, Ga see plàsd. 

plasdraichte, see pl'àsdaichte, 

, plasdrail,** sf. Plastering, besmearing. 

p àt, .CR)s m. Corn bag made of p'aits of straw. 

plat, -a, pl. -an, -achan & -aichean, s. m. Kind 
of cloth made of straw or rushes. 2(MS) Sack, 
3 Plaid of straw or rushes. 4 (DMy) Mat on 
which sheep are killed. 5 (MMcL) Any heavy 
eovering, Tilg a’ ph. sin thairis air, throw 
ihat coverim ovr him ` p.-eich, straw-cloth of 
a »a^k-sad/lle ; p.-fhasgnaidh, straw-cloih on 
which corn ts winnowed. 

tplat. -a, s.j. Gaelic spelling of plate. 

piàt,* va. Thrust in clap upon. Ph. e à làmh 
air, he clanned his hand on it, ' 

platach,(CR) s.m. Mat of plaited straw for put- 
ting on a horse's back under the crook sad- 
dle —W. of Ross-shire, 

plataichean, pl. of plat. 

platan, -ain, -an, see plat. 

plath, -a, -an, see plathadh. 

plath, * v.a. Puff, blow upon. 2 Flash. 3(DC) 
Momentary glance, 

--——ach, -aiche, a. Glancing, twinkling, mo- 
mentary, transient, 2 Flashing, shining sud- 
denly. 3 In clouds or volumes, as smoke. 4 
Gusty, in gusts or squalls, as wind. 

plathadh, -aidh, s.m. Glance, twinkling of the 
eye. 2 Instant of time, moment. 3 Beam of 
light, flash. 4 Volume as of smoke. 5 Gust 
of wind. 6 Swoon. 7** Momentary appear- 
ance of anything, as of lightning. 8 Meteor. 
9* Puff of wind. 10**Sudden gloom.  1lft 
Volume of flame or wind. ` 
A’ p—,pr. pt. of plath. Thàinig p. oirnn,a puff 
came on us ; am p., 12 a moment ; fhuair sinn 
p. dheth, we had a g'onpse of it; a’ p. W ar 
n-&odann, puffing about our faces ; a’ ghrian 
fo pù., the sun under a sudden gloom ; mar ph, 
dealanaich, like a flash of lightning. 

plathag (MS) s.f. Squallof wind, 

plathaich,(MS) v.a. G'ance, 

piathaigeach, d. Windy. 4 

pleachd,(CR) s.f Roll of wool ready for spin- 
niuj —W. of Ross-shire. , 


2 














ANET ARCHIV 


II) 
ml 
II) 


726 


mmer NN E 


| 


| pleodag 


pleadh,** -a, s.m. Digg ng. dibbling, spudding. 

———ach, a. Digging or dëtt a Made for 
digging or dibbling, 

-——ag, -aig, -an,s.f. Dibble, paddle. 

ch, -aiche, a. Workin: with, or using 
a paddle or dibble. 2 Of,or belonging to, pad- 
dies or dibbles. 3 Like a paddle or dibble. 

—— —agachadh, see pleadhagaich, 

p'eadhagaich, s.f. Act of using a paddle or dib- 
ble, paddling, dibbling. A’ p—, pr. pt. of 
pleadhagaich, 

pleadhazaich, v.a. Dig or work with a paddle or 
dibble. 

pleadhagaichte, pr.pt. of pleadhagaich. 

plea thaich, see pleadhagaich. 

————— —te, see pleadhagaichte. 

pleadhain, gen.siny. & n.pl. of p'eadhan. 

pleadhair, -ean, s.m. Diboler, onae who uses à 
dibble, 

pleadhairt,* -e, -ean, s.f. Importunate petition, 


-—-—a 





pleadhan,ff a. Paddling, 2 Trifl'ng. 
- ,-ain,-an, s.m. Little oar, scull, Zeg 
Paddle, di bie 3ttsmall leg. 4(CR) Spat- 


tle for turning bread —W. of Ross-shire, 

pleadhanach, -aiche, a. Having a little oar, 
oars, or paldles. 2 Trifling. 3 Given to trí- 
fling pursuits. 4 see pleadhagach. 

d, 8. f, ind. Paddling or sculliag 
with a little oar. 2**Digging, dibbling. 3 
Trifliug, pursuing of silly or tridin ; things. 

pleadhan-teannachaith,* s.m. Busk. 

plea'lhart, art, -an, s.m. Buffet, blow or slap 
on the cheek, 

plea Ihartach, 
blows, 

pleaghagz, sea pleadhag. 

pleagaan, -ain, -an, see pleadhan. 

pleanais,** s.f. Svecies of coarse linan. | 

plea-g, -a, -an, s.m. Noise, crack, 2 Loud blow. 
3 String of beads. [ga.s. & n.pl. plisg—DU.] 

pleasz, v.a. Crack, burst, break. 

pleasgach, -aiche, æ. Cracking, noisy, making a 
noise, thu apin;, erashiag. 2 Realy to crack, 
burst or break. 

pleasgadh, -aidh, sm. Cracking, act of crack- 
ing, bursting. 2 Crashing noise, A’ p—, pr. 
pt. of pleasg. 

pleasganach, -aiche, œ. That cracketh or break- 
eth. 2 That striketh. 3 Noisy, striking, 
crashing, bursting. 

pleat, Gaelic spelling of plait. 

pleat,” v.a. Plait, fold. 2 Patch, mend. 3** 
Wreathe, braid. 4 Seam. 5 Tress. 

pleata,* s. m. Patch ,piece. 

pleatach,(AC) a. Flat, broad, even. 2 Wreath- 
ed. 3 Plaited, folded, doubled. Casan p., 
broayl feet, fat feet, as in a flat-footed person ; 
falt p., braided hair. 

pleatadh,(DMC) s.m. Folding. 9 Seaming. 

pleath, pr.pf. a’ pleathainn, v, n. Beg a thing 
to be paid for. à ; 

pleathainn, s.f. Actof begging a thing you are 
to pay for. A’ p—, pr.pt. of pleath. 

pleid, see bleid. . 

pleidear, see bleidir. 2 (DMC) Beggar. 

pleideil, see bleideil. J 

pleideir,* v.n., Plead, beg importunately or in- 
cessanbly. 

pleigh,t s.f. Quarrel, fight. : 

— (CR) v.a. Fight—Perthshire. Á 

pleisg,*v.a. Revile or abuse with all your might, 

pleiszeadn,* s.m. Reviling, 2 Scolding in a cold 
sarcastic manner, A’ p—, pr.pt. of pieisg. 

pleiste,** s. Testicle. r 

pleod,* v.a. Warm slightly, a3 milk. 

pleodag,* -aig, -an, sf. Soit, simple female. 2 
Snow-flake— Uist. 








-àiche, a. Buffeting, dealing 





pleodar 


pleólar,** s.m. Harum-scarum, 2 Soft, spirit- 
less fellow. 3 see feodar, 
ach, see fed:larach. 

—air, see feolarair. 

pleodhaisg, see pleoisg. ; 

pledi.y, -e,-ean, $. n. & f. Simpleton, booby, 
bumpkin, | 

pleoisgeaeh, - ich», a. Booby-like, silly,foolish. 

pleó::ga1g, -eiz,-an, s. f. Foo ish, silly, stupid 
Wom in. ) 
plooisgealach l, s.f.ind. Stupi lity, silliness 
p'eoisg»an, -»:n, s.m. Doltish, stupid boy. 
pleoisgeil, -e, a Dolcish, sottish, stupid. 
pliaca15,(DJ M) s. E lible dog-fish. 

pua, -a, -an, s.m. Plot of ground. prov. 

pliadach,(AC) a. see pleatach. 

pliidan, -ain, -an, s. m., dim. of pliad. Little 
plot of ground. 

p iadanach, -aiche, a. Abounding in little plots 
uf groun i. | 

plia/1n, A, -an, $.f. Splay-foot. 2 Bandy-leg. 

pliadh,** v.n. Swagzer. 

pialhich, -»iehe, a. Splay-footed. 2 Bandy- 
legg d —*5à;-O»air. 

: —,* -aiche, s.f. Splay-footed female, 

pliadhaich>, St Gil, Splay-footedness, 
pliadhair,*-ean, s.m. Splay-footed or bandy- 
legged man, 

p'iarain, -a m, s.m. Babbling. prov. 

pliaramach, -aiche, a. Babbling. prov. 

pliath-rod,** -roid, s.m. Slipper. 

pliathroid, see pliath-rod, 

plibean,** ein, s.m. Plover. 

pliobair, sm. Flunkey, worthless fellow. 2(DC) 
Mean fellow — Lismore. Gille pliobair, an un- 
d^riinj. 

p'iodair,* v. see pliotair. 

piioghiaire, see pliotair. 

plioaas, -ais, s.m, Hypocritical smile—A rgyll. 

pliotair, -ean, s.m. Fawner, sycophant, mean 
eringing feilow, cajoler, flunkey. 

pliotair, pr.pt. a’ pliotairt, v.n. Cajole, seduce by 
flattery. 

pliotaireachd, s.f. Cringing, mean flattery. 

pliotairt,* sf. Cajoling, caressing, as a child. 
A’ p—, pr.pt. of pliotair. 

pliut, -a,-an, s.m. Clumsy foot or paw. 2(D 
MC) in derision, Hand or foot. - 

pliutach, -aiche, a. Clumsy-footed, broad-pawel. 
2 (AH) Clumsy anid benumbed through expo- 
sure to cold—applied to the finsers. 

Ec s.f. Clumsy-footed or splay-footed fe- 
male. 

pliutach, -aich, s.m, Seal, sea-calf. prov, 

pliutaiene, sf.ind. Baker-foot. 

pliutair, -ean, s.m. Clumsy-footed person, 

pliutaireachd, s.f.ind. Clumsiness of feet, 2 
Clumsy walking. 

.plobht,(CR) s.m. Plump of rain. 2 Sound of 
anything falling into water—Perthshire, 
cots, plout. 3 (0C) Shoal of herring. B’ e 
'n seailadh e,’s cha b’ e plobht dubh an sgad- 
ain! that was the sight and not the mean shoal 
of herring ! 

ploc, pluic, -an, s.m. Any round mass, 2 Piece 
of earth, large turf, large clod. 3 Club or 
bludgeon with a round or large head. 4 Head 
of a pin. 5 Block of wood. 6 Short stump of 
a tree. 7 Bung, stopper. S Block, pulley. 9 
Rountlhead, 10 Hump hunch. il Chump. 
1’ Cheek, 13 Potato-masner, 14 Lumpish 
promontory. 15**Blockhead. 16 Block-head- 
ed stiek. 17 Block-headed instrument. 

P.-chul-te«llaich, a block of wood placed at 
|o the back of the rir». 

pioc, v.a. Strike with a club, block, clod or pes- 
tle. 2 Strike on the head. 3 Bruise, pound, 








727 


plocan, -ain, -an, s.m., dim. of ploc. 


plodadh 


pi Ram against. 5 Mash, as potatoes, greens 
c. 
plocach,* em, Boy, lad. 
plocach, -aiche, a. Abounding in pisces of earth, 
turf or clods. 2 Abounding in blocks of wood. 
3 Like a block. 4 Having a large head or end 
like a clubor b:'udzeon. 5 Haviny clubs or 
bludgeoas, 6 Having blocks or pulleys. .7 
Humped, 8 Sturiy, stout. 9 Having large or 
swolien cheeks. 10 **Turgid. l1**PFull-faced. 
An galar p., the quins 1, amps. 
plovcadn, -aidh, s.m.  Soriking. 2 Act of strik- 
.ing with a block or pestl», 3 Striking on the 
head. 4 Bruising, act of bruisinz, poundioz 
or mashing. A'pc-, pr.p..of ploc. A’ p.a’ 
bhuntàta, mashing the potatoes. 
ploeag, -aig, -an, s.f. GCorpent little woman. 
prov. 
plocagach, æ. Thiek-set. 
plocaich,** v.a. Bung, 
ds enone fut.aj/.a. of ploc. Shall or will bruise, 
C. 


ploeaidh, gen.sinj. of plocadh, 

plocair,** s.m. Haggler. 

plocaireachd,** s.f. Haggliug. 

ploc-a’-mhais, s.m. Buttock. 

Wooden 
hammer, mallet. 2 Little clod or block, 3 
sea blocan, 4 Potato-masher. 5 Policeman’s 
baton. P. a’ bhais, the hammer of death ; p. 
: bhuntàta, the potato-inasher—West coast of 

035, 

plocanach, -aiche, a. Abounding in small clods. 
2 Furnished with mallets or wooden hammers, 
3 Furnished with small blocks or pulleys. 

plocan-bhuntàta, ssm. Potato-masher. 


| plocanta, -ainte, æ. Stout, sturdy. 2 Having 


fullor swollen cheeks, 3 Lumpish. 4 Round- 
headed. 5 Full-faced. 6 Blockish. 

p'ocantachd, s.f.ind. Stoutness, sturdiness. 2 
Swelling of the cheek. 3 Fuliness of visage, 
4 Lumpishness, blockishness, doltishne:s. 

p'oc-cheaunach, a. Beetle-headed. 

ploc-dubh, see dordalan. 

ploc-lomaidh,tt s.f. Block of wood, hollowed 
out and furnished with a ponderous woven 
.pestle, having a handle inserted towar ls iis 
upper extremity, at right angles, waich is 
used for hulling barley, or pounding bari for 
tauning. 

ploc-mhalach,** œ. Beetle-browed. 

ploc-mhaildheach,** see ploc-maaiach, 

plod, -a & -uid, pl. -an, s.m. Ciod. 2 Pool, 
standing water. 3 Carnage. 4 Damage. 65 
Fleet of shipping, especisliy herring-b abs. 
P. mor loingeis, a larye flert of vessels ; is iad 
a rinn am p. ! what carnage tiry have made! 
[** gives both 2 & 5 as t, with gen.sing. -oid.] 

plod, v.a. Pelt or strike with a clod or clods, 2 
Scald, parboil. 3 (CR) Reimn»ve clods from 
turnip-land. 1* Float, cause to float. A’ 
plodadh na m ics, scalding the nij. i 

plodach, -aich, -aichean, s.m. Puddle, mire, 2 
ttLair for burial. égal? 

plodach, Ach, a. Abvun ling in clods, M 

plodaeh.-4iche,q. Lukewarm. 2 Parboiling, 
thet parboils. 3 Parboiled. 4 Scalding. 6 
Buoyant, floating, like, or belonging to, à 
float. Uisge p., Lukewarm water. 

vlolachalh,** s.m. Floating, buoyancy. 

plodachd,** s.f.ind. Lukewarm iss. Led 

ploladh, -aida, s.m. Striking, act of striking or 
pelting withclods, 2 Act of parbyiling. 3 
Nealding, seald. 4 **Buoyancy. 5 ** Float. 
6 Removing clods from turnip-land,.—Skye. 
i**Fleet, 8 (AH) Jettisoning. A’ p, pr. pt. 
of plod. 


plodag 


plodag, -aig, -an, s.f. Water gruel, warm posset. 
Deoch phlodaig, a drink of gruel. 

plodaich, v.a. see plod. 

plodaiche, s.f.ind. Lukewarmuess. 
being parboiled. 

p'odaireachd,** s.f.ind. Buoyancy. 

plodan, -ais, -an, s. m., dim. of plod. Small 
clod. 2 Small pool. 3**Small float. 4 Smal! 
boat of a smack, see p. 78. 

plodanaet, -aiche, a. Abounding in little clods, 
or 2 in litle pools. 

pledanachd, | s.f.ind. Paddling in water. 2 
Floating. 3 **Guddling. 

piodanaicue,** s.m. Dabber. 

plodar, see plodmhor. 

piod fhéath,(AH) s. Dead calm. [féath-gheal.] 

plodh,* sand. Anything put temporarily toge- 
ther. Z Sick person that dies ou getting the 
Jeast coid or injury. 3 Man or anything hard- 
ly hanging together. 

plodhai-g, see pleoisg. 

p'odhaisgesch, see piedisgeach. 

plodhaisgeachd, see pledi-gealaché, 

pP'odhaisgeag, see pled syeag. 

plodhaisgean, see pledisgean, 

plodhaman,* see pieoisg. 

plodmhor,** a. Buoyant, floating. 

plodraich, -e, s.f. State of becoming stagnant. 
Z^Carnage. 3 Havoc. 4* State of lying here 
apditherefuncared for. 

ploic,t -e, -ean, s.f. The mumps [with the art. 
a’ ph—. | 

ploiceach, . -eiche, 
Plump-cheeked. 

ploiceag, cm, -an, 8.7. Plumyp-cheeked woman. 

i/oivcean, -ein, -an, s.m. Plump-checked boy. 

l1o!ceanaca, -aiche,tt a. Plump-eheeked, 

pioiceanach, -aich, s.in. see ploicean. 

ploicha, see ploic. 

picichdeach, see ploiceach. 

ploide, see plaide. 

Picidcag, s.f. Good-natured female, 

ploidln g, see pleóisz. 

plo dhisgeach, see pleoisgeach 

pioidbisgeag, see pleotsgeag. 

plo.dhisgean, see pieci: gean. 

pioiseaci,( DMK) s. am. Portion of anything, a 
of a pièce of cloth — Caithness, 

ploisg, see plosg. 

p!oigh, Gaelic spelling of Scots ploy, 

tploisg, -e,a. Spongy. 2 Elastic. 
mable. 4 Quick, 5**Dry. 

pleiteach,* -eiche, a. Powny. 

ploiteag, (DC) s.f. Karthworm—Uist, 

ploitean,(MMcL) s.m. Downy peat. 

plosg,** a. Quick. 

piosg, pr.pt. a’ plosgadh, a’ plosgail & a’ plos- 
gartaich, v.n, Palpitate, throb, start, pant, 

. gasp. 2 Sigh, sob. A chridh' a’ plosgail, Ais 
heart palpitating. 

plosg, -oisg, -an, see plosgadh. 
céile, lifeless on the bier. 

plosgach,** o Panting, throbbing, gasping. 2 
Causing to pant or throb. 3 Like a pant or 
sob. 4 Quick. 65 Boid. 

ploseadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s. m. Palpitation, 
quick motion of the heart. 2 Start, throb. 
throb'ing of the heart. 3 Sigh. 4 Loud 
sound or noise, 5 Life. breath. 6 Aspiration, 
A’ pr.pt. of plosg. Gun ph. aur déile, without 
a gasp on the stretching board. 

plosgail, s.f. £ pr.pt. cf plosg, see plosgadh, 

ploszarnach,** a. Quick, bold. 2 Panting. 

plosvarnaich,** s.f. Panting. 

p osgair,(MS) v. Blow. 

plosgartach, -aiche, a, Breathless, panting. 2 
Throbbing. 3 Quick. 4 Bold. 5 Open. 


2 State of 


a. Having the mumps. 2 


2* Shawl. 


3**Inflam- 


Gun ph. air 


T ` f 
1 L 
mi A Le i En 1 I = 
A I I| Pa) lj 
d = L 1 x K E 


| 
rn 


728 


plucadh 


pio-gartachd.** s.7. Panting,casping,throbbings 

plosgartaich,** v.n. see plosg. 

plosgartaich, pr. pt. of plosg & **plosgartaich, 
see plosgadh. : ' 

plosgat,§ -ait, s. m. — Corn-marigold, see bile 
bhuidhe. 

plot, see plod. 

plotadh, see plotadh & plutadh. 

plub, p "pt. a’ plubadb & a’ plubairt,v.n.Plump, 
fail suddenly into water 2 Emit a noise, as 
of liquor in a cask, or of porridge boiling. 8 
Speak invrticulately and rapidly. : 

plub, -mwb & -a an, sm. Any great and soft un- 
wieldy lump. 2 Sudden plunge. 3 Sound as 
of a stone falling into water. 4 Noise of 
hyuor when moved in a cask not quite full. 6 
Noise of porridge boiling. 6 Ciumsy, lubber- 
ly persen 7**Round-head, jolt-head. ` 8** 
brain-pan, P chadail, a moments sleep. ` 

plubach, -aiche, a. Sounding as liquor moved in 
a half-filled cask. 2 Sounding as a stone fall- 
in? into water, 3 Speaking indtstinetly and 
rapidly A" Soft and clumsy. 5ttPlunging. 7 
™ Round headed, jolt headed 

plubach,* -aiche, s.f. Soft, lubberly female. 

piubadh, -a.dh, sm Act ot falling suddenly 
into water 2 Act of sounding, as agitated 
liquor in a half-filled cask, 8 Act of speakine 
indistinctly and rapidly. 
plub. 

piubadaich, -e, s.f. see p'ubadh. 


plubaiehe, s./ ud  Lumpr-hness, clumsiness 2- 


Habit of -p aking miis inctly avd rapidly, 

piubair, -ean, s.e booby, 7 One who speaks in» 
distinctly and rapidly, 3 Lubbert  4**Joite 
headed fellow 6 Chubby-(aced tellow, 

——-eachd, s.firnd. see plubraich. 

neach, Ach, see phlubair, 

— ———- sin, -ean, s.s. Marsh-marigold, 

plnbairt, s.f. d pr.rt. see plubadh 

plubais,** sf, Paddling 2 Paddling noise, 3 
Gurgling ouise. 

plubarta:cb, see plubraich, 

plub-cheann, -chinn. s,m. Lumpish head. 

ach, -aiche, a. Lump-headed. 2 

Dull, stupid ete 

piubrach, aiche, a. Making a plimping noise, 
% Gurgl'ng, gugpling 3 Paddling or playing 
in the water 4 Floundering. 

piubraich, -e, gf Continued noise as of stones 
faliiug into water. 2 Paddling in water. 3 
Continued noise of agitated water. 4 Gurg- 
ling, ruggliug. 6 Speaking iudistinctly. 6 
Piunging, foundering. P. nan tonn, the gurg- 
ling of the waves; na bricm p., the trout 








fiounderiau. 

pluc, -uic & .a, an, s.m. Lump. 2 Knot. 3 
Bunch. 4 Tumour, 5Pimple. 6 Bung. 7 
Tie rot in sheep. 8 Head of a pin. 9 se6 


a’ phloic. 
browed, 
pluc, pr.pt. a’ plucadh,v.a.Blow,puff out. 2 Stop 

with a bung. 3 Knot. 4 Make bunchy. 
piuc, pr.pt. a’ plucaih,v.a. dn. Beat, thump. 
2 Pelt. 3* Jumble. 4ffPluck. | 


10**Hunch P.-mhaildeach, beetle- 


plueach. -aiche, @. Lumpy, knotty. 2 Bunchy. 


a Fuil of tumours or pimples: 4 Having the 
mumps. 5 Having the rot, as sheep. 6*Jumb- 
ling. 7**Chubby. 8**Hunchy. Sròn ph., 4 
pimply nose ; an galar p., the quinsy, 2 rot in 
sheep, 

plucadh, -aidh, s.m. Blowing of the cheeks, 2 
Slate of becoming knoity or buxcby, 3 Act 
of bung mg, or stopping with a bung. A’ p—, 

r.rt. of pine. : 

piucadh, -anih, 4&fm.Beating. act of beating or 

thumping. 2 Pelting. A’ p—, pr.pt. of piùe, 


A’ p—, pr. pt. of | 


ae | 


E d: a 


e Pm 
AP A. 


3 Je = 


plucaich 


plucaich, v.a, Plug. 

—e, s.f.und, Lumpishness, bunchiness. 
Knottiness. 

p'ncair, -ean, $m Person having a swollen or 
pimpled tace. 2ttBeater, thumper. 3 Chub- 
by taced fellow. 

eachd,** $ f. Chubbiness. 
nence. 

plucais,** st Flux, 

plucan, n.pl. of pluc. 

, ain, [ p/- -ain & -an.] s.m., dim. of pluc, 

Little lump 2 Liitle knot or bunch. 3 Lit- 

tle tumour or pimple., 4 Small bung. 5* Lit- 

tle jumble of sea, 

ach, -aiche, a, Abounding in little lumps, 
Knots or bunches 2 Abounding in little tu- 
mours8 or pimples. 3* With a little jumbling 
of sea 

pluc-aodach,** s Baize 

plucas, -ais, s.m. Diarrhcea 

-——ach -aiche, a. Affected with diarrhea 2 
Causing diarrhoea, 

plüch, ug Press, squeeze slowly and tightly, 
compress, 2 Smother. 3**Throng 4**Mouth 
when eating. 6**Constringe 

plochadh -aidh. s m. Squeezing, act of squeez- 
ing, compressing *squeezing slowly and last- 
Iv tightly 2 Smothering. 3**Thronging. 4 
**Mouthing 1D time of eating. A’ p—, pr.pt. 
of plach. [plüchdadh in Gairloch—DU.] 

pluc mhailgheach, -eiche, a Beetle-browed. 

pluic, -e, -ean, s.f The cheek. 2 Blub-cheek. 
3 pl. of ploc. 4 Beard, Loisg ia air a chéile 
leis na pluic, they forght (fired on) each other 
with turfs ; tba a bhreug 'nad ph., thou liest 
—lit. the lieis in thy cheek ; do phluicean 
mar na caoran; thy cheeks like the rowan-herry, 

-——each, -eiche, a. Blub-cheeked, chubby. 
cheeked, having large cheeks. 

——each. eich, s.m. Blub-cheeked person, 

-——each, -1ch, ert The toothache. [With the 
art. a’ ph—.] 

pluicean, -ein, -an, s.m., dim. of pluic, Little 
round cheek. 2 (AF) Chub (Gabi 

ach, -aiche, @ Having little round 

cheeks. 

acb. -aich, s.m. Blub-cheeked person. 

pluideach, -eiche, a. Club-footed.-splav-footed., 

pruideiche, s.f.znd Distortion of the feet, 

pluidse,* s.m, Big lumpish man or beast. 

ach? -eiche, s.f. Clumsy, awkward fe- 
male. lumpish female. 

pluinnse. sf Swash Gaelic spelling of plunge. 

ach,** a. Plunging. 

——ag.(DMy) ss Large coarse apron 

‘pluirean. em an 6m. Flower 

- ach. -aiche, a. Flowery. 

piuit,* s.f. Claw. 
plum. -dim. s.m. One who sits stock-still.  2* 

^ Dead calm. 3tt Anything that stands stock 
«till. 4* Hum-drum. i 

plum, pr pt, a plumadh, v.n. Plunge, sink un- 
der water, às lead. 

pluma s.m Plummet 

plumacn.(DU) a. Black and deep. Lochan p. 
MhicLeoid,—the name of a small deep lake 
on the south side of Loch Ewe, 

plumadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of falling or plunging 


2 





2 Imperti- 


























into water, 2 Plunge, dash. A’ p—, pr pt. 
of plum, | 
plumas, s.f. see pluma, 2(DU) Little deep 


pool. 

plumaich.* v. n. Coagulate without yeast, as 
milk. 2 Stagnate. 

——te, a. Curdled. Bainne p., curdled 





milk, 
plumaid,(CB) ¢.f. Gaelic spelling of plummet. 


Digit 


NTERNE 


ex ba 
EU Ai 
— Em ms = = 
E | AT E 
Lai rl Xi 
4 d s P EL 


729 


pocachadh 
Nach b' e a’ ph. i 1 kow 





2 Plump female. 
plump she ig! 

plumanaich, e, s. f. Continued noise, as ¢ 
stones falling into water. 2 Dashing. 
Noise of waves. 4**Plunving. 5 (DU) Dark 
ening. Anns a’ ph., in the darkening or lat 
twilight, 

plumastair,(A H) s.m, Dull, sullen, dour man. 

plumb, -a, -an, s,m. Plunge. 2 Noise of any 
substance faliing into, water. 

plumb, v. see plum. 

——,* $.f. Heavy shower. 

plumba, -idhean, s.m. Plummet. 

plimbach, -aiche, a. Making a noise in the wa 
ter, 

plumbadh, -aidh, s.m. & pr.pt, see plumadh, 

plumbais, -e, -ean, s.f. Plum. P. sheargta, @ 


prune. 
-fhiadhain,§ s.f. 
domesticus. 
each, -eiche, a. Full of plums. 
-sheargta, s.f. Prune. 
plumbas, see plumbais. 
ach, see plumbaiseach, 

plundrainn, -e, -ean, s.f. Pillage, spoil. 

spelling of plundering. 

, v.a. Plunder, pillage, spoil. 

plùr, -uir, s.m. see flùr. 2**Nosegay. 3 Flour. 

plurach, -aiche, see flurach. 

pluran, see flùran. 

ach, see flùranach. 

achd, see flüranachd. 

plüranaiche, see flàranaiche. 

plüran-cluigeanach, see fluran-cluigeanach (in 
appendix.) 

plur-an-lochain, see flür-an-lochain (appendix.) 

plüran-seangain, see flàran-seaugain (appendix. ) 

plir-na-cubhaig, see flur-na-cubhaig (appendix.) 

plür-na-gaoithe, see flur-na-gaoithe (appendix.) 

plür-na-gréine, see flür-na-gréine (appendix.) 

plutadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Breaking down, 
2t Falling down, as of rain. 

pnamh, see pràmh. , 

pobal, [** for pubull] see gallan-mor. 

tpobhlar, -air, -an, s.m. Poplar-tree.. l 

pobhnaidh, see pònaidh. Gaelic spelling of Scots 
pow nie. SC vi ; 

pobhnilleach,** @, Abounding in, or belonging 
to, poplar. 

tpobhuli, -uill, -an, s.m. see pobhlar. 

pobuli, -uill, -an, s.m. People. 2'lribe. 3 Con- 
gregation, 4 Nation. 

—— -ach, -aiche, a. Laica!t. 2 Populous. 3 
Of, or belonging to, the people. Duthaich ph., 
og populous country. 

achd,** s.f.ind. Poputousness, 

poc.| s.m. The mumps, [With the art, am.] 2 
(DM K^ Disease in cattle—Caithness. 

poc. pr.pt. a’ pocadh, v.a. & n. Put into a bag 
or sack. 2 Become like a bag or sack. also 





Wild plum—prunus 





Gaelic 

















pocaich 
poc. pr.pt. a’ pocadh, v.a. & n. Put into a poc- 
ket, 2 Furnish with pockets, alsopocaich. , 
oca, -n & -pnan, s.m. Bag, little sack, satcnel. 
2(DMy)Blister, P.-saic, a large sack thrown 
across a horses back. and large enough to con- 
tain æ loal; air a’ ph., begging. 
poca, -n,-nnan, s. m. Pocket. 2 Small bag. 
Leabhar-poca, æ pocket-book; airgiod pòca, poc- 
k»t-mon y. 
poca builhe, CR) s.m. Deer's stomach— West of 
Ross-shire & Suth'd. i 
pócach, -aiche, «. Having pockets, 2 Like 4 
3 Havinz large pockets or pouches 


poexet 
pocach, aiche, a. Having bags. 2 Abounding 
in bags. 3 Likea bag, 4 Bagged, 


pocacbadh, -aidh, s. m. Act of patti into à 


NT E R d ET 


pocachadh 

bag. 2 State of becoming like a bag, bageing: 
A’ p—, pr.pt. of pocaich. 

pocachadh, -aidh, s.m. Pocketing, act of poc- 
keting. 2 Act of furnishing with pockets. A’ 
p—, pr.pt. of pdcaich. ; i 

pocachan, -ain, An, s.m., dim. of poca. Little 
pocket. . 

pocaich, pr.pt. a’ pocachadh, v.a. & n. Put into 
a bag or sack. j 

pocaich, pr.pt. a’ pocachadh, v.a. dn. Put into 
a pocket. 2 Furnish with pockets. Ith do 
leòir ’s na p. mir, eat as much as you like but 
pocket nothing—said to boys going toa party. 

pòcaid, e, -ean, 8.7, see pòca. 

each, -eiche, a. see pocach. 

ich, v.a. Pocket. 

pocain, gen.sing. & n.pl. of pocau. 

pocair,** s.m. Beggar. 

pocait, see pòcaid. 

pocan, -ain, -an, s.m.,/i;n. of poc. Little bag or 
sack. 2* Little squat fellow. 3 in derision, 
Impudent little fellow. 

pocan,tt -ain, An, s. M., dim. of poca. 
pocket. 

ach,tt -aiche, a. Abounding in little poc- 
kets. 

pocanach, -aiche, e. Having little bags. 2 Like 
a little bag. 3 Impudent, 1ll-bred, 4**Squat, 
diminutive in person. Is fhearr mathair pb. 
na athair claidheamhach, better is @ mother 
with a bag (full of victuals) than a father with 
a. sword by his side. 

pocaran, p/. of pocan. 

pocanan, pl. of pócan. 

pocan-garbh,(CR) s.m. Sea-urchin—Gairloch. 

pocan-na-buidseachd, (DMK) s. m. Small bag 
containing odds and ends used by witches in 
the practice of their voeation. 

poca-puinsein, s.m. Spider.— Ballachulish, Ben- 
derloch, e, 

pocanta, -ainte, a. Like a bag or little bag. 2 
Squat, thick and short in stature, stumpy, 
diminutive, s 

pocantachd, s.f.ind. Squatness, thickness and 
shortness of stature, stumpiness. 

poca-salainn,(CR) s.m. Large grey spider found 
in the openair, It has white legs which are 
shorter than those of (ber damhan-alluidh.”’ 
In some places every kind of spider is called 
peca-salainn, the term damhan-aliuidh being 
considered quite bookish. 

pochd, see poc. 

pòg. -dig, -an, s.f. Kiss. 

pog. pr.pt. a’ pògadh, v.a. Kiss, P. mi, kiss me, 

pógech, -aiche, a. Kissing. 2 Given to kissing. 

-—---—,*s.f. Blandishing female. 2 Offerer of 
kisses, 

pògadh, -aidh, s.m. Kissing, act of Kissing, Kiss. 
A` p—, pr.pt. of pòg. 

pogaidh, fut.aff.a. of pog. Shall kiss. 

pogair, -ean, s.m, Kisser, one who kisses. 2 
Galant. 

-eachd, s.f.iná. Kissing, frequent kissing, 
continual kissing. 

pogau, see poigean. 

poganta, -ainte, a. see pógach. 2 Fond of kiss- 
ing. 











Little 











chd, see pogaireachd. 

pogarsaich,** s. Kissing. 

dea (am) s.m. Gaelic spelling of bow- 
tne. 

pogta, see pògte. 

poste, past pt. Kissed. 

poibleach, -ich & -a, -an, s.m. Tribe, people, na- 
tion. 2 The common people, mob, populace, 
3 Plebeian. 4* Commonwealth, 

— , pl, of pobull, 


Digitized b y 
^ rm 


CHIV 


Ar i 


780 


poit-dhubh 


poibleach, -eiche, o Popular. 2**Plebeian, of 
the populace. 3 Like a rabble, 

poibieacnas,** -ais, s.m, Popularity. 

tp ibleag, Se, Poplar-tree. 

poiblidh,tt -e, 8.f. Public manifest. 

," gen. of pobult. 

tpoibfigheachd, of Commonwealth. | 

poicean, -eiu, -àn, 8.74. Short, squat fellow, see 
pocan. 1 

—-ach, a. Thick, short, squat. 

poichean, -ein, sm. Pithless, diminutive fellow. 
2 Little impudent fellow. 3 Little piz. 

poichean ! int. Call to a little pig— E. Perthsh, 

poienidh, sf. Young pig. Am tac thu na poich- 
idhean ? have you Seen the young pigs ! — Eaet 
Perthshire. 

poichidh t } (CR) int. Calls to young pigs— 

poich ! poich ! E. Perthshire, 

poigean, -ein, -an, s.m.,dim. of pòg. Little kiss, 
smack. Thoir p. dnomh, kiss me. 

ach, -aiche, a. Kissiay. 2 Fond of kiss- 





— 





ing. 
pil, Gaelic spelling of pole. 
poilich, see bòilich. 
poilleadh,** -idh, s.m. Boring, riercir.g 
poineach, see pouacu, 
poinidh, -ean, s.m. see pònaidh, 
póinireach, see pónaireach. 
póir, -ean, s.m. Pore. 
poircean,(A FE) s.m. Little pig. 
poirse, Gaelic spelling of porch, 
Ee, o. Haul, drag, lug. 
poisde, 
poiste, \ see pósde. 
poit, -e, pl. -ean & -eachan, s.f. Pot, cauldron, 
pòit, v. Drink deeply or to excess, carouse. 
———, 8.f. see poite. 
poit-chamag,** s.f. Pot-hook. 
poit-chreadha,** s. f. Earthen pot. 2 Potter's 
clay. If the accent be on chreadha the mean- 
ing is ‘an earthenware pot,” but if on poit it 
signifies ** potters clay." 
poit-dhubh (a’ ph—,) s.f. The '* sma’ " still. 
We are indebted to DMK for the following 
names of ius parts, and a drawing from which 
the annexed sketeh wa. made. 


p Porpuisd 





570. A’ phoit-dhubh. 


1 An Leid, the fire-nlace— Ross-shire; an Sorch- 
an—,(AH) N. Argpil ; an Teallaich— Lorn. 
2 Bod-an-leanna, the discharge cock. 

3 Am Braghad, the shoulder. 

4 An Lionadair, the charger. 

5 An Ceann, the still-head. 

6 An Gearradan, the connecting piece. 

7 A’ Chliath, the worm. A’ chaora chrom— 
Bainne ajg ua caoraich uile ’s galan aig,a’ 
chaora chruim, @l/ sheep have milk, but dhe 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS Ml 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 





-— 


S 2. 


men 


x 


d D 
» bAs ^ 
T 3 ps 
tat- M LCS. "aw 


ud TEE y nd 


ai 
i 
| 


v 


di 


poit-dhubh 


len —Old Port-a-beul—( Fionn. ) 
8 An stann cléith, the worm-tud. 
9 Am Feadan, the spout. 
10 An Glacadan, the spirit rece Or, 
11 An Spùdan, an svùdan fuar, (/ionn) Fead- 


dan, DM) the chute for supplying the worme | 


tub with cold water for condensing the vapour 
that passes from the siili to the worm. 
poite, see poit. 

pive, 8.f. Drinking, tippling, drinking to excess. 
[** says excess in easing or drinking, MeL & 
D, t, & * give póit.] 

poiteach, -eiche, &. Drunken, addicted to drink. 

poiteach, -eiche, a. Having pots. 2 Using pota. 

poiteadh, -idb, sm. Tipp!ing. 

poiceag, -eig, -an, s.f., dum. of poit. Little pot. 

ACh, a. Having or using smal) pots. 

poitea},** -eil, -ealan, s,m. Potvle (— four imper- 
ial pints.) 

poitean, see boitean & poiteag. 

ach, see boiceanach & noiteagach. 

pòitear, -eir, -an, s.m. Drinker, bottle compan- 
ion. 2 Drunkard, gourmand. 

poitear,** -eir, s.m. Potter, pot-maker. 

poitearach, -aiche, a, "ippling, addicted to 
drinking, drunken, 

—d, sf.ind. Drinking, drinking to ex- 
cess, carousing, banqueting, 2 Habit of tip- 
pling or drunkenness, 38**Gormandizing, 

poitearachd,** s f. Pot-making. 

poit-fheola,* s.f. Flesh-pot. 

—— -fhua'l, sf. Chamber-pot—W. coast of Ross. 

—— -fhiuran, $.f. flower-pot. 

—— -ghlanaidh, s.f. Fining-pot. 

poitidh ! (UR) int. Call to a pig. 

poitigir,(MS) s.m. Pharmacopist, 

poit-leabach, s.f. Chamber-pot. 

—— -luibh, -e, -ean s.f. Pot-herb. 

— -luibhean,** s.f. Flower-pot. 

—— -mbuin, s.f. Chamber-pot, jordan. 








poit na h-adhaire, s. f. Ludicrous name for a 


tea-pot. 

poit-phronnaidh, s.f. Mortar. 

poit-ruadh,* s.f. Still. 

poit-shedmair, s.f. Chamber-pot. 

poit-thogalach,** s.f. Still. 

pol,** -oil, s.m. Pall, 

pola,(DMy) s. Bowl. P. bainne, a bowl of milk. 

polachan,(MMcD) s.m. Small clay jar about 15 
to 18 inches high, used in Lewis for holding 
cream 

polar,** s. m. Sign. [** gives it for pollair.] 

polaradh,(AH) -aidh, s. m. The groove along 
vp the nail-holes are pierced on à horse- 
shoe. 

pol!,** s.m. Pole of land, containing 30j square 
yards, 

——,** v.a. Hole, bore. 


poll, puill, pl. -uill & -an, s. m. Hole, pit. 2 


Mire, mud. 3 Bog. 4 Pond, pool, 5 Deep 
stagnant water. 6 Dark and deep part of any 
stream. 7 Wet, miry meadow. 8 Nostril, 
Am pollaibh a shròine, in Ais nostris. 
p.-a-aireachd, 
p.-acarsaid, 
p.-acraiche, 
p.-büiridh, rutting-place of deer, 

p creadha, à clay-pit. 

p--damhair, a rutting-place for deer. 


a bay to anchor ships. 


p.-domhain, à deep pool, 
p.-éisg, ` a fish-pond, 2 a pool where fish 
p.-iaszaich, lie. 3% a fishing-station, 


p.-iaimhrig, a landing-p:ace. 

p.-leathair, a fanner’s pool. 

p.-mareachd, a road for ships. 

p.mo:ne or p.-mona, @ peat-moss, peat-bank, 


Digitized | 


E p—-——ELEeET xk EX Ze 2j 4-3 

* LLInIELE C EA [ oF i 
d 

! KANNER. CH kk vL 


721 
sti/l-worm (lit, the crooked sheep) has a gal- 


pónair-chapull 
peat-hag, 
p.-nan-tninag, the duck-pond. 
p.-salainn, a salt-pit. 
poliach, (CR) s. m. Cod—Suth'd & Easter Ross. 
2 Half-sized cod—Farr, 
pollach, -aiche, a. Lumpish, stupid, prov. 
2 Holed, hollowed, 3 Fungous. 4 Porous. 6 
(Ms) Thick. | 
a3, “als, $. m. Lumpishness, stupidity, 
prov, 





x? 


571. Pollag (3.) 
pollag, -aiv, -an, ef, dim, of poll. Little pool, 


hole, pit or pond. 2 Dimple. 3 Gwin' ad, 
fresh-water herring, found in lakes in Wales 
and Cumberland. 4 Pollock, lythe. 5 Whit- 
ing. 6 Pollan, powan, vendace. 7 (AC)Corn-. 
mortar.—a primitive form of hand-mill con- 
sisting of a hollowed-ont stone, The grain 
was placed in the hollow and pounded into 
meal with a stone pestle. Meal thus prepar- 
ed was called ‘‘ min-phronntaidh ” (bruised 
meal.) The pollag, which is a’more primitive 
form of mil! than the quern, was in use in tha 
Outer Hebrides in comparatively recent times, 
8 (Fionn) Nostril — Lorn. 9(AH) Potato-pit 
left out on the field during winter and spring. 
10 see pollair. 
ach, @ Of, belonging to, or abounding in, 
little holes, pits, ponds, dimples, Ze. 
-chnotaidh, Arqgy/l tor clach-chnotainn, 
-seirce, see pollag. 
polla-ghuirean,** s, Ozoena. 
pollair, -ean, s.m. Nostril. 2 Searcher of holes 
and corners. 
pollaireachd,* sr Searching of holes and cor- 
ners. 
pollairean, see pollaran. 
pol!an, -ain, -au, s.m. Plash. 2 (MS) Nostril, 3 
(AF) see pollas, P. na sròine, nostri. 
pollaran, s.m. The duniiu —pol?dna alpina, also 
called Bird-of-the-mud-pits—'ltring avariabi- 
lis. Also pollairean in summer, and gille-fead- 
aig in winter. 
poll-cheannach, -aiche, Lump-headed, jolt- 
headed, stupid. 
poll-cheannan, -ain, ap, s.m. Tadpole. 
polldach, -aich, -aichean, s.f. Marshy ground, 
LEM $.m. Fish-pond, 2 Pool where 
sh lie. 
poll-mhogaz, (CR) s.f: Toad—W. of Ross-shire, | 
poll-inóna,* s.m, Peat-pit. 2t+tPeat-hag. | 
poll-suathaidh,(AF) s.m. Rubbing-pool of Kiln, 
see àth (in appendix.) 
po:lta, past pt. of poll. Bored, 
polltach,tf a. Full of holes, 
pdloich, see bòilich. 
polt,** s. Nostril. 
ponach,f-aich, ëm, Boy, lad. 
to 2 or 3 years— Perthshire. 
gyll—(4'1onn,) 
pònaidh, -ean, s.m. Pony, small horse. 2 ** 
Doeked horse. (garis. 
pònair, gen. pònarach, s.f.coll. Beans—faba vitl- 
-airneach,§ s.f.coll. Kidney beans. 
-chapull,$ s. f. coll. Bog-beans, buck- 
beans, marsh-trefoil—menyanthes trifoliaid. 
(all, 572.) 
222 











a. 


2 (CR) Child up 
[poineach in Ar- 








~~ f 
E 


pudhar 


pirating sore —W, of Ross. 
pudharach, a. Hurtful, harmful, injurious, 2 
Ulcerous, having ulcers. 
—adh, -aidh, s.m. Suppnration. 
pudharaich,(MM) v. Suppurate. 
pudharan,(DC) s.m. Black stalk of corn found 
occasionally in a field of growing oats— Uist. 
puibleachadh,”™ -aidh, s. m. Publishing. 
fpuibligh, -e, a Public. 
tpuiblich, v.a. Publish, proclaim. 
puic, -e,-ean, sf. Bribe. Fhuair e p., he has 
been bribed ; chad’ thug e p. dheth, he made 
nothing of him. Also used for pùc. 
puic, wa. Bribe. 
puiceach, -eiche, @ Bribing, giving bribes. 2 
Receiving bribes, 3 Easily bribed. 4**Like a 
bribe. 
püiceach,* eich, s.f. Female briber. 
puicean, -ein, -an, s.m. Veil or covering over 
De eyes. 2 Game of blind-man's-buif, 3 
riba, 
püicear, -eir, -an, s.m. Briber. 
— —— —Aaáchd, s.f. Bribery. 
puichean, -ein, -an, s.m. Little impudent fellow. 
2 Pithless, sickly, diminutive fellow. 
puicneadh,** -aidh, s.m. Blindfolding. 2 Im- 
position. 
puicne-sgreabhal,** s. Spangle. 
pùidse, -an, s. f. Pocket. Gaelic spelling of 
Scots pronunciation of pouch. P. uaireadair, 
a fob; p. briogais, @ trousers pocket. 
puiiseach, a. Having pockets or pouches. 
puilg an, (CR)s.m. Little fat persen— W. of Ross, 
see builgeau. 
ninc, -e, -ean, see punc. 
puincearn, -uirn, -an, see puingearn. 
puing, see puuc. 
puingean,** -ein, sm. Roll of butter. 
puingearn,** -eirn, s.m. Beam for measuring or 
weighing goods, the graduated beam. (pung- 
jarann,) 
puinnd, gen. & pl. of punnd. 
puinne, s. Drop, spout, stream, see buiune. 
'Dol le puinne ’na chuaich,— Rob Donn. 
puinneag,§ -eig,-an, s.m. Common sorrel, 
buiuneag. 
ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in sorrel. 2 
Of, or pertaining to, sorrel. 
puinneagau,-ain, s.m. Sorrel. 
puinneanach, -aich, s.n. Same meanings as 
painneanachsdh. 2**Bruiser, pugilist. 
puiuneanachadh, -aidh, s. m. Beating, act of 
beating or thumping, thrashing, belabouring. 
A’ p—, pr.pt. of puinneanaieh. 
puinneanaich, pr. pt. a’ puinneanachadh, v. a. 
Beat, thump, belabour, bruise. 
puinng, see punc. 
puinse, Gaelic form of punch,toddy. Am p. mil- 
is, guanach, the swet heady punch, 
puinseach, a Abounding in punch. 2 Of, or be- 
longing to, punch. 
puinsean, -in, -an, s. M. Poison, venom. 2** 
Term of contempt or disgust. A phuinsein a 
tha thu ann ! reptile that thou art! [puinn- 
sean is nearer the usual pronunciation, but as 
the best Gaelic Dictionaries give puinsern, 
that spelling has been followed here, Mel 
& D gives puing’an in the Ga?l.-Enz.part, and 
and puinns’an in the Eng.-Gael. part.] 
ach, -aiche, @. Poisonous, venomous. 
2** Baneful. 
puinseanachadh, -aidh, s. m. Poisoning, act of 
killing by means of poison. A’ pc, pr.pt. of 
puinseanaich, 
puinseanaich, pr.pt. a’ puinnseanachadh, v. a. 
Poison, take off or kill by poison, 
_puinseanaichte, past pt, of puiaseanaich. Poison- 





see 


~ — 








D 


ee Late 
Boe Bo re 
JTERNET ARCHIVE 
= 1 KL i d aun r LE 


710 


»nn^alachd 


(son. 
oisonons, Venomous, 


el, killed by 
pui eanta, 6. 


puinseantach|, sf. Same meanings as puin-. 


Scant, = 

puinseantas,* -ais, sm. Poisonousness, venome 
ousness, 2 Vineictiveness, resentment., 

P'linsion, -in, -ean, see pninsean, 

—— ———aAeh, see ptinseanach. 

puíusiouacha/h, see puins-anachadh,. 

puinsionaich, see piinsevynaieh, 

pnuiusionaichte, see puiinseanaichfte, 

puin donta, see puinaeauta, 

puintealta,** œ. Precise. 2 Punctual. 

pu'p,(D Mu) @ Worthless, untidy. Am fear pe 
sin, trat worthless fellove—Suth’ d. 

puirleag, -eig, -an, $.f. Crest, tufs. 

püirleazach, -aiche, a Crested, tufterd. 

pulrneach,** -ich, eum, Hunter. 

puirt, gen. d pl. of port. 

puirtean, -eín, -an, 8. m., dim. of port, Sonnet, 
2 Little harbour or haven. 3 Little turret, 

puis, -ean, s.m. Puss, kitten, little cat. 

puiseag (DU) s.f. Kitten. 

fpuisg.** va. Beat, whip, lash. 

puisidh, Gaelic spelling of pussy. 

paision, see puinsean. 

puish, gen.sing. & n.pl. of post. 

fpuitric, s. Bottle. 

pulag, aig, -an, s. f. Round stone, 
Pedestal. 4 Footstool of a pillar. 
poise. 6* Large round stone. 

pulagaca, -aiche, a. Abounding in round stones. 
2 Like a round stone or ball 

pulaidh,(CR) -nean, s.f. Turkey. Coileach p., 
a turkey-cock ; cearc-ph., a turkey-hen —W. of 
Ross-shire. 2 (DMy) Champiou, hero, especi- 
cily in strenth and boxing. — '$ Niall Mac- 
Aoidh "na ph. orra, and Neil MacKay a tur- 
key-cock over them. 

pülais, S. SutA'd for bùlas. 
ula-mhullach,** pulaichean-m-, 

| cupola. 

pülas, see bùlas, 

pulbhaz,** -aig, A8, 3.f. Round stone, sizeable 
round stone. 

pulbhas,** s.f. Pollock (fish.) 

pullag, -aig, -an, s.f. TPantry. 
lythe (fish.) : 

puiprid, Gaelic spelling of pu/pit. 

pumpaid,(CR) Arran for cübaid (pu'pit.) 

pamoais,(MMceD) s.f. Pimples on tue face oz 
skin— Lewis. 

pumpais (MS) s.f. Pump. 

punan, ** -ain, s.m. see punnan. : 

punc, -uine,-an, 8. mM. Point, tittle. 2 Point, 
stop. 3 Article. 4 Notein music, 5 Quirk. 
6 Quibble at law. 7 Aspiring. 8 (MS) Posi- 
tion. 9ttFTone. 10 Point iu a debate. Chir 
thu as mo phune mi, you defetted my int^n- 
tion ; tha e làn phuncan, Ae is full of quirks ; 
air a’ ph. sin, om that point. — 

puncach,** a. Pointed, having points. 

yunerchadh, -ailh, s.m. Punctuation. 

puncachas, s.m. Position. 

puueaich, v.a. Point. ` 

puncid,* -e, -ean, s./. Quirk, stratagem. Lan 
de phuncaidean, full of quirks. 

puncaideach,* -eiche, æ. Full of quirks or tricks, 
stratagetical. 

puucail,(MS) v.a. Adjust. .— 

puncail,-e, d. Distinct, articulate. 
accurate. 3 Pointed. 4 Punctual, 
6* Business-like in everything. 

puneaireachd,s.f. Punctuation. ` 

punevlacad, sf. Distinctness, articulatsaess. 2 
Exactness, correc: nass, ACCUT voy. 3 Pointel- 
ness. 4 Punebusity. 5 Tidiness. 


2 Ball. 83 
5** Por- 


s.m. Dome, 


2(AF) Pollack. 


2 Exact, 
5 Tidy. 


Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


Ei iR SN = A "T= 
b mn [a M | 
ILLINOIS. Al 





| PPP 


puncalachd 


attention. 

Puncalas, see puncalachd. — ` À 

puncan-dearbhaidh, s. Quotation points ('' 
2 (DMy) Proofs, tests, — . 

puncar, -ais, s.m. Article in grammar. 

puncglas, -ais, s.m. Species of purple grass. 

Pint labii ee v.a. Articulate. 

punc-labhairt, puinc-, s.m. Articulation, 2 Ac- 
cent, accentuation, 4 

punc-labhraiche,** s.m, Distinct articulator. 

pund, see pnnn !. 

pundglas, -ais, see puncglas, 

pung, ning, -an, see punc. 

pungach, see puncach, 

pungachadh, -aidh, see puncachadb. | d 

pungail, see puncaid. 2(DMy) Stiff, inactive 
feinale. 

punegaideach, see puncaideach. 

pungail, -e, see puncail. 

pungalachd, see puncalachd. f 

punnag ff -aig, -an, s.f. Baloon in architecture, 

punnan, -ain, -an, s.m. Sheafof corn, 2 Bundle 
of hay or straw. 38**Burden. 4**Fardel. 5** 
Blast, as of a horn. 6** Bittern. 

puond, -uinnd, s.m. Pound weight.(1 tb) 2 Fold 
to confine cattle that trespass, 3 £1 sterling. 
Punnd Sasunnach, £1 sterling. | 

punnd, pr.pt. a’ puundadh, v.a. Pound cattle, 

punnnainn, see funntaiun. [* says, Bad usage 
in being confined in a damp place. 2 State of 
being confined ina cold piace.) 

punndair, -ean, s.m. One who confines straying 
cattle, pounder, 2 (DU) Shepherd paid by a 
district to herd sheep during summer. 

eachd, s.f. Confining of straying cattle, 
pounding, 2 Herding sheep. Tha e ris a’ 
ph., he is engayed as a district shepherd, 

punnt, 8.m. Couch-grass. : 

punntainn,f s.f. Benumbment (also funntainn.) 

punt, -uint. see punnd. 

puntain, -e, see funntainn, 

püpaid, Gaelic form of Scots poopit. 

purgadair, -ean, s. m. Purgatory. 2 Purifier. 
3 l'ormenter. 4* The greatest anxiety to get 
freedom, or to shift quarters. 

purzadaireach, -ich, sm. One undergoing the 
changes and pains of purgatory. 

purgadaireach, -aiche, a. Purgatorial. 

purgadaireachd, s.f. Purification. 2 State of 

urgatory.  3**Changes of purgatory.  4** 
octrine of purgatory 

purgalaireadh, -eidh, s.m. Purgatory. 

purgadoir, see purgadair. 

purgaid, -e, -ean, $.f. Purge, purgative,aperient: 
medicine, P. duine, æ dour man—(DMy ) 

purgaideach, -eiche, a. Purgative, cathartic 
cleansing, vomitory. 

purgaideachadh, -aidh, ¢.m. Medication. 





purgaideachd,** s.f. Laxativeness, frequent | p 


purging. 
purgaidich, v.g. Purge. 
purlag, -aig, -an, s.f. Tatter. 2 Fragment of any- 
thing, prov. 
pürlagach, -aiche, «. Ragged, tattered. 
purp,* -uirp, s.m. The faculties of the mind. 2 
Full possession of mental powers. Chaille a 
h., he lost his faculties ; an fheadh 's a 
hitheas mo ph. agam, while I possess my 
faculties ; gun ph., uncollected, 
purpaidh,? $.f. Pursiane-like orache—atriplex 
poriuiacndes 2$ Poppy. 8**Purslane, 
purpaidh,{ft-e, a. Purple—suth'd & N. Argyll. 
purpail,* e a. Collected, in one’s senses, 2 
Sound in mind. 3 Punctual. 
6**Courageous. 7**Active. 
2 Activity. 


Pointed. 
purpaileactid,** s.f. Courage. 
purpais, see purp. 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 
WENN FAT i vL 


741 






122) 








4 Accurate. 5 


putain 


purpilachd,* a f. Collective- 
ness, full possession of fac- 
ulties. 2 Punctuality. 

purpur, -uir, s.m, Purple col- 
our. 

purr, pr. pt. a purradh, v.q. 
Push, thrust, drive, urge. 2 
Jerk, 3 Butt, strike with the 
head. 4 Poke. 5 Jostle. 9 
Dash a^, as a bull. 

purrach,** æ. Apt to push or 
shove, pushing, shoving, 2 
Jostling. 

purradair, -ean, s.m. Putter. 

purradh, -ailh, -aidhean, s.m., 
Pushing, act of pushing, 
thrusting, shoving or driv- d 
ing. 2 Jerking, jerk, 3 596. Purpaidh. | 
Butt, act of butting with the head. 4 Josil- 
ing. 5 Push, thrust. A’ p—, pr.pt. of purr. 
A’ p. le ’adharcaibh, butting with his horas ; 
an reithe a’ p., the ram butting. 

purraghlas,-ais, s.m. Cat. 

purt, puirt, see port. 

pus, -uis, -ean, Gaelic formyof puss. 

pus, -uis, -am, see bus, 

pus, see pos. 

pusach, see busach. 

pusachaz, -aig, An, s.f. Whining girl. 

pusachan, -ain, -an, s.m. Whining boy. 

püsadh, see pósadh. 

pusag, -aig, -an, s.f.,dim. of pus. 2tfsee busag. 

pusaidh, see puisidh, 

püsda, see D ^ 

püst', see pósda. 

put, -a, -an, s.m. The cheek. 

put, pr.pt. a’ putadh, pa Push, thrust. 2 Jose 
tle. 3 Put with the head. 

put, s.m. Push, shove. 

put, -a,-an, s.m. Young of moorfowl, young 
grouse (pout.) 2 Large buoy, generally of 
sheepskin, inflated. 3 Corpulent person. 4 
Any bulging thing. —Su!A'd. [2 is put in Har- 
ris and not pùt.) P. meadhon, a middle buo; 
p. suab, the buoy om end of cable ; p. sais, tha 
buoy placed just below the surface to prevent 
the ceann-mara (cable) lying on the bottom. 
[** gives pùit as gen. of No. 1.] 

put,(CR) s.m. Bruised swelling caused by a 
blow, asin fighting. 2 Spadeful of the cas- 
chrom. [1 & 2 Ross-shire.) Thug mi p. air, 
I marked him ; am p. fuaraidh, an ceap fuar- 
aidh, the first turned sod of a furrow. 

puta, see pait. 

puta,* s.m. Trout— North. 2 see put 1. 

putach, -aiche, a. Abounding in young grouse 

2 Of, or belonging to, bnoys, like a buoy. 3 

Producing young moorfowl. (bütach.) 

utach,** o Pushing, shoving, jostling. 

putadh, 3rd. sing. & pl.imp. of put. 

putadh, -aidh, -ean, s.m. Pushing, shoving, acb 
of pushing, jostling. 2*Butting. 3 Piece of 
soil turned over at one time with & spade. 4 
ttCheck. 5 t¢Quick turn. 

puta-fuaraidh,(CR) s. First sod or spadeful of 
a furrow in delving.—W. of Ross-shire. 

putag, -alg, -an, sf. Oar-pin, rowlock, thole. 2 
Bodkin. 3 Pudding. 4 Smallridge of land. 
5 Haft or handle of a scythe. 

putagach, -aiche, a Of, having or pertaining 
to, thole-pins. 2 puddings, or 3 smal! ridges 
of land. 4**Having thole-pins, as a boat. 

putagaich, v.g. Provide or furnish with tholee 
pins, as a boat. 

putagaichte, past pt. of putagaich. 

putagan,** -aiu, s.m. Pudding, pock-pudding, 

putain, gen.sing, & n.pl. of putan. 





" VIP 4r 
UN Uu mm = " f ie 


RK - LL 


mà Fa PB Ai E A RATA — 
U A D Ch d e KL H H M H I LJ d 


praiseach-féidh 





575. Praiseach-brathar. | 576. Praiseach-feidh. 
aArvens?, j 
praiseach-fhiadhain,$ s. f. White goose-foot— 


chenopodium album. 








577. Praiseach-fhiadhain.578.Praiseach-gharbh. 

prais ach-gharbh,§ s.f. Charlock, wild mustard 
—sinapsis arvensis. 

«——— -ghlas,$ s. f. White goosefoot, see p.- 
fhiadhain. [** gives fig-leaved Eooscdont 





579. Praiseach-mhin, 580. Praiseach-na-mara,1, 

praiseach-mhin,$ s.f. Common orache—atriplea 
hastata & patula. ' 

-na-mara,§ s.f. Sea-side goose-grass— 





582. Praiseach-na- 
iràgha. 


681, Praiseach-na-mara 2. 


= xm = 
^ KE V = ri LI | ki 
LEN = IAN Ld 


791 


preab 


«veda maritima, 2 Glass-wort, erab-grass— 
salicornia herbacea. § says tne Gaelic nama 
is used for both these plants indiscriminately, 

re dE 8, f. Svakale—ci amoa «naris 
ima. 

pràiseachd, s.f.ind. Bracnness. 

praiseag,** -eig, -an, SJ. Little pot. 

praisealachd,(MS) sf. Brassiness. 

praixg,** -e, ef Portage. 

prais-ghnuiseach, -eich», o Impudent. 

pràisiche, -an, 4m. Brazicr. 

prài, v.n. Beseech, | 

——aách,*? æ. Beseechirg, craving, 

— adh ,** -aidh, a.m. Besecching. 

pràmh,-àimh, &. m. Slumber, nap, slight sleep, 
2 lieaviuess, drowsiness. 3 Grief, sorrow, 
dejection. 4*Melancholic duliness. ["roper- 
ly bi-ar-eyedness hence slumber, applied toa 
dozing condition, as, p. a’ chad::l, aiso to 
dimness, as, a’ cur reultan fo phramh.] Fo 
p'ràmh, sleping, slumbering ; a’ gabhail 

ràimh, taking a nap; p. chadail, a nap. 
pramhaci, -aich:, a Sleepy, narcotic, lethar- 
gic, drowsy, slumbering, dozing. 2 Sad, sor- 
rowful. 3**Disheartening. 

——————d, s.f.ind. Somnolency, drowsiness, 
lethargy, sleepiness. 2 Dejection, disheart-. 
enedness. 3 Sorrowfulness, 

pramhail, e, see pràmhach. 

--— — ——ea2chd, see pràmhachd. 

.ràmhalachd, see pra chd. 

y àmhan, -ain, s.m., dim. of pràmh. Slumber. 
2 Gloom, melancholy. 

pramh-chadal,(MM) s.m. Doze, slumber. 

pràmh-cheo, s.f.ind. Slumber, sleepiness, incli- 
nation to sleep. 2 Stupidity. 3 Forgetfal- 
ness. 

pramhtach, a. see prabhtach. 

pramsgal, (DMy) s.m. Worthless ‘talk. 2 Ree 
fuse of grain, &c. 

fprann,** -ainn, s.m. 

prann, see pronn. 

prannasg, 8.f. see pronnasg, 

pranutair, -ean, s.m. ses pronnadair 5, 

————-—,* v.a. Seribble, 2 Mutter. 

prantair, see pronnadair 5, 

praonau, see braonan. 

prap, A, a. Quick, speedy, ready, sudden, prov. 

——adh, -aidh, s.m. Quickness, prov. 

prapag (CR) ert Hay-ceck of x smallest size, 
about 18 in. in height.—Argyll. 

prapanach, sm, Child, boy. Gu 'm b'i siod an 
t-sùil àluinn bh’ aig mo ph. bòidheach, yon 
was the levely eye that my beautiful (lively) 
child had—Filidh, p. 75. (propairneach. ) 

prap-shüileachd, s. f. ind. blearedness of the 
eyes, 

pras,* s.m. Brass. 

prasach, -aich, s.f. Manger, crib, stall, 2(AF) 
s.n. Fox. P.-each, a horse-stall, 

prasair,* s.» see praisiche. `` 

prasgan, -ain, -an, s,m, Little herd, flock, 
bunch or group. 2 Group of people, gang. 3 
Mob, rabble, populace. P. ghabhar, a jlock 
of goats. | 

— — —aàch, -aiche, a. In little flocks, 2 Likea 
flock. 3ttFull of bundlesor groups. 1 Like a 
gang or mob. 1 

prat, -an, s.m.ind, Trick, artifice, prank. 2 (CR) 
Tantrum—A rràn. i 

—ach,** a. Arch. 2 Pranky, tricky, mischie- 
yous. —. 

—achd,** s.f. Archness. 

— ail, -e, a. Tricky, pranky. 

prathaig, (MS) sf. Heap. 2 Crowd,rabble. 8 
Varletry. | 

lpreab, see breab. 





Wave. 





preahach 


fpreabach, see breabich. ` 

+preahadair, sec breabadair, 

preabag, see breabag. 

preabail, see breabail. Y 

preabair, see breabair & breabadair. 2**Drave 
man, 

—————eachd, see breabadaireachd. 2** Acting 
bravely, gallantry. 

preaban,** s.m. Circus. 2 see breaban. 3**Winc- 
ing horse, 4**Courtyard. 

ach, a. see breabanach. 

achd, see breabanachd (appx.) 

aiche, see breabanaiche. 

preach,** v. Crucify. +2 Hlolé. +3 Stand,stay. 
ti**Gra p. T5 Punish. 

preach,” s.f. Bog, marsh, morass, 2**Grasp, 
hold, 3* Little fen—Arvy/l. Chaidh a’ bhò 
'sa, phreach, the cow stuck in the bog. 

preach,*v.a. Speak as with the voice of a bittern. 

ach,** a. Grasping, greedy, ravenous, 

Gu p., greedily. 

air,* -ean, s.m. Croaking preacher, mis- 
erable orator. Am p. graunda bodaich, the 
ugly old croaking orator. 

-——ag,(DMy) s.f. Any substance that, owing 
to its consistency, spreads when poured on 
the ground, as porridge, &e. When a woman 
falls in a heap, it is said, Thuit i ’na preach- 
aig air an talamh. 

preachain,** s.f. Bones taken out of pork when 
making bacon. 

preachan, -ain, s.m. Mean orator. 

preachan -ain,-an, s.m, Crow, 2 Raven, 3 
Kite. 4 Movoor-bittern 5 Little fen— A rgyll. 
6 (AF) Jackdaw, 7(AF) Vulture 8 Any ra- 
venous bird. . 

ach, s.m. see preachan. 

ach, -aiche, &. Ravenous, vulturine, 

grasping, greedy, like a kite or other raven- 

ous bird. 2 Qu.rulous, croaking. 8 Full of 
little pits, kites or ravenous birds, 

achd, &.f iud. MRavenousness, voracity, 
greediness, 

-————— -ceannann, (ceann-fhionn) Osprey, 

- ceirteach, Kite. 

————— -cnàimheach, Raven. 

—— —— -cnaimhlithgheach, see p.-cnaimheach. 

-craosach, Vulture. 

-gearr, Buzzard, 

-ingneach, Vulture, see fang. 

-nan-cearc, Ring-tailed kite. 

prealiud,** s.m. Bishop. Gaelic spelling of pre- 
late. 

. preamh, Blair Athole for pràmh (slumber,) 

+preamh,** s.m. Root, stock. 2 Tribe. (freumh) 

preas, pr.pt. a’ preasadh, v.a. & n. Plait, fold, 
corrugate. 2 Braid. 3 Become wrinkled or 
corrugated, 4 Squeeze, crush by weight or 
force, i 
reas, pris, pl. -an & pris, s.m. Bush, shrub. 2 
Thicket. 3 Brier. 4 Gaelic spelling of press, 
(cupboard,case.) Thi!g i an leanabh fo aon de 






































na preasan, $he threw the child under one of 


the shrubs; am p.,in a thicket; cha deach car do 
theadhair mu phreas, your tether has not gone 
round the bush—said of a person who looks 
well, Preas is not used in Arran where they 
say craobh for & garden bush and tom for a 
wild bush. a; 
p.-chrabhsag, @ gooseberry-bush. 


p.-dheare, 
p.ihearcag, }@ berry bush. 
p.-nan-dearc, 

p.-uris, æ bramble-bush. 
p.-droighiun, æ thorn-bush. 
p.-ftioutag, æ cloudberry bush. 
p.-2an ros, à rosebush. 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


135 


preas-sübh-chraobh 
p-name-flontag, a errwherry bush. 


| preas, a, -an, am. Wrinkle, crease. 2 Plait, fold. 


3 Vorruyation, ‘Pha preasan 'na aodann, hie 
fare is wriik'^d ; gun ph., gun smal, without 
wrintle or spot. 

-——acu, -aiche, og Furrowed, wrinkled, cor- 
mig ised. 2 Striped, 3 Plaited. 4 Abounding 
in bushes, 5 Abounding in presses or cases. 
6 Like a wrinkle, 6 Like a bush. Aghaidh 
ph., @ wrinkled face. 

--—achail, -e, a. Corrugant, 

--—achil, sf. Crispimess. 

preasaih, -aidh, s.m. Plaiting, act of plaiting, 
orfoldiny. 2 Braiding. 3 State of becoming 
wrinkled or corrugated. 4 Wrinkle, Gun 
swal gun ph., without spot or wrinkle. A’ p—, 
pr.pt. of preas. 

preasag, -a/g, -an, $.f., dim. of preas, Wrinkle, 
plait. 2 Little bush, little thicket. Lan ph., 
Juli of wrinkles, 

———a.ch, -aiche, @. Wrinkled, plaited, full 
of wrinkles, 

preasaich, v. see preas. 

preasan, -ain, -an, s.m.dim. of preas. Little bush. 
2 Free-will offering, 3 Wedding boon. 

preasan, n.pl. of preas. 

preasant, Gaelic spelling of present. [* ‘‘prease 
auian " hens’ eggs given to landlords by ten- 
ants asa part of the rent—in Jrish, a wedding- 
present, *' preasanta," a hen so given. } 

preasarlach,(MS) s.m. Coppice. 

preasarnach, -aich, $.f. Siirubbery, arbour,place 
full of shrubs or thickets. 

d, et, Bushiness. 

preas-deilgneach,§ s.m. Barberry, see barbrag. 

preas-(lroighinn,** s.m. Thorn-bush. Mar phreas 
droighinn, léke & thorn-bush. 

péeas-eariag, see àirne, 











588 Preas groiseid. 


preas-sroiseid,$ ¢. m., Gooseberry bush—ribes 
grossu/aria, 

preaslach,(MS) s.m Undergrowth. 

preas-mhucaz,* see ros nan-con. 

preas-min?achaidh, s.m. Mangle. 

preas-nam-mucag,}s.m. Dog-rose, see rds-nate 
con. 

preas-nan-àirneag,$ s. m. Blackthorn, sloe— 
prunus spinosa, 

E Ee s.m. Barberry, see bare 

rag. 

pre4s-nan-gorm-dhearc,$ s.m. Blue bramble, 
dewberry bush —rubus cesius. Badge of the 
MacNabs. (ill. 581.) 

preas-nan-sgeachag,§s.m.Whitethorn,hawthorn, 
see sgitheach geal. 

preas-uan-smeur,** s m. Bramble. 

preas-nan-spiontag,** s.m. Currant-bush. 

preas-shuidheag,§ s, m. Raspberry, see pregs. 
subh-chraobh, 


preas:sübh-chraobh,$ s.m. Raspberry—rubdbue 


; r= Ze E vg. P ` Ve 
J LIRE GC a" Í 
q uad d 


E bci iu 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


585 Preas-subh- 
chraobh. 


6854. Preas-man-gorm- 

dhearc, 
VOS AE és ID 
preastauth,** a@ Unable to bear cold, 2 Timid 
preathal,** -ail, -an, s.m. Dizziness, see breith- 
eal. : 
preathalach, a. Dizzy, confounded. see breitb- 
ealach. 
—— adh, see breithealachadh. (appx.) 
preathalaich, see breithealaich. 
préisgeadh, s.m. Preaching. 
priacail,** s.f. Danger. 
priam, see pramh. 
prib, see priob. : i 
pribhleid, Gaelic spelling of privelege. 
pribleach,** a., contr. of priob-shuileach. 
pric,** v. Gaelic spelling of prick. 
priceadh, sm. Pricking. 2 Stinging. 
prigear,(MS) s.m. Higgler. (Scots, prigger ) 
prigeireachd,** s, jy. Chaffery. 2 Higgling. 
(Scots, prigging.) 
prighig, va. Fry. i; 
—_—eadh, -idh, s.m. Frying, act of frying. 
A' p—, pr pt. of prighig. v 
priginn,** sf. Haggling (Scots, prieging.) — — 
primideach, a. Primitive,ancient, original,radi- 
cal, not derived. Facal p., à primitive word. 
d,** s. f. Primitiveness, originality, 
radicalness. 

$prinndil, s.f. Firstlings, first produce or offer- 
ings. 

prine, -achan, s.m. Pin, as used in fastening 
clothes. P. reamhar, a blanket-pin ; p.-iaruinn, 
an iron pin. 

-———ach, a. Abounding in pins. 

—achadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of pinning, securing 
with pins. A’ p—, pr pt. of prinich. 

prineachan, -ain, -an, s m.,dim, of prine, Lit- 
tle pin, 2 Pin-case, 3 Pin-cushion. 4 pi. ot 
prine. 

prinich, pr.pé a’ prineacbadh, v. o Tuck, pin, 
secure wilh pins 

te, past pt. of prinich. Pinned, fastened 
or secured with pins. 

priob, pr.pt. a’ priobadh, v. aq. Wink, twinkle, 
as the eye. Cha do ph. mo shui, Z did mot 
sleep a wink. 

priob,** s.m. Wink, twinkle of the eye. 

ach,** a. Winking. 2 Having à habit of 
winking, twinkling, 

priobadh, -aidh, -ean, s.m. Winking, act of wink- 
ing, act of winking or twinkling, 2 Twinkle, 
wink, 3 Moment. 4 Glimpse. Bi an seo 
am probadh. be herein a twinkling ; p. cad- 
ail, a wink of sleep. 

priobaiche,** s.m. . linkard. 

priobaid, e, -ean, sf Trifle 2 Evergreen privet, 
see ras: chrann-sior:uaine, 

priobair, -ean, s.m. Worthless fellow, blinkard. 
2 Miser. 

















— —— eachd, ef Meanness of spirit, 2 Arya- prnonh-eaglais, ean, SE The primitive chur 


Di tizen | 


LIZE L 
zl d 4 ZS 
V I-L! V KE CL LI | H KIK 
i 1 d 
LI L. I7 S vL 





priomh-eag!aias 


rice. 

. * J J -* | 
priovairneach, -ich, s.m. Rousing, any sudden | 

excitement. 


priobarrtich, s.f. see priobaireachd. 
tpriobarach, -aiche, a. Brave, heroic. 2 Quick, 
t -——d, s. f. Bravery, heroism, GAllaub 
conduet. ; 
priobarsaich, $.f. see priobaireaehd. 
priobhaid, s.f. Secret. 2 Secrecy, privacy. 
priob-losgadh, -aidh, -ean, s.m. Sudden barning 
or sense of heat. 2 ‘Twinkling. 3 Sparkie, 
b!aze. 
priob-luasgach,(MS) a. Frisky. 
priob-Jnasgadh, MS) s.m. Auxiety, eestasy. 
prob-shüil, s.f. Twinkling eye. 
2 Having the 





priob shuileach,** o Winking. 
habit of winking or twinkling. 
fprioe, v.a. Prick, sting. 
adh, -aidü, s.m. Pricking, 2 
Puncture. 
tpriodal, -ail, see brio:lal. 
prioga-breac (AP) sm. Sturgeon. 
prioghinn,* s.f. Sauce or seasoning in viands., 
2 Choice fool. 
2 Feed 


-——i:h, v.a. Season, as viands. 
with choice food. 
prniomh, a & prefix. Prime,chief, principal, first. 
-abhainn, ef Large river. 
ach,** a. Principal, chief. 
3 Fond of superiority. 
ach,** s.m. Favourite. 
achd, at Source. 2**Supremacy. 3*9 
Principality. 
adh,** -aidh, s.m. Primate. 
-aimsireach,** æ. Antediluvian. 
priomhair, -ean, s.n. Premier, prime-minister, 
2 Chief man, nobie, chief. ` 
priomh-arcal,** ail, ssm. Main beam. 
priomh-athair, -athar, -athraichean, s.m. Patri ` 
arch, progenitor, ancestor. d 
priomh-athaireach,** o Patriarchal. 1 
— — — ——as, 8.m. Patriarchate, i 
priomh-athaireil, a. Patriarchal. | 
prìomh-bhaile, -bhailtean, s.m. Chief town, me- 
tropolis, capital. 
priomh-bhailteach, o Metropolitan. 
priomh-bhan-diüc,** s.m. Arcn-duchess. 
priomh-bhard, s.m. Chief bard or poet, poet 
laureate. | 
priomh-chathair, -chathrach, -chathraichean, 
s.f. Chief town, metropolis. : 
priomh-cheann, -chiun, 8.m. Supreme bead. 
priomh-chiall, -chéille, s. f. Grea& understan iing, 
supreme or superior wisdo.n. 2 Primary sense, 
as of a word. 
priomh-chlachair, -ean, s.m. Architect. 
—— —— —— —— —eachd,** s.f. Architecture, 
priomh-chlàr, -àir, -an, s.m. Autozra»h, orizine 
.al writing. 
ach,** a, Autographical. 
priomh-chiéireach, -ich, s. m. Prime notary, 
proto-notary, chief secretary, chief clerk. 
priomh-chiéirsiun achd,** s.f. Employment or 
oilice of chief clerk. 
priomh-choltas, ais, -an, s.m. Archetype. 
priomh-choslich,** a. Arcaetypal, 
priomh-choslas, -ai3, -an, see priomh-ch»ltas. 
priomh-chrann, -chroinn pl, -chroinn [& -chrane 
nan] s. m. Main-m ist. 
priomh-dhiadhair, -ean, s.m. Chief divine. 
priomn-dhiüe, -an, s.m. Archduke. 
puomh-ihra»idh, ep, s.m. Arch-drui l. 
pnomh-dhuine, -dhaoine, s. m. Noble, chief, 
grandee. 
priomh dion:sgéith, Greater wing coverts, see 
No. 5, p. 328. l 





Stiugiug. 3 








2 Supreme, : 








ESA 








E 
y 
4 


ITF FE" BB | 
VERSITY UF ILL 

7 [^ Fi A A Sa 4 AAS Fi F | Le D | 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGh 


f 
i , 





 priomhlaid,* -ean, s.m. Prebendary. 


- päonnsachan, 
prionnsachd, s.f. see prionasalachd. 


priomh-eag'ais 
2 Cathedral. 5 Established church. 
church. ` ; 
priomhear, -ir, s.m. see priomhair. . 
p:iomh-easbachd,** see priomh-easbnigeachd. 
priomh-easbuig, -ean, 8.7. Metropolitan, arch- 
bishop. 
each, a. Archepiscopal. 
eachd, s.f. Archbishopric. 
nity of an arch bishop. 
priomh-fhàidh, ean, s.m. 
prophet. 2 Primate. 3 Arcübishop. 
riomh-zhineadas;** -ais, s.m. Primogeniture. 
A thaobh còir priomh-ghineadais, by right of 
primogeniture. 
priomh-ghleus, -a, -an, 8. mM. Beginning, founda- 
tion. 








2 Dig 








Ancient prophet, chief 


Gaelic 
spelling of prelate. 

—— ——-.—each, a. Prelatical. 

-—eachd, s.f. Prelacy. 

priomh-laoch, -laoich, s.m. Great hero, hero of 
the first order. 

priomh-long, -luing, -an, sf. First-rate ship. 2 
Admiral’s-shi. 

priomh-long-phort,** -phnirt, s. m. Royal resi- 
dence. 2 Prineipal sea-port or fort. 3 Prin- 
cipal camp. 

priomh-luingeas, -eis, -an, s.f. see priomh-long. 

priomh-mhuinntir, &.co/7. Aborigiues. 

priomh-phrionzsa,-an & -achan, s. m. Priuce- 
roval. 

priomh-shamh!achail, a. Archetypal. 

priomh-shamhladh, s.m. Archetype. 

p:iom i-sheól, -shiüil, s., Main-sail, Thog iad 
am p., they hoisted the ma m-sat, 

priomh-shona,** a. Supremely happy, supreme- 
ly blessed. 

pri ih-shonas, -ais, s.m, Supreme or chief hap- 
piness, ’Se am p. a bhi’creachadh, their chief 
happin’ss is to plunder. 

priomh-shluagh, -shluaizh, s.m. Aboriginal in- 
habitants of any couutry. 

priomh-thüs, Dia, s.m. Beginning, origin. 2 
Foundation. 3 Principle. 4 Eiement, 

priomh-uachdaran, -aia, pl. -ain & An, 8. m. 


Chief ruler. 
-—achd, s.f. Supremacy, su- 
reme rule or authority. 
prìomh-ùghdair, -eau, 8.?n. Original author, in- 
ventor. 
¢priomh-urlamh, -aimhe, a. Ready-handed. 2 


First engaging. 
priompallan, -ain, s.m. Beetle. 2 Noise like that 
2 Making a 


of a beetle. 

-——ach, a. Like a beetle. 
noise like a beetle. 

prionnsa, pl. prionnsan, prionnsaidh & prionn- 
sachan, $.m. Prince. 

prionnsach, -aiche, a. see prionnsail. 

prionnsachail, -e, a. see prionnsail, 

n.pl. of prionnsa. 








H 








prionnsadh, see prionnsa. 

prionnsaidh, n.p/. of prionnsa, 
rionnsail, -e, æ. Princely, like a prince, royal, 
authoritative,influential,commanding respect. 

—eachd, see prionnsalachd. 
rionnsalach,tt -aiche, a. Princely, 2 Authori- 
tative, commanding respect, influential. 

prionnsalachd, 8. f. Principality. 2 Princeli- 
ness. 

prionusan, n.pl, of prionnsa. 

priount, Gaelic spelling of print. 

- air, Gaelic spelling of printer. 

——.-—aireachd, s.f. Printers work, printing. 

prìosan, -ain, -an, $.m. Prison, gaol. Am p., in 
prison. 








Dir 


HIT 

E NTER NET 
V I- EIE 
mme ^ MR. 


EN e L d 
i 
CA [ l - H W 


pao P y 


737 
4 High | prìosanach, -aich, s.m. Prisoner, captive. 





pri-taoil, (CR) s.f. 


pro,(DMy) a. 


tprobhadh,** 
probhaid, -e, -ean, s.f. Profit. 


probhaist, 


- ———vach, 


—__ —_—-—eachidl, sf. Procuratorship. 





prog ! (CR) int. 





priomsheillean 


, -aiche, a Very confinei, within 
narrow bounds, 

à ; alh, -aidh, s.m. Imprisoning. act oi 
imprisoning, imprisonment. keeping in bond- 
diye, A’p—, pr.pt. of prìosanaich. 

—d, sf. Imprisonment, captivity. 











prìosanaich. pr.pt. a’ priosanachadh, v. o, Im- 


prison, incarcerate. 2 Take cap.ive. 
——, gen.sing. & n.pl. of prìosanach, 
te, past pt. Imprisoned, incarcerated, 





priosantachd,** s.f. Arctation. 

priosun, -uin, se? prìosan. 

pris, gen.strg. d n.pl. of preas. 

pri: -o,-ean, s.f. Price, valus, rate, worth, 9 


Respect, esteem. Ciod a’ ph. da ? what is dé 
price ¢’aa chur am p., raising it in estima von: 
tha e am p., it is in high estimation ; p. ne 
circe, the va/ue of the hen; p. a’ phrine, tie 
value of the pin, 


prisercha lh, -aidh, s.m Estimating, act of e :- 


timating or valuing, valuatioa. A’ pr. pt. of 


prisich. 


priseadn, -cilh, s.m. Valuing, valuation. [ness. 
prisealachd, s.f.ind. Value, preciousness, dewr- 
prisean, -ein, -an, s m., dim, of preas. 


Littie 


bush. 2 Little thicket. 


prisean, n.pl. of pris. 
prìseil, -e, a. Precious, valuable, dear. 
prisich, v.a. Estimate, fix the price, price, va- 


Jue, 2 Prize. 

Clatter— Perthshire. Na leiz 
a mhàin e le p., do not let it down with a clat- 
ter or suddenly ; thàinig e staigh le p., he came 
rushing in. 

Croaky, harsh. 2 Stentorian, 
as a bass voice. 3 The opposite of binn. 


deep, 
-aidh, s.m. Proof. 





each, a. Profitable. 

-—ei!, -e, a. Advantageous, profitable. 
.—ich, v. Profit, advantage. 

-ean, s. m. Provost. 2 in derision, 
Corpulent or clumsy fellow. 

-eiche, a. Of, or belonging to, a 
2 Corpulent, c!umsy. 








provost. 


tprobhal, -ail, s.m. Consul, 


—ach. a. Consular. 
—achd, s f. Consulate. 








procach, see progach. 
procadair, -ean, s.m. 


Advocate, procurator. 2 
P. righ, à king’s advocat». 
2 Busi- 
ness of a proctor. 3 Pleading. 4 Importuni*y. 


Man of business. 


procaid,( DU) s.f. Conversation carried on in low 


tones for the sake of secrecy. 


prochdair, Gaelic spelliug of proctor. 


—eachd, s.f. Proctorship. 
Call for a horse—Perthshire, 
Badenoch & N. Argyll. 


progach,(AF)s.m. One-year-old stag.—Sut^'d. 
progaidh ! int. see prog. 


proghain, s.f. Care. 

.— — ——éeach, a. In care or anxiety. 
roghan, -ain, s.m. Dregs, lees, sediment, re- 
fuse. (DU) Mixture of the remains of differ- 
ent foods used to feed calves, 

ach, a. Full of dregs, sediment or lees, 
2 [n care or anxiety. 

proidhid, see probhaid. 

—eil, see probhaideil. 

ich, see probhaidich. 

proidseach, see proitseach., 

proimbeallan,** see proimsheillean. 

proimhidh, -e, d. Fat, prov. 

proimsheillean,  -ein, 8. M. 
Beetle. 











Drone bee, 2 


proinistear 7 


proinistear, Perth for pronnasz. 

proinn, -e, -ean, s.f. Dianer, 
acity. 4 y-n. of pronn. 

proinne, vom». of pronn. 

ach,(A TI) s.f. Fish of a good size. Bha 
'n sgadan a db’ iasgaich sinn an raoir p. lagh- 
ach, the herring we caught last night were of 
a fair size. (also broinneag.) 

—— ——àchadh, -aidh, s.m. Dieting. 
3 Dinner 4 Dining. 

proiunich, pr.yt. A proinneachadh, v.n. 
2 Take a meal. 

proinuisteau, see pronnasg. 

proinn-laun, -a, -ainn, -an, s.m. Refectory, din- 
ing room, eating-room. 

proinn-lios,** see proinu-lann. 
roiuute, @. & past pt. of proinn. Pounded, 
mashed, pulverized, mauled, bruised. 

proiunteach, -eich, -eichean, s.f. Same meanings 
as proinn-lann, 

—— —d, s.f. Grittiness. 

proinstear, Perth for pronnusg. 

pròis, -e,s.f. Pride, haughtiness. 2 Flattery. 3 
Humouring, cajoling. 4 Ceremony. 5 Neat, 
punetilious little female, prude. 6 (DU)Con- 
ceil. 7**Nieeness, Bean gun ph., a wife 


without pride, 

prois,** v.a. Tiddle. 2 (CR) Beseech, entreat, 
urge— Perthshire. 3**Flatter, cajole, put in 
good humour, 

proisdeal, -eil, -an, s.m, Bottle. 

próiseach,"* æ. Apt to flatter. 2 Ready to hu- 
mour. 3 Requiring flattery or humour. 

proisea th,** -idh, s.m. Flattering. 2 Humour- 
ing, cajoling. 

proiseag, -eig, -an, s.f. Prude, coquette. 

proiseal,** o see proiseil, 

achd, s.f.im!. Pride, haughtiness. 2 
Punctiliousness, niceness, cereinoniousness. 
2 Humouring flattering. 3 Punctilious prud- 
ery or neatnuess. 

proisean, ein, -an, s.m. Proud or haughty per- 
son. 2 Puppy, conceited person. 3**One who 
flatters or humours. 4 One who requires to 
be flattered or humoured. 

pròiseil, -e, a. Proud, haughty. 2 Ceremonious, 
nice, punctilious. 3 Gallant, 4** Requiring 
flattery or cajoling. 5 Conceited, foppish. 6 
*Uppish, as a prude. 7*Neat, little and punc- 
tilious. 

proitseach, Ach, ssm. Boy, stripling. 2* Good 
lump of a boy. 

oronaistear, W. Perthshire for pronnasg, 

pronastal, see pronnasg. 

pronastan,(CR) Sleat df Lewis for pronnasg, 

pronn, -oinn & -uinn, s.m. The coarsest part of 
oatmeal with the seeds left in sifting. 2 
(AF) Pollard (fish.) 3 Food. 4 Dinner. 5(D 
My) Ground oats for sowens, (also p.-coirce.) 
lici iad p. agus deoch, they took food amd 
(rini. 

pronn. pr.pf. a’ pronnadh, v. @. Pound, bray, 
mua bh bruise. 2** Grin l, pulverize, mines. 3 
Maul. 4 *Mutter. +5 Give, bestow, distri- 
bute. Ged ph. thu amadan, though thou bray 
a fool; thug e là air pronnadh òir, he spent 
a day in di-tributin; gold ; le phuirt thril- 
eanta shiubhlach, 'phronnar luthmhor le 
dion. with quavering, brisk tun’s played quick- 
ly with keenness—MacMh. Alasdair, Oran an 
(.-59 ; crunluath lomara ’ga phronnadh, o 
“erunluatk” being pounded or broken—i-e, the 
continuous sound of the pipe-tune being 
broken into small fragments or short notes. 
--Mol. en Leòmh., 10. 13. 

pronn, pruinne, €. Pounded, brayed, mashed. 2 
"* Iu fragments. 3 Crisp, brittle, friable. 


2 Meal. 3 Vor- 





2 Diet. 


Dine. 














38 pronnnse 
4**4mooth. Siùcar P^ maist sugar. 
pronnach, -aiche, a. That pounds or breaks into 


fragments, pulverizing, dividing, distributing. 
2 Generous. 3 '' Drossy.’”’ 

——, -aich, 3.f. Anything ponnded or brok- 
en in small fragments, ** dross.” 





pronn»dair, -ean, $.m. One who mashes or 
ounds, 2 Mortar, 3 Pestle. 4 Grinder, 
ruiser. 5"*Hammer, 


————- —eaehd, s.f. Pounding, braying, break- 
ing into fragments, bruising, | 

pronnadh, -aidh, gan, Pounding, act of pound- 
ing. braying, breaking or mashiug. 2 Bruise, 
biuising. 3 Spliatering, grinding, mincing. 
4 see pronndlal, A’ p—, pr.pt. of pronn, 

Tpronnadh, -aidh, s.m. Distributing, giving, be- 
stuwing. % Generosity. 3 Destruction. 

pronnag, -aig, -an, 3.f. Small crumb. 2 “Droga.” 
3 Anythiag minced or pulverized. 

ach, -aichs, æ, In iragments, pulverized- 
2**'* Drossy.”’ 

pronnaich,(MS) v.a. Grind. 

pronnal, -ail, 8.m. see pronndal. 

————avch, -aich, see pronndalach. 

—aich, -e, see proundalaich. 

pronnan. 8. pl. Bits, fragments. 
bread crumbs. 

pronnan, -ain, pl. -an & -ain, 8. m. Fragment, 
bit, splinter. 2 One who divides. 3 Gener- 
ous person. 

——-——ach, -aiche, see pronnagach. 

pronnar, see pronnmhor. 











| pronnas, (DU) s.m. Leavings of food, fragments 


of any sort, detritus. 


pronnasg, -aisg, s.m. Brimstone, sulphur. 





-—ach, -aiche, a. Sulphureous, brimstony, 
2 Asphaltie. dad à 

pronnasgail,** a. $ ureous, sulphury. 

pronnasdail, Pean i for bap: EM 

pronnastair, Arran for pronnasg. 

pronnasgachd,(MS) et Sulphureousness. 

pronn-bhiadh, -bhidh, s.m. Fragments of vict- 
uals. 2**Minced meat. 3 Fragments of nuts, 

pronnastail, Strathspey for pronnasg. 

pronuastal, Edinbane (Skye) for pronnasg. 

pronn-chainnt, -e, s.£. Small talk, 

—— — — ———each, -eiche, a. Loquacious. 2 
Trifling in conversation. 

pronndach,** a. Pulyerizing, bruising. 2 Splin- 
tering. 

pronnital, -ail, s. m. Muttering, murmuring, 
grumbling, growl, undertone. 2 Low noise 
or note. "Dé am p. à th’ ort P what are you 
muttering about ? 

pronndalach, -aiche, a. Muttering, murmuring, 
making a low noise, grumbling. 

pronndalaich, -e, &f. Murmur, continued mut- 
terins or low sound, growling, grumbling. 

pronn-ghloir, -e, s.f. Smalltalk, loguacity, 
tattle, 2 Whispering, 

———each, -eich^,2. Loquacious, tattling, 
2 Whispering. 

oronn-zhldrach, see pronn ghloireach. 

pronn-lios, see proinn-lann. 

prounmhor, -oice, a. Ground, minced, pulverize 
ed, in fragments. 

pronnt, see pronntach. 

promnta, q. $ past pt. of pronn. Pounded, bray- 
ed, mashed, bruised, pulverized. 

pronntach, s,m. Meal obtained by pounding 
grain ina stone mortar—stiil used in some 





parts. | 
prountachd,(AC) s.f. Prosperity. 
+pronntain, -e, $.f. Provender. 
pronntair, -ean, see pronnadair. 
A vae see pronnta, 
prónnusg, -uisg, see pronnasg. 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


P. arain, 


FE. S uas 


ae ll EE e s t. 





bea a 


pronnusga ch 


pronnusgach, see pronnasgach. | 
prop, -a & -uip, -achan, s.m. Prop, 
ar, undersetter, poss. 
prop, pr.pt, a’ propadh, v.a. Prop,support, back, 
uphold | 
propach, -aich, -aichean, s.m. Seaware, kelp- 
“ware, black tangle, lady-wrack—fucus versi- 
crlosus. 2 Smart boy, prov. for propairneach. 
propach, a. Propping. i i 
propadh, -aidh, s.m. Propping, act of propping, 
supporting or sustaining. 2 Support, prop. 
A’ p—, pr. pt. of prop. 
propridh, fut. aff. a. of prop. 
propainn, n.a. see prop. 1 
-—te, past pt. of propainn. 
propairneach, -ich, s.m. Suripling, stout sturdy 
lad. | 
prop^nach, Argyll for propairneach, 2* Well- 
built boy beginning to run about Am D 
à uinn, the handsome stripling. 
prepataireachd, s.f. There are two games in 
Uist called by this name, 

1. A game like qnoits or pitchers. Two 
laige stones or props are set up on end at a 
distance from each other of about 20 yards. 
"he number of players varies from two to six. 
lt more than two play, they may do so singly 
or in picked sides ‘l'ha only articles needed 
are the props anil two flat pieces of stone, as 
nearly balanced as possible, wherewith to 
Loss. The game goes by points, a certain 
number, usually 21, beinz agreed on as game. 
The pointing or scoring, which is not reckon- 
ed in the same way anywhere else, is as foll- 
ows in Uist. Three points if you knoek the 
prop down fairly, one point if that pitcher lies 
nearer the pron than any other, one point if 
yourother pitcher lies nearer than any of your 
opponents, ‘Thus, if your two quoits be near- 
er the prop than your opponent’s two, you 
have two points; if only oue is nearer then 
you have only one point. In, the case of two 
players, both stand at the same prop and toss 
at the opposite prop endeavouring to hit it 
or lie as near to ib as possible. In the case 
of sides (say, two on each side) one member 
of each side takes the stones, while the other 
two stand at the opposite prop, and toss each 
his two quoits to the best of his ability. 
These are then in turn tossed towards them 
again by thoxe at the other end, the game 
counting, as usual, in points, 

propataireachd(2).or leagail shaighdear (fel- 
ling the soldier.) Game played onthe same 
principle as skittles, There are two equal si- 
des of any number, usually about seven, and 
each player has a prop, which he sticks in the 
ground just enough to make it stand. Each 

layer is provided with two stones for throw- 
ng at the props, The side which wins the 
toss then starts to knock as many as possible 
of their opponents' props down in this way. 
The first man in the row throws his two quoits 
trying to knock as many down a3 he can ; his 
neighbour follows, and so on, till all the row 
have thrown their quoits. If they knock 
down all the opposing props, the game is 
theirs ; if not, their opponents start in exact- 
ly the same way to knock theirs down. If 
they succeed, they win the game ; if not, the 
props are set up again and play recommen- 
ces.—'* Uist Games " in Celtic Review, No. 16. 
| propta, past pt. Propped, sustained, supported, 
upheld. | 
propte, see propta. 
prosda,** a. Stronz, firm, stout; 
prosnach, a. see brosnachail, 





739 


pudh^r 
prosnacha lh, see brosaachadh. 





eupport.pill- | prosnac^ail, see bro«achail, 


pro«naiob, see brosnaich. 

Ca, see brosnaichte, 

prosnan, -ain, pl. -ain & an, $. m. Company, 
band, group. 

ach, -aiche, æ. In companies, bands of 

groupa. 

prosuuchadh, see brosnachadh. 

proantrich, see brosnaich. 

protaiz,t et Triok —Ba /^noch. 

protail,t a. Prond—Arran, see brotail, 

prothaid, see probhai l. 

prothaist, ses probhaiss. 

each, see nrobphaisteach. 

tpruchlais, -e, -ean, *.f. Den, cave. 

penidh ! int, Call to catcle— Perth, N. Argyll. 
Mul. 2 Call to a cow or calf—W. of Ross. 8 
Call to a calf—A rran. 

E idh-1hé | inf, Call to a cow—Badenoch, & N. 

rgyll. 

pruidh-dhé bheag ! int. Call to a calt--N. Ar- 
gyll. 

pruilh-é ! int. Call to a calf—Perth & Suth'd. 2 
(MM) Call to a cow near at hand— Argyll. 

pruidh-seo ! int. Call toa calf—Mull, 

pruigean !int.Call to a cow or calf—W. of Ross. 

pruinn, gen. of proan. 

pruinne, comp. of pronn. 

pruiunoan, s.m. Chastisement. 

pruinneasdan,(MS) sm. Sulphur, 

pruip, gen.sing. & n. pl. of prop. 

pruis ! int. Call to a cow— Arran. 

pruixidh ! int. Call to a cow—A ran, 

pruis-o | int. sce pruidl-seo ! 

prunaistean, Glendale for pronnusg. 

prunnan,** gut, Far lel. 

prui-seog ! (AH) int. Call to a horse — N. A rgyll 

pru-siuch ! inf. Call to a horse—W. of Ross. 

puübaid, see cübait. 

pübal,** ail, see pubull 4. 

pübull, -uill, -an, sm. Tent, booth, pavilion, 
marquee, 2 Alcove. 3 Covering. 4$6utter- 
bur or pestilence - wort, see gallan mór. 
Shuidhich iad am pübuill, they pitched ther 
tents, 

pübullach, -aiche, a, Tented, full of tents or 
booths. 2 Of, or like tents or booths, Magh 
p., @ tented field. 

püb"ll-beannach, s.m. Butter-bur, see gallan 
mor. 

pic, pr.pt. a’ pücadh, v.a. Push, jostle, shove. 
2* Fumble, ram, cram. 

pücadh, -aidh, s.m. Jostiing, act of jostling, 
pushing, shoving. A’ p—, pr. pt. of pùc. 

pucaid, -e, -ean, s.f. Pimple, blotch. 2 Scab, 
itch. 3 see bucaid. 

each, -2iche, a. Pimpled, blotched. 2 

Having the itch. 3 Scabbed 4 see bucaid- 

each. 

eachd,** s.f. Scabbiness. 2 Itch. 

pücail,-e, s.f. see pücadh. ’S ann ort 'tha a’ 
ph. ! how you do push ! 

fpucan, see pocan. 

puc-tholl, s.m. Plug-hole of a boat, 

pu‘la,* s. Poult. 

püdach,( DU) s.m. Young of any bird, except of 
domestic fowl (whose young is eòin.) F.-tun- 
naig, a duckling ; p.-faoileaz, a young gull. 

pùdar, air, s.7 see fùdar. 

pudarach, see fudarach. 

püdaraich, see füdaraich. 

—te, see fudaraichte. 

pühair,** Gaelic form of Scots pronunciation 
of power. 

pudhar, -air, -an, s.m Mishap, loss, damuze, 
harm, injury. 2(UR) Hurt, sore, ulcer, sup- 











ponair-churaich 





ponair-churaich, see pónair-chapuill, 

each, -eiche, @ Full of beans, like beans, 

of beans. Aran p., bean-bread. 

-Fhrangach, s.f.coll, French beans. 

-nan-each, $.£.coll, Horse-beans. 

ponarach, see ponaireach. 

ponc. -uinc, -an & -u!ncean, 
Goat 

poucaich, see puncaich. 

poncachas, see puncachas. 

ponvaireachd, see puacaireachd. 

pong. -uing, -an & ean, see punc, 

neit, -aiche, see puncach € 

——ai!, see puncaid. : 

——aideach, see puneaideach, 

—— —Ail, -e, see puncail, 

——aileachd, see punealachd. 

pongalachd, see puncalachd. 

ponzan, pl. of pong, see punc. 

ponz^nnan, pl. of pong, see punc. 

pong-libhairt, see punc-labhairt, 

pong-!abhraiche, see punc-labhraiche, 

ponnan (MS) s.m. Bunch, cluster, group, herd, 
parcel, 

- aich, v.a. Herd. 

1pont, a Fierce, vehement, 

por, òir, An, $. m. Seed. 











see punc. 


2 Cruel. 
2 Grain, corn. 3 


Crops generally (corn, potatoes, turnips, &c.) 


Ciamar tha mp agaidh P how are your crops 
progressing ? 
Race, clan, progeny. 4 Pore of the skin. Am 
p. dubh, the wicked race ; droch ph., bad seed: 
mo phòran düinte, my pores stopped; p. nan 
gearr-mheann,the race of young kids, p. Dhiar- 
maid, the race of Dermid—the Campbells ; p.- 
cochuill, p.-cochullach, pulse. 

pòrach, -aiche, @. Full of seeds, grain or corn. 
2 Seminal. 3 Porous. 

fporaiste,** s. f. Parish. 

-. __———ach, -ich, s.m. Parishioner, 


pore,** -an, s.m. Sow, pig. 3 Gaelic spelling of 


pork. | 

——an,(AF) s.m. Little sow, young pig. 

porcanta,** a. Piggish, swinish. 2 Porky. 

por-cochullach, -aicne, a. Leguminous 
plants. see luis meiligeagach, 

pore-thriath,(AF) s.m. Stall-fed hog. 

porfaor, s.m. Porphyry. 

por-neimhneach, -eiche, @ Venomous, poison. 
ous, radically venomous. 

pòrsan. -ain, -an, s.m. Gaelic spelling of portion. 

ach,tt a Partial. 

aich,va@ Portion, give a marriage portion, 

tport,** a Fierce, vehement, 2 Cruel. 3 Se. 
vere. 

port, -uirt, pl. -uirt & -an, s.m. Port, harbour 
2 Ferry, passage. 3 Strait, firth. 4**Gate. +5 
** Fort. +6**Garrison. T7**Bank. t8**Area of 
a place. f9** House. t10**Common food. fill 
*“*Door. 12(AH) Bay. Ri port, storm-stayed; 
baile puirt, o seaport town. 

port, -uirt, pl. -uirt & -an, s.m, Tune, tune sung 








[ 


Tm 
MITCDRICT ADF T 
WIERANE! ARI V 





2 (AF; 


pòsda, a. & past pt. of pos. 


poslach,** ach, s.m. Bunch, tuft. 
post, pr.pt. a’ postadh, v.a. Tramp, tread with 


post, puist, pl. -an, -achan & -aichean, 8. m. 


as 


postan 


or played on a musical instrument. 2*Favour- 
able opportunity. Gabh port air, watch yowr 
opvortutunity ; gabh port, play a tun» ; port- 
a-beul, a mouth-tune, ‘‘diddling "—&àn accom- 
paniment to a dance used when a musical in- 
strument is not available, 

portach,1f -aiche, æ. Full of havens. 

portair, -ean, ëm. Porter, bearer. 
3 Ferryman, 4 Porter (beer.) 

eachd, s.f.ind. Business of a porter, door- 
keeper, janitor or ferryman. 2 ** Porterage. 
ferriage. 

portan, -ain, -an, see partan. 

portan,(AH) s. pl. Corners of a person’s mouth, 
Bha 'n deoch a’ tilleadh a mach aig p. 4 
bheòil, the drink was flowing back ai the cor- 
ners of his mouth—an expression often applied 
to a sick or dying person. 

"ortan-tuathal, see partan-tuathal, 

portas,* -ais, -an, s.m. Mass-book. 

port-gunna,** s.m. Loop-hole. 

pòs, pr.pt. a^ pòsadh, v.a. Marry, perform the 
marriage ceremony. 2 Become a married per- 
son. 

posach,** a. Bridal. 

ail, -e, a. Marriageable. | 

pósadahn, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Marriage, wedlock. 
2 Marrying, ceremony of marriage, 3 Wed. 
ding, A’ p—, pr. pt. of pòsadh. Tha ‘m 7 
p. coltach ris an t-seillean, tha mil ann 's tha 
gatb anu, marriage vs like a bee, there's honey 
in it and there's a sting in it ; toileach air do 
ph., willing to marry you ; la a’ phòsaidh, the - 
wedding-day. 

posaid,( MS) s.f. Posset, 

posaith,** a. Bridal. 

posaidich,(MS) v.a. Posset. 

posam, Ist. prrs.sing.imp. of pds, Let me marry. 

.2 (for pòsaidh mi) fut.af.a. I will marry. 

Married, wedded, 





2 Janitor. 








see pòste. 
posda, see posta. 
posde, past pt. of pds. Married, wedded. Fear 

nuadh-phoste, a newly-married man. 


pos-gheall,* v.n. Betrothe. ) 


—adh,* -aidh, s.m. Betrothing, betroth- | 
al. 2 Promise of marriage. A'p—,pr.pt.of 


pos-gheall. . d 
2 Group. | 


the feet. P.an làthach, tread the clay. i 


Pillar. 2 Beam, rafter. 3 Post, office 4 d 
**Post in the army. 5ff Leaden slug. . 
posta, -chan, s.m. Letter-carrier, postman, {° ^ 
pl. postaichean. ] ^ 
postachd, s.f.ind. Business of the post-office. 2 — 


Postage. 3 Letter-carrying. Cairt-ph., @ post- 
card. 

postadh, -aidh, s.m. Trampling with the feet, 
act of treading or trampling. A' p—, pr.pt. of 
post. In scouring woollen clothes, blankets 
or coarse linen, when strength of arms and 
manual friction are found insufficient, High- 
land women put them into a tub with a prop- 
er quantity of water, then, with petticoats 
tucked up, they commence the operatiou of 
" pósting," which they continue till every 
part of the clothes receives an effectual cleans- 
ing. When three women are employed, one 
commonly tramps in the middle, and the o- 
ther two tramp round her. 

postaichean, pl. of post. 

postail, a. Post-like. 

postan, -ain, -an, $.m.,dim. Little pillar or beam. 
2** Little post. 3(DMy) Little narrow trough 
to feed lambs from during wintering, also call- 


Original from K 


I n pg d Hrsg pm 
| | ` k l e KA | | 
i= ' M Lu 


Araia i I 
= d LJ as | Ch ] 


GN 


AAA gm j ^ Ran A 
m J i L? II j en i [1] cah 1 i 
L A LS d L A, |; LECHE wW 3l 





postan 


el '' p.-nan-uan.” 

postanach, -aiche, a. Having stout legs or sup- 
porters. A PNA 

—,* -aich, s.m. Thick-set child just be- 
ginning to walk. 2** Person with stout legs. 
2 That which has props. 

poste, past pt. see posde. 

tpota, <an, s. f. see poit. 2(CR) Hole from 
which peats have been cut—Skye. 

tpotadair, see poitear. 

potair, see poitear, 2 (DMy) Man who makes 
himself a nuisance by always remaining in- 
doors and so hindering the domestic duties of 
a house. 

eachd, see poitearachd. 2(DMy) Habit 
or act of © wlemng domestic duties by one's 
constant presence in the house. 

poth, -a, son. Bachelor, 

prab, pr pt. a’ prabadh, v.v. Disorder, discom- 
pose, put into disorder. 2 Spoil. 3 Ravel, 4 
Kiitangle. 5llamper, cumber, perplex. 

prab,* v. Unfit. 

prab, -aib, -an, s.m. Rheum in the eyes. 

¢prab, a. Quick, active, '' clever.’’ 

piàábach, -aiche, a. Disorderly, confused, out of 
order. 2 Shaggy. 3 Dishevelled, ravelled, 
not neat. 

prabach, -aiche, a. Blear-eyed, rheum-eyed. 
*Contemptible. 

S s.f. Contemptible female, 

pràbadh, -aidh, s.m. Confusing, act of confus- 
10g, «hsordering, disarranging. 2 Botchiny. 
bungling, spoiling. 3 Ravelling, tangling, en- 
tanglement, A’ p—, pr pt. of pràb. 

prabag-linn,(DU) $,f. Old torn net. 

prabaiche,1f s find. Lippitude. 

prabair, -ean, s.m. Worthless fellow, one of the 
rabble, untidy fellow,ramscallion, contempti- 
ble fellow 

prabal see pràbar. 

praban, sm Shebeen—Skye. 'Nuair a bha mi 
a’ cumail p. an Cornal, when 4 kept a shebeen 
m Cornal. 

ged -aich, sm., Comely young boy or 
lad. 

prabar, s.m. Refuse of grain or seed— Sàr-Obair., 

pràbar, /ut pass. of prab. Shall be entangled, 
as thread. 
rabar, -air, -an, s.m. The rabble, the mob. 2* 
Little people. Am p. porcanta, the swinish 
multitude. 

——-—ach, -aiche, &. 
rabble. 

daich,* s, f. Smattering, slight know- 
ledge. P. leughaidh, a smattering of reading; 
p chunntais, a smattering of arithmetic. 

pràbarsaich, see prabardaich. 

di pal Qui, 8, Trick. From Scots prat—Perth- 
Shire. 

ach,(AH) a. Flat.footed. 2 Splay-foot- 





1 





9 


~ 





Of, or belonging to, the 








ed, | 

‘prablach,} auch, $. m. Sea-ware, tangle, see 
propach. 2** Thread or hair entangled, 8** 
Anything much entangled. 


prabladh,(DMy) s. m. Grasping suddenly, at- | 


tempting to seize, 
prab-shuil, -shüla, -ean,-s.7. Blear-eye, rheum- 
eye. 





—each, -eiche, a. Blear-eyed, having 
rheumy eyes. 

prabta, see prabte, 

prabte, past pt. of prab. Entangled. 

prac, s.m.ind, Tends, tax, A term peculiar to 
some of the northern districts ani isles of 
Scotland for the vicarage dues or small tithe, 
being a tenth of the yearly increase of live 
stock, and under local usages,of certain other 


E- V i. P | 
Digitized | 


i ti 
Kë Ken om h m "LE 
5 Ka Lä | = re EA i AT E 
i l ar T 
— LI " Dë T — 


I 
— a 


733 


praiseach-féidh 


articles of produc», paid in kind, prior to val- 
uation, and distinct from the large, or corn 
tithe. [**gen. praic.] 

pracadair, -ean, s.m. Collector of tithes. 

eachi, s.f.ind. Collection of tithes, 

praciis, -e, -ean, $.f. Idle talk, irrelevant lan- 
guage. 

prácas, -ais, sm, Gallimaufry, hotch-potch. 9* 
Dispute not easily settled. 3* Nonsensical 
difference. 

pradnainn,* s.f. Press of business, urgent busi- 
ness, hurry, fiurry. 2 Affliction, 

—each,* -eiche, a.Pressed for time, hur- 

ried, flurried. 2**Earnest. 

—eachd,** s. f. Earnestness, state of 
being in à hurry or great haste. 

praghain, 8.f. see pradhainn. 

pràib, -e, s.f. Rabble. 2 Filth, ordure. prov. 

praic!eis, (AH) s.f. Lumber, rubbish, litter,odds 
and ends. 

tpraidhean, -ein, see pradhainn. 

tpraidhinn, -e, -ean, s.f. see pradhainn. 

tprai lhlioneach, -eiche, @ see pradhainneach. 
2 Afflicting. 

praidseach, eich, see proitseach, 

praimh, gen.sing. of pramh. 

praingealas,* -ais, see pracas. 
the nom., and s.f.] 

prainn, gen sing. of prann (for pronn.) 

prainnseag, -eig, -an, s. f. Mince collops. 
Haggis (taigeis.) 

prais, -e, s.7. Pot of a creel. 

prais, -e, s.f. Brass. 2 Pot-metal. 3(CR) Cast- 
Es pot—W. of Ross-shire. 4 Still. 5 see prais- 
each. 

praisbhallach, -aiche, a. Strong or brazen-limb- 
ed. 2**Well-fortified, as with brazen walls. 
3 Strong, as a fortification. 

praiseach, eich, -eichean, s./, Pot. 2 Crucibte. 
3 Broth. 4 Pottage, gruel, 5 see prasach. 
Cas na praiseich a’ tighinn an uachdar, the 
stump of the pot coming to the surface—said by 
the landsman on seeing a porpoise tumbling ! 
mac-na-praiseich, whisky. 

pràiseach, -ich, s.f. Brass, impudence. 2 Bold 
or lewd woman, bawd. 3Slut. 4 Crib, man- 
ger, see prasach, Ath-ph., a harridan, an old 
whore. 

praiseach, a. Brassy, made of brass. 2 Braz- 
en-faced., 

praiseach,$ eich, -ean, s.f, Cabbage—brassica, 








[* gives -ais as 


2 





573. Praiseach-a' -bhalla. 574. Praiseach-bhaidhe. 


————— -a’-bhalla, s.f. Wall-kale, wall-goose- 
foot —chenopodium murale. 

-— — — -bhaidhe,$ s.f. Sea-kale or cabbage— 
brassica, oleracea. 

L—— —— - brAthar,§ s,f. Good King Henry, wild 
spinach, English mercury, mercury goose-foot 
—chenopodium Bonus Henricus. (ill. 575.) 

-——_—— -féidh,§ s. f. Penny-cress, bastard mus- 
tard, boor's or mithridate mustard—thlasps 


r 1| TT 


(E *| uli 
ph x L 


LIE 


NOIS 


Li (Sei fe = ra AN Pat i 


Lai 
Hh 


putair 


putair, -ean, s.m. One who pushes orimpels. 2 
Dibble, 

putaireachd, s.f. Pushing. 2 Nibbling. 

putan, -ain, -an, s.n., dim. of ps. Young grouse, 
itle poult. 2 (AT) Youvg animal.  3** 
Young hare, 

putan, -ain, -an, s.m. Button. 2 Sny or toggle, 


see bata, No. 1, p. 76. P.-duirn, a Sleeve but- 
ton. 
putan, see pait. 


putanach, -aiche, qd. Buttoned. 
in buttons, 3 Like a button. 

putanachadh, -aidh, sm Buttoning. 

putanach4, sf. Button-maling. 

putanaich, v.a. Button. 

putanaichte, past pt. Buttoned. 

putan gorm,$ s.m. Sheep-bit, see dubhan-nan- 
capra. 

puiauta,** a. Shy, as young moor-fowl, coy. 

putantach1,** s f. Shyness, coyness. 

putar, fu'.pass. of put. 

puti, s.m. Snort, 2 Puf. 3 Sound of a shot. 
4 Syllable. A’ eur puthan às a shròin, snort- 
ing witr his nose. 

pushag, -aig, -an, s.f.,dim. of puth. Little puff 
or explosion. 2 Porpoise, grampus, 

puéveaid, (Fionn) $, f. Recess in the wall for 
holding small articles 2 Ventilator in a byre 
wall. so called because it resembles the recess 
in a house wall, 

puchaig,7 sf Marsh-harrier, see clamhan-lòin. 

puthar, -air, -au, sm. Harm. hurt. 


2 Abounding 


scar. 3 Sore, canse cf sorrow. 4 Suppurat- 
ing sore. Gaclic spelling of Scots prouwicia- 


tion of power, 

’S tha 'eunlaith fo phuthar ’an dubhar a 

cnruachan—Crvacian Brann, Filidh. n, 60, 
pucnarachdh, -aidh. see pudharachadh., 
prioz (Ms ef Paddock. 
Tputraib -aiil, -an, s.m. Lock of hair. 


ri y 


r, (ruis, eller-tre»,) the fifteenth letter of the 
Gaelic aiphabet. It generally sounds liker 
in raw, more; as rach, go; mor, great. If in 
the same syllable r be precede: or followed 
by a small vowel te or i, or both,) it has a 
sound to which there is none quite similar in 
Xnglish,but it resembles that of the French r 
in prairie, d meadow ; as in airidh,worthy; fir, 
men, 

'r, cont. for ar, Our. 

'r, cont. for bhur or 'ur, 

r’. cont. for ri, prep. 

rà, cont. for ràdh. 

rà, -tha^, sm. see rath, 

ra, adv. see ro. 

ra. sm. Going, moving, prov, 

rabach, -aiche, a. Litigious, quarrelsome. 
Pien iful, fruitful, 

rabachas, -ais, s.m. Lirigiousness, quarrelsome- 
ness. 2** Plontifulness, fruitfulness. Fear 
rapachais, a litigious fellow. 

rabaii, Gaelic spelling of rabbit. 
young rabbit. 

eacn, @ Abounding in rabbits, 
rabbit. 

ràbair, -ean, s.m. Litigious, troublesome, tire- 
some person. 2¢fRoarer, 3 Wrangler. Cha’n 
"cl ann ach r. òglaich, he is but à wrangler 
of a, fellow. 

each, à, see ràbach. 

——vaichi, sj. see rabachas. 





Your, 


gx 


Cuilean r., a 


2 Like a 








2tt Roaring 


D 


KITE PRI Ar rm 
d -A ndm H -= L ! V = 


742 


2 Wound, | 


rabhdach 


3 Wrangling. 

raba!,** ail, s.m. Noise, bustle, 

-——ach, a. Noisy, bustling. 

-— acond, $ f. Noisiness, continued noise, cons 
tinned bustle. 

rabh,* v.a, Warn, guard. 

rahh, see robh. 

rabhaeair,* -ean, s.m. Nonsensical rhapsodist. 
2 Harangner, proser. see rabhaarr, 

rabbaenreaehd "vr Rhapsody, prosing, har- 
anguing,talkinz noasense. see rabhdaircachd. 

rabnach, -aiche, a. see rabhachail. 

rabhachail, -e, v. Warning, admonitory, giving 
a caution or hint, hinting. 

rabhaeh,** g. Admonitor:. 

rabhachan, -ain, -an, sim. Warning., 2 Beacon, 
3 Advertiser, 

trabhad, -aid, s.m. Precedent, example, 

ri4:hadair,* -ean, s.m. Spy, scout. 2 see rabha- 
chan. 3f[Citer. f4 sae robh. 

rabhadh, -aiih, s.m. Warniag, alarm, hue and 
cry.  2** Adric^, instrwetion, 3 Advertise. 
ment. 4 Example, precedent. 
hint. 6(M3) Memento, Thoir r. dha, inform 
hin, give him a hint; rabhaih eaglais, an 


eclesiastica: edict ; a’ faghail rabhaidh, recei- 


ving instruction. 

ràbhag,/ DU, et Person fuil of fun, or fond of 
practical joxing. 

rabhagach.) -Aich, s.f. 
daileas-bhaite-baan. 
the bottom of water. 

ravhaic, Arran & Islay for raoic. 

rahhaidh,* v.a. Advertize. 

rabhai!,* -e, s.f. ee delivered in 2 drawl- 
ing minner. 2 Mad saying. $ Drawling 
manner or gait. 

rabhail,** a Admoaitory. 

rabhairt,* sf. see reothart, 

rabnan, Arran for ràbitian. 

rabhan, -ain, -au, s.m. Ruapsody, 
dious repetition, rig'naroie. 

frabnan, -ain, -an, 5.22, Spade. 

ra: han. (Uit) am. Kind of grass that grows in 
still water, which sheep often wa'le in to eat 
and are drowned. It is som»t& mes cut fue 
fodder. ranhan» in W. of Ross. Pronounced 
rafan in Ray Cruntry & heights of Kildonan, 


White waster-li’y, see 
277 Weeds growing at 


long and te- 


ra ‘hin, $4. Remains of spate or tide on the — 


shore —Suth’d. | 

ràb'4uach, -a che, a. Rhapsodical, tedious, 2 
**Üaraog"mng, 

rà.hanach, -iich, s.m. Rhapsodist, tedious 
siory teller. Z**Haranguer, 

rabhanachi, s.f. Rhapsody, harangue. 

rabiianaiche,** s.n}. see rabhanair, 

rabh vn :ir,** -ean, 6m. Rhapsodist. 
uer. 3 Proser. , 

rabhanu,(UR) s.m. Grass or reed that grows in 

ls avd is cut for fodder, It has many large 

Joints whici burst when dry, and white roo 
—Siratheouin. 2 Water-lily—W. of Ross-shire. 
3 Piaat with leaves branching alternately on 
each side of the leaf-stem and floating on the 
water —W. of Ross-shire. 

rabhart,** -airt, s.m. Upbraiding. 2 Senseless 
talk. 


2 Harang- 


rài hart, -airt, &.m. (AH) Fun, pleasantry. 2 E 3 


see rabhd. 

—ac, -aiche, a. see rabhanach. 

frabhartha, æ. Overrunuing. : 

rabbi, -a,-an, $. m. Idle or nonseusical talk, 
2 Coars2, tiresome language, vapouring, to- 
dious haraneue, boast. 3 Idle talker. 4 Rant. 

rabhdach, -aiche, a. Talking idly, given to iiie 
talk, haranguing. 2 Usiug coarse or uubecom- 





Original from 


LIP ED? Lë XE TI | 
UNIVERSITY OF IL 


A Caution, ` 


d 
V | 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN i 


Rx 


^w end gobs Po taf er 


nl 
í 
Li 





H ict s 
Ze P 
fai e dt Ay A 
Ee Ee AAS eg 


P 
"eet 


E 


H E E T P 


E 


GET, 
> = 












F ER af 


at? 


rabhdach 


ing language. 

rabhiladh, see rabhd. A 

rabh:lair, -ean, s.n. Idle, tiresome talker, boast- 
er. gossip. prate , rüapsodist, vapourer, 2*" 
Bully. 3 One who uses coarse or unbecoming 
language. 4ffWbulist. 5 Ranter. 

eachd, s fand. Habit of talking idly, 
coarsely or tiresomely,rhapsody, proving, har- 
anguing, verbosity, vapouring, gossiping 

rabhdal, -ail, s.m. Coarse jesting, prov, 2 Pros- 
ing. 

: — ach, -aiche,a.Coarsely or vulgarly sport- 








ive. 

rabhdarach, -aiche, 

rabhla ih, -aidh, s.m. see rabbdal 

rabhoil, see rabhail, 

ràc, -àic, an, sm Rake. 2 Ring keeping the 
yard to the mast, traveller, see bata, 24, p. 76 
|t gives rac for No 2.] 

rac, àic, -an, 8 m. Drake.—* North. 
dant, disgusting music—* West. 

rac, sm. Crash, prolonged crash. 2 Prattling. 
3 Gushing 4 Shedding, as tears. 5 Croaking 
nose, as of crows. 

frac, sm, King, prince, 2**Bag, pouch. 

rac, v a. Æ n., L£ $. see srac. 

rac, pr pt, a’ racadh. va & n Rake, harrow. 2 
Quack, as ducks or geese. 3 Make a crash- 
ing noise. 4 Croak 5 Rebearse, repeat. 

ràcach, deus a. see ràácanach. 2 Crashing 
noisy. 3 Abounding in or belonging to, 
drakes. 

ràcadal, ail, sm Horse-radısh. 2**Wild radish. 
[I gives racadal.] 
» ach, -aiche, à. Abounding in horse-ra- 

ish 


ràcidh, -aidh, -aidh, $m, Raking, harrowing, 
act of raking or harrowing. 2 Quackineg of 
ducks or geese, 3 Crashing noise. 4 Noise 
made by the tearing of cloth. (sracadh.) A’ 
r—, pr.pt. of rac, 

racadh, -aidh, $ m. see sracadh. A’ r—, pr. pt. 
of rac. 

racaid, -e, -ean, s.f. Noise, disturbance. 2 Con- 
tinual erashing noise, 3 Discordant voice, 
croaking. 4 Racket. 5*Drawling female, 
6 Strong blow. Thug mi r. dha "aa chluais, 
I gave him a hard box on the ear. 

racanleach,tt -atche, a. Bustling, noisy. 

racail, s f. Quacking, as of ducks or geese. 2 
Continued crashing noise. 3 Discordant 
voice. l 

ràcain, gen.sing. & n.pl. of ràcan. 

ràcair,-ean, s.m, Lying, talkative fellow, ro- 
mancer., 2 Impertinent prattler. 3 Rehears- 
er. 4 Raker. 5 One having à harsh or dis- 

. cordant voice, 6* Drawling, croaking orator 
or piper. 7* Croaker of a preacher. 8 Loud 
talker. 9 Talkative, lying person. 

———-eachd, s. f. Habit of lying, romance, 2 
Impertinent loquacity, verb:age, rehearsiug. 

` 8 Discordance of voice, oratory or musice, 
-roaking. 4 Raking, 

Yàcan, -ain, -an, s.m. Rake 2 Instrument for 
breaking clods and used asa harrow. In the 
W. Isles, it consists of a block of wood with a 
few teeth, and is used in such places as will 
Dot admit of the use of a harrow. It is com- 
monly tied to the horse’s tail, but not unfre- 
quently it is dragged along the surface by wo- 
men and boys. In H Ross-shire it is ap- 
pe to a short heavy rake with a head over 

in. in thickness and a handle under 4 ft, in 
length. With it the seed is covered, clods are 
broken, and potato ground, before the tops 
come through, is raked or harrowed to keep 
down weeds—CR. 3 Noise, croaking noise, 


see rabhdalach. 
2 Boasting. 


2 Discor- 





[i "ntized | y 


aiar A MESA T 
JIERMET ARI V 


743 


———————— —Á— M € —— IR ene 


rach 
4 Crash. 6 Bandy or crooked stick. 6 Mise 
chief, evil, wickeiness. 7 Bowling 8 Riot, 


noise. 9 Provincial denomination of arable 
laud (ceann-racain.) Nach aun annad’ tha 'n 
r. !how mischievous you are !I—4Arran. (race 
an not racan in Arran ] 
ràcan, pl. oí rac, Rakes, harrows, 
———ach, -aich, 8.m Mischievous person. 
ach, -aiche, d. Of, belonging to or furs 
nished with rakes or hand-harrows. 2 Crashs 
ing, 3**Croaking 4”*Prating 5**Dissunant. 
racan-arbhair,(Fionn) s m. Corn-craik. 
rac-an-fheoir,(CR) sim, Corn-craik. 
racanta,** a. Clashing, noisy. 2 Croaking. 3 
Loquacious. 
racas, -ais, s.m Sail-hoop. prov. 
rach, for rachadh (would go ) 
rach, def. v. Go, proceed, more, travel, walk, 
Active Voice— 
IND. past, chaidh mi, &c., I, &c. went. 
» fut. théid mi, &c, Z, de will go. 
[Although commonly given by grammars as 
the future tense of rach, (béid 1s quite a dif- 
ferent word.] 
INTERROG. & NEG. past, (an ? nach ? cha) 
deach or deachaidh mi, &e . 
N H Jut, (an ? nach? cha) 
téid mi, &c. 


SUBJUNCT. past, (ged) rachainn, (though) I 
would go; (ged) rachadh tu, e, i, (though) 
thou wouldest go,he,she would go; (ged) racha- 
maid, (though) we would go ; (ged) rachadh 
sibh, iad, (though) you, they, would go. 

fut. (ma) théid mi, &c., (if) L &c.shadl 





LI 


go. 
IMPER. 1st. per.sing. racham, let me go. 
INFIN. a dhol, to go. 
PRES. PART. a’ dol, going. 
Used Impersonally thus— 
IMPER. rachar, theirigear, na rachar. 
IND. past, deachas, chaidheas, an deachas P 
cha deachas. 

» fut. téidear, théidear, an téidear? cha 

téidear. 

Am fear a théid lideag am mearachd, the 
man who goes a syllable, letter, least bit, wrong; 
chaidh làithean na seachduin iomrall orra, 
they got confused about (lost count of ) the days 
of the week ; chaidh a' chüis 'sa mhuileann 
orm, I became hopelesely puzzled over ihe mat- 
ter ; chaidh thu gu Dun-bheagain orm, you 
went to the extreme with me—lit. to Dunvegan, 
a Lochaber saying—N.G.P,; chaidh mi 'nam 
cheò, "nam bhreislich, Z became mystified, 
muddled ; chaidh mi bho obair, bho rath, bho 
fheum, I have becom? very useless ; chaidh mo 
thoirt as mo ghabhail, I have been disappoint- 
ed of my origina! intention ; chaidh mi thar 
mo shiubhail, thar mo sgeòil, Z have deviated 
from, lost, my road, my story ; chaidh sion 
thar a chéile, we quarrelled, fell foul of each 
other ; chaidh mi am feirg choimhich, 1 be- 
came transported with rage ; chaidh iad gu 
bròn 's gu briseadh-cridhe, they gave way to 
mourning and heart-jrievin] ; chaidh mi a ris 
gu w’ smuaintean, I reconsidered things, re- 
viewed matters again ; chaidh e gu mor bho 
aire féin, he was so distraught as to be hardly 
himself ; chaidh am bata air chrith, the boat 
began to quiver; cha ieach sin gu math dhaibh, 
that did not suit them at all, it upset them ; cia- 
mara chaidh dhuit? how did you manage, get 
on, how did things turn out for you ; rach air 
t aghaidh, or rach air aghart, proceed ; ma 
*s tua th’ ann, is tu chaidh as, tf that be yot, 
you have sally altered, you are merely the sha- 
dow ef your former self; chaidh e as orm, Ae 


rach 
escaped from me, evaded me ; chaidb an teine 


744 


1 


ra g-bharalachd 


radan, n.p!. of rad i 


as orm the fire I kindled (or was tending) went | radanach, ‘aiche, a Abounding in rats. 2 Like 


out ; chaidh as daibh, they died, were killed, 
therr influence ceased , cha téid anam á mac 
bodaich Je muiseig. threats will not killa 
churl’s son ; is mairg a rachadh to do mheach- 
annas, pity him who would trust to your dis- 
cretion or mercies ; chaidh Righ Lochlainn am 
meinp va Féinne, the king of Lochlann begged 
the clemency of the Fingalians , cbaidb mi an 
dail, an ceann, an seilbb no an tarruing na b- 
Oibre, or chaidh mi an sas anns au obair, J 
set about the work , chaidh agam air, 4 man- 
aged it, accomplished tt, or I prevailed over 
hun, cha téid gad air geailadh, you cannot 
bind a promise with æ withy ; cha téid fiach 
air beul duinte, a closed mouth does not run 
info debt ; cha téid plasd air bagairt, à threat 
needs no plaster, chadh a’ bhrog oirre mu a 
cous, the shoe fitted her foot, slipped on to it ; 
Chaidh na geinneagan air a’ chota, the buttons 
were attached to the coat; cbaidh eòin an 
geall caithream, the birds began chorusing ; 
na h-igheanan 1s boidhche ’théid air ürlar, the 
lasses who dance most elegantly ; an nighean 
a’s deise ‘théid fo ’n‘éideadh,the girl who dress- 
es most tastefully ; an là théid clo ar air faiche, 
the day the new cloth or dress ws sported in 
public ; théidiad air faoigh, they will goon a 
genteel begging expedition ; théid iad air a’ 
bnannaig, they will go on a bannock-begging 
Christmas round ; théid 1ad air an déirc, they 
will go begging for alins ; théid iad air chéil- 
idh chuige, they will go on à visit to him; 
théid 14d 'nan deannaibh, they wl go, run- 
nung furiously ; rachaibh dhachaidh, go (ye) 
home , théid sinn dhachaidh, we will go home; 
na téirig dhachaidh, don’t go home ; chaidh 
sinn dhachaidh, we went home ; an deachaidh 
e dhacbaidh ? did he go home ? 
rachadh, past subj, of rach. Would go. 2 2nd. 
d: 3rd per. sung, & pl. tmp. of rach. R. e, let 
hun go. 
frachail, s.f. Winding-sheet. 
rachainn, Ist, per. sing. past subj. of rach. I 
would go, 
frachall, -aill, s.m, Winding-sheet. 
racham, 1st. per. sing. imp. of rach. Let me go. 
rachamaid, Ist. per. p}. past subj. of rach. We 
would go. 2 Ist. per pl. of rach. Let us go. 
rachar, used impersonally. Rachar suas leo, they 
ascended, 
rachd,s.f.ind. see reachd, 
ràchd, 8. m. ën see rac, 
rachd, -an, see reachd. 
rachdadh, see racadh, 
rachdaid, see racaid. 
ràchdail, see ràcail, 
rachdair, see racair. 
rachdan, see racan, 
rachdan, -ain, -an, s.m. Tartan plaid worn in 
the shapeof a mantle or cloak. 
rachdmbor, -oire, à. see reachdmhor. 
— —————aáchd, see reachdmhorachd. 
rache,(AF) (? raitche) s. Scent-hound. 
tracholl, -oill, -an, s.m. Winding-sheet. 
rac-mhara,(AF) s. Salmon. 
rac-mhaighreadh,(AF) s. Salmon. 
racuis, -e, ean, s,f. Rack, 2 Toasting appara- 
tus. 
rad, -àid, -an, see ròd. 
trai, -a, a. Ready, furnished, 
radaidh, a. Dark, sallow, Duine r., dorcha, 
o sallow-complezioned man, (also rodaldh) 
radaireal,** eil, ëm, see rodaireal. 
tudan, -in, -an, am, Rat, 2 Qunnaing person. 
K. Armeniach, an ermine, 


-— — 


[1 gives rachd.] 


c» t9 


D 


NTERNET ARCHIVE 


a rat, 

rddanach, -aiche, @ Not affectionate, distant.: 
2 Dissembling, uncandid. 

radan-dubh, s.m. Black rat. 

raclau-üir, (AF) s.m. Mole. 

radan-uisge, s.m. Craber, water-rat. 

radh, s m. Saying, act of saying, affirming, or 
expressing 2 Word, saying, adage, proverb 
3 Noise, 4* Assertion. 5 Speech. Ag r—, pr, 
pt. of abair. Tha 'n r. ud tìor, that saying is 
(rue ; tha mi 'g r., I say. 

radh, s Settled 1ntention—Swuth'd. Tha mi air 
r. seo a dheanamh, J intend doing this. | 

fràdh, past af. of abair. Do r.e gach uair, he 
said each time. 

radhad, -aid, -an, see rathad. 

radhadh, -aidb, -aidhean, see rabhadh & roghe 
ainn. 

ràdnainn, prov. for ràdh. 

radhaircin, see raghaircin, 

radhar, see raghar. 

radharc, -airc, s.m. Sight, power of vision. 2 
View, prospect. 3 Pupil of the eye— Lewis. 
R. mo dhà rosg, the sight of my two eyes. [also 
fradharc.] 

—ach, -aiche, a. Seeing, having the facul- 
ty of sight. 2 Commanding a good or exten- 
sive prospect. 3**Observant. 4** Conferring 
the faculty of sight. 

radmuinn,(AF) s. Fox. 

rafan, see rabhan. 

rag, -aige, a. Stiff, rigil, not pliable. 2 Stif, 
benumbed. 3 Obstinate, pertinacious 4 
Inflexible, inexorable. 5 Unwilling, disinelias 
ed. 6**Tight, as a rope. 7**Tough. 8**Dim, 
9 Asinine. 

rag, pr.pt. a’ ragadh, v.a. Become stiff or dis 
tended to stiffness. 2 Be benum 

rag, -&, -achan, s.m. Starch, 2 Wrinkle. 3 gea 
luideag. 4 Term of personal contempt. § 
Shabby fellow. 

ragach, -aiche, a. Wrinkled. 2** Tough, stiff, 
obstinate. 3 see Inidsagach. 

ragachadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of stiffening or mak- 
ing stiff. 2 State of becomiag stiff or rigi 
3 Toughening, tightening asa rope. 4 
Wrinkling. 

ragachail, -e, @ Inclining to 


qum 
tendeucy to, or causiug stiffness, 


or tighinoss. 
ragadair, -ean, s.m. Stretcher. 2 (DMy) Rag- 
man. 
ragadh, -ai!h, s.m. Growing or becoming stiff, 
rag^ich, pr.pt. a’ ragachadh, v.a. d& n, stiffen, 
make stiff. 2 Become stiifor rigid. 3 Curdle, 
congeal. 3 Toughen, tighten, or stretch, as a 
rope. 4 Become tight, as a rope. 6 Conden- 
sate, 
— — — te, past pt, of oh, Stiffened, becoma 
stiff, pure : te toughened, 5 i 
ragaim, sf. Sneesewort (meacan ragaim. 
i jars -ean, ën, Kxtortioner, 2 Violent man, 
š Villain, rogue, deceiver. 4**Instrument for 
tightening a rope, 6** Person with a wrinkl« 


ed face. 
razalreach, -eighe, a. Violent, using violence, 
Kach nous, 8 Decciv. 


oppressive, 2 
Extortive, 
practice of vie. 


ing, deceltful, 
ragaireachd, sfiind, Vielen 

: 3 Roguery, 
villainy., 4 Deceit, deovitfuluess 6 Clammie 


ence, 9 Extortion, oppression, 
ness, 
rag: bhalach,ff -aich, sma, Lubber, 
Ak 





rag-bharalach, tt -aiohe, a, Opinionative, 
mre Thay, Posltiveucas 





rag-bheart 


rag bheart, -bheirt, -an, s m. Obstinacy., 2 Vil- 
lainons, mischievous or wicked deed. 3 For- 
ced work. 

—ach, -aiche, @. Obstinate, perverse, 
headstrong. 2 Committing mischievous or 
villainous deeds, 

—— — Chd, s.f ind. Perverseness,obstinacy. 
2 Mischief. 3 Wickedness. 

—— as, -ais, -2is, $m. Same meanings as 
rag-bheartachd. 

ràgh,* s.m. Row, rank. (Scots, raw —row rank.) 
2 Raft of wood. E. shaighdearan, a rank of 
soldiers 

ragha, see roghainn, f 

raghadh, ab, see roghainn. 

raghaidh, (CR) s. Waruiug— W of Ross for ragh- 
adh. (pron. ráo'i.) 

raghain, see roghainn. 

raghaircin, s m. Eyebright (plant.) 

raghan, -ain, an, s.m. Churchyard, 

raghar, -air, an, s.m. Arable land not in till- 
age 2 sometimes Grazing ground enclosed 
between the arable land and the oper moor 
Perthshire. 

. tag-bheirteach,(MS) a. Mad-brained. 

rag-mheirleach, Ach, s.m. Arrant thief. 

rag mhuinealach, aiche, a. Stiff-necked, stub- 
boru, headstrong, perverse. | 

——— — —4à, s find. Contumacy,stiff-neck- 
edness, obstinacy,stubbornness, perverseness, 
2 Depravity. 

rag-mhuinealas, -ais, $. M. 
achd. 

rag-roth,** s.m. Torturing wheel. 

rag-sheallaen, -aiche, a. Stiff looking, awkward, 
unbecoming. 

rag-shüil, -shüla, -shuilean, s.f. Dim eye. 

each,** a. Dim-eyed, 

fraib, s.f. Turnip. 2 Rope. 











see rag-mhuineal- 





raibeach,** a. Loose. 
(Irish form.) 


fraibh, see robh. 





587. Raibhe, 

raibhe,§ s.f. Radish.—raphanué. 

raibheic,* see raoic. ` 

eil, st, see raoiceadh. 

raibleachan,** .ain, sm Scullion. 

ràic, -e, s. f. Impertinence, impudence 2 
Idle prattling. 3 Gibberish. 4 Boastfulness, 

——ealachd, ‘s.f.ind. Habit of talking idly. 2 
see raic. 

—eil, -e, a. Impertinent. 2 Troublesome. 
3 Given to idle talk. 

raichd, -e, see raic. 

fraicneach, -ich, $.f. Queen. 

raid, gen.sing. of rad, 

raide,** s.f. Cunning, slyness. 
cunning people. 

raideachas,** -ais, s.m. Boastful speech, arro- 
gant language, arrogance, pride. 2 Saying. 
$ Report. 4 Trial of skill. 





Luchd ràide, 


Digitized by 


BBO ae T A om si I y 
INTERNET ARCHIV 


745 


raizneachadh 
raideag,** ei, s f. Mvrtle. 
ràidealach,** œ Cuuninz, slv, insidious, 
fràidealaehd, s./,ind. Luvention, readiness in 
devising plans, 2 Cunning, siyness, artful- 
ness. 
ràileil, -e, a. Inventive. 3 Cun- 
ning. crafty, sly. 
traith, va. Threaten, menace. 2 Appeal,look. 
traidh, s.f. Radius. 
ràidh, -e, -ean, s.f. Arbitration. 2 Decision. 
3 Appeal, entreaty. 4 Threat, threatening. 5 
Umpire. 6 Good will. 7 Competition. Leig 
gu ràdh nan daoine seo e, submit it to the ar- 
bitration of these men ; tha mise, a dhaoin’ 
uaisle,a’ leizeil a’ ghnothaich seo g’’ur ràidh- 
se, I a»peal to you g^ntlem?n, in this matter ; 
fear-ràidhe, an arbitrator; a’ raidh air a 
chéile, competing with each other , thoir t., 
threaten. [** gives s.in. for Nos. 1.2 & 34 
raidh,** s.m, Judge. 
ràidh, enn, s.m. Rank, as of soldiers (ragh.) 2 
Saer, 3 Entreaty. 4 intercession, 5 see 
raith, 
raidh,(CR) s.f. Boasting, brag, vain-glory. Tha 
pailteas r. ann, he is much given to boasting— 
W. of Ross-shire. 
ràidh, -e, -ean, s.f. [McL & D gives m.] Quarter 
(of a year.) 
ms sf ind. Umpirage, arbitration. 2**Ar. 
iter, 
ach,** o Prone to threat, threatful. 3 
Appealing. 
—— —ach«,** s. find. Habit of threatening, mi- 
naciousness, 2 Circumstance of appealing. 
raidhean,** ein, $.m. Crowd, rabble, 
raidhean, -ein, ssm. Quarterly, as a paper or 
magazine. 
raidheil,* ee, Challenging, fond of challeng- 
ing 2 Boasting, 
ràidheil,-e, @ Quarterly. 
raidhir, see raoir. 
ravibm, s. Rheum. 
fra ‘thmbheas, -eis, -an, s.m. Dream 2 Romance, 
3**Cubib. 
——ach, -aiche, o, Romantic,fabulous, 
gasconading. 
harlhreach, och, -ean, s.m. Prayer, petition, 
request. 
ravlhiteach, -eiche, ø. see raiteach. 
raidse, -an, s.m. Prating fellow, idle talker. 2 
** Yerbiaxe. 
ach, -aiche, a. Prattling, garrulous, prat- 
ing, verbose. prov. 
ach,* ech, s.f. Chief witch. 
achas, -ais, s. m. Habit of prating, idle 
talk, verbiaze. 2 Witchery, enchantment. 
raidis,** -ean, $.f. Gaelic spelling of radish. 
raige, &fiind. Stiffness. 2 Obstinacy. 
raigo, comp. of a. rag. 
raigead, ed, s.m. Degree of stiffness or obg- 
tinacy. 2 Tightuess, toughness, tenseness. 
Isr. an còrd an tarruiug sin, ¢hat pull has 
made th» cord tighter. 
raigealachd,** s.f. Impetuosity. 
raivealtach, (CR) s. m. Rascal. 
fellow— Perthshire. 
raigeann, (DC) s.m. Obstinacy, stifneckedness. 
— Uist. 2 MS) Slowness. 3 Harshness. 
traigh, s.f. Frenzy. 
raighe, s.f. see ruighe. 2 Rank or file of sol- 
diers (ragh. ) 
raigheil,** a. Frantic. 
raigionn.(DC) see raigeann. 
raizle, s.f. 8ee réilig. 
—ar.** -eir, sm. Ragged, untidy person. 
raigneachadh,* -ai.ia, 8.?n. MS ech 
d 


2 Sagacious., 














2 Rollicking 





NTERNET ARCHIV 


raigneachadh 746 raineas 


ed. A’ r—, pr.pt of raignich. Tha mo làmh- 
an air raigneachadh, my hands “re beunumued. 

raignich,* v a. Stiffen. 2 Beuumb. 

rail,$ s. Oak, see darach. 

railidh $ s. Oak, see darach. 

raijliz, see réilig. 

railleach,(AF) s Redshank. 

railidh,*^ s f Fight, fray (rally.) 2 (AUD 
Boisterous fun or sport 

ràmh, gen. Sng & nipl. of ramh, 

traimh, s.f. Brimstone, 

raunnhdeas,** -eis, s.m. Fatness, greasiness. 

raimhe, see reamhra., 

raimhead,* see reamhrad, 

raimhre, see reamhra. 

raimigil, e, s.f. Confusion, prov. 

raimisg,* S.f. Coarse, vulgar person. 

rain, y7n.siny. Of ràn. 

rain, see ran, 2 contr. of rainig. 

rainche (AF) s.m. Fox. 

raineach, -nich, s.f. Fern, brake—ñiiir fæmina 
vulgaris. Goisean rainich, @ tuftof fern. 

ail, -e, a. Abounding in fern, ferny. 2 

Like fern. 


l 


jl 











-an-fhaile,$ s.f. Sweet mountain fern, |590. Raineach 591. Raineach-Muire. 
gee crim-raineach, -chuilionn, . 
stuchum | lonchitis.—Lorn, dec. [colg-raineach 
X in Breadalbane. ] | 


raineach-mhara,$-ich-m-, s.7. The sea-fern (kind 
of sea- weed.)—Aa/ydri8 stliquosa — Skye. 
-mhór,? -ich-móire, $.f. Common brake — 
fern—pteris aqutlina, [Preceded by the art. — 
an. | | 
-Muire,$ -ich-M-, ert The lady-tern— . 
athyriwm filix foemina. [** gives Common 
male fern—fliz major vulgaris. 
— .na-mára,l s.f.Sea-fern—asplenium mæ- 
rinum. $ 
— -nan-creag,§ s.f. Polypody, see clach- 
raineach. 














? 
` 
os A E -— — r 


588. Ravneach-Beinn-Ghobhrdardh. 
æ Bheinn Ghobhrdaidh,§ s.f. Mountain | 
bladder-fern—cystopteris montana. [Found 
wild only on Ben Gourdie.—$) 
j 





Y 















ex Ki i 592. Raineach-na-mara. 593. Raineach-nan- 
Kl raineach-nan-radan,§ -ich-, $ f. lastrea spinulosa — 
Sat 7 (f and the allied species dilatata and fænisecii. -— 
"Za KH (ill. 593 is foenisecii.) 
MN -reangach, -ich-,&. f. see r.-rioghai!, (call- 
a sch ed *' reangach " from its wand-like stalks.) 
vi? eau | -rioghail,3 -ich-, s.f. The royal fern— 
ies osmunda et ay ie i 
e y —— -uaine,§ -ich-, . The green fern—dé- 
589. Raineach chruaidh. plenium adiantum nigrum. (ill. 596.) "A 


o Chruaidh,§ s. f. The hard fern—blech- 
mum spicant. (Preceded by the art. an.) 
= -Qhuilinn, -ich-c-, sf. Holly fern—poly- 


ra neas, ** -eis, s.m. Romance, fable. . 
,ineas, see ràinig, R. tirnam Donan trom, I^ 


“å reached the land of vines heavy (with grapes.) ` y 


Original from x: 
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS of 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN- aa 


raineas 
(An infleetion preserved chiefly iu the North.) | 








596, Raineach-uaine, 
raing,(DMK) s. f. Ring of meal that forms a- 
round the edge of the upper mill-stone when 


the mill is grinding—Caithness. (reached. 
ràinig, past ind. of ruig, R. sinn, we arrived, 
ràinigeadh, past. ind, pass. of rue, R e., it was 
reached. 
rainn, yen. & pl. of rann. 2 see roinn, 
rainn-an-uisge,** s.m. Eyehright, 
Trainne-rüisg, s.f. Eyebright. 
rainn-mhill,** v.g. Abolish, abrogate. 
raiunsich,** v.a. Arrange, put in rows or ranks, 
——-— —ean, SD. Ranges, rows, ranks. 
—te, past pt. of rainnsich. Arranged. 
rainnt, Gaelic form of rent.—Suth'd. 
rainnte,** g. Articulate, 
rain-sgrios,** v.a. Abolish. 
raip. -e, s.f. Filth. 2 Foul mouth. prov. 
Debauchery. 
raipeach,tt a. Filthy. 2 Foul-mouthed, 
raipeas, -eis, see raip. 
Taipleach, -eich, -an, $.f. Filthy or slovenly wo- 





EA 


mg ET EE E rr femme 
——— E E EE rk _ <> 


Digitized by 


IRITCORICT ADS LJ 
INA ERINEIT. GP PI VM 


717 


| råiteach, -eicue, 


ramh 





man, 

raipleachag, -aig, -ag, s.f.,dim, of raipleach. Lit- 
tle squahid woman. 

ra‘'pleachan,** -ain, s.m. Scullion. 

rair, see (an) ravir, 

frais, s. f. Path, way. 2(DMy) Play. R. a’ 
chniloin ris an t-seann cuu, the puppy’s play 
with tre old doy. 


| raiszan, -ein, -an, s.m. Goat’s tail, prov. 2 (AF) 
[*givas 


Goat. 3 (AW) Tousy-headed child. 
raisinn for No. 1.] 

rais-mhaol, see ras. 

raitche,(AF) s f. Bitch, female dog. 

ràite, -An, s.f, Saying, word. 2 Aphorism, pro- 
verb, allage. 3**Idie conversation, gibberish, 
verbiage. 4 Arrogant language,boasting. 9 
One who talksidly. 

i a. Verbose, sententious. 2 
Boasting. 3**f'luent. Mor r., 626009 ` beaz 
T., (a, iturn, quiet. 

ràiteach, Ach, s.m. Desultory prater. 

——ail, -e, a. Boasting, vain-glorious, arro- 
gant, challenging. Daoine r., boasters. 

as, -ais, s.m, Boasting, vain-glory. os- 
tentation, pride, arrogance, bluster, 2 Say- 
ing, speech. 3 Competilion, contest, emula- 
tion. 4 Lie, report, idlə surmise. 5*i'rial of 
strength. A’ r. air a chéile, competing, em- 
uiating «ach. other ; a ràiteachais, Ais lies. 

————], s. f. Same meanings as ràiteachas. 
Luchd-r., idle talkers. 

ràitealachd. (MN) s.f. Arrogation. 

raitvan,** -ein, s.m. Pleasure. 

raiteauas, -àis, See ràiteachas. 

ràith, see ràidh. 

ràith, v. Threaten. 2 (CR) Scold— Perth-shire. 
R eair, he scolded hirn. 

raith,} -e, -ean, s. f. Common brake, see aa 
raineach mhór. 

raith-dorch,s.m. see ràth-dorcha. 

ràithe, see ràidhe. 











achd, see raidheachd, 
ràitheil, -e, @ see raidheil 
ahne, gf, see raineach, 
raithneach, -ich, see raineach, 
ràitiuün, see ràdh. 
raitse,** s.f. idle conversation, boasting, 2 De» 
sultory prater, ` 
raitseach,(UR) s.f. Strong and lazy young wo- 
man—W, of [ioss-8nuwre, 
rails,* v.G. see rac. 
rallsa,* s.n. see ràcan. 
rallsadh,* -aidh, -aidn, see racadh. 
ramaciiulair, -ean, s.m. Coarse, vulgar fellow. 2 
Romn»ing, noisy fellow, 
———eachd, s.f.ind.Coarse play,romping. 
ramachidas, -ais, S.M. Coarseuess. 
ramair,* -ean, s.n. Romp. 2 Blockhead.  3* 
Vuigar coarse fellow. 
eachd,* see ramachdaireachd. 
ramaiscei!l,(CR) a. Romping, noisy—A rran. 
ramaiair, -eau, sam. tRambler. 2 see ramachd- 
air 
ramallag,* -aig, -an, s.f. Puddle. 
rainas,** xm. thyme. 2 Romance. 
——ach,** @. itomanbie, fabulous. 
ramisg, -aisg, sm. Sea-vak, a kind of seaweed. 
Scots, tangie. 
ràmir, -aimh, -an, s.m. Oar. 
Branen. 4** Wood. 
try of woods. 
PARTS OF AN OAR :— 
1 Cnotan, box, placed on the oar to protect it 
from wear. Cladan—(AU) cleat. 
2 Dorn, handle or grip. Doirneag, dorn-chur. 
8 Lunu, part between the handle and box, 


3A 2 
rigihal from 


7, Uuem ei FAIT 
| | / IK kk yo le 
| L d J d 





Q'eTrod. 379 
Talamh nan r., the coun- 


LM SETS = 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


ac, see ràidheach., ‘ 


NOIS 


d 
d 
i | 


ramh 


5 Liagu, feather, blære. 
ramh,$ s. The family of plants known as rham- 
nacee—\adiyi.luaily rhamnus. 
ràmh,** va. Kow a boat. 
ràmhach, -aiche, OG.  Oared. 2 
Branchy. 
ràmhach, -aich, sm. Raft. 2 Boat propelled by 


oars. 3 Galley. 4Set of oars 5**Rowing 6 
** Rowing-match. Se-rambiach, a siz-oared 
boat. 

ramnacnadh, -aidh, s.m. 
ing. 2 Furnishing with oars. 3 Branching. 
A’ r—, pr.pt. of rainhaich. 


ràmhachd, s.f.ind. Rowiag, pulling. 2 Branch- 
ing. 38**Qar-making. 
ràmhadair, -ean, s.m. Oar-maker. 
rarely Traveller. 
ràmhadaireachd,** s.f Oar-making. 2 Rowing. 
ràmha(dnh, -aidh, ssm. Rowing. 
rànhag,(CR) s.f. Root. Cha'n 'eil sion ach an 
r. ann, i is all but dead —used of animals but 
not of human beings— W. of Ross. (Used of 
persons also in Gairloch—DU.)  (fréamhag) 


2 Rower. 3 


ràiuhaich, v.a. Row (iomair.) 2**s5upply with 


oars. 3**Man with oars. 
ràmhaiche,-an, s.m. Rower, oarsman. 
ràmhaichte, a. & past pt. of ràmhaicn. Furnish- 
ed with oars. 2 Impelled by oars, rowed. 
rawhair, -ean, s.m. Rower. 
eachd, s.f.ind. Rowing, employment of 
rowing. 2 Oar-making. 
ràmhan, n.pl. of ràmh. 
ramhan, Perthshire for ràbhan. 
ramhar, -mura, see reamhar. 
ràmin-bràghad (AH) s.f. Forward, or pilot oar. 
bamb-deiridh, s.m. Stroke-oar. 





597. Kamh-dhroighionn. 


Fàmh-dhroighionn,$ -inn, e m. Prickly buck- 
thorn—rhamnus catharticus. 
ràmh-gualainn, sam. Stroke-oar. 2(DMy^One 


of the foremost oars, or vars nearest the bows.. 


ramh h-amar,(DMy) s.m. One of the oars near- 
est the steru. 

ramhlair, -ean, s.m. Humonurist, 2 Noisy fel- 
low. 3**Rambler. [** gives ramlair.] 

eachd, s.f.ind. Play, sport. 2 Noisiness. 
3 Rambling. 

ràmh-long, -luing, -an, s.f. Galley, boat or ves- 
sel fitted for rowing, (long-ràmhach, see p.78.) 

ramhraich,* v. see reamhraich. 2 Come to 
high-water asspring-tide. 3 Beat tiil one's 
body swells. 

frampair, -ean, s.m. Rampart. 

ran, -ain, s.m. Roar, loud cry, shriek, bellow. 2 
*Melancholy cry. 3* Drawling, dissonant roar 
or cry. ‘lhoir r., cry out; thug e r. as, he 
cried out. 

ran, pr.pt. a’ rànaich, a’ rànach & a’ rànail, v.n. 
Koar, shriek, bellow, cry out, make a noise. 2 
**Crash loudly. Ged rànadh sléibhtean, though 
hills Should roar. 

fren, s.m. Erop: 

ran,** -ain, s.m. Crumb, morsel. 





2 Truth, 


Digitized by 


NTERNET ARCHIV 


748 
4 Seasgadh,part bevween the box and feather 


Woody. 3 


Rowing, ac: of row- | ran lach,** -a ch, sin. Partisan. 


Aira r., rowed. 


‘rannadh, -aidh, -aidhean, 8. m. 





rannghall 


tran,** a. Clear, evident. 2 Nimble. 8 Noble, 

ranach,* -aich, s.m. Cave that gives an echo, 2 
Large ill-furnished nouse. | 

rànich,(CE) a. Hoarse—Arran. 

rànaich, 3.7. Roariig, act of roariug, shrieking 
aloud, as with paia, bellowing. 2* Drawling 
crying. A’ r—, pr.pt. of rau. 

ràiail, s m. & pr.pt. Same meanings as rànaich. 


rantich +, $f son. Bellower, roarer. 


ranan, Lt, -& i, 3. 
stag 


din. of ràn. Roar of a 

7 Shriek, cry, bellow. 

(Scots,ran ly.) 

randoniich,** væ. Abrogte, ab lish. 

rang, -aing, an, & Category. 2 Columr 8 
Rank, row, order, range. 4 Bank of a river. 
5 Stream 6 Wrinkle. 

ag ch, -aiche, a. Ia ranks, rangesorrows. 2 
Wrinkled ! 

rangacnail,** o Tactical, 

raugachadn,** -aidh, s. m. Tactics. 2 Putting 
in rows, arrang uz, arranzem.:ni. 

rangaich, ** pe Put in rauxs or rows, arranga. 

rangaichte,** past pt. Put in order, arranged. 

rangalr, -ean, s.m. Wrangler, prov. 

rangan, seerong. , 


-rangan,** -ain, s.m Sloth. 


rangan,** n.pl. of rang. Ranks, rows. 

raug-có ág,** sme Tactics. 

rang-oilean, s.m. Taccics, 

rann, -ainn, -an & raantaichean, 8.f. Part, por- 

tion, division, section 2 Verse, stanza, 

distich, catch, canto, section. 3 Epiezra:u, 

song, poem. 4 Quatrain, stave. 5 Genealogy, 

pedigree, ancestry. 6 Relationship. 7** 

Bond, tie. 8**Promontory. 9 Verse of a 

chapter. 10 see reang. 11* Oration, in poetry. 

ranua, see roiane, gew.sing of minu. 

rannach, -aich, s.m. Sonugsier. z Rhymer,bard. 
3 Story-teller, reciter. 

rannach,* g. Belonging to a peninsula. 

rannacn, ft -aiche, a. Distrivuted ın parts or 

portions. 2 Metrical, in verses, 3 Versifyiug. 


rannacha ih, -aidh, s.m. Act or act of versifying, 


prosody. A’ r—, pr.pt.of rannaich. 

rannachd, s.f. Rhyme, metre, versifying, versi- 

fication, z Tale, story. 3 Satire. 

Division. 2 

Bringing to a point, sharpening. 3**Begin- 

ning. 4(AH) Continent. Cd g rannaidhean 

ruadha 'n.dorahain, the five great continenis of 

the giobe. 

raunvdiiail,* -e, s.f. Rhapsody, rant, ranting. 

——each,* -viche, a. Rhapsodical. 2* None 

sensical inoratory. * 

raunnag, -an, see reannag, 

rannaich, v. a. Compose verses, versify, rhyme 

2 Bring to a point. 

EE EEN -an, s.m. Versifier, songster, poat, 
rd. 

rannaicheachd, see rannachd. 

raunaichte, past pt. of rannaich. Made into vers 
ses, versified,. 2 Pointed. 

raunailheachd, s.f.ind. Prosody, versification, 
metre. | 

rannair, -ean, s.m. Divider, distributor, diyi- 
sor, 2 Versifier, poet. 2 Orator, rhapsodist. 

rannan,** -ain, sin. Lowing of deer. 2(DMy) 
Slime of fish. 

—— ——., pl. of rann. 

ranndachd, s.f. Versification, metre, poetry. 2 
*Extent of territory. 

ranndadh,** s.m. Rondeau, 

ranndaichean, pl. of raun. 5 

ranndar, Air, $s. m. Murmuring, complaining, 
discontented language. prov. 

rannghell,; CR) s. m. Inferior poetry, doggerel, 
— iW. of Ross-shire, Inverness & Argyll. 





Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN. 


rann-leabhar 
rann-leabhar,* air, san. Anthology. 
raun-mheas, A, s.m. Scanning of verse. 
raun-phairt, -e, af. Participation. 2 Participle. 
2** Portion. 
rann-phàirteach, -eiche a, Partaking, sharing, 
apt to share. 2 Communicating. — 
raun-phairbeachadh,-aidh, s.m. Sharing,commu- 
nicating. A’ r—, pr.pt. of rann-phairtich 
tann-phairteachail, -e, a. see raun-phàirteach. 
2 Portionable. hs 
rann-phàirtich, v.a. Partake, share. 2 Distri- 
bute. 3 Communicate, impart. 


rann-phairtiche, -an, s.m. Partaker, skarer. 2. 


Distributor. 
rann-phairtichte, past pt. Shared, imparted 2 
Communicated. 3 Divided into shares or sect- 
ions. 
rannsachadh, -aidh, s.m. Searching, enquiring 
into,serutinizing, review, reviewing, search- 
ing minutely. 2 Rummaging.  3* Search, 
scrutiny. A’ r—, pr.pt. of rannsaich, 
rannsachail,1f -e, a. Inquisitive. 
rannsachair, -ean, s.m. Searcher, explorer, ex- 
aminer, inspector, reviewer. 
rannsaich, pr.pt. a’ rannsachadh, v.a. Search, 
scrutinize, examine miuutely, explore, re- 
|. ye Ww, rummage. 
ranusaiche, an, s.m. Searcher. 
rannsaichidh, fut.aff.a. of rannsaich. 
rannsaichte, past pt. of rannsaich. Searched, 
| explored, examined, inspected, scrutinized. 
rAnnsuchadh, see rannsachadh. 
rannsuich, see rannsaich. 
—— —— — te, see rannsaichte. 
rannta, past pt, Shared, divided. 
ranntach,a. & s. see rannach. 
—-——d, see rannachd. 
-—d,* s,f.ind. Extent of territory, juris- 
diction, sphere. 
ranntair,tt -ean, s.m, Poet, songster. 
ranntair,* st Range, extent of territory, '* di- 
vision." Tha 'n r. ioma-chumhann, the rang" 
ws limited ; a’ tighinn a staigh air an r. ag- 
ainn, encroaching on cur territory (rann-tir.) 
ranntannan, s.pl. Title-deeds, deeds of convey- 
ance. 2 Chattels. Sar-Obar 
ranntar-buth, em. Confused dance without sys- 
tem. —Sar-Obair. 
ranntrach,* -aiche, a. Extensive, 
rannuidheachd, see rannachd, 
rant,**-a, s.m. Rant. 2 Noise. 
dance, 
rantair,** Gaelic spelling of ranter. 
rantaireachd,** s.f. Noisiness, ranting. Is ann 
ort tha 'n r. ; how noisy you are ! 
raob,** va. see reub. 2 Prop. 
—— —ach,** a. see reubach. 
raobachd,** s.f.ind. see reubachd. 2 Excess. 8 
Gluttony. 
raochd, see raoic. 
raod, -aoid, -an, see rud, 
raod, see reudan. 
raodach,(CR) a. Kindly—Arran. 
raodan, -ain, see reudan. 





3 Confused 


racdhair, raodhraichean, $. m. seeraghar. 2 


Hope. 

raog, -acig, -an, s.m. Rushing, prov. 

raogag, -aig, -an, $.f. Woman of an impetuous 
temper, 

raogha, see rogha. l 

raoghnaich, see roghnaich. 

raoic, v.n. Roar, bellow. 2 Belch. Mar a raoic- 
eas leòmhan, as a lion roars. 

raoic,** s.f, Bellow, roar. 2 Voice of a deer. 3 
Belching noise. 4 Sound made by cattle when 
fighting. 5*ľhe roar that a cow gives when 
gored by another, 


749 rapach 


-- e 








ragiceach, -eiche, e Roaring, bellowing. 2 Fla» 
tulent, making a belching noise. 3 Makinz æ 
hoarse noise. 

raoiceadh, -idh, s.m, Roaring, act of roaring, 
bellowing. 2 Belching. A’ r—, pr.pt. of raoic. 

raoiceil, see raoiceadh. 

raoichdeil, see raoiceadh. 

raoichdich, see raoiceadh. 

raoichd, see raoic. 

raoichdeach, see raoiceach. 

raoid,(AC) s.f. Sheaf of corn consisting of 24 
handfuls, each bound with three stalks ef 
corn. 2(DC) Sufficient quantity of corn,hay, 
PER, &c. for a meal for a borse or cow— 

ist. 

racimeach,** e Plundering. 

raoimeadh,"*-idh, s.m. Depredation, plunder- 
ing. ; 

raoin, gen sing. of raon. 

raoine,t s.f. Young cow that has had a calf, or 
even two, but is barren and has the calf’s 
share of milk on her thighs. 

raoineadh,** -idh, s.m. Triumph, victory. 

raointeach, -eiche, a. Full of plains or fields, 
meadowy, agrarian. 

raointean, pl. of raon. 

raoir, (an raoir) adv. Last night. 

raoit, -e, -ean, $.f. Indecent micth. 2 Rakish fe- 
mal». 8ffDrunkezness. 

raoitealachd, s.f. Prod'gality. 

raoiteach,ff a. Drunken. 

raoiteil, -e, œ. Indecently merry. 2 Prodigal 

raoiteir, ean, s.m. Drunkard. 

-—eachd, s.f. Drunkenness. 

raomadh,** -aidh, am, Phlegm. 

traon, v.a. Turn, change. 2 Tear, break. 

raon, -avin, pl. Lan, -aichean & raointean, s. f. 
Field, plain, 2 Mossy plain. 3 Green. 4 
Road, way. 5 Hop». 6 Uplaad field, down. 

raonacb,* -aich, s.m. Plain country, 

raonach, «aiche, see raointeach. 

raonadh,** -aidh, s.m. Way, road, 2 Haunt. 8 
Breaking, tearing. 4 Changing. 

raonaichean, pl. of raon, 


2 see raoit. 








599. Raosar dubh. 

raosar dearg,$? s.m. Red currant—ribes rubrum, 

raosar du*h.$ s.m. Black currant—ribes nigrum. 

raosar geal,$ s.n. White currant—ribes album, 

trap, -4, @ Sudden, quick. 

frap,(AF) -a, an, s.m. Any creature that digs 
for its food, or draws its food towards it, as 


593, Ransar dearg. 


cows, 2**Noise. 

rap,* s.m. Bad halfpenny. 2 see rop. 

rapach, -aiche. a. Nasty, filthy. 2 Slovenly. 3 
Drivelling. 4 Foul-mouthed. 5(CR) Stormy, 
dirty, of weather — W, of Ross-shire, Inverness 
& Argyll. 


il from 


Origit 


3, LPT ein EAE Be Dus AT 
i F e i Lj - i -— j 
UNIVERS O LINOIS Al 


s T -" 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


Digitized by 


INTERNET 


A P £I n J 
L ARGA Y 


rapech 


rapach, -aiche, @ Noisy. 

rapail (MS) a. Sumptuous, 

rapair, -ean, s. m. Frothy, noisy fellow. 9** 
Slovenly fellow.  a*wWorthless fellow. 4* 
Drawling fellow. 

ràpaireachd, s.f. Noisiness, habit of noisiness. 
2ttFoolish, idle taik. 

rapaireachd,** s.f.ind. Slovenliness. 

rapais, -e, 3.f. Filth. nastiness, siovenliness. 2 
Drab, careless femaie. 

ràpal, -ail, sm. Noise, bustle. 

rapal,” s. f. Nonsense talk. 

rapalach, -aiche, a. Noisy, bustling. 

rapas, -ais, see rapais. 

r' ar, (for ri ar) Dy or beside our, to our. 
taobh, to our side. 

ras, -ais, s. Fury, rage— Dàin I. Ghobha. 

ras, -ais, s.m. Shrub, underwood. 2 (AF) Seal, 
sea-calt. 

rasach, -aiche, a. Shrubby, boughy, branchy. 

,TAsnch,( M Mel) s.7. Grating placed against the 
wall, in which grass, de is placed for feed- 
ing young sheep » wiutered in the bouse—Lewis. 
(prasach. 3) 

rasachd,** s.f. Shrubbery, shrubbiness. 

rasaiche,** s, f. Gipsy, hussy, rambler, rambling 
woman. Generally used to denote à roving 
lewd woman, 

rasiir,** s m. Rambler. 

rasaireacid,** s.f. Rambling. 

vasal, ail, -4n, 3.52. see rasdal, 

rasan, -ain, an, s.m. Harsh, grating discord- 
ant noise, bickering. 2 Loquacity, constant 
speaking, 3 ‘Tedious highway. 4 Smell. 6 
**Unpleasant monotony. 6** Mouotonous 
speaker. 

rasan, -2°n, -a, 
copse, shrubbery. 

rasan, pl. oi ras. 

ra:auach, -aiche, a. A bounding in brushwood or 
Uu'nierwood.or 2 rivulets, 

rà:anach,** g ‘fedrous, long-winded, loquaci- 
ous, 2 Di-cordaut. 3 Monotonous. 

rà«in ch SE -3ich, s.m. Dull, prosy speaker. 

rasanachd,** et Cant, diatribe. 2 Monotony. 
3 Tedious verbiige. 

ràsanaich,** v. Cant. 

ràsar, -air, Gaelic form of razor. 

ras-chirann, -a:nn, 8.1. Shrub, 


R’ ar 


s.m. Brushwood, underwood, 
2 Rivulet. 


ras- -chrannach, ** -aic! ", $m. Shrubbery. 
ras-chrannach, -aiche, a. Aboundiug in shrubs. 
2 Made of addc 


EIE ZK 
dëi 


T" 


Lal x 
SÉ T3 
S X 
EX 


"Mee, 





600. Ras-chrann-sior-uaine. 
ras-ehrann-sior-uaine,l s.m. Evergreen privet— 
ligustrum vulgare, 
rasdach,** -aiche, a. Churlish, unpolite. 
ra«dach,** -^ich, s.m. Chnel. 
ràsdail, v.a. Rake, harrow. 
ràs dail, gen.sing. of ràsdal. 


HITI SEW! D 
AITUTPEITT Am VJ 
V FANE) ARC W 


750 


rathan 


rasdair,** sf. Great satiety. 

rà«dal, -ail, -an, s.m. Rake. 2 Hand-harrow. 3 
Harrow, 4**arebone. 5 l'rizzliog sound, as 
of nesh being frie:t. 

ràsdal-ghead, s.m. Ilan t-harrow. 

ràsdalach,rt s.n. fharrowing. 2 Of, or belong- 
ing to, rakes. 3 That can be raked. 4 Like 
a rake. 

ràsdaladh, -aidh, s.m, Raking, act of raking to- 
gether, as hay. 2 Gathering. A’r—, pr. pt. 
of rasdail. 1 

ràsdalaiche,** em. One who works with a rake, 
2 Raker of hay. 

rasg, aisg,-an, see rosg, 

rasgach, -aiche, &. see rosgach & rea gach. 

ràsgair, ** sn. Idle talker. 

rasgaireachd,** s.f. ldie talk. 

rasgan, Lewis for ros;an. 

rasmiaol,** -inhaol, s.m. Sea calf. 

rastach, -aich, s.m. see rasdach. 

rastach,** a. Couutry. 

rastair, see rasdair. 

rà:uidheach,** a. Rambling. 

ràsuidheaci,** sf. Rambling. 

trat, s. Motion. 

tràth, $2. Fortress. 2 Artificial mound or bar- 
row. 3 Village, town, 4 Royal seat. $ 
Fern. 6 Plain, cleared spot. 71['tesid nce. 

rath, -a, s.m. Prosperity, fortuna, success, ine 
crease, profit, advantage, good luck. 2 (A) 
Shoal. 3 Surety. 4 Charieter. 5 Wages. I3 
boag r, a bhitheas ort, your D dr wiil be very 
precarious ; is beagr. a rinn é dhòmh-sa, i£ 
did very little good fome ; chaidh e bho f., he 
went to pigs and whistles ; mac-ratb, a lucky, 
fortunate person; r. éisg, a shoal of fish ; is 
duilieh r. a chur ‘air neach a dh'aindeoin, you 
can’t make à man lucky against his wili—in 
spite of the strong general belief in fate and 


luex, there are several Gaelic proverbs to the © 


effect that a man makes his own fate or luck, 
or that one wno makes no effort bimseli can- 
not have good luck. 

rath, see ravi. 

rath, -a, sm. Circle. 2 Raft. 3 see ràthan, 

rathach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to, circles, 
or 2 rafts. 3 Abounding in circles, or 4 
rafts. 

rathach, -aiche, o see ratbail & ratümhor. 

trathach, -aich, s.m. Hough. 

rathachadh, -aidh, s.m. Prospering, succeed- 
ing. 2 Act of making prosperous. 3 Pros- 
perity, success, A’ r—, pr.pt. of rathaich. 
rathachas.tt ag, s.n. Success, fortune. 
rathad, ail, pl. -an & -aidean, s.m. Road, way, 
highway. 2 Path, track. 3* Method. R. 
mor an righ, the public road, the king's high- 
way ; as an rathad, ott of the way, @side ; ar 
an rathad, on the way, coming; 2 pr emani. (of 
women only) ; gabh do r. ! begone ! luchd-gabh- 
ail an rathaid, wauyfarers ; ve an rathaid, the 
whole way. 

rathadach,tf a. Pushful, diligent. 
rathad-liridh, s.m. Ascent. 

rath: id-iaruinn, s.m. Railway, railroad. 

tathaich, v.a. Make prosperous, 2 Diess. 

ratbaich,(AC) s. Passion. 


ratbail, -e, a. Prosperous, 2 Astute. 3 Fortune 
ate. 4 Famed, well spoken of. Dreamr., d 
SEENEN people. i 

rathamhnas, -ais, s.m. Prosperity. 2 Mappi- 
ness, 

rathan, ain, s.m. Buneh. 2 Bundle. 3 Strum- 
pet. 

rathan, -ain, Ap, s.m. see rothan. 2 Sheave 


of the "Den of a spinning-wheel, the grooved 
drum that receives the driving-cord. 


Original fron 
UNIVE Y OF ILI 
UR gei" CHAMPAIGN 


ERS E aiT 


TY ruat t^g 


a LAAD 
SE Iuda ri 


fue ` 2 ' 


$ 


$ » > 
i PRSE 


+ =e 


K 


a, 
EECH =! 





a, 
o 


= TI 
cui 


eg 


TINOIS AT f 


| 
i | 
Aiii 


EEOAE iL 

ratha, -ain, -an, s.m. Surety, security, Chaidh 
ean r. air, he became surety for him; theid 
mis’ an r. ort, J can assure you (North) ; 
théid mi am bannaibh dhuit, or théid mi au 
urras ort, or bàirnidh mis’ thu (/s/ay.) 

rathanach, a. Having pulleys. (rothanach) 

ràthanas, -als, s.m. see ràthan 

rath-dorcha, s.m.ind. The moon in the wane, 

. rathmhoire, comp. of rathmhor. 

rathmhor, -oire, &. Prosperous, successful, for- 
tunate. 2 Noted. 3 Happy. 

rath-sholus, -uis, s.m. The space between the 
front and back doors of a house. 

rath-soluis, s.m.The time of moonlight at night. 

-yath-thiodhlaicidh,(CR) s.m Lair, grave-plot— 
W. of Ross-shire. 

rati, s. f Ludicrous appellation applied to 
whisky —Sar-Obair. 

ratreut, s.m. Retreat. 

ré, s.f.ind. (** gives m.) The moon. 2 Time, 
season, duration,space oftime. 3 Life, exis- 
tence, life-time. 4**Planet. Ré nuadh, the 
new moon, (generally, an solus ur); fad mo 
ré 's mo là, during my day and generation. 

ré, adv. & prep. During. Réan là, during the 
day ; ré na bliadhna, all the y. ar, during the 
whole year ; ré an rathaid, a4 the way [Goy- 
erns the genitive case. ] 

re see righ & ri. 

reab, see reub, 

géabach, see reubach, 

réabail, see reubail. 

reaban, s.m.(MS)Minnow. 2(DMy)The fringe 
of’whiskers men were formerly in the habit of 
leaving when shaving from ear to ear, 

freabh,l s.m. Wile, trick, cunning. 

treabhach, -aiche, a. Subtle, crafty, cunning. 2 
** Joyful. 

reabhach,** -aich, s.m. Mountebank, one who 
plays tricks, hence a wicked fellow, a devil. 
2 The Devil. Anr. thu, devil take you. 

reabhag,(AF) s.f. Linnet, titling. 

— -mhonaidh,(AF) s.f. Mountain linnet, 

meadow pipit, heather lintie, 

-fhracich (AF) see reabhag-mhonaidh. 

reabhair, -ean, s.m. Crafty, subtle fellow. 

réabhair,(CR) s.m. One fond of running about 
— Perthshire, 

BEER CR) s.f. Running about— Perth- 
shire. 

reabhaireachd, s.f.ind. Craftiness 

reabhart, -airt, -an, s.m. see reothart. 

reabhdan, see reudan. 

treabhlangar,** a. Skipping, playing, sporting. 

reabhradh, - aidh, s.m. Disporting, as of boys— 
Badenoch. 2**Skipping. 

reabunn, -uinn, see reubainn. 

treac, s.f Woman, damsel 

reacar.** o Swift. 2 Growing quick. 3 Hot. 
4 Strong. 

reacn prov. for rach. 

reacnadn, see rachadh. 

reachd, s.m. Law, statute, ordinance. 2 Right, 
due 4.3 Toll. 4 Command, power, authority. 
5b Keen sorrow. 6 see reachdmhoireachd. 
Dream gun aireamh fo d r., people without 
number under thy command 

geachd, s.find, Great vexation, keen sorrow 
2*tLoud sob or sigh. 3 Emotion, tears, shed- 
ding of tears from vexation or a tee:ing of 
insult. 4 (AC) Strength, toughness 5 (AC; 
Emulation. — Bhris r. air, he gave expression 
to his Sorrows; thamig r. ‘am mhuineal,a lump 
(or choking sensation) came in my throat ; 
thàinig r. orm, ^mo/io came upon me , bhris 
air mo r., my strength broke down. 

reachdach, -aiche, &. Ot, or beiongiag to, a law, 











reachdachadh, -aidh, s.m. 


reachdail, o Legal, lawful. 


reachdair, 


reachd - dhaingneachadh, -aidh, 


readhag 


2 Right, lawful, 3 Imperative, giving law. 
4 Authoritative. 5 Strong. 6 Vexatious,an- 
noying. 7 Haughty. 8 Prone to take offence. 
9 Causing deep sorrow. 10 Strong, stout, 
powerful. 11**Knactive, legislative. 
Enacting. act of en- 
M or legislating. A’ r—, pr. pt. of reachd- 
aich. 


reachiiachd,** s.f. Legislation, enaction. 
reachdadair, -ean, s.m. Lawgiver, legislator, 9 


**Ruler, rector, 


reachdadh,** s.m. Legislation. 
reachdaireachd, s.f.ind. Legislation, enaction, 


decrering. 2 Rectorship. 


reachdaich,pr.pt. a’ reachdachadh, v.a. Enact, 


legislate, ordain, decree, appoint. 


reachdaichte, past pt. Enacted, prescribed by 


law, ordained, 
2 Regular. 


see reachiladair. 2** rarely 


322 
reachiach. 

s. M. 
Dairyman. 


reachd-airm,** s.f. Court of Judicature. 
reachdar, see reachdmhor. 
reachd-cheangail, v.a. Bind by a law or decree, 


2Stipulate. 3 Article, articulate. 


reachd-cheangailte, past pt. of reachd-cheangail. 


Bound by law or decree. 2 Stipulated. 


reachd-cheangal, ail, s.m. Binding by a law or 


decree. 2 Stipulating, act of stipulating. 3 
Fixing by law. A’ r—, pr. pt. of reachd- 
cheangail. 


reachd-dhaingneach, -eich, -an, s.m. Decree, 


statute. 
see reachd- 


cheangal. 


reachd- dhaingnich, see reachd-cheangail. 
reachd-dhaingnichte, see reachd-cheangailte. 
reachd-mhathair,** -mhathar, s.f. Mother-ine 


law. 


reachd-mhod, -óid, -an, s.m. Court of law, court 


of justice. 


reachdmhoire, comp. of reachdmhor. 


———--——achd, s.f.ind. Valility. 2Stoute 


ness, 3 Rankness. 4 Productiveness, as of 
corn. 5 Substantialness, pichiness. 6 Sor- 
rowfulness, 7 Spiritedness. 


reachdmhor, -oire, a. Stout, energetic, strong, 
robust. 2 Valid. 3 Rank, luxuriant full of 
substance, substantial, pithy. 4 Spirited. 5 
Sorrowful, tearful. 6 Commanding. 7 Im- 
perative. 8 Legislative. 9 Vexatious, tor- 
menting, 10 Easily offended. 11 Handsome, 
fair. 12* Productive, as corn. Seachd dias- 
an r. agus math, seven ears of corn, rank 
an good, 

—achd, s.f.ind. Vexatiousness. 2 Readi- 

ness to take offence, 

reacnil-shaoirseach, see reachd-shaor. 

reachd-shaor, -shaoire, a. Licensed, authorized. 

reachd-thabhairteach, -eiche, @. Legislative, 
lawgiving, 2 Fond of, or pertaining to legis- 
lation. 

reachd-thabhairtear, -ir, An. s. m. 
lawgiver 

treacht, an. sm. Man. 2 see reachd. 

réadan, ain, -an, s.m, see reudan, 

treadan, .ain, -an, s.m. Reed, pipe, tube, 

reaclanach, see reudanach. 

read-chord, -chuird, s.m. Rein of a bridle. 
————— .--an, pl. of read-chord. 

readh, see readhag. 

readh, see rachadh. 

readb,** o Tough. bard. Chagnada e sleagh re 
he would chew a tough spear. 

rèadh, see riadh, 

readnag, (AF) s 


Legislator, 


Mad bull or ox, 


readb-seaoileadh 


freadh-sgaoileadh,** -idh, s m. Flux. 
reafog, -oig, -an, s.f, Linnet. 
freag,** -eig. s.f. Night. 
reag-dhall,** a. Purbiind, 
reagnlorach,** a. Resounding. 
real, see reul. 

reall, see reul. 

reallag (Af)s.f. Linnet. 
réalt, see reul: 

ream id, see rachamaid. 
reamain, s.f. Beginning. 


reainalair, Perthshire for ramalair & ramachd- | 


alr 

treamh, see roimhe. 

reambi, see ream ra. 

reamaad,** -aid, s.m. Bulk, fatness, 

reamhag, see riabha«. 

reamh»in "rer, Foretelling, prognostication. 

reamhair,** -ean, s.m. Traveller,waytaring, man, 
vagabon l. 

reuinhar, -mhra, a. Fat, plump, fleshy. 2 Fat, 
greasy, oily. 3 Big, great. 4 Thick, gross, of 
great circumference. 5**Coarse. An sneachd 
nach iix mu Shamhuinn, thig gu r. mu Fhéill- 
Brìgh le, the snow that comes not at Hallow- 
mas will come thickly at Candiemas ; r. am 
teòi!, fat-fleshed. 

freamh-cheuman, s.pl. Ancestors, forefathers. 

reamhra, comp. of reamhar. 

reamhrach, -aiche, @ Coagulative, thickening. 
2 Fattening. 

-—adh, -aidh, s.m, Fattening, act of fat- 

tening or making fat. 2 State of becomiag 

fit, gross, thick or large. 3 Grossness,fatness. 

4 Coagulation. A’ r—, pr. pt. of reamhraich. 

—ail, -e, o, Fattening,having a tenden- 

cy to fatten, or mak» fat. , 

~d, s.f.ind. Fatness, grossness. 2 Suet, 
3* High-water, full spring-tide — Islay. R. a 
bheathaich, the fatness of the beast ; r. 'sa 
phoite, suet in the pot ; r. muic-mara, blubber ; 
r. na talinhainn, the fatness of the earth. 

reamhrad, -aid, s.m. Fatness, degree of fatness 
or grossuess. 

reamhraich, v.d, & n. Fatten, make fat. 2 Be- 
c»ne fat, thick or gross. 3 Concrete, coazu- 
late, clot 

-—te, past pt. of reamhraich. Fattened, 
fed, made fat. 

rean,** s.f. Span. 

reang, va. t£ n. Kill, starve or subdue with 
hunzer. 2 Become emaciated or lean. 

reang, reing, -an, s.f. Rib, see bata, E 3, p. 73 ; 
see rong. 2 Joggled frame in a boat, see bata, 
C p. 73. 3 Wrinkle in the face. 4(AC) Bar. 5 
(AC) Stalk. 6 (AC)Rod, pole, wand. 7 (AF) 
Hare. 

reang, -3,-an, s.m. Rank, row, series. 2 Rein. 
3 Kidney. Reanga, reins. 

reangach, -aiche, a. Lean, starved, cadaverous. 
2 see rongach. 3* Full of wrinkles,wrinkled. 
4 Full of strings or fibres. 5 Delaying, lin- 
gering. 6ttRanked, ranged. 7 Like a rein. 
8 Like a kidney. 9**Having reins or kidneys, 
10 Ribbed, as a boat or shin. 

reangachach, -aidh, s.m. Starving, act of stary- 
ing with hunger. 2 State of becoming leaa 
or emaciated. 3 Puttin: in ranks or rows. 
A’ r—, pr.pt. of reangaich. 

reangadh, see reangachadh. 

reangaich, v. see reang. 

reangaichte, past pt. of reangaich. Starved with 
hunger. 2 Lean, cadaverous 

Fangai -ean, s.m. Loiterer,lingerer 2 Wran- 
gler. 

——————eaàcbd, s.f.ind. Indolence, lingerin 
dek ae deeg 














ns eel r | TT Rm. LJ 
i ca Kë Pii E CO ER I H VI 
i d La 

KAN L- mil Ni L] 


759 


reana, s.pl. 


réibean 

reangan, see rong. 

Bit s.m. Stringer of boat, see bata, F5, p, 
Ae 

reann, see reang. 

freann, -a, pl. an, [& rinn**,] s. m. Star. 2 
Land, soil. 3 Country, - 

. Stars. 

reannach, -aiche, œ. Spotted, striped. 








601. Reannach. 
reannach, ach s.m. Mackerel. 


2 Mackerel- 
sky. 3**Strong, robust man. 

reannach uaine, s.m. Blue muckerol. 

reaunag, -aig, -an, 3.f, Star. 2 Starlets. 3 Shoot- 
ing scar. R. earballach, a com-t. ; 

reannagach, -aiche, o Starry, studded with 
stars, spangled. 2 Like a star. 

treannair, -ean, s m. Astrologer, astronomer. 

reannan, -ain,s.m., dim. of reann. 
stariet. 

reann-ghlan,** a. Starbright. Na rosgan r.,tie 
starbraght eyes. 


reann-raineach, s.f. Royal fern, see raineach 


rioghail. 

réap,(CR) s. m. Untidy person—SutA'd. 
Gairloch rivp —DU.] 

réapach, Suth'd for riapach. 

rear, (AF) s, Blackbird. | 

frear, sn. Provision. 

rearg, (AF) s. Blackbird. 

reas, reis, s.m. Bice. 

reas,* s.m. Heal of dry curied hair. 

reasach, -aiche, a. Pratbling, talkative. 
ing dry curled hair. 

reasan, see reas, 

réasan, see reusan. 

aich, see rcusanaich. 

freasart, -airb, s.m. Preservation. 2 Health, 

reasbait,** s.m. Begzars brat. 

reasgach, -aiche, a. Stubborn, frowarl,perverse. 
2 Restive, impatient. 3 Iraseiule. 4ffizough, 
5 Skittish. Eachr.,a restive horse. 

reasgachd, s.f.ind. Stub .oracess, perverseness, 
frowardness, 2 Irascibliry. 3 Restiveness, 
impatieace, 4** Contumaey. 5tfRouginess. 
6 Skittishness. 7**Aching. 

reasgaiche, see reassachd. | 

reasgaicheachd, see reasgachd. 

reasgaichead, -eid, s.m. Stubboruness, d-gree of 
stubbornness. 2 Contumacy. 3 Irasci»ility. 
4 Impatience, restiveness. Is r. an t-each aa 
spor, Che spur makes the horse more restive. 

réasg-shuil, -shüla, .snüilean, sJ. Blear-eye. 

—eaenh, -eiche, a. Blear-eyed. 

réasouta, see reusonta. 

reasuall,( AF) s. Whale. 

freatair, s.m. Clergyman, clerk. 

treatas, -ais, s.m. Eumiby, hatred. 

réath, a. see reidh. 

reach, -a, -an, s.m. see reithe. i 

reatha, s. see reith. 
eathach, @ see reitheacn., i 

reabhachas, -ais, see reitheachas. z 

reathadh, Northern form of rachadh, 

reathath, -ailh, s.m. sev r-itheachas. 

reathiau, ** -ata, sm. seo rei ihlean. 

treathreain,** sm. Climate. 

ré-choarcall, -aill, -an, s.m. Halo. 

tredhream, Son. Cliinasa. 


[Ia 


2 Hàv- 








réibean,(MS) s.m, Moustache. 3 Stickleback, 


see rea 
Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


Little star, 


AF 


réidheas,* -eis, s.f. Peace, 


rethbh 


freibh, see ribh. i e 8 

reic, s.m. Sale, auction, selte, act of selling. 
A’ r—, pr.nt. of reic. 

reic, pr.pt. a’ reic, v.a. Sell, vend. 

réie, pr.nt, a’ réiceil, v.n. Roar, howl. 

reic-cheal,** s.m. License or permission to sell 
publicly. 

—ach,** a. Licensed, authorized to sell. 

reiceach, -eiche, og, Scliinz, fond of selling, 
trucking. 2 Saleable. i 

réiceach, -eiche, a. Roaring, howling, 

reiceadair, -ean, s.m. Seller, salesman, broker. 
2 Auctioneer, f i 

eachd, s.f.ind. Selling, business of sell- 
ing. ?ffMerchaudize. 3 Auctioneering. 

reiceadh, -idh, s.m. & pr.pt. of reic, see reic, 

réicoa/lh, -idh. sm. Roaring, act of roaring or 
howling. A’r—, pr.pt of réic. 

reicealaciil, (MS) s.f. Vendibleness. 

reicear, ful.pass. of reic. Shall be sold. 

,s.m. Seller, auctioneer. 

réiceil, -e, s.f. Roaring, act of roaring, howling. 
A’ r—, pr.pt. of réie. — 

reiceireachd, see reiceadaireachd. 

reic-fholiaiseach,(MS) ` $ f. Auction, 

reicidh, fut.aff.a. of reic. 

reicte, past »t. of reic. Sold. 

réide, see réite. 

réideach, see réiteach. 

————adlh, see réiteachadh. 

ré‘deachair, see réiteachair. 1 

reideadh, s.m. Reaping. A’ r—, pr. gt. of reid- 
ich. 

freidh, s.m. Rop». 2 Withe. 

réida, -ean, s.m. Plain, mea low, level grount, 

réidh, -e, a Plein, ievel, smooth. 2 Polished. 
3 Straight, uninterrupted, clear of obstr .ct- 
ion. 4 free, ex mpr. à Recoaeiled, al peace, 
appeased, conciliated. 6 “aʻe, noo danger- 

8 Disentangied. 9 











ous, 7 Realy, prepared. ; 
Unravelled. 10 Harmonious, clear, melodi- 
ous, 11 Ordered, arranged, disposed, in or- 


der. 12** Allied,  158** Regular, Aite 
r., a plan or cleared place ; thi mir. dheth, 
I have done with it ; thaial r. a nis, they are 
at peace now ; T. ri Dia, at peace with God ; an 
bheil thu r. P are you prepared ? gu b-òrda.l, 
r. well-ordered and harmoniously ; gur., a ler- 
sure ; fiodh r., s2400th wood ; sabh r. a bhlàir, 
beta ke yourself to the plain ; fhuair e réidh ’s 
e, réidh 's a’ chùis, Ae got clear or rid 07 «t, rid 
of the business— Arran, ni mi r. e, 4 well ap 
pease him. 

réidh, gen. sing. of riadh, 

réidh-bheart, bheirt & -e, pl. -ean. s.f. Concord, 
harmony. 

—— —— — Ach, aiche, a. Harmonious, agree- 


ing. 

réidh-charbadair,{t s. m. Hackney-coachman, 
cabman 

reidheachd, s.f.ind. Plainness, state of being 

lain or level, smoothness. 2 Polish. 8 Un- 

interruptedness, straightness. 4 State of 
being free or exempt. 5 State of being recon- 
ciled or at peace. 6 Safety 7 Readiness, 
state of being prepared. 8 State of being dis- 
entangled or unravelled. 9 Harmony, mel- 
ody. 10 State of being arravged or regularly 
disposed. 11 Ready service, officiousness. 

tréidheadh, -idh, s.m. Agreement, asseut. 

réidhealachd,( Ms) s.f. Accommodation, 

Faigh le r. e, get it 
im peace, without disturbance. 

réith-thiodh, -a, s.m, Plane-tree. 

reidhir, see raoir. 

réicdh-labhart, -airt, s.m. Eloquence, smoothness 
of speech or utterance, 


Digitized by 


yO al ool ee A m di pu jJ 
N | C RN L | i^ ri L. HI V 


753 


reimeeach 


réidh-labhrach, -aiche, a. 
smooth'y, 

réilinleach,* -eich, s.m. Down. 

ré dhlean, -5in, -an, s.m. Green, level plain,mea- 
dow, 2**Bowling-green. 3 (AH )Scope, range, 
latitude, elbow-room. Air an r., on the 
plain ; chun an r., to the plain. 

reidhlean, ein. -an, s.m. Wheel of a pulley, see 
ulag, 6, p. 78. 

réilhleanach, -aiche, a, Aboun'ling in plains or 
meadows, meadowy. 2 Pain, level, 3 (AH) 
Unconstrained, unconfined, unrestrained. 

réilhlie, see réilig. 

reidhneach,(AF) s.m. Barren cow—Suth’d. 

reidhne-mairt,(CR) s.m. Cow that does not give 
milk and is not with calf—W, of Ross-shire. 

réidh-raineach,} s. Polypoily, see clach-raineach, 

réiilh-shnasaich, v.g. Anatomize. 

réidhte, see réite. 

ach, see réiteach. 

reidich,(DMy) v.a. Cut oats or barley with a 
sickle, 

réidich, v.a. Reconcile, conciliate, appease. 2 
Clear away, disentangle, adjust. (see réitich.) 

te, pas! pt. of réidich. Reconciled, concil- 
lated, propitiated. 2 Cleared of obstruction, 
disentangled, adjusted. 

reige, s.f. Ridgling. 

treighlios, s. Church, shrine, sanctuary. 

réil, gen.sin7. of reul. 

freil,** a. Clear, manifest. 

réiie, -an, s.f. Pebble. 

réileag, see réilig. 

ach, see réiligeach, 

réilig,-e,-ean, s.f. Grave, burying-place. 2** 
Church, 3* Crypt or burying place under a 
church. 4* Stone chest where bones dug out 
of graves are placed. Bithidh dùil ri fear 
fairge ach cha bhi ri fear-réiiige, there may be 
hope of a man at sea, but none of one in the 
Arane, 

rèiiige, see réilig. 

réi'iveach, a. Like a churchyard. 2 Having a 
churchyard. 3 Belonging toa churchyard. 

réil'eag, -ig, s. f., dim. of renl. see reultag. 2 
Herb robert, see righeal-cuil. 

ach, à. see reulta»ach. 

réiltean, -an, [ **p/. -tein.] sm., dim. of reul 
Asterisk, 2 Little star. 3**Astrolabe, 

reim, Gaelic spelling of rheum. 

reim,‘CR) s.f. Wheel of a spinning-wheel, 2 
Grooved rim of a spinning-wheel. 3 Rim of 
driving-wheel, 

réim, -e, -ean,'s.f. Power, authority, dominion, 
sway. 9 Way. 3 Progress, order. 4 An or- 
der. 5 Calling out. 6 Troop, band. 7 Even- 
ness oftemper 8 Course of life, career. 9** 
Consistence. 10/CR) Self-command, self-con- 
trol.— H of Ross-shire. 11**Series. 12 (MS) 
Pituate, 

fréim-bhriathar, -thran, s.m. Adverb. 

ré mealachd, s.f.ind. Sway, authority. 2 Cons 
stancy. 

réimeas,** s.m. Rhyme. 

réimeil, -e, æ. Authoritative, bearing sway. 2 
Persevering. 3 Even-tempered, constant, 
even-minded. 4**Progressive. 5 (MS)Rheum- 
atic. 6(Ms) Pituitous, 7 Phlegmatic. 8** 
Rampant. Stedrnadh r., steady steering. 

reimhe, $./.ind. Fatness, thickness, grussness, 
2 Pride. 

reimheach, -eiche, a. Arrogant, proud, petulant, 
conceited. 

reimheachd,** s.f ind Arrogance, forwardness, 
petulance, conceitedness. 

reimse, -an, s.m. Club, staff, 

reimseach, -eiche, a Heroic, 


Eloquent, speaking 














reimseach 


reimseach, -ich, -an, s.m, 
man. 

reing, -e, -ean, see reang & rong. 
eing-an-rui:g.$ see lus-nan-leac. 

reingeach,** -ich, s.m. Ship-timber. 

— — — —,-eiche, a Abouuding in, of, or like 
ship-tiinbers. 

tréir, see raoir. 

réir, gen. «€ dat.sing. of riar. 

réir, «à réir & do réir) phras*. According to, as, 
like as, Na'm bithinn ’nad r., if I were of the 
same opinion as you; iomadh gille og am r., 
many a youth fond of m? ; tha sinn à r. a 
chéile, we are pleas»d with each other, on the 
best of terms ; leadh dom’ r., a feast worthy 
of me; ar. cuimhne dhomhsa, to the best of 
mu recollection. M’ a réir, is often used for 
'* free,"as leig iad m'a réir e,th2y set hun free. 

reirceire,(AF) s. Plover. 

reir-chearc,: AF) s.f. Grouse. 2 Heather-hen. 

réis. e -eav, s.f. Race, chase. 2 Span (9 in.) 
3 Runninzcourse. Ruith e’r., he ran his 
race, r. d' a theangaidh, @ span of his tongue. 

réisde, Therefore, then. Is beag an t-iogh- 
nadh a r. ged robh teangaidh do bheoil-sa 
'se"mn gu binn cliù éibhinn t’ fhir pòsd’, it is 
little wonder therefore, that your tongue should 
sing sweetly your husband’s glad praise.— 
Dain I. Ghobha. 

réisg, gen. sing. of riasg. Le 'n sròin ag 
iarraidh nan aighean riabhach feadh shliabh- 
chnoc réivg, seeking with their noses the brin- 
dled hinds among the mountain grass. 

réisz, v.a. Arrest. 2 Seek, 

reisghiobhar,** -air, s.f. Prostitute. 

reisiche,** s.m. Rehearser. 2 Romancer. 

réisimeid, -e, -ean, s,f Regiment. 

-——each, -eiche, a. Regimental. 

treismeirdreach,** -ich, $.f. Harlot, street pros- 
titute. 

reisgeadh. s.m. Hanging of fish or flesh up to dry 
—Suth'd. 

réit, see réite, 

réite. -ean, s.f. Concord, agreement, harmony, 
reconciliation. 2 Expiation, atonement. 3 
Agreement, contract, settlement, adjustment. 
4 Marriage espousals or contract. 5**Dis- 
entanglement. Dean r. be reconciled ; a dh’ 
fheuchainn an dean mi r. air son bhur peac- 
aidh, to try if I shall make atonement for 
your sins. 

réiteach, Ach, -ichean, s.m. see réite, 2**Plain, 
any level place. 

— Ach, see réiteachadh. Leannbh réit- 

ich, an illegitimate child—Lewis. 

see réiteachail. 

réiteachadh, -ai ih, s.m. Act of reconciling, set- 
tliug, avreeing. 2 Act of clearing, unravelling 
or disentangling, disentanglement, adjust- 
ment. 3* Putting in order. 4* smattering. 
5**Harmony. 6**Union. 7**Covenant. A’ 
r—, pr.pt. of réitich. R. pòsaidh, a betroth- 
ment, marriage-contract. 

réiteachail, -e, a. Reconciling, that reconciles | 
or conciliates. 2 Ready to be reconciled, fond | 
of reconciling. 3 Fond of clearing away ob- | 
structions or entanglements. 4 Appeasable, 
arbitrable. 5 That unravels or disentangles. 

réiteachair,** sam, Appeaser, reconciler, concili- 
ator, mediator, one who clears away obstruct- 
ions. 

réiteachd, s.f.ind. Reconciliation, agreement, 
state of being reconciled. 2 Disentang!lement, 
tate of being disentangled. 3 Peace, con- 
cord. 

réitealachd,(MS).s.f Appeasableness. 

réitear, (MS) s.m. Peace-maker, reconciler, ap- 





Coarse, sturdy wo- 





sr eR Cl 7 


754 
SS 


reótanda 


peaser. 

réith, -e, see réidh. 

reith. v.g. see réitich. 

réith-bheart, see réidh-bheart, 

——ach, see réidh-bheartach, 

"ache, -achan, s. m. Ram. 2 Dimmont tup. 

9 The sign Aries (T) in the zodiac. 

reicheach, -eiche, a. Rammish,like a ram. 9 
Ruttish. 

reitheachadh, -aidh, s.m. Lining, rutting, as & 
ram. A’ r—, pr.pt. of reithich. | 

reitheachan, pi. of reithe. 

reitheachas,-ais, s. m. Rammishness, tuppish- 
ness 2 Ramming. 3 Rutting of sheep. 

reitheachd, s.f. see reitheachas. 

reitheadh, -idh. $. m. see reitheachadh. A'r—, 
pr. pt. of reith 

reithean, s.m., dim. of reithe. 
ram. 

reirhe-cogaidh, pl. -Achan-cogaidh, s.m. Batter- 
ing-ram. 

reithe-slachdaidh, pl. -achan-slachdaidh, 8. m. 
see reithe-cogaidh. 

treithe-raobhta, s.m. Battering-ram. 

reithe-séisdidh, s.m. Battering-ram, 

reithich, v.a. Line, rut, as a ram, 

réithleach, -ich, -an, see réidhlean. 

réithlean, see réidhlean. ` ` 

réilich, v.a. & n. Reconcile, conciliate. 2 Agree 
upon, ratify. 3 Adjust, determine, regulate, 
set in order, disentangle. 4 Prepare, 5 Ad- 
just or settle the terms of marriage, be be- 
trovuhed. 6 Articulate. 7 Appease. 8 Clear 
away, clear. R. an taigh, put the house in or- 
der ; réitichear a’ cheist, the question shall be 
determined ; r. thu àite fa chomhair, thou hast 
prepared a place for him; r. an snàth, disen- 
tangle the thread ; r. an rathad, clear the way. 

réi ichte, past pt. of réitich. Reconciled. 2 
Agreed upon, ratified. 3 Adjusted, deter- 
mined, setin order, regulated. 4 Prepared, 
set in order, 5 Betrothed. 6 Appeased. 7 
Disentangled, disencumbered. 

re na h-ùine seo, Meanwhile, 

reò, see reòdh & reòthadh. 

reobhart, see reothart. 

reódh, v.a. € n. Freeze, cause to freeze. 2 
Become frozen, 

reodhath, -aidh, ssm. Act of freezing or causing 
to freeze. 2 State of freezing or becoming cou- 
gealed. 3 Frost. [Used for ice as well as frost 
in Arran.] A’ r—. pr.pt. of reòdh, 

reodh-lea^.** -lic, s.f. Sheet of ice. 
—————,** p.n. Congeal. 

reòlhta, a. & past pt. Frozen. 2 Cold, frosty. 

reoilhtach, a. Freezing, frosty. 

reodhtarhail,* -e. a. Congealable, 

reodhtachd, s.f.ind. Algidity. 

reó lhtadh, -aidh, s. m. Freezing, congealing, 
2 Frost. Taigh reódhtaidh, an ice-house ; 
oi hehe reodhta:dh, a frosty night. 

reói hte. see reòdhta. 

reolaist,* s.f. Doggerel. 

rcó-leac, Je, -an, s f. & v. see reódh-leac. 

reomhad, see romhad. 

reon,** -din, sm. Span. 

reo-shruth,** sm. Frozen stream. 

reòta. CR) s. Frost. Fuachd an reòta, the cold 
of the frost. 

reòta, see reòdhta. 

reòtach, see reòdhtach. 

reòtadh, see reòdhtadh, é' 





Young or little 


‘redtaidh, Strathtay for reodhta. Oidhcber,, @ 


frosty night. 
reotanach, -aiche, a. Stinging, 
————_—d, s.f. Stinginguess. - 
reotanda, a. Stinging. 


B. s ot. crm cuu 


Original from 
UNIVERSITY. OF ILLINOIS AT 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


f fs 


e x b mio 
- Le 3 wel SCH 
E EH oe 


os 
pé dess 154s P 


E E 


reòth, see roódh. 

reorha, see reòthadh. 

reothadh, see redi\lhadh, 

reothart. -airt, -an, 8.m. Spring Die 2 The time 
of spring-tile. bàn r., 86pring-tide ; àirde- 
reothaircs, height of sprina-tide ; r. an diagh 
agus cóntraigh am miaireacn, up to-day and 
down fo-morvow-exvores ive of too much anri 
too little; r. nan eun (t^e sepring-tide of the 
birds — 4130 calied rr, mór na Féi!l-Pàdruiz," 
the high soring-tide of 3’, Patrick's day. At 
that tim» of the year tha spr/n»-tidos are its- 
uailv very hi;h, and large quantities of sea- 
ware are cast ashore, waich is occu ia l later 
on as a nestling-ground for larg» numbers of 
birds. | fem. in Argyzc-shire.) 

reothta, see red thra. 

ré'r (re-ar & ré+’ur) During our, 2 During 
your, Re'r là, during our day. 

rà s-al adv. Vora tims. 

reub, po Tear, rend, puil asunder. 
mang!e. 3 Abuse. 4*Gore, asa bull. 5 La- 
cerato, pain iabensely 6* Tear as with a 
shearing hook or any jagged instrument. 
Reub e 'aodach, he rent h's clothes. 

reub, -a, -an, s.n. see renbadh. 

reubach, -aiche, a. Reding, tearing. 2 Wound- 
ing, lacerating, brursing. 

renhachd, s.f.ind. learing. 

reibadth, -aidh, ssm. Rending, act of rending, 
tearing or laceraiing. 2 Rent or fissure pro- 
duced by tearing. 8 Avulsion. 4 Wound. br 
Goring. <A’ r—, pr.pt. of reub. 

reubaidh, fut. af. a. of reub. Shall tear 

reubail.tk pr rt. a’ reuvladh, v. ‘ear, mangle. 
[tt gives reabail. ] 

reubsinn, sf. Robb-ry, plundering, freebooting. 
rapine. 

—— —— ach, -eiche, a, Plundering, robbing, pi- 
ratical. 

eachd, s.f.ind. Robbery. practice of rob- 

bery, plundering or freebootiny. 

ear. -un, Same meanings as reubair. 

reubair, an, ssm. Robber. 2 Violent person. 
3 Render, tearer, bruiser, 

reubsireachd.** sf Robbery, plunder. 2 Tear- 
ing, laceratin». 

reuLal, -a:, san. Rebel. 
—ach, -aiche, a Rebellious, 

———ach, aich, s.m. Rebel, 

—-—achd, s.f. ind. Rebellion. 

reubaltach, -aiche, æ. see reubalsch, | 

——-—,, -aich, s. see reubalach. 

-—d, see reubalachd. 

reubam, Ist. sinj. imp. of reub, Let me tear 
2 fut.ag.a. of reub (for reubaidh ui) A shall 
tear. 

reuban, seereubainn. 

reubanair, see reubainnear. 

reubar, fut.pass. of reub. Shall be torn. 

reubhag, an, see riabhag. 

reubta, past pt. of reub. 'l'orn, rent, pulled asun- 
der. 2 Wounded, mangled, maimed. R. le 
dealan, wounded by lightning. 

reuchilal, -ail, -an, s.m. Tediousness, wearisome 
ceremony, dilatoriuess, 

reuchdalach, -eiche, @. 
ceremonions, 

reud, see reudan, 

reudan, -ain, -an, s.m, Moth, timber-worm. 2* 
Dry-rot in wood. 3(AF) Weevil. 4** Wood. 


2 Wound, 














Tedious, wearisome, 


louse, 5 Pedicular insect that eats through 
timber and paper. 6**Pipe. 7**Reed, 
reudan, pl. of reud. 
reudanach, -aiche, a. Abouuding in moths or 
woodliee, 2 Moth-eatem,  3*Dry-rotten. 4 
Reedy. 
Di 


TERNET ARCHIV 


1 


755 


reumhalr 


reudanaich,* v.a. Dry-ro*. 





-7—te, à, & past pt. Moth-eaten, 2 Dry. 
rotten. 

roul, réil, roultan, af, Star, 2 Delle, R.-chomh- 
le vchl, sg:ectite, planet; r. na madra, the 
doj-stdr ; Y. seachrain, a come’; r. seachran- 
ach, a nlan t ; r. «euainha&ch,a Breu star; aous 
n^n reu'tan, s'artigA*, 

reulach, -aiche, a see reultach, 

ronia,lair, -^an, 4m, Astronomer, 2 Astrologer, 
star-cazer, 

2achd, 8.f.ind. Astronomy. 2 Astrology, 

star-gazinz. 

reuiadh,** -aidh, 8m. Declaration. 

reulag, -aig, s.f., dim. of rent, Liucle star, bosa. 
2 Asterisk. 3 Siar —Arran. 

ach, -aiche, a. Gliccer. nv with little ears, 
2 Starry, astral. 3 Stud ded. 

reul-airziodach, ** o Studded witt. silver. 
Claidhean r., € silver-ntudded sword. 

reu'anaeh,(^M3) @ Astr.ferous. 

reui-an-iuenair, s.f. The duz-star, 

reul-bhad, san, Constellation. 

raul-bnuidheann, see reul-baad. 

reul-chearbach, -tan-, sf Comet, 

reui-chu-urt, -ean, s.f. Orbit. 

reul-dhealrich, -aiche, o Star-blazing. 

reul-diiathaireachd, s,f.ind, Astro-tueology. 

reul-dhruidh, -ean, s.m. Astrologer. 

-——eacit, @ Astrological. 

-——eachd, 8./ ini. Astrology. 

reul-eolach, -aiche, y, Skilled in astronomy or 
astrology. Gu r., astrologically. 

reul-eòlas, -ais, s.m. Science of astronomy or as- 
troiugy. 

reul-fheasga’r, s.f. Evening star. 

reul-ghrigivach,** a. Siderai, astral. 2 Thick- 
set wilu constellations, 

reul-ghrigleachan, -ein -an, s.m. Constellation, 
cluster or group of stars, as Pleiades. 

reul-ghriglean, -ein. -an, s m. Constellation. 

real grigieanaco,** @ see reul-ghrigleaca. 

reul-1à:l, sf. Pole-star. 

reul-na maidne, s.f,Aurora (plant.) 2 The morn- 
ing-star, 

reul-sholus, -uis, sm. Starlight. 

reult, -a, pl. -an & reite, see reul. 

reuita, pl. of reul, | 

reultach, -aiche, d. Starry, astral. 2 Starred, 
Oidhche r., à siarry nghi, 

reultag,** -aig, -an, S.f. Starlet. 2 Asterisk. 3 
Stul. 4 Astrolabe. 

reuitagach, o Starry, abounding in little stars. 
2 Studded. 

reultaich,** r.a. Stud, 

reultaichte, past pt. Studded. 

reultair, see reuladair. 

eachd, see reuladaireach4. 

reultanach, -aiche, à, see reuiach. 

reultan, pl. of reul., 2 dim. ot reul. 

reult-bhurlheann, see reul-bnuidieann. 

reult-caosgair,** -ean, s.m. Astronomer 2 As, 
trologer, star-gazer. 

reult-chuirt,** s.f. The star-chamber, 

reult-iasg (AF) s. Star-ti:h. 2**Fish with shine 
ing teeth. 

reum, -a, (AH) s. m. Viscuous saliva, rheum 
secreted iu abnormal profusion. 2(DU) Sense, 
consistency. Cha'u eu r. 'nad chamat, your 
talk es senseless. 

reumach,** æ. Pilegmy. 
tarrh. 3 Kheumatie. 

reumalachd,** s.f. Constancy, perseverince, 
steadiness, 2 Phlesmatic temperament. 

reumail Teo see réma 

reumhach, Skye foe freumhach. 

reumuair,**-cau s.. Praveller wayfaciag mag, 














2 Afflicted with ca- 


reumhair 758 


rover, vagabond, 

reumhair-ach4,** s.f. Travelling, wayfaring,rov- 
iog, roaming. 

reusan, -ain, -a n, -an, s.m. Reason, cause, mo- 
tive, argument. 

reusanach, -aiche, æ. see reusanta. 2 Argumen- 
tative. 

reusanachadh, -aidh, s.m. Reasoning, act of 
reasoning or argninc,ratiocination argument, 
expostulation, A’ r—, pr. pt. of reusoaaich. 

reusanachd, s. f. ind. Rationality. reasonable- 
ness, reasoning, argument, justness, just 
grounds, con:scionableness. 

reusanaich, v.a. Reason, argue, ratiocinate, ex- 
postulate, think. 

reusanaiche, -an, s.m. Reasoner. 

reu:anta, a. Endowed with reason, rational. 2 
Reasonable, just. 

reusontach?, s reusanachd. 

reusantas,** .ais, s m. Ratiocination. 

reu-baid,(CR) s.f. Groove or bed in the keel of 
à boat to receive the edge of the fliuch-bhorl 
or eairlinn, that is, of the first strake or 
plank. 2 Rascal, beggar's brat, term of con- 
tempt— Arran, 

reusbanadh,(CR) s.m. Mal-treatment, ill-usags. 
Is £u a rinu an r. air,how badly you ^ave beat- 
en him, or used it—Sut d. 

renson, see reusan. 

reusonta, see reusanta. 

ri, prep. To, implying similarity or likeness. 
2'To, denoting equa'ity of one object with an- 
other. 3 To, implying adhision, 4 To, to- 
wards. 5 Denoting attention or earsestness. 
6 To, in the direction of. 7 To, unto. 8 ‘fo, 
implying exposure, 9 Don, to be, implying 
possibility. When placed before present par- 
iiciples it changes thm into the future pass- 
ive—an absurd grammatical statement that 
passes current. 10 Against, in opposition to. 
11. At, near to. 12 During. whilst. 13 For, 
implying expectation or hope. 14 In, denot- 
ius employment or ocenpation. 15 Of, con- 
cerning. 16 Up, upwards.  17**With. 18 
As, likeas. 19* Ín contact with. 

Cho min ri mi iicion?, as softas kid-skin ; vi 
d' chiuas, to your ear; ri gréin’ (exposed) to 
the sun ; ri bruthach, ascending the acclivity ; 
a’ cogadh ri gaisg ach, fighting with a hero; 
bhnail e a cha: ri cloich, he dashed his foot a- 
gainst a stone ; ri saorsainnoa^hd, employed as 
carpenter ; ri 'làimh, at his hand ; ri linn 
''hearlaich, in the days of Prince Charles ; ri 
la gaoithe, on a windy day; mar dhuilleiz ri 
doinionn, like a leaf in the blast : na caomh- 
aich ri sìth, the friends at peace ; gua dùil ri 
pilleadh, without hope of returning ; an rain- 
each ri turram 'sa gha ithe, the fern whist ing 
in the wind ; cho ciù'n ri aiteal, as mild as a 
brvath of wind ; bha 'n righ òg ri móran àbh- 
achi, the young king was at mech pleasure— 
W.H.1.12, cha'n 'eilagainnri dol na’s fhaide, 
we have not togo any further —W.H.1.145;thà n- 
ig egu aoise dol riceaird, he came of aye 
to arn a trad; thàinig e ri a bheatha féin, 
he took his own life, committed suicide ; uibhir 
ri cach, as much a; the rest ; beul ri tri mios- 
an, nearlu three months ; bha e ri tighinn, Ae 
w&: to com». Ri in Lewis often takes the 
place of a7,as, tha e ri bualadh, Re is striking. 
Compounded thus with the personal pro- 

nouns :— | 
Rinm, to me ; riut, to thee ; ris, t» him; rithe, 
to her ; ronn, to us; ruibh, to you; riu, to 
them. 

r !int. see righ ! 

ria, see rithe. 


Digitized by 


NTERNET ARCHIVE 


riadhan 


ria, prov. for reub, 

rivba lh, prov. for reubadh. 

riabh, see riamh. ` 

riabhach, -aich, s.f. Common lousewort, 

riabiach, -aich, s. m. Grey or grizaled person. 
An riabhach mor, the devil. 

riabhach, -aiche, a. Brindled, greyish, grizzled. 
2 Brown, drab. 3 Yellow-grey—Arran. Rd 
r., a grizzled cow; sleagh r., a brown spar. 

riabhag, -aig, -an, s.f. Lark. 2ttHedge-sparrow. 

riabiagich,tt a. Abounding in larka or hedg-- 
sparrows. 

rivbiag-choille,] st Wood-lark, see uiseag- 
choille. 2 Tree-pipit—anthus arboreus. 

riabhag-fùraoich.T s, f. Moantain linnet seo 
riabhag-mhonaith, 

riabhag-mhonanla,q s.f. Tit-lark, see snathaid- 
ag. 2 Mounta n linnest—linota montium. |** 
gives ala uda pratensis.) 

ri .bhaiche, s.f. iud. Greyishness, 

riabhaichead, -ei tl, s.f. Dogree of greyness, brin- 
dl^dness, greyishness or brownuess, 

rinbhan, -ain, -an, sm. see riadnan. 2°*Hand. 
some young stripliug. 3 Dappled, spevkled 
place. 4(UMu) Chain of doc nei, 

ria bhaaach,** a. Haudsu:ne, like a striplinz. 

rive), see riabhach. 

riach, pr.pt. 4' rivchadh, v.a. Cut the surface, 
graze or plough slong the surface, 2* Cut, 
as when flaying a beast, 3 (DU) Rule, asa 
slite or piper. R.e air mo chraicionn, ít 
grazed my skin. 

riach «dh, -ailh, s.m. Act of cutcing che suriaca, 
slightly cuttings, graziag of secato nz the 
skin, slight eut or scratch, 2 (DU) Ruliag, as 
asate or piper, A’ r—, pr.pb. of riach. 

riachaid, -e, -ean, s. f. Distributing, dividing, 
partition. 2**/outroller. 

friachan, s.m. Anything grey. 

riachdail,** a. see rioch tail. 

riuchdaileachd,** sf. see riochdalachd., 

riachuailleas,** -eis, s.m, IN«oessioy, want, 

riachdalas,** -ais, sm. Ulearuoess, ananifescness, 

riachdanach, -aichs, œ. Necessary, 2 immoral, 


impure, 3 oud of sexual lutercourse, 3 
Needy, necessitous, needful. 6 Duutui, iu- 
cumbent. 7 Given to uncleauness. 


triaciid nas, -ais, sm. Necessity, want, indigen- 
ce, misery. 2 [ndixpensable duty. 3**Forni- 
cation, uneleanness, 4 Necessaries. 5 Force, 

riad, (CR) s. Crack, split in woud—Blair Athote, 

riadh, réidh, 2.224. interest of ituney. 2 Usury, 
rent, hire. R. azuscalpa, imerest and prin- 
cipal ; taigh-réidh, s bank ; a:rgiod air r., wo- 
ney invested for “interest, | 

riadh,** s.m. Correc.ion. 2 Racing. 3 Tamiug. 
4 Grief. 5 Kind of capital punishment among 
the Irish Gael. 

riadü, -a, -an, sf. Snare. 2**Rib. 

riadh, Badenoch for ciaiuh & ruith. 

triadn, v.a. Hang. 2**Grucify. 

riadh see riaşh. 

riadh, sm. Row,drill, as of potatoes—Baden- 
och. 


risdhach, -aiche, 2. Usurious. 2**Hired, 
riadnad ur, -ean, &m, Usurer. 


friadhadh, -aidh, s.m. Hanging, A’ r—, pr.pt. 
of riadh, 

frialhadn s.m. Gallows. e, 

ria ihan, (DMy) s. m. Trail, as when grain or 
meal is escaping from a bag while carrying ib. 
2 Raking of bay, anytbing continued in aiong 
line. 4 Streak. 65 'lemporary passage for 
water to run in. 

riadhan.(CR) s.m. Swathe of hay that has been 
turned with tuerake—W. uf Ross-shire. < 
see riazhan. 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY-OF ILLINOIS AT 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


et | 


riadh lann 


t1a.1h-lann,** -lainn, s.m. [Louse of correction. 

riadnanhortair,** s.m. Hired assassin, bravo. 

fialranach,** -aica, £f. Old maid. 2 Cast-oT 
mistress. 

fragn, a. Re'igious, 

razh, see riaih. 

tragi, -a (& reigh**.]pl. an, 8.f. Cross, gallows, 

riaghail, pr.»t. a’ riaghladh, v.a. Rule, govern, 
reign, rezuiate, order, seltle, direct, arrange. 
Riaghl: dh làmh an dichiollaien, the hand of 
the diligent shall govern. ` 

riachail,-e,-ean, s.% see riaghailt. 

riaghailt, -e, -ean, s.f. Weaver's rule, 2 Rule, 
re.ulition. 3 Law directory. 4 Mariner’s 
CO. NX, 5ttoot-rule. 6 Sense, judgment. 
7**Ascortainment. 8 Government, direction. 
Is math an r. sin,that is a good law ; ch»idn e 
asar., he lost his sens’s; r. eaglais, @ law of 
the church ; dean r., apportion ; dean r. air an 
annlan. apportion the sauce carefully. 

-chearnach,(DM) a. Square, rectan- 








war. 

Ma» uailtchinonaidh, s.f. Joiner’s bevel. à 

riaghailteach, -eiche, a, Reguiar, according to 

rule. 2 Peaceable, orderly. 3 Accurate. 4 
Moderate, sober. 

riaghailteacha lh, sm. Adjustment. 

riagi.ailteachil, «find. Orderliness, regularity. 
2 Sobriety, sedateness, 3 Peacefulness, 4** 
Rliviou:sness, 

riaghailtear,* s.m. Regulator. | k 

riaghailteara hd,"* sfiind. Administration. 

riaghailtich, v.t. Arrauge, adjust by rule, regu- 
late, put in order, govern, »poortion, 

-—e, comp. of ringhailveach. 

—te, vast pt. Adjusted, arranged by 
rule, governe:l, 

friavhaire, -an, 
gallows, rogue. d 

riaghal-cuil, see rizheal-cüil. 

riaghalta, past pt.of riaghail. 2**rarely Devout. 

—— —— chd, sve riaghaiiteachd. 

riaghaltair, see riaghladair. | 

riagüan,-ain, an, sm. Swing. 2 Exercise of 
swinging. 3ffDrill. 4HrGibbet. 0(M3) sling. 

riarhanaca,ff a. Aboundiug in swings, drills or 
gibbets. 

riaghlach, -aiche, a. Regular, 

friagilach, -aich. s f. Old woman, 

riaghlachadh, -aidh, see riaghladh. 

riaghladair, -ean, s.m. Ruler, governor, regula- 
tor. 

riaghladaireachd, s.f.ind. Ruling, governing. 2 
Office or practice of ruling, governorsh:p,man- 
agement, administration. 

riaghladh, -aidh, s.m. Ruling, administration, 
direction, managemeub. 2 Mustering, A’ r—, 
pr.pt. of riaghail. E. air slòigh, the muster- 
inj of hosts. j : 

riaphlaich,** v. Same meanings as riaghail. 

riaghlaichte, past pt. of riazhlaich. 
riigülair,-ean, see riagh'a.lair. 

riighlaireachd, see riagiladaireachd, 

riaiche, comp. of riach (for riabhach.) 

rialls,* v.g. Handle roughly or unseemly, as a 

female. 

Tia! lsadh,* -aidh,s.m. Rough or unseemly hand- 
ling. A’ r—, pr.pt. oi rialls. 
riamh, -a, -an, 5 m. Series, number, 2 Drill, as 
of potatoes, tu nips, &c., prov. 3* Duration. 
riamh,* v.a. Drill, as turnips, poiatoes, &c.— 

Skye, 

Sith. adv. Eeer, at any time before. 2 Always, 
(or with the negative—never.) [Used only of 
past time.] An robh r. ? was there ever ? bha 
e r. mar sin, he was always so ; Mar nach robh 
riamh a leithid ann, such as never was the 








s. m. Hangman. 2** Scape- 


Digitized by 


IKFTEDNIET AG (P Di 
EET LEMIC PY S | v 


757 


riarachd 


like ; r. i3 roimhe, sti and before, abidingly ; 
na h-'il: dnine riamü agaibh,every man of yous 

Tri «mb, -a, s.m. Beauty, elegance. 

ramhach, -aiche, see rìomhach. 

riumaadh, ai Uh, -ailhean, s.m. see rìomhadh. 

riamhag. -aig, -an, s.f. Small root or thread, (or 
filimihag, for freawhag.) 

riamliagaich, -e, s.f. Filaments appearing in & 
wonnd, prov. (for freumhagaich.) 

riamlach, a. see driamlach. 

ran, (MS) s.m. Appointment. 

rian, -an, s.m. Mode, method, manner, fashion, 
form, 2 Order, management, arrangenient, 
adjustment. 3 Regularity. 4 Economy. 5 
Sobriety. 6 Good or peaceable disposition. 7 
**Span. 8**Carriage. 9**Sea. +10 £oad, way, 
pata, footstep. 11 System. 

rianachadh, -aidh, s.m. Adjusting, act of ad- 
justing, arranging, distributing, act of distri- 
buting. A’ r-, pr.pt. of rianaich. 

rianadair, -ean, s. m. Governor, arranger, su- 
percargo, representative, director, steward. ` 


EE v.a. Adjust, arrange. 2 Divide, disiri- 

use, 

tianighe,** s.m. Wanderer, traveller. 2 Slow, 
lazy, shiftless man. 

rianaichte, past pt. Arranged, adjusted. 2 Dis- 
trisuted, divided. 

rianail, -e, a Mesbodical, in just or due order. 
2 Keon mnie»l 3 Well-disposed, of à mild or 
peaceable disposition, —4**Consisteat, — 6** 
Well-formed or fashioned.  6**Goud-tei:per- 

s el. ZER 

riaialachd, s.f.ind. see rian. 2 Aristocratical- 

tian-atharrachadh, -aidà, s. m. Inveraioun, 

r'an-gréine, s.m. The solar system. 

Fil OPE, s.m. The Herb Robert, sea righeal- 
cüil. 

riapach,(CR) a. Untidy; slovenly. 

riapail, v.a. Mangle, 2 Bungle, botch, manage 
cium iy. 

riapalauh, -aidh, s.m. Mangling, act of mang- 


iing. 2 Bangling, act of bungling or poteu- 
ing. A’r—, pript. of rivpail. 


riapailte, past pt. of riapail. Mangled. 2 Bung- 
led, botched. 

riar, réir, s.m. Pleasure, will, inclination, dic- 
tate, desire. 2*Approbation, satisfaction. 3 
Word of honour. 4(MS) Allotment. o**Judy- 
ment, decree. Agus ni thu mo r., and thou 
shalt do my will; dean mo riar-sa, act up to 
my approbation ; mo r. fhéin! upon my word 
of honour ! ma ni thusa riar, if you act up 
to his approbation ; dean thusa mo r.-sa, study 
to please me; mo r.-sa nach tig e 'u nochd, 
forsooth, he wiil not come to-night; mo r.-sa 
nach 'eil ! pon my word it is not so! cha/n 
‘eile soirbh ar. a dheanamh, it is not easy to 
please him ; mo r.-sa, my desire. 

riar, v. see r araich. 

friarach, -aiche, d, Submissive. 2**Ready to 
plase, obliging, 38 Contented, pleased. 4 
Ready to participate, ready to share, dispens- 
ing. 

riarach,** -aich, s.m. Servitor. 

riaracha‘th, -aidh, s.m. Pleasing, satisfying, act 
of satisfying. 2 Satisfaction., 3 Sufficiency. 
4 Distributing, sharing. 5 Act of distribut:ng, 
or dividing.  6* Attending at table, 7 Dis. 
tribution of elemeuts at a sacrament, A’ r—, 
pr.pt. of riaraich. R.-inntinn, satisfaction of 
mind; air à r., distributed, 

riavachair,** s.m. Portioner. 

riarachas, -ais, sm. Same meanings as riarach» 
adh. 

riarachd, s.f.ind, 'Same meanings as riarach- 
adh. R.-inntinn, contentment. 


nal TOT 


ALTA OA dio TUN E 
UNIVERS Y Fr 
INW C a 2 


LLINC 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


t 


| C d 
y Jl [^ 


riaraich 





tiaraich, pr pt, a riwa:hadh, v.a. Please, sa’ is- 
fy. 2 Divide, distribute. 3 Dispenso the 
sacrament, 4**Carve. 5**Dish. R. orra e, 
dis'ribute it among them. 

rivraiche,tt an, s.m. Steward, dispenser of 
food. 2 Economist. 3 Shirer. 

riaraichte, pasi nt, of riazaica. Picased, satis- 
sed. 2 Shared, served, distributed, supplied. 

riaraiunicho (MS) s.m. Administrator. 

riaraiste,** s.pl. Arrears. 

riarta,** pest pt.* Shared, served out, distribu- 
ted. 2 Oontent. 

riasail.v.a. Year Bech asunder, mangle.''tonsle." 

te, past pt. of riasail, see riaslaichte. 

riasan, -ain, see reusan. 

riasant, see reusanta. 

riasg, réisg, s. m. Moor, fen, marsh. 2 Ley 
ground. 3 Coarse mountain-grass (neitean.) 
4 Sedge or dirk-grass. 5 Place in which this 
grass grows. 6(DMy) Peat-moss. 7* Land 
that cannot be ploughed or dug on account of 
the dirk-grass it convains, or so hidden with it 
that it cannot be cultivated. | S*Indocility, 
stubbornness. 2 (DU) Bog-cotton piant (not 
the flower.) 

ria-gach, -aich, s.m. see riagg. 

, niche, @. see riasgail. 

rinsgachd, (MS) Sterility. 

riasvaidheachd,(Ms) s.f. Harshness. 

riasgail, -e, a. Moorish, marshy. 2 Heathy. 3 
Uncultivated, untractable, wild. 4 Hagzarl. 
5(M3) Sgraggy. 6 In?ocile, 7**Sff. 

riasealacha, stat, Indocility. 2 Turbulence. 
3 Un*rictableness. 

ria-glach, -aich, -aichean, $. f. Mangled car- 
case. 2tł Sedgyy morass, 3 (CR) Land that 
cannot be cultivated. 

riase-shuil, see réasg-shuil. 

-—vach, see réasz-shüileach. 

riaslach, Ales, œ. Tearing, mangling. 2 Apt 
to tear or mangle. 3 Criticizing. 

riaslachadn, -aida, see riasladh. 





2* Turbulent. 








~-- 


riasladh, -aidh, s.n. Tearing asunder. 2 Act 
of vearing or mangling. 3 Critieizinx. 4 Car- 


essing. 5 Murdering—Daà/n 1. Ghovia, A’ 
r—, pr.nt. of riasail. Oganaich ’gan r. fu 
eachai^h, young men manyied under horses. 

riaslaich, v.q. see riasail. 

e, see riaslair. | 

riasiuir,** s m. Tearer, mangler. 

riason, see reusan. 

ach, see reusanta. 

achadh, see reusanachadh. 

riasonta, see reusanta. 

—— ——ch į, see reusanachd. 

PESO -aiche, a. Confused, disordered, disor- 
eriw, 

riaspaiche, s.f.ind. Coarseness. 

riaspan, sm. Slowness. 

acn, a. Slow, taking unnecessary time. 

riasplach, see riaspach. 

riaspiaicine, see riaspaiche., 

riasp-shuil, -shula, -shüiiean, 
prov. see réasg-sauil. 

—e^ch, -eiche, a Blear-eyed, prov. see 
reasg-shdil ach. 

riastadh ** -aiah, sm. Welt. 

riastaidieachd,* sf. Fornication—North. 2 
Wan ouuess—Mac Mhainh. A’asdair. 

riastair, v.a. & n. Become turbuient or disorder- 
ly. 2 Confuse, disturb, put into disorder, en- 
tangie. 3 Wander hither and thither. 

riastar,** -air, s.m. Insult. 2 Drawing, 
mig. 

riastradh, -aidh, -aidhean, s. m. Turoulence, 
disorder, disorderly conduct. 2 State of be- 











2 Confusion. 





ges 


s. f. Blear-eye. 





naul- 


coming turbulent or disorderly ia conduct. 3j" 


758 


rihean 


Act of confusing, disturbing, putting into dis 

order or braed'ug strif». 4 Act or habit of 

wanieriug hitner and thither. 6 Outbreak- 

ins, immorality, eruption— Sar-Obair. A’ r—, 
pr. pt. of riastair. kä. Ze 

riastrailh, fut a.a of riastair. 

riastran,** -ain, s.m. Ontrage, insult. 

ach, -aiche, a, Turbulent, disorder'v. 2 

Of dissolute habits, 3**Insulting, outraging, 

outrazeous. 

achd, s.f.ind. Turbulence, disorderli- 











ness. 2 Dissoluteness of mauners. 3 Out- 
_Tageousness, outrages. 
riata^h,-aiecne, a. Wanton,immodest, 2 Ille- 


gitimate. 3 Foreiga. 

rlàtacnas, -ais, s m. see riatachd. 

riatachd, s.f.ind. Wantonnass, i-umodesty, im- 
m lest mirth. 92*?*Tliegitimacy. 3**Outlana- 
ishness, siate of beiang foreiza. 

riataich, a. Wlegitimate—Sar-Obair, 

viataiche, s.find. lil gitimacy, state of being 
born in fornication, bastardy. Leanathr., @ 
bastard child. 

tiasaiuheachd, see riatachd, riastaidheachd & 
riataiche. 

riatanaen, -aiche, d, 


prov. 
riatanas, -ais, s.m. Necessity, indispensable- 
ness. prev. 


riathach, see riabhach. 

rio pr.pt. a’ ribeadh, v. a. Enenare, entangle. 
9 Separaie seed from flix. 3 Involve. 4*iry 
to Luke away a person who is the guest of 


another. 

rive, -achan, sS. m. Hair. 2 Rag, clout, tatter, 
3 Gia, suare. 4**tmpediment. 5(M3)Jobweb. 
Gr snare to catch fish. 7* Double rop? to kep 
a mad buil. 2* Shag. 9ff Biade. 10 ** Am- 
buscad», 
Ribeachan nan cuinneana, the hairs of the 
nostrils. 

ribe.cu, -eiche, a. Rough, hairy. 2 Nes. 
ling, veusrarivg. 3 Ragged, torn. 4* Cold. 
Reithe r., à rovgh ram. 

ail, -e, a. En-narinz, ready to ens"are. 

an,** Au, $8. m. Denticulated piece of 
wood, used for s-parating flux from the seed. 

rib. achan, n.pl. of r.be. i 

ripoeachas, -ais, s.m. 'l'endency or readiness to 
ensnare. 2 Kusnaring, encanglement. 3 State 
of being ensnared. 

ribeachd, s.f, see riueachas. 2 Hairiness,rough- 
ness. 

ribeadn, -idh, s.m. Eusnaring. 2 Act of en- 
snaring or entangling, 3 Precess of sepirat- 
ing its seed frow fax, by pulling it in havdtuls 
through a denticulated piece of wood. A' r—, 
pr.pt. of rib. 

, past pass. of rib. Was ensnared. 2 

3rd. pers, $ mj. & pl. ump. of rib. 

cibvag, -eig, -an; s.f., dim. of ribo. Hair, little 
nair. 2% Small rag or tatter. 3 Tassel, friaze. 
4 Bunch of anything hairy. 5 Handful of fiax, 
6 Dossit or plelget of lint, — 7**^Vhisker. 8 
On? hair—4Á rran. 9 (At) In st. Krida, a hair- 
rove once used for rock climbing, or rather 
lowerin:z. Now it is made of hide-thongs, 











three ply, covered with sheep-skin or swine- 


similar, materiai to prevent chafing. Tais is 
a very valiabie and scares possession. anid 
has been anowu to form the dowry of a brida, 

ribea^ach, nicha, à. Ragged, eloutod, tattered. 
2 Tasselled, fringel. 3 Abonoding ia hairy 
bunches, dossils or pledgets, 4*liaury. 

ribe..g-bhroin, sf. Weeper, white cutilev former. 


ly wuru at funerals. 
bean, -ein, -an, Si, Ribbon, fillet, 2 Sash 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


Necessary, indispensable, : 


Pag PS gea eg, 


a> 
ef. 


of aks) 


4 


"de A e T 


dr ¥ 
^ T 
t- RET 


d 


a’ 


Les 


sio. i et 
> T nd CELLS 


— 
Ke 


ti 


HP a 


Wm 


ribean 


worn by females. 

ribeanach, -aiche,a. Of, or belonging to,ribbons. 

ribear, -eir, -an, $.m. Ensnarer, sharper. 

, fu',»ass. of rib. Shall be entangled. 

ribh, prep.pron. (ri--sibh) To you, against you. 
2 With you. 3* Molesting you. 4* Mastering | 
you. A’ bruidhinn r, sprating to you; a’ 
gleachd r., sparring with you ; có tha r.P, who 
is molesting you! a' cur r., mastering you, 
** sortin)” you ; cuirear seo T., this shall be 
added to you; thig er., he will please you ; cha 
tig dad ribh, no harm will happen to you. 

ribheag, see riobh^g. 

——_———aichte, see riobhagaichte. 

richeannaich,(DMy) s.pl. Ragged skin at the 
base of the nails. 

ribheid, -e, -ean, $.f. Reed. 2 Reed of a wind- 
instrument. 3 Music. 4 Musical note or voice. 
5* Barb of a hook. 6 (Cli) Cord attaching a 
bnoy to a herring-net.  7**Pipe. 8**Oaten 
pipe. 9**Chanter. 

each, -eiche, a. Furnished with reeds, as 
a wind-instrument, 2 Musical, melodious. 3 
** Hi stulous. 

ribhcid»achd,** s.f.ind. Canorousness. 2 Mel- 
od y. 

ribhid, see ribheid. 

each, see ribheideach. 

rìbhinn, -e, -ean, s.f. Nymph, maid. 2 Beautiful 
f-male, 3(AF) Serpent. 14 Young lady. 51 
Queen. 6ffQuean, R.-shith, a fairy ; a r. ur! 
thou blooming maid! [Professor MacKinnon 
holds that it is a mistake for righiun, which 
is suggesied by righbhean in Irish. In Neil 
MacLeod s poems he has made rìbhinn ** rìgh- 
inn." 

ribhinn-chro, (AF) s.f. Barren ewe. 

ribhinneach, -eiche, a. Beautiful, maiden-like. 
2 Lady-like. 

ribi bh. v.a. Hook, 

ribin, see ribean. 

-——each, see ribeanach. 

ribleaci, -ich, -an, s.m. Long string or line. 2 











Anything eutangled. 3*"*Entanglement, 4** 
Kuoltiness. 5* Fringe. 6 Manin rags. 7ff 
Anything in tatters. 8 Shagginess. Tha ‘n 


cord 'na r., the rope is quite entangled, 
ribleach,** a, Entangled. 7 Ragged, torn. 
— — — adübh,** -aidh, s.m. Entaugiing,entangle- 
ment, 
d,** s, f. Entanglement. 


2 Anything 
much entangled. 3**Kuottiness. 


ribiich,* v.a. Fringe. 2 Make hairy or 3 En- 
tangled. i 

ribiicie, -ean,,s.m. Man in rags. 

ribte, past pt. of rib. 

ribteach, ** a. Entangling, ensnaring, 2 In- 


volving. 3 Apt toentangle or ensnare. 
frichasan,l s.m. * Carbunculus." 
Frichead, -eid, ap, s.f. Kingdom. 
lriclean, -ein, -an, sm. Dwarf, 
ricus,** s. m. One of the Gaelic names of the 
letter R. 
tideag,} -eig, -an, $.f. Bog-myrtle, sweet myr- 
tle, sweet gale, see roid. 


 rideal, see rideil. 


rideaiach,** see ridealach. 

ridealadh, see ridleadh. 

ridealair,** s.m. Sifter, winnower. 

ridealach,** a. Like a riddle or sieve. 
ridealadh, -aidh, s.m. Riddling. 2 Act of rid- 

dling or separating by a coarse sieve, sifting, 

rideil, v.a. iddle, sift, winnow. 
,$.m. Riddle, sieve. Cho tollach ri r. , as 
Juill of holes as a sieve. 

, A’ r—, pr.pt. of rideil. 
Tideilich,* v, a. Riddle, sift, winnow., 





Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIV 
"E Sik) = miN X v 


759 


rief 

rideilichte, past pt. of 
sifted. 

ridein, (AC) sf, Queen. 
en, beautiful girl. 

ridgileanach, see cam-ghlas, 

ridghuileanach,{ -aich, s.m, see cam-ghlas. 

ridhe, -au & -achan, see righe 

ridhe, see righe.  211Wrist. 

ridheach, -eiche, a. see righeach. 

ridhil, pr. pt. a’ ridhleadh, v. a. & n. 
yarn upon a reel. 2**Twirl, hurl, roll, 
righil, 

ridhil, -e & -dhle,pl.-ean -dhleachan & -dhlean, 


rideilich. ` Riddled, 


2 Handsome maid» 


Twine 
3 see 


s. m. Reel on which yarn is wound. 2**Hurl. 
3 see righil. 

ridhle, gen. sing of ridhil. 

ridhleach, -eiche, aq. Having reels. 2 Like a 


a reel. 

ridhleadh, -eilh, sm. Winding. 2 Act of wiad. 
ing yarn upon a reel. 8 Hurling,rolling. A’ 
r—, pr.pt. of ridhil. 

ridhlean, -ein, -an, $. m. Small reel. 2**Little 
wheel, 2 Wheel of any vehicle. 3 Sheave of 

a pulley, see ulag, 6, p. 78. 

ridhiichean, -ein, s.m. Small reel. 
ridhreadhachd, s.f. Verity. 

ridil, see rideilich. 

ridil, see rideil. 

ridir, -ean, s.m. Knight. 

r. beò-shlàinte, a knight-bachelor, 

r. oighreachd, a knight-baronet. 

r. spleadhach, r. nan sleagh or r. claidheimh, 
a knight-errant. 

R. a’ Chluarain. Knight of the Thisile (K.T.) 

R. Phàdruig, K mght of st. Patrick (K.P.) 

R. a’ Ghartain, Knight of the Garter (K.G.) 

R. a’ Chroinn mhóir, Knight of the Grand Cross 

K.G.C.) 

R Feadhnach, Knight Commander of the Bath 
(K.C. B.) 

R. Deòrsa, Knight of St. George (KG)—a Russ- 
ian order. 

R. Uilleim, Knight of King William (K.W.)— 
a Flemish order. 

R. Anna, Knight of St. Ann(K.A.)—a Russian 
order. 

R. Ainndreis, Knight of St. Andrew (K.A.)— 
a Russian order. 

R. na Gealach ùire, Knight of the Crescent (K. 
C.)—a Turkish order. 

R. na Rionnaige Tuathaich, Knight of the N. 
Star—a Swedish order. 

R. na h-Iolaire Ruaidhe, Knight of the Red 
Eagle—a Prussian order. 

R. na h-Iolaire Gile, Knight of the White Ea- 
gle—a Polish orler. 

R. na h-Iolaire Duibhe, Knight of the Black 
Eagle—a Russian order. 

R. an Leomhainn 's na Gréine, Knight of the 
Lion anid Sun—a Persian order. 

R. an Lomairt Oir, Knight of the Golden Fleece 
—a Spanish order. 

R. an Dùin 's a’ Chiaitheimh, Knight of the 
Tower and Sword -a Portuguese order. 

R. Iolair nam Beann, Knight of the Mountain 
Eagie—au order it was intended to establish 
had the Chevalier St. George succeeded in 
gaining the British throne. 

(** gives the above Gaelic names of foreign 

orders. ] 

ridireach, -eiche, a. Knightly. 

-———-d, s.f. Knighthood. 
chivalry, 

ridireil, see ridireach. 

ridirich, oe Knight. 

ridleadh, -eidh, s.m. d pr.pt. see ridleadh. 

rief, s. brimstone. 


2 Chivalrous. 
2**Knightliness, 


nal from 
LU M VE R > TY CF 


Lo 
vk 


LLINOIS 
aN 


HIIRRANA-CHAMDBAIG 
UN DANA FMAM F ANN 


ech 


n 
! 1 


rif 760 


righniehte 





rif, soe rot, 

rifeid, see ribheid. 

each, see ribheideach. 

rig, see rui». 

frig, s. Spy. 

rige, (AF) s, Ram. 2 Semi-castrated ram— Skye 
& Argyllshire. 

rigean, see ridean. 

revear, fut. rass, of rig. 

righ, v. Lay out or stretch a body. 2* Dress 
or shrowl as a corpse. A righ, nach robn thu 
air do rizheadh ! £ wish to Ged you were 
shrouded ' 

righ, pl. -rean & righre, sm. King. An ceud r. 
Tearlach, King Charles I, ; bas R. Seumas, the 
death of King James ; r. nan dal, the governor 
of the ele. ts; r. 
sovereign g ace; A Rìgh gléidh sinn ! O Lord 
preserve u$ ' r, nan uamhann, the king of ier- 
rors. 

righ ! int. Strange ! 

rigibhion, see rìbhinn. 

—each, see ribhinneach. 

righ-bhuth,** s.m. Royal residence. 
pavilion. 

righ-chathair, -chathrach, -chathraichean, s. f. 
Throne, 2 Metropolis (from the supposition 
that it contains the king’s H 

rizh-chiste, an, s.f. Royal treasury. 

righ-cholbh, -chuilbh, -an, s.m. Sceptre. ' 

rirh-choron, -oin, -an, sm. Royal crown, 

righ-chrun, -üin, s.m. Royal crown. 

rich-dauihna,** sant, King's heir. 

righ-dhail, -e, -ean, s.f. Assembly, parliament. 
2**Congress of sovereigns. 

riyhdir, see ridir. 

righe,(CR) a. Stretched, tight, tense. Tha 'n 
còrd righe, the cord is tense—W. of Ross-shire. 

righe, s.m. Field. 2 Bottom of a valley. 

righe, -an, 8. m. Wrist, 2 Arm. 3 The fore- 





2 Royal 


nan gras, the disposer of 








602. Rith éal-cucl. 


, righ-fhéinnidh. see meh-fheathnich, 
.ngà-gnulleanach,(AF) sun. Redshank, see cam- 


galas. EA 

rizbich, v. see rìoghaich. . Righichidh an Tigh- 
earn gu saoghal nan saoghal, the Lord shail 
reign for ever un^ ewr. 

—— Gr Haudcutts—Skye. 

rizhidir. see ridir. 

rghil, righle, rizhleachan, s.m. Reel, a Scot. 
tish dance, ?ff Yara:roel. [Righle is also 
used as nom.| Rig "ie Thulaichean, the Re- 
of Tulioch,--a form of reel from whicl females 
are generally exciude:l.] 

rizhil, v.a. Dance a reel, 

righinn, rìghne, a. Tough. 2 Adhesive. 3 Elas- 
tic, supple, pliant. flexible. 4 sluggish, drowsy, 
dilatory, slow. óo**Lasting, durabie. made of 
good stuff. 6**Clammy. 7 Viscid stit. s** 
Rigid, contumacious. 9fTenacious. Chaidh 
E r. a bhearnadh, tough spears were 
IHN: 8 


righinn,** s Snake. 2 see rìbhinn. 3*Princess, ` 


riztinneachd, s.f. Clot. 


! 
rid, uot anus £e uae p f C CNN 


30m 


* A. Y 


au t 


AW 





arm. 4 Outstretched part or base of a moun- | righ-laun, -ainn, -an, s.m. Palace, royal resi- | 
tain. 5 Slope. 6 Summer residence for herds-| dence. 2** King’s court. 
men and cattle, sheiling. 7 Reproof. Bac na |rieh-laoch, -laoich,s.m. Princely warrior. 2** | 
righe, the hollow or bend of the arm. [McL & Respectable man, 3**Good fellow. 


D gives also for pl. righeachan & righeannan. 
** vives 8./.| 
righeach,(Ms) a. see rìoghail. 


rig'ile, -achan, s.m. see righil. 
rijhleadh, -eidh, s.m. Reeling, dancing reels, 
2*i"lounderirg. A’r—, pr.pt.of righil. 


righeach, -ich, -ichean, s.f. thong, pinion. 2) righ-mhilidh, -ean, s.m. Heroic chief. " 
**Arm. 3(DMy) Sinew, muscle. rizii-mhort, sm. Rezicide. H 
——, -eiche, a. Having strong arms, 2|righ-mhortadh, -aidh, s.m. Regicide (act.) d 





Having handsome arms. 3tt Pertaining to, 
or abounding in, sheiling huts, 

rivheachadh, see rioghachadh, 

righeachan, (for ridheachan & righean,) pl. of 
righe. 

righeachas,f¢ -ais, s.m. Wrestling at arms’ 
length. 

righeachd, see ruigheachd. 

ripheachd, see riogbachd. 

righeadh, s.m. Stretching out. 2 Act of stretch- 
ing. A’ r—, pr.pt. of righ. Corp a r., to shroud 
Q corpse. 

righealadair, see riaghlair, 

righealair, see riaghlair. 

righeal cüil,$ sm. Ths herb Robert, stinking 
craue's bill,—geranium Robertianum. 

Ee s.m. The herb Robert, see righeal- 
cull, 

righean, see ridhean & ruighean, pl. of righe, 

Fig uean nam for ridhean or ruighean, p/. of 
righe. 

a or rated WIS s.m. Cubit. : 


righeil, see riag hail. tough, adhesive, viscid or clainmy, clot, 3 
righ-fhalluing.** s. Pall. Deiay, procrastinate, prolong the time. 4 
righ-fheadhnach,** -aich, s.m. Generalissimo. Mace stt, 5 Grow stit. d 
righ-fheall, s.f. Treason. ———-te, past pt. of righnich, Toughened, "a 
1igh-fudéinneach, s.m. see righ fheadhuach. adhesive or clanumy. 2 Prucrasiiuated. 3 H 


righ-maortair, -ean, ;, o. Regicide (person.) 

righ-na-coille,S san. The oak, see darach. 

righ-nan-ia-g, AF) sm. Salmon. 

rign-uathair, -thrach. -thraichean, sf. Cockae 
trice. 2 Large serpent, basilisk. 

righne, comp. of rigiinn. 

righneadh, see righuea 1. 

—adh, -aidh, s.m. Act of making tough, 
adhesive or clammy. 2 Growing tough. 3 
State of growing tough, adhesive or ci.mmy. 
4 Act of delaying, procrastinating or prolong- 
ing. A’r—, pr.pt. of righnich. 

— — as, -ais, s.m. Toughness. 


2 Sluggish- 
3 Stiffness. 


ness, laziness, drowsiness. E 
Delay. 5 Clamminess. 

—— —— --4d,s.f.in4. see righneachas, 2** Gift. 
3**Favour, 

nghneai, -eid, s.m. 
Glutinousness. 

righneas, -eis, see rivhneachas. 2 Tenacity. 

nigunich, pr.pt. a’ righneacha:lh.v.a.«&n, Torgh- 
en, make adhesive or clammy, 2 Becums 


Degree of toughness or 2 


Original trom 


UNIVERSITY OP ILLINOIS Ale 


"LR A ae CH. 


» è 
Ze Beef". A. 





hei 





P 


Digitized by 


MTERNET ARCHIV 


URBANA-CHAMPAIOGN 909 
RI 


rizhnichte 
Stiff ned. Ek 
righ-phà:lliun, -iuin, -iuinean, &;«. King's pv 
yilion, 2**f'aberni:le. 


761 


riochdail 


you posseés ? a’ chearb r., the very extent ot 
sphere. 
trinne, an s.f. The understand'nz. 








righ-phubuill, -uill, -an, s.m. see righ-phà'llian. | rinne, emphat. form of rinn, prep. pron. 


righ-rain»ach,) s. f. Royal fern, 
reanzach., 

rig)-rath, -a, -an, sm. Royal fortress or seat. 

rizhre & rìghrean, pl. of righ. 

riga-seise, d, $22. Greater bur-reed, brauched 
bur-reed, see seisg-rizh, 

rizh-shlat, -ait & -a, pl. -an, s.f. Sceptre, 
«Jat-riozhail. 

righ-th2a^h, -an, sam Kiag’s honse or palace. 

irigntheaeh. -eich, -an, 8$.» see rigaeacn. 

 Xizh-theachdair, -ean & -theachdraicnaan, 8.7. 
Envoy.xubassador, plenipoten/ur ary, embassy. 
{reachdair-righ. ) 

ri-h-uilleanach, see cam-zhias. 

rgieachan,** sm. Castrated ram, 

ri h-à ne, adv. By-and-by. 

rill,** va Rildle. 2 Wiünow. 

rileadh,** -idh, o m. Riddting, 
sifting. 

ri|le2,** -ein, s.m. Rid lle, coarse sieve. 

tmb, ©, ean, sf. Number. MA 

tah, pa, Reckon, compute, number, 
rim'ieach, a. see rìomhach, 

ria1eadh,** -idh, s. see riomhadh, 

Trrnhiadh, -ith, em, Pride. 

riuhiun, soe ribhinn. 

each, see ribhinneach, 

rinc,** v.a. & n. see ring. 

rinceach, see rin zeaci, 

rinchsa,(AF) s, Kitten. 

rineach, s.m. Arran c. for reannach, 

ring,** v.a & n. lear. 2 Pull. 3 Danes, hop. 

ringeach,** -eichs, a. Tearing. 2 Pulling. 3 
Paring, 4 Dancing, 

ringeadh,** -eidh, s, »n. Tearing, 
3 Dancing, dance. 

ringea!,* s, Circle, xphere— Mainland. 

ringear,** -eir, $m. Dancer. 

Yingheall,** -ill, s.m. Promise, 

rinzh:imhlean,** s.pl. Chains, 

tringuheach, -eiche. a. see ringeach. ` ` 

tirn, prep.pron (ri--sinn) To us. 2 Against us. 
3 Meddling with us, Thubhairt er., ke said 
to us ; maille r., with us, together with us ; na 
bi r., do not meddle 10 h us ; cuiridh iad r., 
they will ply us, they will try our metile, they 
will add to us; an Spiorad a’ cur r., the Spirit 
applying tous; cha tig er., it will not please 
or satisfy us ; cha tig ni r., no harm will befal 
us. 

-rinn, -e, -ean, s.f. Acumen,acumination. 2 Pro- 
montory, point. 3Pianet (reann.) 4** Music. 5 
**Barb. 6**Nib, 7 *'Hoot. 8** Cail QMS) 
Apex. lO0ffEdg». 11(D0) Poiitofapin. 12 
** sae roinn. An incudar ua Raine, in the 
farthest of par's of the rhinns or peninsula ; 
Righ na rinne, King of the planets ; r. saath- 
ard, the point of a needle ; dh’ fhaibh an r, di, 
its point is off. 

Trinn, past ind. of dean, — Rin iad sinn, they did 
that. Is ole ar. thu [how badly you arquit- 
ted yourse/f! dh’ aon rud ’s gu ‘nd’ rina e, 
despite of all he vould do. 

rinn-an-ruisg, -ean-nan-rosg, $.f. App!e or pupil 
of the eye. 2 Evebright, see lIus-nin-loac. 

$rinn-bhearthag, -aig, -:n, $.f. Surgeon’s knife. 

riun-bhior, -a, -an, s.m, Sharp stake. 

——A4ach, -aiche, o. Suarp-poiuted. 

rinndeal,” cil, s. m. Sphere, extent, limits, 
boundaries, territory. Tha inr, io:inachuui';- 
ann, the boundaries ara linited : leanar an 
rinileil, the renta’- or stent-hoots de any, 
fearaiua ath’ agad ? wha! egini of lan do 


sce 


winnowin:, 





2 Ilanging. 





see raineach | rinneach, CR) s. 


Loose shreds of skin at the 
base of the finger-na ls—A rran. 

rinueaen, -eica», a Cuspated, printed, having 
a sharp point. 2 Abounding in promontories 
or head:ands, 

adh -aidh, s.m. Sharpening, forming 
into a pvint, 2 Act of forming into a poini. 
A’ r—, pr nt. of rinnich. 

rinueadair,** s.m. Carper, spyfault. 

trinnea lar, v. They did. 

rinneadh, past.pass. of dean. 

rinneamh,** -eiinh, s.m. The constellations, 

rinn-gneur, -e, @ Sharp-potnted, acute, 

rinn-gheuraich,( MS) v.a. Barb. 

rinnich, v.a. Sharpen into a point. 

^, -an, sm. Graving tool. 

te, past pt. ofrinnich, Sharpened into a 

| point, 

triuareim,** g. Constellation, 

riob,* v. & s. see rib, 

rioba,* see riba. 

-—ci,* see ribeach. 

chan, pl. of riob, 

-—ch1,* see ribaachd. 

-——dh, -aidh, ënn, & pr.pt. see ribeadh. 

riobag,* sce ribeag. 

ach,* see ribeagach. 

riobaich, v.a. see ribich. ! 

riobaid, -eau, s. m. Spendthrift. 

— ——»ach,** a. Extravagant, prodigal. 

—eachd,** s.f. Extravagance. 

riobain, ses ribean, 

riobalac,* s.m. Hairy, curious-looking, ragged 
persoun. 

rioban, see ribean. 

aich, ** v.a. Deck with ribbons. 

riobhag,** s.f. Barb, as of a hook. 

ach, -aicho, a. Barbed, barbated. 

aich, v.a Barb. 

aichte, past pt. Barbed. 

riovhaid,** see ribheid. 

—each, see ribheideach. 

triobhar, -air, -an, s.m. Sieve. 

trivba-chiar, -chlàir, -an, s.m. 

Tobhach, -aicn, s.m. Rival. 

rioblach, a. & s. se» ribleach. 

—adüh, see ribleachadh, 

—d, see rib!eachd, 

rioblaich, see riblich. 

riobta, see ribte, 

riobte, see ribte. 

riobiach, see ribteach. 

rioch,* v.v. see riach. 

riochd, -a, -an, s.m: Likeness, form, appearance. 
2 State, condition, 3 Stead, place. 4 Ghost, 
spirit, 5 Porson of wan appearance. 6 Rel- 
alive size, proportion. 7* Interpretatioa, ex- 
position. 58 Hue. 9 (MS) Air. Chaidh iau 
r. gearraidh, she assumed the shape of a hare; 
"(le is r. de m’ aisling P what is the interpreta 
tio of my dream ? an v, mairbhe, having the 
gong ance ofa dead ma^» ; aréir r. gach aoa 
dhiubh, @wording to the proportion of each. 

riychdivehi 1^, -aida, s.m. Personating. 2 Ach 
of personating or representing. 3 Substitu- 














nutes ghetto JR dena 























2 Honeycomb. 
Catalogue, 








uy SIN 


tion. A’r—, pr.nt, of riochdaich. 
riochdaich, pa, Personato. 2 Represent, pour- 
tray. 





—te, past pt. of riochdaich. 

riochdail, -e, a. Acvual, real, positive. 2 Hand- 
soins, stately, 3 True, 4 Manifest. Gu r., 
glan æ'tually anl real? so; dh'innis e ‘thomh- 
ad D gut, ginu, he tuld it me us & positive fact, 

Lë 


riochdail 


riochdail,* s. Skeleton, poor-looking person. 

riochd-aium,-e, -eannan, s.m. see riochdair. 

——each, «. see rioehdarail. 

riochdair, s.m. Representative, substitute. 27 
Delegate. 3 Plenipotentiary. 

riochdair, -an, s.m. Pronoun in gramiar. 

—-—eil, -e, a. Pronominal. 

riochdalachd, s.f.ind. Reality. 2 Comeliness of 
shape or dress. 38f{fPortliness, 4 Manifest- 
ness. 

riochdall, -aill, -an, s.m. Dwarf. 2 Fairy. 

riochd-bhriathar, air, -thran, s.m. Metaphor, 

riochd-bhriathrach, -aich3, a. Metaphorical. 

riochd-dnealbhach, -aiche, a. Mosaic. 

riochd-fnacal, -ail, -an, s.m. Pronoun. 

riochd-fhear,**s.m. Agent. 

riochi(Imhor,** -oire, OG, Shapely, proportioned. 

friochos, s.m. King. 2 Rule. 

triodh, s.m. Ray or beam of light, 

riof, pl. -a, -annan & -achan, s.n, Reef of a sail. 
21f3Sunken rock. 

riogh, see righ. 

rioghach,* s,f. Pinion, string to tie the arms of 
a prisoner. Anr. air an òlach, may the fel- 
low be pinroneil !—adeuce take the fellow ! 

rìoghachadh, -aidh, son. Reigning. 2 Aet of 
reigning. 3 Reiga. 4 Governiag, govern- 
ance. A’r—, pr.pt. of rioghaich. 

riozhachd, an, s.f. Kingdom, realm, empire, 2 
Dom nion, sway, government. Is farsuing 
dor. 's gur fial, extensive and hospitable is thy 
dominion. 

—ail, -e,@ National, 

rìoghaich, oa, & n. Reign, rule, govern. 2*Pin- 
jon, tie, R. e dà bhliadhna dheug, he reigned 
twelve years, 

rìoghail, -e, @ Royal, kingly. 2** Princely. 3 
Loyal. Lios r., a royal court; taiga r., a 
palace. ` 

rioghainn,(CR) pr.pt. a’ riognaiun, v.n. Reach 
to, arrive at, An r. thu air ? can you reach 
at ? —Períhshire. 

rovha/r,* -ean, sn. Royalist. 

rlogualach, -aich, sm. Loyal subject. 

+a, $J.ini, Royalty. 2 Loyalty. 3 
Diguity of port anl character. 4 Regal pomp. 
5 Priuceliness. 6 M ijesty. 

riozhann, see rìbhinn. 

¢rioghthach,* -aicn, s.f. Felloe of a wheel. 

rioghlach,** -aich, st Old hag. 

rioglachan,(Af) s.n. Will duck. 

riogh-bhuth, see rign-bhuth, 

riogh-lann, see rign-ianu. 

riogh-laoch, see righ laoch. 

riogh-nathair, sea rìgh- athair. 

riogh-phubull, see righ-phatilian, 

rioluinn, -e, -ean, s.f. Cloud. ? (AH) Fantasti- 
cally dressed woinan. (tf riolainn.) 

each,tt a. Cloudy. 

riomb,* s.m. Wheel. 

riomba,* s.m. Semi-circular bay or beach. 

riomball,*-aill, s.m., Circle, halo. R. mu'n 
ghealaich, @ halo round the moon; gearr r., 
draw or describe a circle. 

ach,* -aiche, a. Circular, circuitous, 

like a circle. 

achd,* s.f.ind. Circularity, roundness, 
circuitousns3ss. 

nomnh,* s.m. Costly jewel. 

riomh, see riamh. 

Triomh, &m. Reckoning, numbering, computa- 
tion. see rimh, 

, v.a. Number, compute. 

riomhach, -aich, s.m. Beau, danly. 

,-aiche, a, Fine, elegant, handsomsa, 

beautiful. 2 Precious, valuable, costly. 3 

Gaudy, conceited. 4 Gorgeous, superb, bi 











e 











see rimh. 








762 


ris 

Fond of. 6 Stately. 7 Regal. 

ean r., of gorgeovs apparel. 

rìomhachas, -aizs, s. m. Fineness, elegance, 
handsomeness, beaucy, superbness, 2 Coste 
linsss, precionsness, valuabdleness, 3 Gauilie 
nei 4 Conceitedness. 65 Gorgeousaess, 6 
Reval ity. 

riomhichd, s.f. see riomhachas. 

riounadh, -aidh, s. »1. see rìomhachas., 92% 
Fondiess, 3 Habiliment, 4 inumeration. 

riomhaich,{f v.a. Grace, set off, 

tiomiaiun, -e, -ean, see rìbhinn. 

; —each, -eiche, og. see riohinuneazch. 

riomhair, -ean, s.m. see rìomhach. 2 Counter, 
reckoner, arithm Dean, 3 Caiculation, 

- — ,** v, Calculate. 

riomnaireachd, s.f, Calculation, arithmetic. 

riom-:sa, see rium-sa. 

riotusachan,^* -ain, sam. Searcher, 

rion, s.m. *see rian. 12 Way, road, track. 

rionachas, see rionuacnas. 

Tixonadair,* see rianadair. 

rivuaich,** v.g. Carve, eugrave, 

rionaiche,** -an, s.m. Carver, engrayer. 

rionaidheas,** s.m. see rionachas. 

rionluas,** -ais, $.?n, Career, 

rionnach, -aiche, d. see reannach, 

rionnaern, -aich, s.n. see reannach. 

frionnachas,** .ais, $.?». Engraving. 2 
ture. 3 Graven work. 

rionnachd,** s.f. Burial, interment. 

rionnich-uaine, see reannach-uaine, 

rionnadh,** -aidh, s.m. Redness. 

rionnag, see reannag. 

—ach, see reaunagach. 

rionnaidh,** s.m. Satirist. 

rionual,** -ail, s.m. Graviug, sculpture, 

riounalaiche,** s. Graver. 

rionntaidh, see riounaidh. 

riopail, v. see riapail. 


De chulaida- 








Sculp. 





riopla!h,-a:dh, s. m. & pr. pt. of riopail see 
riapala th, 

riostal,* -ail, see risteal. 

rìreadh, (i. e. da rìreadh or a rìreadh.) [Al 


ways da riribh at Poolewe.) Truly, actually, 

indeed, seriously, verily, of a truth, certainly. 

An ann da rireadh a tha thu ? are you serious? 

tha e cheartr., he is in real earnest. 
rir.amh,** s. Good. 


ris, Form of the prep. ri used before the article, 


e.g. What is now written “ris an duine ” 
should be *' ri san duine,” the s belonging to 
the article,  2ttExposed to view. 3 In the 
practice of, in the habit of. 4 Employed at, 
engaged in. Tha e ris, it is exposed to view; 
casan ris, barefooted ; leig ris, expose, divulge, 
reveal your mind to; ris an tombaca, using 
tobacco ; ris an t-snaoisean, usiny snuff ; "dé 
tha thu "eur ris ? how are you employed P 
what are you enjaged in! risa’ chlachair- 
eachd, employed as @ mason, engaged at ma- 
son-work ; ris an am seo, during this weather, 
ris, prep. pron. (rite) To bim ; with him ; ae 
gainst him or it; equal to him or it. Cum 
ris, do not yield to him or it; is math a tha thu 
a’ cumail ris, you match him well, or how 
you persevere at it ! or you wear your yeara 
well—look younger than one would expect 
you to at your age; na bi ris, do not mo 
lest him, do not use or practice; abair ris, say 
to him ; theirig ris, fight him, try him ; sin ris 
be seduced by him ; 'dé do ghnothach ris 
what is your business with him ! thig mi ris, 
1 will do for him, I will finish him, 2 I will 
please him ; cuir r., master him, 2 add to it, 3 
exert yourseif; tha dòchas, (or dùil, or sùil) 
agan ris, 4 expect him ; feuch ris, try it. 





j CS 
A 
AT € n, 


-AMA i 


NE a 
Tris 


763 


rebhas 





ris, adv. (i. e. & ris) see rithis. 
ris, £a3n.ind. Rice. 
tris, s.f. History. 
riy. 
Fils, -ean, S27. 
risd, see ritnis. 
rislich, Suth’d for rithis. 
iriseach, Ach, sm Romance, 2 Story-teller. 
1isean,** -ein, ëm. Historian. 
——, See ris-san. 
riseil. (CR) v.n. Rastle— Perthshire, 
risg 'anach, Auch, s.m. Brave soldier. 
Ii»iC, S.f. Affix. 
 *frision, -an, s.m. Historian, 
t--——, see ris-san. 
rixlealh, v.a. Rustle, 2 Move things about— 
Perth, A' r—, pr.pt. of riseil. 
ris-.an, einphat. of ris. 
rist, see rithis. 
risteal, -eil, -an, Su, see crann-ruslaidh. 
rith, see ruith. 
trith, -e. -ean, see righe, 
rithe, prep.pron. (rici) Aga’nsther. 9 Molest- 
ing her. 3 To her. Na bi r., do not molest 
Avr ; na h-abair r., do not say to her ; cuir r., 
master her. 
tritheadh, -idh, s.m. Grove, 
richiun, a. see righinn. 
rithis, adv. (i.e. arithis.) Again,second time. 
Jha mhallaich mia rithis an talamh, J toil 
mob again curse the earth ; an dràsd 's a rith- 
is, vow and ajan ; a choigrich, guil a rithis | 
Brawer, wep ajain! 
vithisd, see rithis. 
richist, see rithis. 
rithistich, Baienoch for a rithis, Thoir gaol 
do d’ bhean (mhnaoi) rithistich, love thy wize 
avan Cer Hi 
rithinreachd, see righneachd. 
rith- earg,** $, Extemporaneous rhyme. 
rithneas,** eis, s.m. see tighneas, 
rit hiiceh, see nghnich. 
riù, (rit+iad) prep.pron. To them, unto them. 2 
Against them. 3 Towards them. 4 With 
them. Cuir riù, manage them, aid to them; 
cum r., keep up to them, supniy them, do not 
yield to them; na bi rid, do not molest them, 
do not annoy them; thig e riù, he or it will 
please them; cha tig dad rid, no harm will 
befall them. 
triubh, s.m. Brimstone. 
nugha, see rudha, rudh & rudhadh. 
rillean, see rudan & reudan. 
ach, -aiche, see reudanach. 
aich, see reudanaich. 
rium, (ri-- mi) prep. pron, To me. 2 Against me. 
.3 Towards me. 4 With ine, Thubhairt e r., be 
said to me; cum rium, keep up 19 ino, $"mply me 
as 1 want,hold up to me,do not yield tome; thig 
e rinm, it will please me, it will become me ; 
na bi rium, do not molest me, do not meddle 
wiih ine ; abair r., say to me ; còmhla r., along 
with me ; an robh fiughair agad r. P. dil you 
expect me ? cha tig dad rium, no harin wil be- 
Jall me ; rinm-riut, @ faise person ; maille r., 
together with m». j 
rium-sa, emohat. of rium. 
riü-san, emphaé, of riù. 
Hut, prep.pron. (ri+thu) To thee. 2 Against 
thee. 3 Towards thee. 4 With thee. An tig 
e riut? wil it please thee ? maille r., or com »- 
la r., along wiih thee ; thachair e r., he svtt/-d 
|. * OU, gave you a‘ proper dressi” ; fear riur 
«iut, a false, double-dvaling person ; á iomall 
* a talmiainn éibhidh mi riut, from the ends 
ou the earth 1 will cry unto thee ; có à bha r. 
who was meddling with you ? cha tig dad r. 


Kiag. 








—— —— —— —— — —— — — ———M—— ———— 


nothing wili harm you. 
rintha-san, empjat. of riù. 


2 Knowledge. 3 Cause, | riut-sa, empha’. of riat. 


ro, ado, Very mach, exceedingly, Used as a 
prefix to adjectives, and supp!ving the place 
of a superlative. Math, good ; ro mhath, 
very good, The initiat consonaut of the 
aljeciive following is always aspirated, 
excep. s when followed by any consonant but 
l norr 2 foo much. Tha e ro fnuar, it 
1$ too cold. 3 Used as an intensive particle, 
Aire, attention ; ro aire, great attention. 

Ro mhor, too /arg^, too great ; is tu an Dia 
ro maór, (hou art the very great God ; cha'n 
‘ell ini ro chinnteach, L am not very sure ; tha 
e ro bhochil, he is very sick (or poor); cha’n 'eil 
e ro thagairach, he is not excessively willing 5 
ro sgairteil, very active ; ro shleamhaina, very 
slippery , bu ro chaomh leam tighinu,I should 
very much lke to cone—a common idiom in 

. Gaelic for expressing very much, 

ro,” son. Romaice, gasconading. Tha e cho 
làn r. 'sa thachdas e, he ws as full of romance» 
ing as he can hold—he ** draws a long bow.” 

ro, (AC) s. Path. 

ro’, see roimh, 

ro’ see troimü. 

ro-aire, s.f.ind. Great attention, care or dili- 
gence. Thoir an r. air, take great care of him. 

ro-ainaideach, a. Ridiculous. 


ro-&oibhneas, -eis, -an, s.m. Great joy or'glad- | 
ness. 
rob, -o1b, s.m. Coarse hair. 2 Shag. 3 Hairi- 


ness, shagziness, 4 Slovenliness. 5 Filthi- 
ness, 6**see [rap. 7 Gaelic form of robe. R.- 
bhrat, a shaggy mantle. 
rob, see rop. 
robach, -aicae, a. Rough, hairy. 
Filiny. 4 Not clear-sighted. 
1t Wet, as weather. 
robag, -aig, -an, $./. Coarse, slovenly, sluttish 
woman, slut, drab. 
robag., DU) s,f. Pet name for a little girl— Uist. 
Zut Smal, clever chiid. 3 (WC)Anything 
smt. R. prisde, æ cl-ver little chi'd : r. ba- 
laich, @ clever little boy; r., eitheir, œ litile 
boa’. 
robaicae, s..f.'272. Stovenliness. 
robaidh-racignde (WC) s.m. Robin, 
robail,** 8.f. Robbery. 
robain, s.pl. Towering waves, swelling, roaring 
billows. 3 Heavy rains, Sàr-Obair. 
robaiun,** v.a. Rob. 
, &.f. Robbery, plundering. 2 see rop» 
ainn. 
robair, -ean, sm. Gaelic form of robber, 
eachd, s.fiind. Robbery. 
neach ff Ach, s.m. Smart or clever boy. 
Ber (DO) sm. Pet name for a little boy- 
ist. 
robann, -ainn, see reubainn. 
roban-roid, s.m. Robin, see brù-dhearg, 
trobar-fola,l. s.m. Fluxus sanguinis. 
robh, »as&Giorm of bi, used wich interr, & neg. 
partic'es; An robh thu ? were you fe ait’ an 
r. tnu P where were you ? caa robh mi ? I waa 
no’. 
robh,** .a, -achan, s.m. Roll of broad. 
robnalh, -aidh, -aidiean, see rabhadh., 
ro-bhà'gh,** s.m. Great mercy. At 
2 Wallow, 


2 Slovenly. 3 
5* Shaggy. 6 








robhainn,** v.a. Roll, roil together. 
robhair, see rotnair. 
rubbairt, see reothart. 


trobiusr, a. Red, 

robhar, -air,** s.m. Sieve. 

ro-bhàs, -àis, s.m, Violent death. i 

robhas, -ais, -an, 8.214, see rabhas, (appx. ) 
252 


E ` 
we heagan T 


ro-bheagan, -ain, s.m. Very small quantity. 

robh'd, s. Lump, bit— Badenoch. 

ro-bheus,** sam, Good breeding, 

rob-ruadh,(AF) s.»n. Robin-redbreast. 

robuist,** s.f. Custody. 

robunn, -uiun, san. see reubainn. 

roc, -oic, -an, s.m. Gaelic form of rock, 

roc, ruic, s.f. Anything that tangles a fishing- 
hook, 2 Entanglement. 3 Curl, wrinkle, 
plait or corrugation, particularly in cloth- 
waulking, caused by drawing threads too 
tightin weaving. 4(AH) Tangle, species of 
seaweed.  5"* The tops of seaweed that ap- 
pear above water, 6(AF) Skate, thornback 

* (fish.) 7 Fold, plait. 8 AH) Sunken, tangle- 
grown rock, 9 (AH) Hollow, impotent or 
gurgling cough as tht emitted by a min with 
with a bone or a cow with a turnip stuck 
in its throat. Cuiridh tu do cheann 
an r., you will entangle yourself ; roc aodann- 
ach, having a wrinkied face. [McL & D gives 
gen. -a, pl. -an. 

roc, v.n. Wrinkle, become wrinkled. 

roc, A. -an. s.m. Hoarse voice or cry. 
sound. 3 Haw. 4ttRook. 
prov. [** gives gen. roic.] 

roc, pr.pt. a’ roc&düb, v.n. Cry hoarsely, utter a 
hoarse sound, 

Rocabarra s. Imaginary rock inthe mythical 
lore of the Hebrides. Like the fairy-flag of 
Dunvegan, it has already appeared twice, and 
when it appears the third time the destruct- 
ion of the world may beexpected. ’N uair à 
thig Rocabarra ris, is dual gu’n téid an saogh- 
al sgrios, when Rocabarra appears again, the 
world is doomed to destruction. 

rócach, -iiche, a. Hoarse,having a hoarse voice, 
2 Uttering a hoarse sound or cry. 





2 Hoarse 
9 Cough, retching, 


rocach, -aicne, a, Wrinkled. 2 Curly. 3** 
Crisp. 4**hocky. 5**Plaited. 6 Dishevelled, 
as hair. 


Fzocadaich,-e, s.f. Retching, coughing, 2 
Hoarse screaming, as of birds of prey. 

rocadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of crying boarsely or ut- 
tering a hoarse sound. A’r—, pr. pl. of ròc. 

rocadh, -aidh, 8m. Becoming wrinkled. A’ r—, 
pr.pt. of roc. 

yocaideach,* s.m. see rócas,.— Islay. 

rocail, pr.pt. a’ rocladh, v.a. un Tear, mangle. 
2 Corrugate. 3 Become corrugated. 4 ff 
Croak, roar hoarsely. 

rocail, -e, SE Roaring or crying with a hoarse 
voice, croaking, hawing. 

rocair, -ean, s.m. Man with a hoarse voice. 

rocair.** -ean, 38$. m. Customer, 2 Common 
guest, one who baunts or often visits a place. 

rócaireachd, s.f.ind. Hoarseness of voice. 2 
Habit of speaking hoarsely. 

ròcais, n.pl. of ròcas. 

rocal, -ail, -an, s.m. Coarse clothing. 

rocaladh, -aidh. s.m. d pr.pt. see rociadh. 

rocall, see rocal. 

rocan, -ain, 8. M., dim. of roc. Plait, fold. 2 
intricacy. 3 Wrinkle,  4**Stumbling-block. 

trocan, -aiu, -an, s.m. Little cottage, hut. 2 
Hood, mantle, cloak, surtout. 3 Thicket. 4 
Fray. 

ert -an, 8. m. Moarseness. 2 Hoarse 
voice. 3** Person with a hoarse or rough 
voice. 4|tWooden clip for seaweed. 

rocanach, -aiche, œ. Crisp. 2 Wrinkled. 3 
Plaited, folded, in folds, 4 Mantled,hooded. 
5 Of, or like acotor hut. 

rocanach, -aiche, a. Hoarse, having a hoarse or 
rough voice. 2 Hawing. 

rocanachd, s. f. ind. Hoarseness, continued 
hoarse sound. 


Digiti: l 
RNET ARCHIV 


NTE 


64 


. rddadh 


rocanaich,* af. Hawing, hemmi ig. 
roc-aodann, s, Wrinkled face. 
-—àen,-ai-has, a. Having à wrinkled 





facs. 

ròcas, -ais, -an, s.f. Im, in Badenoch.) R»ok-— 
corvus frugil-gus. 2$ Crow, [ pl. -ais in Ross.) 

roc-eudainneacn, see roc-aodannach. 

roc-eudauu, see roc-aodanu. 

— acb, see roc-aodannach. 

rocas-dhearg-chasach, (AF) st Chough--Sty* 
The chough whichis characteri tic of che arins 
of so many Cornish fainilies, is now a/ most ex- 
tinct in Coruwall. 
father shootiug one near Countisbury, Devon, 
about 1874, and the keeper then remarking va- 
its rarity. 

rochaid,see rochnaid. 

roenall, -aill, 8. m Coverlet. 
block. 13 Fray. 

rochailt,* s.f. Blustering female. 

rochair,** v.a. Slaughter. 

froehar, s.m. Slaughter. 

rocheaidh,(AF) s. Whale. 

rocud, -a, -an, &m. see roc. 

rochil, see roc. 

rochdach, see rocach. 

rochdadaich, see rocadaich. 

rochdail, see rócail. 

rochiair see rocair. 

trociadan,** -ain, s.m. Thicket. 

rochduin,** s.f. Ascent. 2 Arriving at, reach- 
ing. 

ro’ chéile, for troimh chéile. 2 for roimh-chéile, 
one in à hurry-burry. 

ru-vhriontachd, s.f.ind. Oversaving. 

ro-cioill, -e, pl. -an & -lltean, s.f. Thick wood, 

— —— — each, -eiche, a. Of, or belonging to, 
thick woods. 





*2 Stumbling- 


ro-curann, -oiun, pl. -an & -oinn, s.m.Stately or ` 


lofty tree. ’S biodh do gbarrain de ro-chrann- 
aibu (van comhdachadh le n-uaill—W. Ross, 
p.4. Air meangan ard nan ro-chrannaibh 
on ^ high branch of the stately trees. —Ross, 
2.19. 
—ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in stately or 

lofty trees. 

rochuaid,** -ean, s. Lamprey. 

trochuaidh, -ean, $./. see rochuaid. 2 Plague. 

rochuaideach,** @ Full of little lampreys. 2 
Like a lamprey. 

rochuilleach,** a, Terrible. 2 Very dangerous. 

ro-chüram, -aim, -an, 8$. m. Great anxiety, ex- 
cessive care. 2**Vigilance. 

——— —Ach, -aiche, a. Over careful. 

rócladh, -aidh, s.m. Mangling, act of mangling 
or tearing. 2tf Croaking or roaring hoarsely. 
A’ r—, pr.pt. of rocail. 

rocus, -uis, see ròcas. 

rod, -oid, pl. rodan & ròidean, s. m. Way, road, 
pan track. 2 Ditch. 


Measure of six lineal yards. Rod 
œ highway ; r. móran righ, the king’s high- 


‘he author remembers his - 


etos is tt ae cao A ate a 





3 Perch of lani. 4 B 
lethod. 5* Rood of mason-work. 6 (AH) _ 
mor, 2S 





NI 
5 
4 Y 
4 
= 
1 

| 

M 

4 

| 


—ÀÀ MÀ T 


ji 


M P j 
Ae ew E: 


si 
- 


- 


Shy PEE a E e 9TH 


GE 
Ze 


j 


4 ba 


way; r. réidh,@ plain road ; réan ròid, all the —— 


way taobh an ròid, the roadside ; r. cartach, 
a cart-road. 

rod, -oid, -an, s.m. Quantity of seaware cast on 
the shore. 2**Cast, shot. 3 (CR) Row or drill 
of potatoes—Skye. 


rod, -òid, -au, s.m. Foaming sea beating against — 


the shore. 2*Foam. 9 
rod,* pr. pt. a’ ródadh, v. a. Scarify.. 2 Blade, 


come through the ground, R. do chas, scari- ` | 


fy your Foot, 
rolachd,** s.f, Covering; 2 Fence. 


rodadh, -aidn, s.m. Scarifying; 2 Blading,come 8 ; 


ing through the er opd —Skye. — Tha'm bun 





p" rodadh 765 roid 
tataa’r., the potatoes are coming through the| desired. 2 Opiionable, 3 Preferable. 4 
ground, Choosing, picking. selecting. An roghnaiche 


rodaidh, -e, €&* Coarse-featured, 2*Ruldy. 3 
Darkish, prov. 4** Rotten. 5**iílavi g a rot- 
ten smell, 6**-hruuken. 7 Rougn, forward. 

eachd, s.f.ijl. Coarseness of features. 
2* Ruddiness. prov. 

rodail,** a. Prospsro is, 2**Lancinz, scarifying. 

ródair,** s.m. Wayfaring man, 

—  —eil,** .eil, ¢.m. Strolling. 

rodan, n.pl. of ròd. 

rodan, see radan. 

rodh," a. s.m. Water-edze, 2 Water-mark. 

rodha,** see roladh. 

ro-dhéidh, e, -ean, s.f. Great desire, striving. 

———eil,tt a Very desirous, 

ro-dhoineanta, -eiate, a. Very stormy, 

ro-dhoinionn, ann, -an, $.»e. Severe tempest. 

ro-dhiil, -e, -ean, &.f. Eag:r or earnest expect- 
ation, 2**Jealousy. 3 Earnest hope. 

fro-dhuine, pl. -aoin3, s.m. Noblem in, 2** Ex- 
cellent man, 3**Comuoner. 4**Rogue. 

ro-dhürachd,-an, $. f. Great care or diligence. 
2 Strong desire or inclination. 

frodmuin, s.m. Fox. 

ro-earail,** s.f. Importunity, 2 Earnest desire. 
Rinn e r., he ire. 

ro-earbsa, s f Entire confidence. | 

ro-eólas, -a13,8. m. Familiarity, intimate acquaint- 
ance, 

ro-fhonn,** s.m. Earnest longing, keen desire. 

ro-fhu chd, san. and. Great cold. 





2 Wan lering. 


rog, -oig, -an, 8 m. Gaelic form of rogue. 2 Ro- 
Suerg, slyness, 3 heft. 
rogainn,** oo Duck, 2 Tease. 3 Handle 


roughly. 

'* sf. Rough handling. 
he got a rough handling. 

rogair, -ean, 8.7. see ragair. 

each, see raaireach. 

eachd, see ragzaireachd. 

rogh,** s.m. Order. 2 Custom. 
see roghainn. 

trogh, v.a. Choose. 

rogha, see roghainn. 
husbands or wiv’s. 

roghadh, -aidh, s.m. see roghainn. R. is tagh- 
adh, the best and choicest. 

ròghail, -e, a. Fond of romancing., 

roghainn, -ean, s.m, Choice, opti n, preference, 
selection, choosing. 2 Best of anything. 3 
Eligibleness. Theiriz do roguainn 
bhealach, go where you will; r. de sheudar, 
the best of cecar ; tharruing i sreang la r. 
beachd, she drew a string with hor best aim; 
r. nam ban, the best of women; tha sin 's ar, 
a bhi dha, that may be as it pl-avrs—W. S.2. 4; 





Fhuair e r., 








3 Wreath. 4 


Rogha chéile, the best of 


tha sin’sar, agad, be that as you please.—W, | 


H. 1.45 ; tha diugh is r. ann, thre is pick and 
choice among them ; r. an t-sealgair, the best of 
marksmen ; an r. air sin, in prej^rence to that; 
dean do r. ris, ‘make a kirk or u mill of it." 

roghainneach, -eichs, a. see roghnach. 

rovhainnich, v. see roghnaich. 

roghalachd,* st ind. 
gasconading iic'/ination, 

roghinachaith, Swt!’./. for roghnachadh. 

roghann, see roghainn. 

roghannachd, see roghainn, 

roghlach,** -aich, s.m. Choosing or selection of 
soldiers. 2 Boly of pi:Xe soldiers. | 

froghlach, a. Angry, enraged. 

Troghmnal, -ail, s.m, El. ction of a prince. 

troghmiar,** o, Valiant, 2 Very dinzerous. 

,-air, s.m, see ruathar & ruamhar. 

rogunach, -aiche, œ, Eligible to be chosen or 





Romancing disposition, 


leat seo ? do you prefer this? is roganaiche, 
yes ; '8e seo a's roghnaiche leam, 1 think this 
is preferable ; cò a’s roghnaiche leat, whoever 
you may choos», 

rog inachadh, -ailh, s.m. Choosing. 2 Act of 
choosing or selecting, 3[fPreferring. 4 Se- 
iection, election. 

roghnaich, v.a. Choose, select, pick out. 2$ 
Prefer, like. 

—e, comp. of roghnach. 

—ear, fut.pass. of roghnaich. 

—te, past pt. of rognnaica, Chosen, Së: 
lected, elected, 2 Preferred. 

roganuchadh, see roghnacaadh, 

roghuuich, see roxhtiaich. 

e, comp of rogunach. 

--——— te, see roghnaichte, 

roghuiun, see rogha. nu. 

-—each, s»e roghnach, 

rogh-ràdh,** s.m. Apophtnegm. 

roi’, cont. for roimh & troimh. 

roi’-ainmichte, see roimh-ainmichte, 

roi'-aitline, see roimh-aithne, 

roi-aithnieh, see roimh-aithnich. 

roib, -e, s.f. Filth. 2 Slovenliness. 3 Filth 
avout the mouth. 4 Overgrown or squalid 
beard, 5 Circ e of hair. 9 Pubes, 

roüibeach, -eiche, a. Filthy 2 Slovenly. 3 Hav- 
ing filth round tho mouth. 4 Having an over- 
grown or squalil beard. 

roibea lh, s m. 
arvadh-cl uais. 

roibeag, -eig, -an, s.f. Moustache. 

roibean, -ein, -an, sm, dim. of roib. Filthiness, 
2 Filth around the mouth. 3 Squalid little 
beard. 4** Bushy beard. 5 Moustache, whis- 
ker. 6**Small rop? or cord. 7**Mop. 8 Wick, 
Cha b’ i pòg an roiban duibh i, it was not 
th» kiss of the sywalid little black beard—Gil, 
140. 

















ach, -aiche, &. see rdibeach. 
a moustache or whiskers, 
beard. 4 Ropy. 5 Moppy. 

-— Ach l, s.f./n4. see ròib, 2 Bushiness, a3 
of a board. 3 Moppiness. 

roib-fneusagach, -aivüe, @ Having a squalid 
beard. - 

roibhe,§ s.m. Sneezewort, see cruaidh-lus. 

froibne,* nt, sm. Dart, lance. 

roibneach,** a.Shirp. 2 Pointed. 3 Likea 
lance or dart. 3 Armed with a lance or dart, 
róic, v.a. Tear. 

—, -ean, sm, Banquet, sumptuous but unre- 
fined feast, 2 Luxury of the table. 3 Fond, 
ness for good eating. 4 Eating greedily, glut. 
tony. br Superabun iance of the good things 
of life without any of the refiaed manners of 
good society. [**rdice.] 

roic, see raoic. 

rò'c-ehuilm, s. Carnival. 

roicvach,** -eiche, a. Bellowing, roaring. 2 Rift- 
ing. 3 Belching. An eas r., the roaring cas- 
cade. 

roiceach, -eiche, a. 

roicealachil, s.f.in 7. 
Eoieurism, sort of brutish luxury or giuttony. 

roiceil, -e, a. Roaring, bellowing. 2 Rifting. 
3 Belching. 

róiceil, -e, a. Luxurious. 2 Gluttonous, eating 
voraciously. 3 Fond of fat meats, epicurean. 

roichd, see raoic. 

froid, v. Run fast. 

roid, Gaelic form of road. 2 g»n.sing. of rod. 


2 Having 
3 Bushy, as a 





see roiceil. 


r i | IT 


1 1 Ip Pa ges Hr, P £I 
| | d CT Es Ké L eof Te 
wd i Re d 


War-mark om sheep, see comh- 


Luxury, luxuriousness. 9 


LLINOIS 


i 
L. i ns =a 
—T E RE 2 = G RER 8 mm 
| | E ANI A A. Ni 1 A i 
| | Ciy rug; rx ee - | iE ENN Fi GA Lali 
Ki 8 ut LI LI Të LI LU P em 


pan 
mi 


roid 





roid, -e, s.f. Bog-myrtle.sweet- 
myrtle, sweet-g.ile—myrica 
gie, [Ba lge of vertaia sepis 
of th» Cam bhs.) 

roid, -e, -ean, $. f. Short rac». 
bounce, race before a Lean, 2 
Gale. 3 Force proluced by 
motion. Thng er. a stii:h, 
he bounced in or rushed in; a’ 
dol r. do 'n bhail ul thall, 
going for a little whil to yon 
town; leum r.,@ runnin] lean, 
arunniny long leap. (eruinn- 
leum, o bound.) 

roid-chinn, s. Head-stretch— 
Dain I. Ghobha. 603. Roid. 

roide,§ s.f. Wormwool, see burmaid, 

roidean,** -ein, s.m. Wildfire. 

roideas, -eis, s.f. Runuing about, frisking, prov. 
(also rui leas.) 

roid.ghuilbuealh,T s.m. Bar-tailed godwit —Zi- 
mosa rufa. 

Toidhleag-urchrach, s.f. Cartri lg. 

roidhse,** -an & -avhan, s.f. see roinnse. 

ach, see roinns2acn. 

achd, see rvinuseachd. 

roidh.ivn, see roinnsich. 

froididh, -e, à. Rotten. 2 Shrunken 

roiz, s. Den, cave—Rod Donn. 

roighchi, see ra»ic. 

roigüne, See rogaaian, 

roiznneach, see rozhnach. 

ilh, see rognonachadh, 

roigünich, see roghnaich. 

te, see roghnaichte. 

ruil, geit siny. of rol. 

roit, (Mv) s. siaver. 

roileach, a. Slavering. 

roilbn,** e s.f. Mountain. 

ouch,** a. Hilly. 

froile, fur ri chéile. 

roileag,** -eig, sf. Church. 2 Burying-ground. 
(réilig. ) 

roiicai, -eiu, s.m. Snout of a sow, 2 (WC) 
Bound piece. R. ime, a ‘print’ of butter. 

roileau, see roithlean. Roòil:inean, rollers of a 
spinnin heel, 

roileanach,** a. Having a snot like a sow’s, 

roileasg, -eisg, -an, s.m. Confused joy or person. 
prov. 2 Confuse th ste. 

ach,tt a. Confused. 2 Hasty. 3 Frisky. 
4 Confused with joy. 

roileiserch,(MN) o, R miss. 

roilig, -ean, $. see réilig. 2 Frolicsome person. 

-— each,” -eicne, a i'roliesome, 

roille, s.f. Fawning or too corditl reception. 2 
Tare. 3$ Darnel, rye-grass, sea breoillean. 

-——acen,** æ. Aboun'ling in, or like darnel. 

roilleac^an,** -ain, s.m. Rolling stone. 

roii!ean, -ein, -au, sim. Cora-fan. 2 (WC) Fat, 
thick person, 

roille-chraos, -aois, -an, $.m. Slavering mouth, 
prov. 


—— ` 





























ach, -aiche, a. Haviag a slavering 
mouth, prov. 

roi leamas, -ais, s m. Coarse play, prov. 

ach, -aiche, a. Given to coarse play. 

ro'lleun, see roillean. 

roimh, pr»p. so» troimh & troimhe, 

roimh, prep. Before, in respect of situation or 
place. 2 Before, in respect of time. 3 Above, 
in preference to. R. na h-uile ni, in prefer- 
ence to »pruthing ; có roimhe a bhitheadh ea- 
gal orm ? of whom should I be afraid ? r. ghin, 
in prefer à to any ; r. do ghnùis, before thy 
face ; cn v r., put before, prompt, dictate ; an 
là roimu», the day before the other day ; r. 








roimh-bhria thar 


sgrios théid uabhar, prid» goeth before a fall ; 

r. an am, before the time. | 

Combiae'l thus with the personal prononns : 
romham, before me; romhad, before thee: 


ann, before us ; rom^aibn, befor? you ; rompa, 
before them.  linich romhad, or gbh rom iat, 


romhad, determine, resolve, intend; tha thu 

"cur romhad cur asda, you are delerminel 

to finish him ; chuir mi romham do! dachai th, 

I was determined to go bom, am bheil roiuhal 

dol dachaiulh 8 do yon intend to go home ¢ tua 

'n gnothach gu math romhad, your work o 

cut out, (the business is well before uou.) | A4- 

pirates a consonant following, and governi 

the dative. } 

roimh, -e, s.f. Earth, soil. 
ground. 

roimh-abuich,11 e, o Precocious. 

ead, -eid, s.m. Precociousness, 

roimh-a-chéile, adv. Prematurely, too hastily. 

roimh-ainmich, oo Prenominate. 

te, a. Forementioned, forecited, 


2 Family burying- 














above-cited. 
roimh-aisneis, -e, -ean, s.f. Foretelling. 
roimh-aithn,** v.a. Command, foreordain. 
roimh-aithne, tur Forexnowledge, precoge 
nicion. 

roimh-àithne,** s, f, Previous commandment, 
former iajunction, 

roimh-aithneachadb, -aidh, s.m. Foreknowinz. 
2 Act of foreknowing, anticipation. <A’ r—, 
pr.pt. of roimh-aithnich. 

roimh-aithnich, v.a. Foreknow, anticipate,fore- 
see. 

roimh-aithnichte, o. & past pf. Foreknown. 

roimh-aithris, -e, -ean, v.a. Previously rehearsa. 
2 Forebode, foretell. 

roimh-aithris, -e, -ean, 8,f. Previous rehearsal. 
2 Foreboding, foretelling. 

—— —enaeli, -eiche, a. Predictive. 

roimh-aom Tt v.a. Predispose. 

-—a lh, -aidh, sm. Predisposing, pra- 
dispos'tion, A’ r—, pr. pt. of roimh-aom. 

roimh-bhacail,-e, a. Preclusive. ; 

roim)-bharail, -e, s.f. Anticipation, presenti- 
m n^, preconception, 

roimh-bk*à aich, D v.a. Pretecease. 

roimn-bheachÀ, -an, s.m. Precoaception, fore* 
knowlod ve, presentiment, anticipation. 

—ach, -aicue, @. Preconceiving, 
for’-knowing, looking forward, anticipating, 
2 Giving a presentiment. 

roi nhn-bhsachdachadh, -ailh,s.m.  Preconceiv- 
ing. 2 Act or circumstanss of preconceiving 
or preconsidering, precognition, anticipation, 
foreknowledge. A’r—, pr. pl. of roimh- 
bheachdaich. 

roinh-bheachdaich, v.a. Preconceive, foreknow. 
2 Consider beforehand. 

roimh-bheach ail, -e, a. 
foresighiful, prescient. 

ro mh-hbhaaths, sf. Pre- -xistencs. Oe 

roimh-bheathachadh,(™1S) s.m. Antepast. 
roim!i-bhith, -e, sf. Pre-existence. 
roimh-bhiais, pr.nt. e roimh-bhlasad, v.a. Fore 
taste. 2 Ante-date, anticipate. : 
roimh-bhlas, -ais, -an, s.m. Foretaste, antici- 
pation, ; 

roinh-b^lasad,-aid,-an, s.m. Foretasting, 2 
Act of foretasting. A’ r—, pr. pt. of roimb- 
bhlais. 

roimh-bhlasdachd,** s.f. Anticipation. 

roimù-bhreith, -e, -ean, s.f. Pre-judgment. 

roimh-bhriashar, air, -bhran, s.m. Alverb. 2 
Preposition. 3** Preface, preamble. 











—— 


Provident, cautious, 


Jriginal trom 


bd Ke dë 
= e | 1T 
| | 


A d | i 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


[TI 


roimhe, before him ` roi'npe, before her ; rown- 


go forward; 92 go about your business ` eur: 


% Jm. = 8. Sege 
d | d e jus 


eds T 


Aa anui d WE 


ernek. Yu oi ous 


ame ke d 


2 


«X ao eee eS ee 


em — 


— 


- 


roimh-bhriathrach 


Toimh-bhriathrach,** a. Adverbial. 
tory. i 
roimh-chao^hail, v. Pre-decease, 
roimh-charadh, -ailh, em Predisposition. 
roimh-chéile, see troimh-chéile., 
roimh-cheum,** em. Precedence, 2 Generation 
before or past. 
roimh-chiallachadh, -aidh, s. m. Presignitica- 
tion. A’ r—, pr.p'. of roimh-ocnialiaicen. 
roimh-chiallaich, v.g Presignify. 
roimn-ehluich, -2, -4an, S.J. Prelude. 
roimh-chnuasachadh, -vidh,s.m. ?remeditation. 
roimh-chomhairleacnalh,** sm Preainonition. 
roimh-chomhairleachail,** a. Prem ouitory. 
roimh-chomhairlich, pe Preadvise. 
roimh-chraicionn, -inn, -en 'an, 8. m. 
reimh-chreid, v.a, Presum». 
roimh chuir, v.a. Preceds. 
roimh-chüis, -e, -ean, s.f. Prelude, 
roimh-chümnhnan?, -aint, -an, s.m. Precontract. 
—ach, -aiche, a Precontracted , 
roimh-chunnuil, -e, en, $.f. Premonition. 
roimh-dhealbh, -dhvilbb, -an, s.m. Preform. 
roinh-dhilinneach, -eiche, a. Anted!lurian. 
——, -eich, s.m. Antediluviau. 
roimhe, prep.»ron. (roimh--») Before him or it. 
2 lu front of him. 3 In preference to him. Am 
fear nach seall roimhe, he who will not look be- 
fore him ; ghibhe eagal r., he was afraid of 
him. 4 Roimhe before it, the indetinable it in 
it is a good day. Before, formerly, previously. 
Chunnaic mi r. thu, J saw you before; au la r., 
the other day, the former day. 
roimheach, a. Relative. 
roimh-eairadh, -aith, -aidhean, s.m. Forenoon. 
roimhear, -eir, -eireau, $. m. Antecedeut, rela- 
tive. 2 Preposition. 
roimhe-chéile, see troimh-chéile, 
roimh-edlas, -ais, §.m. l'oreknowledge, anticipa- 
tion, precognition, preconception. 
roimh-fheuch, v.a. Precaution. 
—— — — — — ann, -ean, s.m. Foreseein *,taking 
recaution. 2 Foretaste. 3 Forecast. 
roimh-fheumail, -e, o Perquisite. ~ 
roimh-fhidreachadh.(MS) s.m. Precognition. 
roimh-fhios, -à, s.m. see roim-eólas. 
——rachadh, s.m. Anticipation, 
rachd, s.f.ind. Presensiou. 
roimh-fhirinnean, s.pl. Premises, 
roimh-ghabh, v.a. Anticipate, 
——-—ail, s.m. Auticipvtion. 2 Antepast. 
A’ r—, pr. pt. of roimh-ghabh. 
roimh-gheall,** v.a. Promise beforehand, pre- 
engage. 
——adh, -aidh, s.m. Pre-engagement. 
— — — tainn, -ean, $.m. Promising before- 
. hand,pre-engagement, A' r—, pr.pt.ot roimh- 
heall, 
roimh-ghiac, v.a. Anticipate. 
roimh-ghoile, sf Ante-stomach. 
roimh-¢hoireas, -eis, sm. Prerequisite, 
roimh.iarr, v.a. Pre-requnire, 
roimhi^h, see romhaibh. 
roimhid,* adv. see roimhe. 
romhid-a-chéile, prov. tor troimh-chéile, 
roimh-imeachd, s.f.inl. Precedence, A'r—, pr. 
pt. of roimh-imich. 
roimh-imich, pr. pt. a’ roimh-imeachd, v. n. 
. Precede. 
madens, v. Gà. Foretell, predict, tell before- 
and. 





2 Prefa- 


Foreskin. 





























-—each, -eicha, a. see roimh-innseach. 
—eadh, -eidh, see roimh-innzeadh, 
-—ear, see roimh-innsear. 
roimh-innseach, -eiche, a. Predictive. 








tormh-innseadh, -eidh, sm. Foretelling, pre- 
deng, 2**Divination. A’ r—, pr. pt. of 
Digitized by 


NTERNET ARCHIV 


767 


, roimh-thaghadh 


roimh-innia. 

roimh-iónnsear, -eir, -an, s.m. Predicter. 

roimh-ionnsuich, v.a. Pre-instruct. 

roimh-làimh, adv. Beforehand, previously. 
roimh-l!à:mh, o, see roimh-làimneach, 

—sach, æ. Prelusive. 

— —— ——ich,( ALS) v.g. Ante-date. 

roimh-làn, a. Pluperfect in grammar. 

rornh-làthaien,( MS) v.a. Ante-date. 
roim^-lón, -lóin, -an, s. m. Provision for a jour 
ney, Viaticu:n, 

roimh-lnailnts, o Above-cited, 

roimn-inheadhon-là.** s.m. Foreuoon, 

roiina-rahsalcuinn,** gan Anticipation. 
roimh-m ieasrachadh, em Precoaception. 
roimh-mheasraich, v.a. Preconceive. | 
ruima-mbeirbheadh, -idh. s.m. Predigestion, 
roimh-inhinien, v.a. Premise, preface. 
roimh-nitha, s.p. Premises, 

roimuüu-oi lhirpich, v.a, Pre-oce py. 

roimh-órluchalh, -ailh, s.m. Ordering before- 
hand. 2 Act of ordering beforehand. 3 Fore- 
ordaining, predestinatinz, 4 Act of predesti- 
nating. A’ r—, pr.pt. of roimh-órduich. 

roimh-órduich, v.g. Order beforehand or pre- 
viously. 2 Fore-ordain, predestinate. 

—— —1‘e, past pt. of roimh-orduich. Or- 
daiaed beforehanl or previously. 2 Fore-or- 
dained, predestinabesd. 

roimnps, see roimpe. 

roimh-ralh, -àidh, -an, s.m. Preface, preamble, 
prolo:ua, 

-——ach, -aiche, a. Prefatory. 

roimh-ruitheach, -eiche, a Precursory. 

roimh-ruithear, -eir, -an, s.m. Fore-runner, 
coimh-raith-fhear, see roimu-ruithear, 
roimi:se,** et Sin, iniquicy. 

roimh-sgriobh, v.a. Ante-dats. 

roimh-suamhlachail,-e, æ. Prefizurative. 

roimh-sha:uhlaich, v.a. Presignity. 

roimh-shesa!bnadair, -ean, s.m. Prepossessor, 

roimh-sheall, v.a. Look forward. 2 Provide 
against. 

roimh-«heallach, -aiche, a. Looking forward, 
foreseeing, cautious, prospicient. 

roimh-shealladh, -aidh, -aidnean, s.m.Foresight. 
2 Previous look or sight, 3 Front view. 4 
Prospectus, 5 Caution, prospicivnce. 

roimh-shealltainn, s.m. Looking forward, 2 Act 
of looking forward. 3 Act of providing against. 
4 Foresight, precaution. A’ r—,pr.pt.of roimh- 
sheall. 

roimh-shedmar, AE, -sheóimraichean, s.m. Anti- 
chamber. 

roimh-shocrachadh, -aidh, s. m. Pre-establish- 
mont, 

roimn-shocraich, v.g. Pre-establish. 

roimh-smaoin, -e, -tean, s.f. see roimh-smuain. 

roimh-smaoineachadh, -aidh, see roimh-smuain- 
eacha ih. 

roim-sinaoineachail, 
ail. 

roimh-smao' nich, v. see roimh-smuainich. 

roimn-smuain, -e, -tean, SE, Forethought, pre- 
vious reflection. 

— ——— ——— —eachadh, -aidh, s. m. Act of pre- 
consi lering or anticipating, forethought. A’ 
r—, pr.pt. of roimh-smuainich. 

roimh-smuainichn, v.a. £ n. Think beforehand, 
preconsider. 7 

ro!:mh-smuaineachail, -e, o Thinking before- 
hand, provident, cautious. 

roimh-stalla/ir,** -ean, s.m. Forestaller, 

——eachil, s.f. l'orestalling. 

roimh-stéithich, v.a. Premise. 

roimh-thagh, v.a. Fore-choose, pre-eleet.. 

-—aih, -aiih, &.. Fure-caoosing, 2 











seo roimh-smuaineache 








roimh-thaghadh 


Act of fore-choosing or pre-eleeting, 
destination, pre-selection, pr2-2lection, 

roimh-thaghta, past pt of roima-thash. 
chosen, pre-elevfed, predestinated, 

roimh-thaisb?an, v.n. Prelude. 

roimh-theachdair, -ean & -chdraichean, s. m. 
Forerunner, 

roimh-theagaisg, v.d. Pre-instract. 

roimh-thionnsgaina, v.a. & n. Premeditate. 

— — 28h, -eiche, à. Premeditated. 

roimh-thionnsgaadh, -ailu, s.m. Promeditation. 
A’ r—, pr.pt. of roimh-thioun :gainn. 

roimh-thràthail, -e, v. Premature, 

roima-tinilterach, a & s. Ante liluvi wn. 

roimhü-thüradh, æ. A(ore-nvm»d, aforesaid. 

roimh-uidhe unvch, v.a. Pre-tispose. 

ruimp?, prep.oron. (roimit+ti) Beture ber. 2 In 
froutof her. 3 [n proforouesto hor. Gah 
r., go before her, stop her progress; cuir r., 
promot her, dicta'e to her. 

roimpzs-se, em phat. of roimp». 

roimse,** -an, S.f. Pole, stase.: 

roimseuich,** a. Lize a poleor stake, 
poles. 3 Inactive. 

—,** .eich, s.m. Inactive person. 

ròin, g«n.sing. & m. pl. of ron. 

ròin, -9, -cai, sf. A siuzle hair. 2 One hair of 
a horse's tail or mane. 3 Small quantity of 
wool or of any hairy substance. 4** Crest or 
tail of any beast. 5 tfair-cloth. Leud roins, 
a hair's breadth ; saic-aolach roine, sackcloth 
of hair. 

roóiu-ao.lach,** -aich, s.m. Hair-cloth. 

roineach, see raineach. 

roin ach, -eiche, @ Hairy, full of hairs, as meat. 
2 Mads of huir. 

S* Ach, sm. Hair, horsehair. 

(dh, -ailh, s.m. Stuffing wich hair, 2 

Fitting or dressiag with hair, as fish-hooks. 

A’ r—, pr.pt. of roinich. 

l, s.f. Hairiness. 2 Roughness, 

ròineag, -eig, -an, s.f. Single small hair. 2 Small 
quantity of wool or any hairy substance. 

ach, -aicne, @ Hairy. 2 Rough. 3 Hay- 
iug small quantities of wool or any hairy sub- 
S.Auce, 

róin.ch!óimh,(WO) s.f. Bunch of wool pulled 
from the shorn fleece and given to the poor 
women who frequent the gheep-fold at shear- 
inz time. 

roinieh, v.g. Stuff with hair. 2 Provide with 
hair. 3 Dress with hair, as à üsh-hook, 

roinn, g2n.8/ng. of rann, 

roiin,-e,-ean, sf. Share, portion. 2 Division, 
dividing, class, distribation, proportion. 8 
Sect, division, schism. 4 Seccion in writing 
(§.) 5 Pair of compasses, 6 Part of a sword 
distinct from the point, 7 see rinn. Mo r. 
fuéin, my own shure; an r. a riun e orra, 
the division he mud» of them ; r. rahe is athar, 
shure and share alixe, equal distribution ; a’ 
togail roinnean, ra's/ng divisions or sects ; r. 
dà leth, a bipartition, 

roinn, s.mind. Dividing. 2 Act of dividing. A’ 
r—, pr.pt. of roinn. A’r. orra, distributing 
among them. 

roinn, pr.pt. a’ roinn, v.a. Divide, impari, dis- 
tribute. 2 Deal, as cards. R. orrae, distri- 
bute or divile it amon; them ; roinneadh esan 
aig am bh il dà chdsa, let him that has two 
coals divide. 

roinn, v. see roinnich. 

ròinu, -e, -ean, see ròin. 

roiun-bhearraz,** s. Bistoury. 

roinn-cuairt,tt -e, -ean, S.E, Arch. 

roinne, see ròin. 

———ach, see ròineach. 








2 Of 

















ee C a E LA see? - 
i Ln VE ^ Di H ij 
d ` PE] li 

Ka 4 = (el kk Wy 


763 
3 Pre- | roinn2ach, -eiche, a. 


róis^a! | 
Distributive. 





2 see rinn. 
each, 


Fore- |-—————n^ ih -aidh, s.m. & pr.pt. of roinnich, see 


rinn.ach dh. 

roinneaciia la, see ròi 12achadh. 

roinneac‘ud, see roineacht. ~> 

roinuea lir, -ea3, s.m. Divider, divisor, 

roinn?ali, sae ro.nn. 

roinneag, see ró:n»ag. 

roinneagazn, see roi i2 igach, 

roiunsar, fuf.puss. of roin. 

ro'un2-bhiaidheo,** s.f. tair-ctoth. 

roinn-gaeur,-a & -eóra, d. see r.na-gheur, 

róinii-h, see rotaich. 

roinnich, v.a. see rin ich & roinn. 

—— —te, vast pt. of rvinnica, see rinnichte, 

roinnidh, fut.aff.a. of roinn. 

roinnidh, -e, o Hairy. 2 Long-haired, 3 Thicke 
haired. 

roian-léin2, -léintean, s.f. Hair-shirt. 

roinn-puaicteach, -eiche, o Suacing, dividing, 
2 imparting. 3 Divisible, i 

roinni-puÈirteacha là, -aidh, s.m. Distributin v. 2 
Act ot distributing, imoartiag or sharin s. A’ 
r—, pr.pt. of roiun-phàirtich. : 

roinn-phàiriich, v.4. Saare, divide, distribute. § 
impirt, 3 Partake. 

roinn-phartach, see roian-phàirteach. 

roian-phàrcachadh, see roinn-phàirteacha th. 

roinn-ruithe, s.f. Ran-rig, division or common 
run. ‘This system of occupying land is often 
spoken of a3 mór-»arránun, (greats divisida) or 
mor-fh-a-aan, (great lanl.) It prevailel, of 
old, all over the British Islanis and the con- 
tinent of Europe,aud was common in Ireland, 
It is now extinct in Eugland, anl oosolets iu 
Scotland,except in parts of the Westera Isles. 

roinuse, -achan, s f. Rinse. 

ach,** @. Rinsing, scouring. 2 Acting 
as à rinse, like a rinse, | 

Acha/lh,** -aidh, $. m. Rinsing, scouring, 

Scrubbing. A’ r—, pr.p'. of riuusich. 

ar, s.m. Rinser. 

roinnsich,** v.a. Rinse, scour, scrub. 

-te, past pt. Rinsed. scoured,scrubbed, 

roinn-slaci:lan, see slacodan. 

roinute, d. & past pt. of roinn. Divided,shared, 
distributed. 2 Disagceeing, dissentiont, 

roinntea-hadh, s.m. Scparation, 

roinatealachl,(MS) s.f. Pariivility. 

roipe, see roin. 

roipsach,** a, Extravagant. 2 Drunken, 

ro.peai,** ëng, Rapier. 2 Tuck, 

rois, seo ros, 

rois, gen.sinj. of ros. 














| ròis, ven.seng. of ros. 


rois, pr.pt. a’ roisea lh, see frois. 

roisc.al,** s. see roisgeul. 

roisd, see ròsd. 

digi -ain, s.m. Instrument for bolling 
ax. 

roiseal, see róiseid. 

roiseadh, -oidh, s.. & pr.pt. of rois, see rosadh. 

roiseag, WC) s.f. The pith of the rush used for 
wicks. | 

roiseagan,(CR) s.ol. Very small and numerous 

tatoes— W. of Ross-shire. 

roiseal, -eil, -an, s. in. High-swelling wave or 
surge, 2fttSurge of a wave, 8 Assault, ate 
tack. 4 Gasconade. 5. Boast, boastiag. "0 
Pomp. 7 Fores or rapidity of a vessel ia mo- 
tion, weigh, impetu:  8**Novel, 9 Lowest 
or basest rabble —Sàr.Ovair, 10 *Dispiay of 
ability. 11 Pretensious fuss. Le r., with an 
o t-ntatious disp ay ; r. teina, @ big, biazing 
Pre; r. soluis, @ finc origAt light or display of 
light, 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF TELIA 


ech 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 





v 


ike Veter eee T Su 


Es 


= 


¥ 
At 


o SÉ 


^" 
we 





T! 


ròiseal 


ròiseal, -eile, a. The lowest, most base. 

———,* v.a. Display, make a pompous disp'ay. 

———ach, -aiche, &. Abouu'liaz ia high waves 
or surges, 2 Making an attack or ass3ult. 3 
Boastful, boasting. 4 Sailing swiftly.  5* 

- Pompous, ostentatious, 6* Fond of displaying 
on2's featsor ability. . 

o——achd,* &.Jf.ind. Boasting. 
ostentation 

roisean, (DC) s.m. Flail, the striker of which 
is mado of strong thick rope, used for taking 
the grain from en, but not so completely 
as an ordinary flail. The proces: of using a 
roisean is called roiseadh, and sometimes tap- 
(lh — Uist. 

ruisean, (CR) s.m. Tail or train of a skirt —W. of 
Ross-shire, 2(DU) Wet or mud on the train 
of a skirt. 3 Wet or muddy traiu, 3 (DMu) 
Tait of à cow, 4 (WO) Tail of a deer. 

roissid, s.f.ind. Resin. R.-fidhle, vielin-resin, 

—— -eaca, -eiche, æ. Resinous. 2 Covered with 
resin. 

roig, gon. & pl. of rosg, see*ruisg. 

folsy,** a. Callow. 3 Unfledged. 

roiszeach,** a. Wise, 6 

roisyeur, -eil, -ad, s.n. Romance, romantic tale, 
2 Boasting, swelling words. 2 Sentence, ver- 

. dist, deerse, [**roiszedil.] | 

ach, -ticne, a. ‘felling romantic or mar- 
vellous tales. 2 Boastful. 

—— —Achd,** s.f. Same meanings as rdisgeul, 

roisg-mhévirleach,** s.m. Tory. 2 Burglar. 

rois-arunn, -uiun, -an, s.m, Roasting «pic. 

roi ire,** s.f. Auger, choler. 2 High spirits, ex- 
hiaratiou, 

roi;t, pr.pt. VU ròstadh, Roast, toast. 2 
Parch, scorch. 

roiste,** af Roach. 

ròiste, past pt. of rdist. 
scorched, parched. 

roisteach, -ich, -iciiean, s.f. Roach. 2 Bream, 


2 Pomposity, 





v a. 


Roasted, toasted, 


*YID7820% "09 





rolstean,*® -ein, s.m. Gridiron, 2 Frying-pan. 
roit, Worm woo, see roid. | 
roit, -e, -ean, s.f. see roid. 

froith, e -ean, s f. see roth, 

troithean, see roithlean. 

roithleach, -eiche, a. Rolling, tossing, unsteady, 


i+ g H i 
i " [| 
2, | ^ n i i d 
i — kal ii — ] 
d i i Ch LL ul 
= i — | i Y 


769 


romach 


2 Whselv, haying wheels. 3** In rolls. 
troithləachan, -aià, -aa s.m. Circles. 2 Wheel, 
ruithlsaga ** -ain, sn. iwiel 2 Listle roll 3 

Circle. 4 Little wheel. 5 Pulisy of flyers ia 

& spinning-wh3el, the grooved drum tnat re- 

exives the driving-cori., 
roithlein, -zin, -an, s.n. Little wheel. 2 Rim of 

a wheel, 3 Grooved wheel of a pulley, see 

ulag, p. 73. 4 Knee-pin. 5 Worm wool,gall. 
6 Trucks of a boat, see H3, p. 7». 7(M3)Ffly. 
8 Pulley of flyers in a spiunainz-wheel, tna 
grooved drum tht receives the deivinz-cord, 
roichieanaech, -a'cna, d. Hvviag small wheels, 
——9 — -—111n (M3? s.n. Larl, 
roithlear,.-ir, -àn,:.2n. W noe! wrizht, cartwright, 
2* see rolair. 
roithlearachd, s. f ind. Business of a wheel- 
wrighs or cartwright. 2**Rolliug. 
roithieas, see roileasz. 
roithleis, sea ruileasg. 
roithleiseach, see roiteasgach, 
froithleun, -ein, -an, s.m. se» roithlean. 
roithlich, -e, s.f. Noise of the shrouds of a ship 
in à storm. 

roithre,** s.m, Prater, babbler. 

achd, s.f. Pratiug, bavblicg, loquacity. 

rol, see rola. 

oc? v.a. Roli, make into rolls, as hay, roll toge- 
ther. 

ròl, (CR) sm, Long-continned noise —Skve. 

rola, -oil &-a, -an, s.m. Volum». 2 Roll, as of 
tobacco. 3** Swathe or roll of hay or grass. 

4** List. 
rolach, (MS) s.m. Sally. 
rolach, -aichs, a. In volumes or rolis. 
roladh, -aidh, s.m. Rolling. 2 Act of rollin, or 

making into rolls, 3 Roll, swathe., 4 Vol- 

ume. A’r—, pr.pt, of rol. A'r. na criithair, 
shaking the sieve—to separate the husks from 
the corn, 

rolag, -aig, -an,s.f., dim. of rola, Little roll. 2 

Anything small rolled together. 2 Swatne of 

grass, line of cut grass as left by th» scythe. 

4 Rowans, the long roll of wool as it leaves 

the cards for the spianin :z-wh»»l, 5 hi tle 

volume, R fheòir, a roll or swathe of hay 
or grass. 
rolagach, -ajiche, o Rolled. 2 In rolls, like 
carded wool or hay. 
rolagan,(DU) -ain, -annan, s.m. Half-sized cod. 
-truisg, s.m. Ifalf-sized cod. 
rolaich, CR) s.f. Long-continued noise—Skye. 

R. òrain, an interminable song; nach ann orra 

tha 'n r. ! what æa nois? they are makiny !— 

said of cattle when making à great lowing. 
rolaig,(DC) -ean, s.f. (variant of réilig) Oue sin- 


gle grave, 
rolair, -ean, s.m. Roller. 2 Ruler. 3**Cylind- 
3 Em- 








er. 4**One who rolls ground. 

rolaireachd,** s.f. Rolling. 2 Ruling. 
ployment of rolling ground. 

rolais,(U My) s. Slip-shod way of working. 

rolaiseach,(DMy) a. Slip-shol. Buain r., slip- 
shod reaping. 

ro!aist, -ean, s.m. Romance. 2 Deciamation. 3 
‘Exaggeration. 4ffRizmarole. 

ròlaisteach, -eiche, a Fabulous. 2 Given to 
exaggeration or declamvtion. 3 Restless (of 
ch:ildren)—Swuth’d. 

rolan, -ain,** s.m. Roll, volume. 2 Roller whica 
turns flyer of sp.naing-wheel, 

rolbtaen,( MS) s.m. Run. 

Oe, Sp Pubes. CS Shag, 

| rò nach, -aiche, a. Hairy, roxgh with hair. 2** 

| Bearded, shagzy. Am fear r., the hairy cater 

| pillar. 

| róinach,(AF) s.m. Hairy caterpillar. 


romachad . 


romachad, see rdinaichead. 

roinag, -aiz, -An, $.f. Athole brose—drink of oat- 
nizal honey and whisky 2 Drink of oatmeal 
aud whiskv,—Suth’d. 3 ** Female with a 
beard. 4** Pu lenda of a f:mule, 

róinagach,** -aicha, a. Having a beard, as a fe- 
male, 2 H dry, rough, shaggy. 

rónaiche, comp. of ro nach. 

, s.f. see romaichead. 

romaicnead, 8./.ind. Hairiuess roughness, shag- 
giness. 

rom vs, -ais, -an, s.m. Hairiness. 

rom wach, see ròmach. 

romh,* see roiuh. 

romhad, prep.vron. roimh-Fthu) Before thee or 
you. 2 Previous to you. o In your contem- 
pip or intention. 4 At you. 5 Of you. 6 

ith you. 7 [n opposition to you. 8 La pre- 

ference to you, Bithidh miser. fhathast, Z 
will be unsides with you yet—you have do ie 
me an ill tura, but L will pay you otf yes ; is 
beag eagal a th’ aige romüad, little does he 
dreal you ; 'dé à tha thu 'cur r.? what do 
you intend to do? tha mi'cur roimh wu siu à 
dheanamh, Tom determined to do that ; gabh 
T., !go about your business, begone ! abair r., 
or labhair r., say on; am bheil r. tuu f.iéin a 
mhilleadh ? do you mean to ruin yourseif 1 

romhad-sa, emphat. of romha l. 

romhaibh, prep.pron, (roiiah+sibh) Before you. 
2 Ln front of you. 3 In preference to you. 4 
In opposition to you. 5 before your presence. 
Toar., you ar? determined ; gabhaiba x, ! be- 
gon, go your way ! 

ro:inh uibn-3e, emphatic of romhaibh. 

rounainu,** va. d n. Roll. 2 Wallow. 

roinhuiuu, prep.pron. (roimh 47 siuu) Before us. 2 
In front of us. 3 In preference tous. 4 [n 
oppositiou to us. Sneas iad r., they stood be- 
fore us; gabhaidh er., he will oppose us ; cuir 
T., prompt us, dictate to us. 

romhainne, emphat. of roiniainn, 

rom^hair,** Gut, s.m. Roller or cylinder for lev- 
elliug groun i. 2 Cylindrical rule. 
who rolls ground. 

eachd,** s.f. Roling, levelling ground. 

romham, prep.pron. (roimb +ni) Before m». 2 
Prior to me. 3 In front of me. 4 In prefer- 
euce to me. 5 La oppositio: to me. Tna mi 
’cur r., I propose; théid mir., 4 will go my 
way ;’s iomadh linn a chuir mi r., many a 
generation have I put pas! me. 

romham-sa, enphat. of rombam. 

ròmhan, -ain, -an, s.m. Groau. 2ļ$Wheat, brank, 
see cruithneachd. 3(CR)Wild talk, raving 
rigmarole, prov. 

ròmhan wich, -e,s.f Groaniny, uteri 'g of hollow 
groans. 2 Irrational taik. 3 Wiid exclama- 
tiou, raving— Dain I. Giodha, 

ro-mhar,** s.f. Sprinz-vide. 2 Full sea, 

rouihas, -ais, -an, sm, see robhas. 

ro-mhend, sm, Kxess-ive greatness, 

ro-mhiuaun, -4, -an, s.m. Kxcessive or great de- 
sire. 

ro-mhannaeh, a, Excessively desirous. 

ro-inhoid, -e, s.f. Exee sive greatness. 

fromhra lh, -aidh, sm, Si Cut, 

romhiibh, see romh (Du 

romnacois,** a. Yellow an l grey. 

rompa, pre pron. (cto matiti) Befors them, 2 
In fcont of them. 38 Pri»r to them. 4 In pre- 
ference to them. 5 In opposition to tiem. 
Dh’ imich iad r., they went their way ; cui r., 
oppose them, prompt them, dictate to thei. 

rompa-san, emnhat. of rompa. 

rìn, -óin, s.m. Seal, sea-calf. 2*etters for the 
fore feeb of à horse—Inverary. 3 (AF) Milk- 











770 


3 One 


ronnag 


U A a M me. 
whipper orfrother. 4* Rom of hiir un «am», 
5 sse roli. Is toigh leian anra, aca cha 
toigh leinn naidhvacad an roin, we like th» s-q' 
but not the seal’s news—which is, tnat bal 
weather is at hand; ròn loniil, a circl of 
hair round the frothiny-stick ; ionad falaich 
nan r, 3lapaeh, the hiding-p.ace of the splash- 
ing s als, 
tron, æ. sStrong-bodied. i 
ròuach, set $.in. bese dag 2 Seal-h inting. 
ronen, -aAich?, a. Abounding in seals. 2 Snag: 
. h uiry, like a seal. § We, 
routerami -ain, ëm, Fellow resemb'ing a sea- 
eif, 
ròn wih, -aidh, s.m. Club, stake, 
ro-nidurra, a, Very natural. 
ron un, -aiu, -an, sun., dim. of ròn. Little seal or 
sea-c.vlf, 
roncais, see rongais, 
rung, -a & -oinge, pl. -an, s.f. Joining spar, 9 
Kang. 3 Any piece of wood by which others 
ars joined. 4 Rib or timber of a boat. 5 
Stati, blaldgaou. 6 Lean, catavery 1s-looking 
person, 7 idle or loun 'inz persoa. 8 Drunisa 
person. 9* Bandy. 10** Hoop, 
roag,-oing, s.m, The vital sparx, life. 
'eil r, aau, he is lifeless, 
rongach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to, spars, 2 
bludzeous or staves. 3 Ribbed, asa borb. A 
Lean, cadaverous. 5 Lazy, idle, droning, 
lounging 6 Tedious, liazerinz, dalaying. 7t} 
Languishing. 8**Having rungs or spars. 
rongicnadn, -aidh, s.m, State of becoming lean 
or magre. 2 Act of lingering or delaying. A’ 
r—, pr.pt. of rongaich. 
rongaich, v. n. Become lean, bony, meagre or 
cvlaverous, 2 Linger, delay, lounge. 3tf 
Lauguish. 
rong vichs, s.f.in!. Leanness, maagreness. 2 
Idleness, laziness. 3 Lounging. 
ronvair,-ean, 8s.m.  Loiterer, lin;erer. 
lent, idle or listless fellow. 
or cadaverous person. 
5**ifoop-driver. 6 Ugly, big-»oned animal or 
person, T Languishing person. 
roungaireachid, Stol Loitering, lingering, do 
lay. 2 Laziness, idleness, 3 Leanaess, msa- 
ereness. 4* Tedious,drawling,louazing min- 
ner, slugzishness, dronishness. 5**Hoop-driv- 
ing. 
rongais, -ean, 8m, see rongas. 
ronzas, -ais, pl. -aa & -ais, & m.  Joining-spar, 
ruag. 2 Timbers or ribs of a boat, see bata. 


2 Indo- 
J Lean, meagre 
4 Lounge, louager. 


3, p. 73. 3 Staff, bludgsoa. 4 Bat, ban ly. 
5 Baluster. 6**Hoop. 7**in derision, Dronish 
person. 

ron-inar.,(AF) s.m. Seal. : 


ron-mulbnach,( AF) xem. Sea-calf, 

rou-muilaca, see ron-.nulbhacn. 

troan, A, - 1, 3m, Coain. 2 Bond, tie. 

ronn, -vian, -an, s, m. Slayer, spittle. 2 Any 
drop of liyuil of a ropy coasistency. 3 
Raeum. Piobair nan roua,—a nickname for 
a slovenly p:per. 

ronnach, -aiche, a. Abounding in spittle or są- 
liva, 2 Ropy, viscous, glutinous, (of liquors ) 
3 slavering. 4 Causing salivatioa. 5 (WU) 
see reannach. dion e baigam r. dhebh, Ae 
mae it @ them: of slavering scoff, 

rounae),* -sich, sf. Slavering, dirty female, 

, ich, ëmm. see ranuadch, 

ro"nachadh, -aidh, s.m. Acc or stato of slayer- 
ing or emitting saliva, 2% State of bocuming 
ropy. 3 Act of rendering viscous or ropy, 4 
Salivabiou, slayer. A'r—, pr.pé. of rowuaieh. 

ronuath,** -aidh, s.m Club, stad. 

ronuag, -aig, -am, see reaunag. 


Cha'n 


B Adr. uk 





ronnagach 


Tonia,ach, -aiche, d@ see reaunavach. 

ronnaich, v.a. d n. Spit, emit saliva. 2 Become 
ropy or viscid. 3 Make ropy or viscid. 

Fonuair, -cau, sn. Siovering person, driveller, 
slanberer. ` 

we ————eachd, s.f. Discharging of spittle or sa- 
ilva. 7 iiabiv of slavering or spitting. 

ronuaireachd, s.f, When tne notes of the bag. 
pipes seem lo be payed With spittle in the 
cChanter—MacMratga. Alusauer, | 

rounad, sdin, -aa, s.24. soe ronn. 

rona-Ghraos, -4018, "An, ot. Suavering or slab- 
bering mouth. 

———uach, -aiche, a. 
spittle, 

runngau, sm. Slaver. Sé:didh Uisdean piob 
an rongain, Hugh wiil blow the siaverinyj pipe 
— Dona. Ban p. 1539. 

roni-2hi'ar,l -air, sm. Rheumatism. 2 Saliva- 
Ow 3 US Aarrh. 

tonusàchadu, seo rannsachadh. 

ro-u. rdiicirceas,** -eis, s.m. Excellency, Air son 
ru-uirdiieirceas COlais, for the excellency of 
Knowleuy2. 

fro olach, s, Crapitalatus vino. 

ròp, pr.pi. &' ropadh, v.a. Kasten with ropes. 2 
iintangle, ravel, 3* Sell by auction. 4fTitivet. 
(tf gives ropa for No. 3.] 

rop,* v.a, Gore. 2 ‘Lear open a bag with a 
knife, 3 Let out the viscera with a 0113 

Tòp, -a, -an, s.m. Rope. Z tow. 3 Coilection 
of seaweed floated aiong for convenience oí 
Janding. 3* Auction 4 (AF) Any creature 
that digs for its food, or that draws its food 
towards it, as & cuw, (also rap.) Cas ropa, 
æ hair-rope used gé d stirrup, [tf gives pl, 
ròpaichean. ** gives yen. sing, roip.] 

ropach, -aiche. @. Oi, or belonging to, ropes. 
2 Like a rope. 3 Furnisued wita ropes. 4 
Made of ropes. 5 Abounding ia heaps of sea- 
weed. 6 Siovenly, squalid, aaunetaodical, (of 
a person.) 7 Havelled, 8 Moppy 9 Eutangl- 
ed. 10 (DU) Siow. 11* see ronnach. 

ropach, a. Viscous, glutiaous. 

ropadair, -ean, s.m. Rope-maker, cordwainer. 
Z**see rópaiuuear. 

eachd, Sr, Rope-making, cordwaining. 

rópadh, -wida, $.m. Fastening, act of fastouiag 
with ropes. 2 Act of entaugliug or 3 Ravei- 
ling. A ’r—, pr.pt. of rop. 

Tòpag, -aig, -an, s./. Slut, slovenly woman, 

ropaiche, s.f.ind. Slovenliness. 2 Sluttishness. 

rópainn,** s. Sale by auction, 2 see reubainn, 

ear, sn. Auctioneer. 

ropair,** s.m. Rapier. 2 ‘treacherous person. 
3 Robber (robair.) 

rópair, -ean, s.m. Sloven. 2 l'abulist. 3 Auc- 
Lioneer. 4(DU) Unmethodical person. 

eachd, s.f.ind. Slovenliness. 2 ‘Tedious 
rehearsal, nonsensical tales. 

rópal, -ail, s.m. Rhapsody, vain idle talk, va- 
pouring, vauning. — 

ach,tt a. Khapsodical. 

ròpan, -ain, pl. -an & -ain, Se Ma, dim, of rop. 
Lit:1e cord, small rope. 

ropanach, -aiche, æ. Abounding in little cords. 

rop-parraich,(DMK) s. Rope made of twigs of 
birch twisted together— W. coast of Koss. 

ro-phris, s.f. Greav price, great value. 

—ealachd,** ».f. Excellence, great worth, 
preciousness, transcendent value, 

toram,* -aiin, s. m. Liberality with much os- 

tentation, dealing out extensively among a 
family, as provisioas. 2 Hospitality. 38 

. Ability to stand fatigue. 

roramagh,* -aiche, a. Liberal. 2 Lasting long, 
Su being capable of dividing well in a fam- 


Emitting slaver or 




















` IT ED Al ET A Di 4 LIT 


771 


rosdadh 


ily, #8 provisions, profusely hospitable. 

roraniachd,* af.ind, Liberality. 2 Extensive 
us-fulnoss in a fam'ly, 

rorcual,(AI') s. Wnale, 

rort,** -otrt, s.m. Kua, race. 

rortadh,** -aida, aan, Flowing over. 

rorual, see rorciual. 

rds, -òis, -an, ëm. Rose. 2 Red or rose-like 
cuwur, 3 Erysipeias [with the articie an. } 
(ttgives gen.siny. -a. | 

ros, -vis, -an, s.m. Seed. 2**Linsecd. 3 Prom- 
untory. 4 Istnmus, 5 Peninsula. T6 rary, 
Science, knowledge, 7**Aravle land. R.-lin, 
linseed. Cha’u’eilr. again, 4 have no know- 
ledge ; cha d fhuair mir. air, 4 did not get 
Knowledye of him ; an r. Maiieach, the penc 
sula or proinoniory of Muil. 

ros, pr.pi. a' rosadn, v. a. & n. Shake of seed 
Or grain from ibs stalk, as by wind iu au- 
tumn. 2 Be stripped of seed or grain, 3 De- 
feat, miscarry, disappoint. t4 Create, make, 
R. e orm, 4 have been disa»pointed init; r. 
an lar bracha seo,this floor of malt miscar ved, 
or went trong, 

ros, tf A. -achan, s. see ròst. 

tros, à. Pieasaut, pretty, delightful. 

rosach, -aiche, a. Rosy, red, as a rose, 
bouuding in roses. 

rosach, -aiche, @ Seedy, full of seed. 2 Shak- 
ing off seed or grain from the stalk. 3*Disap- 
pointing, dsieaiing, 

rosachd,** sfe Kuchantment. 2 
Witcacraft. 

rosad, -aid, -an, s.m. Mischief, mischance, mis- 
foruuno, 2 Low, mean, despicable person, d 
**Warnity. 4 Knchantment, evii spell, 5 
Charm. 6 Witchcratt, 7* Disappointment. 
StrWorthless persoa. "Dean r. a rug Oru? 
what the mischief came over you ? 

rosadach, -aiche, a@,Mischievous, hurtful. 2 Un- 
fortunate, unLoward. . 

rosadh, -aidh, s.m. Shaking, act of shaking 
seeds of corn from the stalk, as by wind. zZ 
State of being denuded of seed. 13 Creating, 
4* soo rosad. A’ r—, pr.pt. cf ros., 

rósag,** -aig, sJ. Rosv-tree. 

rosaich,** oa. Cover or bedeck with roses. 

rosaid, see roiseid. 

—each, see roiseideach. 

rosail, sce rósach. 

trosai, -ail, San. Judgment. 

rosal,(AC) s.m. Scho»i, college. 

rosan,** -ain, s.m. Shrub. 

rosan,** s.m. Sing-song. : 

ros-an-ceol, sm. Nightingale, see spideag. 

rosann,** -ainn, s.m. Roasting. 

rds-ai-t-soluis,§ s. m. Round-ieaved sundew— 
droszra rotundiflora, (ill. 605.) 

rosar.ach, -aich, -ean, s.m. Piace where roses 
grow, rose-garden. 

rosoach,** a. Bleared. 

rósbachd, s.f. Blearedness. 

rosbaich,** v», Blear. 

rosblian,** -ain, s.m. Apple of the eye. 

rós-bheul, -éil & -eoil, pd. -an, s.2n. kvosy mouth, 
rosy lips. ¢ 

—ach, a. Rosy-mouthed. 2 Rosy-lipped. 

rosblach,** æ. Vim-signced, saud-blind. 

rosblacnd,** sf, Dimness. 

rosu-shuilerch,** æ. Biear-eyed. 

rós-chrann, -ainn, s.m. Rose-bush or tree. 
gà'ailh, a garden rose-tree. MA ks 

ros-chrinnacn, -aiche, a, Abounding in rose- 
bu nes. 

roz-chravbh, $.f. Rhododendron, 

rosd, see roist. 

rosdadh, see ròstadh, 


2 A- 


2 Caarm. 











Re 


| 
d 


— p Te 
| 1 
— bej 

i 


rosdadh 











605. Ròs-an-t-soluis. 


rosdadh, see rostadh. i 

ro-sheol, s.m. Highest of a ship’s sails, top-gall- 
ants. 2 Full sails—Sar-Obair. — F 

rós-dhearg, -dheirze, o Blushing as the rose. 

rosg, roisg & ruisg, pl. -an & ruisg, s.m. Eye- 
lid. 2 Eye-lash. 3 The eye. 4 Eyesight. 5 
Dawn, understanding. 6 Incitem ot to bat- 
tle, war-ode. 7 Prose, prose writing. Is lom 
an t-sùil gun an r., naked is the eye that wants 
an eye ash. 

rosgach, -aiche, a. Having large or full eyes. 2 
Having han:lsome eyes. 3 Having large or 
long eye-lishes. 4 Angry. 5**Wise,knowing. 
6 Of, or belonging to, eyes or eye-lids,  7** 
Dawning. 8**Clear-sighted. 

rosgadh,** -aidh, s m. Eyesight. 2 Eye-lid. 3 
Eye-lash. 4 Eye. 5 Looking. 6 Observation. 
7 Dawn, 8 Dilution. 

rosgail,-e, @ Clear-sighted. 

rosgal,** -ail, s.m. Joy, pleasure. Dh’ éirich r. 
"nad chridhe, joy rose in thy heart. 

frosz-catha, s.m. Speech to an army, incite- 
ment to battle. 

frosg-dhalladh, s.m, Error, mistake. 2 Blind- 
ness. 

rosg-fhradharc,** aire, s.m. Sharp sight, clear 

' sight. 2 Vision. 

rosg-fhradharcach, -aiche, a.  Sharp-sighted, 
clear-sighted. 

ros-gharaidh,§ s.m. Cultivated rose, 

rosglach,** -aiche, a. Joyful, glad, merry, 

,** -aiche, a. Sharp-sighted, quick- 
sighted, elear-sighted, 

ro-shedl.s.m.Highest sails of a ship,top-gallants. 
2 Full-sail—sa@r-Obair. 

rosg-shüileach,* a. Sharp-sighted. 2 Having 
long eye-lashes, 

rosg-troghad, s. Soft rolling eyes, 2 Full-orb- 
ed eyes—Sar-Obair. 

ros-lachan, s. Duckweed, see mac-gun-athair. 

rosladh,** -aidh, s.in. Assaiion. | 

ros-lin. s.m. Flax seed. 

ros-Mairi,} sm. Common rosemary, old man — 
rosmarinus opicina.is, 

ros-Mairi-fiadhaich,$ s.m. Marsh andromeda 
(Zit. wild rosemary) — andromeda polifolia 
(The plant rosemary belongs to a diferent 
order—/abiate.| Badge of Clan Rose. 

ros-mall,$ s.m. Hollyhock—alth@a ros«a. 

rós-Muire, see ros- Mairi. 

ros-nan-con $ s.m. Dog-rose-- rosa canina. 

ròs dr,ts.m. Wood loose-strife or yellow pimper- 





[ 


| | ) 

IF An = 
JET ARCHIVE 
Jm i dh a an 


772 





605. Ró*- Mà ri-fadhaich. 607. Ròs-nan-con. 
nel (rò:+òr) see seamrag-Muire. 
rosp,* s.f. Blear «ye. 
rosp-shuileach, -eiche, a. see réasg-shtileach. 
ros-sior-gheal,** s.m. Rosemary. 
ròst, A. -achan, s.m. Roast, piece of roast meat. 
ròst, v.a. see ròist. 
ròsta. soe ròiste, 
ro slach,** @ Roasting. toasting, 
rostadh,** -vidh, s.m. Mishap. l 
ròstadh, -aidh, s.m. Roasting, as of meat. 2 
Roast. Feòil air a r., fesh roasted. A’ r—, 
or. pt, of ròisb, 
rot.(CR) s. m. Anything thick, R. maide, a 
thick stick ; r. caillich, @ corpulent woman— 
W. of Ross-shire, 
rot, -oit, -an. s.m. Belch, belching. 2 Bursting, 
as of waves. prov. 3 (DMy) Uriving, chas- 
ing, as of cattle in the corn or preserved pas- 
ture, R. air a’ chladach, waves breaking on 
the shore, 
rot,/DU)s.m. Lumpish person. 
rotacal, -ail, s.m. see racadal. 
rotach,-aich,s. f. Rush at startiag.running, bound. 
2 The flux. 3 Circle of mud gathered by a 
female’s dress off a muddy road, 4 Hand- 
rattle, used to frighten cattle from corn or 
grass, 5 Storm —Suth’d. 
rotach,(DU) a. Medium-sized, stumpy, lump- 
ish. 
rotadh, -aidh, s.m. see reddiitach. 
rotadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Cutting out, divi- 
ding. prov. 
ro'ag,(CR) s.f. Stone not greater than that two 
could be lifted by a man—W. of Ross. Ba» 
cloiche, a small ston”. 
rotaiche, 8.f.ind. Bursting of waves. 
rótaidh, see reòdhta. 
rótair, -ean, s.m. Clumsy, awkward fellow, 2* 
Slaver. 3* Sloven. 4ttLazy fellow. 
eachd, at Clumsiness, awkwardness. 9 
Coarseuess. ; . 
rotal, ail, s.m. The wake of a ship under sail. 
trotan, -ain, s.m. Redness. i 4 
rotanach,(DU) s.m. Anything of middling size. 
R, balaich, a well-grown boy. 
roth, -a, -an, s.m. Wheel. 2**Rim of a wheel. 
3 Halo. Tha r. mu'n ghealaich, there is a halo 
round the moon; r. a’ mhuilinn, the mill-wheel; 
r.-cartach, acart-wheel ; r. mòr, the driving- 
wheel of spinning-wheel ; eadar na rothan, be- 
tween the wheels. 
PARTS OF A WHEEL :— 
1 Aiseal, azle, : 
2 Bachall, hoop, tyre(t 
Crudha. Cearcall. 
3 Bannan-ciche, nave-bands, 
4 Bas, spoke, Clàr. t{Spog. Tarsnan-rotha, 
( nl.) spokes. 
5 Cairt-cheap, nave. Ceap-chartach. Crüb. 
iiCrubh. (Ms) Imleag-rotbha. Cìoch aa 





ron ring on wheel.) 


al trom 


| » 1 i Es Pa ës ef Ar 
L i m mb m F | 
il V L5 J 


Oriail 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


LINOIS A 


we wm d Eeg] 


— e 


= 


roth 773 


cuidhle. 

6 Crann-ai«si!, azle-tre», 

7 Cuairsg-an, felloe. Foileas, Roth, the fel- 
lors together. Reim. (WC)Cuairtlean. 

8 Gramaiche, trijjer—a catea to holl the 
wheel when driving on steep ground. 

9 Ream, rim. Roithfean. Ruitalean. 

10 Tarunn-aisil, dynch-pin — pia that keeps 

the wheel on axle. "l'arruug-cuibhle. 

11 Slios, fange. 
roth, v.c. Wheel, coil. 
rotha, -n, s.n. Screw. 
rotha^h, -aiche, a. Furnisned with wheels, 2 

**it mined, asa wheel, 3**Rotular. 
rothachadh, -aidh, s.m. Swathing, 

»wathinz, wrapp'ug up or shroudinz 

pr.p!. of rotha ch. | 


a'so rothaig. 
2 Vice, 3 see rola. 


2 Act of 
A'r—, 


Frothach-trà»ha, see praiseach-tràgha. 


rothadair, -can, sin. Wheelwr gnb. 

-—_——-cachi,tt s.f. Business of a wheelwr'ght. 

rothadh, -aidh, s m. Wneeliug. 2 Coiliug. A’ 
r—, p? .pt. of roth. 

rothadh, Arran for reóthadh. Uisgeanan ródh- 
adh, icicles. 

rothaich, pr pt. a’ vothachadh, v. a. Twine, roll, 
swathe, wrap up, shroud, 

eadb, -eidh, see rothachadh. 

te, past pt. of rothaich. Swathed, wrap- 
ped up, shrouded, 

rotha'dh >, -an, s.m. Cyclist. 

———— —achil, s.f. ind. Cycling. 

roth iig, v.a. see rothaich. 

eadh, -eidh, s.in. & pr.pt. of rothaiz,see 

rothach dh 

| te. past pt. of rothaig. see rothaichte. 

rothair, -ean, s.m. Cylinder. 2 Roller. 

rothaireachd. s.f.ind. Wheeling, 2 Spinning. 

rothau, -ain, pl. -an, [& -ain ] s.7n., dun, of roth. 
Little wheel. 2 Little rim. 

ach, -àiche, a. Having little wheels. 

rothar, s. Bazpip2-chanter — Roo Donn. 

rothar, -air, -an, s.m. Cycle. 

rothar-da-chuidhleach, s.m. Bicycle. 

rothar-tri-rothan, s.m. Tricycle. 

rothas,(WC) -ais, s. m. Knowledge, acquaint- 
ance, Cha'n'eil r. agam air, 4 am not ac- 
quainted with him, 

rothas, see ros, i 

roth-fiaclach, s.m. Cog-wheel, 

rothlag, see rólaz. 

rothlair, -ean, s.m. see rothair. 

rothlas, -ais, s.m. Evolution. 

ro-thoil, -e, s.£. Great desire. 9 Great willing- 
ness, Bhar. agam TI was greatly desirous, 

each, a. Very desirous. 

ru, s.m. Bue, 2§ Plants resembling rue, 

trù, see rùn. 

truadh, -aidhe, a. Reddish, of a reddish colour, 
ruddy. 2 Red in general, 3 Red-haired, 4 Dri- 
ed,scorehed. 5**Brown. An tuil r., or an dile 
r., the general deluge; sgillinn r., @ penny ; 
Seuinas r., red-haired James. 

vuadh,* -aidh, s.m. Reddish colour, redness. 

ruadh, -aidh, sp Deer, hind, roe. 2 Red-d»er. 
3**Strength, virtue. 4(M3) St. Anthony’s fire, 
erysipelas. 

ruadh, -a, a. Strong, valiant. 

1uadhachadh, -aidh, s.m.  Reddening, act of 
making red. 2 State of becoming red. A’ r—, 
pr.pt. of ruadhaich. 

ruadhadh, -aidh, s.m. Making red or brown. 2 
Becoming red, brown or tanned. 3 Rusting. 
4 Blushing. Mar ghàd air r., like a rusted bar. 

BS -aig, an, s.f. dim. of ruadh. Young 

. deer, 
3 (AF) Crab. 4**Goat. Anr. a’ spioladh air 
t’ uaigh, the young roe browsing on thy grave. 














Digitized by 
NTERNET ARCHIVE 


hind or roe. 2 Robin, see brù-dhearg., 


ruaidhe 


ruadhagail,f -e, sf. Thrift. 

roadhiich, pr.pt. a’ ruadhachadh, v.a. & n. Red- 
den, miky red. 2 Redden, become red. 3 
Kkmbrown, b:come brown. 4(DMy) Expose or 
poiut out a p’rson, R.e mach ini, he exposed 
m’, or pointed me out. 

-e, (MIs) s. Carrotiness. 

-tə, past pt. of ruadhaich. Reddened, 
made red, 2 Becom: red. 

rua diaig.** yensing. of ruadhag, 

ruxdhain,** a. Fusty. 

. achd,** s.f. Fustiness, 

ruidnhair, see ruwaha r. 

rua/lhan, ain, san. Mineral seurf that collects 
on the suríac» of wells and other waers. 2 
Sediments mixing with agitated waters. 3 
Aay kind of m:at over.lonein eooking, 4 Rud- 
dle, auy substance that dyes brown, 5 Red- 
dishness, brow iness, reddish or brown tings. 
Tha 'a t-ia g’nar., tha 'n t-araa 'na r., tha na 
h-uig eau 'uan r., the fish, brea l, egys are over- 
covked ; bürn glan gun r., clear water without 
t brown tinge. 

rualhan (AF) s.m. Robin. 

-udlle,(AW) s.m, Sparrow-hawk. 

ruaiihar, see ruamhair., 

rua‘tharach, see rusmharach & ruatharach. 

ruadhara lh,** -aidh, see ruamhar & ruathar. 

ruadh-bharr, s.m. Rhubarb. 

ruadb-bhiast, -an, s.m. Moor-fow], prov. 

rne ipe, -bhuie, pl. -an & -bhuic, s.m. Roa- 

uck. 

ruadh-bhoinne, see ruadh-bhuinne, 

ruadh-bhórd, s.m. The plank next to the garb 
in a boat. 

ruadh-bhuidhe, a. Of a reddish-yellow colour, 
auburn. 

ruadh-bhuinne, s. f. Mountain torrent. 2 Tor- 
rent embrowned by being impregnated with 
peat. 3**Flood-water. 

rudh-chailc, -e, s.f. Ochre, ruddle. 

each, a. Ochreous, 2 Asphaltic. 

ruaidh-ehreadh, -a, s.f. Red clay, ruddle. 

ruadh-chreadhach, tt o Pertaining to red clay. 

ruadii-chu, Al’) s.m. Wolf. 

ruadh-laith, s.f. Choler. 

—————- —— each,** a. Choleric. 

ruadh-thuil, -e, -ean, SE Great flood, hill tor- 
rent red lened by the peatin mossy grounds 
through which it passes. 2 The deluge. 

ruag, pr.pt. a’ ruagidh, V. a. Pursue, course, 
chase. 2 Put to flight. 3 Persecute, harass. 

ruagach, -aiche, @ Pursuing, that pursues or 
puts to flignt. 2 Persecuting, harassing. 3 
Scaring, dispersing, banishing, like a pursuit 
or flight. 

ruagadh, -aidh, s.m. Pursuing. 2 Act of pursu- 
ing or puttiug to flight, pursuit, flight, dis- 
persion, 3 Persecuiing, harassing. A’ t—, 
pr.pt. of ruag. 

ruagair,-ean, s.m. Pursuer, chaser, hunter. 2 
Auy dislodgiug instrument, 3 Wedge. 4 
Latch of a door. 5 Small bullet, swan-shot, 
slug. 6**f'ugitive, outlaw, wan lerer. 7 Per- 
secutor, 8**Bar, bolt. 9 Any instrument used 
for scaring birds or other creatures.  10** 
Hunter. 

——-eachd, s.f. ind. Pursuing, hunting,chasing. 
2 Persecution. 

ruagalaiche,** s.m. Fugitive. 

ruaghag, see ruadhag. 

ruaghan, see ruadhan. 

ruaichill,** v.a. Buy, purchase. 

— — ——te, past pt. of rutichill. ; 

ruaidh, gen. & voc. sing. of ruadh. 

ruaidh, Së v.a. Redden, embrown. 

ruaidhe, $. f, ind. Redness, ruddiness. 2 Defect 

















2 Gipsy. 


ruaidhe 


in fir timber. 3 Erysipalas (with the art. an. } 
4 Nettle-rash--Arran. 5 (AF)Rash iu cattle. 
5*ilerpe3, siingles. 

ruaidhe, com, of radh. 

ruaidhie,** s.m. Poor worn-down creature. 

ruaidhmre,** 5, Cochineal, 

iruaidhneach, Ach, s f. Hair. 

ruaidh-rinn,** s.pl. Red poiats or eges. 

ruaig, (CR) s.f. Shower of rain—Percishire 

ruaig, =e, ean, SE Pursuit, hunt, chase. 2 
Flight, defeat, precipitats retreat. 3 Perse- 
cution. 4 Scaring away, dispersion, banish- 
ment, Thozisdanr., they took up the pur- 
suit; chair sinn an r. orra, we put them to 
flight; gabi iad at vuaiz, they took to flight 5r. 
an tuirc, the boar-hunt ; ruaig sionnaich,a fox- 
chase, 

ruaig, see rug. 

ruaizidh, ful.aj.a. of ruaig. 

ruaille, -an. s.f. Poor, wretched female. 

ru ailpeach,$ s.m. Alpine rie. 

ruaim, -e, -ean, s.f. Fiush of anger on the face. 
9ttHed scum. 3 Fishing-iiae, 4 Line. 

fruaim, -eau, s.f. Alder-tree. 

ruaimeanach,** -ich, s.m., Marsh. 

ruaimhs2anta,* œ. Jolly, hearty though very 
old.—ZJslay. 

—-— — —— —— —chd,* s.f.ind. Heartiness of an 
oid person, vigour. 

ruaimill,* oa, Rumble, agitate, as water. ` 

ruaimle, -an, s, f. Red muddy water, dirty 
pool, standing water impreguated with clay. 
2 see ruaim. - 

ruaimleach, -eiche, a. Muddy, as water, turbid, 
ayvitating. Conadn r., dark rage—Moladh an 
Leòmhainn. Gu r., muddily. 

——,tt s.m. Red, muddy water or mire. 

ruaiml^achadh, -aidh, ssm. Agitating. 2 Act of 
agilating water. 3* Muddiness of water. A’ 
r—, pr.pt. of ruaimlich. 

ruaimleachd,** s.f. Muddiness. 

tuaimnleadh,* s.m. see ruaimleachadh. 2 Water: 
hily— Colonsay. 

ruaimleachd, s.f.ind. Mudiiness, turbidness. ` 

ruainlich, pr.pt. a’ ruaimieacnadh, 90.4, Agi- 
tate as fluid. 2+ttMake muddy. 

——_——— 16, past pt. of ruaimlicn. 

ruaimneach, -eiche, «. Strong, active, robust. 

ruaimneachd, s.f.ind.strengua, activity, rooust- 
ness. 

ruain.** ep, Kind of weed which gives a red- 
dish eolour. 

ruaineach, -eiche, 
Strong. 

rua'neacnd,** s.f. Fierceness. 

ruainidh,** e, a. Reddish. 2 Strong, able, 3 
Charitable. 

,** s.m. Strong, boisterous fellow. Maol- 
r., see maol-ruainidh. 

ruainn, ** Sr, Water in which dye stuff is boil- 
ed, 

ruainne, $.f. see ròin. 

ruais," s.f. Rhapsody. 2 Rhapsodist. 

-—,** .ean. s, n. Clown, sluggish, stupid fel- 
low. 2 Noisy fellow. 

ruaisealachd,"* er, Clownishness. 2 Disorderli- 





a. Fierce, 2 Froward. 3 


up 





ness. 
ruaiseil,* -e, o Rhapsodical. 2 **Clownish, 
disorderly. 


qriuaivone, a. Reddish green, grey. 

yuam,* -aim, sm. Kind of plant used in dyeing 
red. 

fruamh,* -aimh, -an, s.f. Spade. 
straw, see ruin. 

ruamhair, pr.pé. a’ ruamhar & a' ruamhradh,v.a. 
Delve, dig with a spale. 92 see ruathair, 

cuamhar, -air, sm. Delving. 2 Act of delving or 


Z3Yellow bed- 


774 


ruhaizge2dh 


d'r ing with a spuda 3 Stirring up. 
ruashar. A’ r—, prot. of ruumhair. 
tna uharaeh, ** a. Dizgiug, delving. 2 Stirring. 

rauim/aorviche,tf s.m. Delver. | 

rua uuradn,-alla, sse raamhar. 

cuam (raida, fut.aff.a. of rua uhair. 
ruimnach,** a. Indignant, angry. 
rua nuada,** -ailh,s.;n. Reproof. 


4 sob 


2 Reprenen- 


siun. [ 
ruanach, æ. Firm, steadfast, stony. 2 Fierca, 
—»oar-O»air. 


rusaacehd, s.f. Fiction, novel, romance, 
anws: 

ruanaicne,** s,m Romancer. 2 Haranguer. 

ruaiaidh,** a. Red, reddish. 2 Strong, able. 3 
Charivable. 

riinwiin,** sf. Anger. 2 Darkness, 3**Strong 
boisterous fellow. 


2 Har- 





608. Ruanardh. 609. Ru-bhatlaidh. 
ruanaidh,§ s. Sheep's sorrel—ruinee acetosella, 
The seed-bearing part is called samh., 
ruanail,** a. Lying, false, untrue, fictitious, 
rüapais,* -ean. s.f. Rigmarole. 
ruar, (DMu) Used in the phrase, Mo ruar, my 
miserable one — SutA'd. 
ruar, -air, see ruamhar & ruathar. 


Pure -ain, s.m. Floundering. 2 Grorel. 

er. 

ruarach, see ruatharach. 

* Sn. Liar, romancer., 

ruaradh, -ardh, s.m. see ruatharadh. 

ruavshual,(AF) s.m. Lawprey. 

ruarhbag, see rua llus, 

ruathair, Dt, Rummig3. 2 Make sudden on- 
seb, fixit. 3 see ru«inunair. 4 (DMy)Kpidem- 
ic ‘Near. 'san teas ach —s4id when one ai- 
ter a10t* er woull fall ill and the canse was 
nol definitely «.nowa. 

ruathar, -vir, an, s.m. Violent onset, fi+rce 
abtaet.ru:h. 2 Fores, violones. 3 Force pro- 
duced by motion. 4 Kxpedistion. 5 Skir- 
mish: 6 Misforsans, sudden nnexperted cal- 
am.óv. 7 lLiurried exertion. 8 Luvasion, 9 
Pivag> 10 incursion. 1b Hea.. 

ruatharvch, aieue, @ Making a sudden or vio- 
lent onset ov attack, 2 Having much force or 
velocity. 3 Unfortunate, bring ng a sudden or 
vaexpected ca ami'y, 4 Strugg'ing. 5 Skir- 
misniag. 6 Rushing. 7 see ruaamhsrach. 

ruatnarachsth,** -Aidh, s.m. Digg'ng, delving, 
stirring up. 2 Rushing, making an onset. 

ruathnavaiche,** «om.  Abtac«er, 

ruathra th, -aidh, -vidhean, s.m. see ruamhar, 
ruachar & ruambhradi. 


— 





| rub, pr.pt. a’ rubaih, v.a. Rnb. 


ruba, s. Small quantity of wool—S*'ys. 

rubaen,** a. Rubobiag. 2 Prone to rub. 

rubadh, -a'dh, s.m Rubbing. 2 Act of rube 
bing, friction. A’ r—, pr.pt. of rub. 

rubaig, ses rub. 

eadh, see rubadh. 








d 
aM 


rubà'gte 775 rüdhrach 


ru zigte, seo PUE, 

Foul, s. f. Tumnlte. 2 Rumbling. 3 (AH) 
Rumbdling nie in the intestines. 

Fu ait, -ean, a.m, RKubb»r, one who rubs. 2 Any 
jas. rament with which on? rubs or scrapes. 

fru»an, -ain, -an, s.m. Barrel,anker. 2 Huber, 

rüban, -ain, -an, s.m. Ruby, 2(DMy) Ribbon. 
ru beax.$ s. m. Lesser mallow rue—thalictruim 
minus. 

ru bhaliailh,? 8. m. Rue fern—asplenium ruta 
MUA à, 

rubh vdh, a dh, s.m. see rughadh. 

rubhag,** -aig, sf. Thongof hemp or flax. 2 
Shoemaker's wax-end. 3**Puliing, snatching 
Violently. 

rubta, vast pt. of rub. Rubbed. 

ruc, -uic, -an & -anuan, 8. m. Rick of hay or 
corn. 2 Heaped measure, 3 (AF) Sow, pig. 
(also ruc.) 

ruc,* v.a. Make ricks. 2 Build peats into small 
stacka, | 

rucach,** a. Abounding in ricks.. 2 Like a 
rick. 

rucail, s.f. see rocail & rüchail. 2(WC)Noise 
in the bowels. 

rucan, -ain, -an, s.m., dim of ruc. Small round 
hill. 2 Small rick of corn or hay, [also rican.) 

rücan, see rüchan & ruc. 

rücanach, see racharnach. 

ricaAnaen,** o Aboundiug in stacks of corn. 

rucas, -ais, s.n. F'onilness, keen desire, foolish 
tenderness. 2 Arrogance, prile, forward- 
ness, sauciness, 3 Fawaing, fondling. 4* 
Jostlinx kind of fondn»ss. 5** Frisk. Le r. bhi 
'g al fhodirneadh, with avrojance intruding 
thysetf. : 

rucasach, -aiche, a. Fond, foolishly fond of any- 
one, 2 Arrogant. 3 Fawniag, fondling. 4 
Frisking. 5 Forward, pert, saney, 

d, s.f ind. see rucas. 2tfHabit of fond- 
ling. 3 awning. 4 Fon (ness, foolish fond- 
ness, keen desire. 5 Arrogance. 6ff Foolish 
mirth. 

rüchail,** s.f. Hoarse voice, hoarseness. 2 Any 
hollow, hoarse sount, 3 Croaking. 4 Rum 
bling. 5 Grunting. 6 Tearing, rending. 

rüchail,/CR) v.a. Rummige—Arran 

ruchall,** -aill, s.m. Fetter.  - 

rùchan, -ain. -an, s.m. ‘The throat, 2**Wind- 
pipe. 3 Wheezing orra:tliug in the throat. 
4 Hoarse noise. . 

ach, -aiche, a. Wheezing. 

rùchd, -a, an. s.m. Grunt. 2 Belch. 3 Retch- 
ing. 4 Rumbling noise, 5** Mask. 6**30w, 
pig. 7**Hutrails. 8 Lain»n:ation. 9 see ruc. 

ruchd, see ruc, 

rùchd, pr.pt. a’ rùchdail, v.a. Grunt as a sow. 

Retch groaniuxly. 3 Belch. 4 Make a 
hoarse. noise, shout, croak. 6 Make a rumbl- 
ing noise, roar. 

fruchd, see riochd. 

ruchd,** a. Vehement. 

ruchdach, see rucach. 

ruüchdach, -aiche, a. Grunting. 2 Belching. 3 
Retching. 4 Croakiug hoarsely. 5 Makinga 
rumbling noise. 

rüchdaih, -aidh, s.m. & pr. pt. of rùchd, see 
rùchdail. ` 

ruvhdail, -e, s.f. Grunting, as of a sow. 2 Belch- 
ing. 3 Retehing. 4 Rumbling noise. 5 
Hoarse noise, 6 Hoarseness of the voice. 7 
Croaking. 8 (DMy) Choking with cough, 
strangling, A’r—, pr. nt. of rùchd. 

rüchdan,**-ain, s.m, Throat, 2 Hoarse noise 
in the throat. 

Fuchdan, see rucan, 

zud, -uid, -au, s.m. Thing, matter, affair, busi- 























ness, c. rcumstauce, 2 Small quantity of any- 
thing, 3 Term of contempt. 4 Membrim 
virile. Ciod au r. a tha thu’g ràdh? what 
are yousayiny ? r. mhosaich ! you nasty thing! 
agus r. eile dheth, and ano'her thing; an r, 
nach buin duit na buin da, do mot medie 
with wha’ do»8 uot concern you; rud air chor- 
eiginn, somthing or other, 

rùda, see rata. 2 Aged tup or three-shear ram 
in Lewis, where a young ram is reithe. 

rudach, -aiche, @ Concerned in many things, 
busy. 2 O.ficious, meddling. 3 irifling. 4 
(GR) Kindly attentive. a Affectionrste— 
Perthshire, 6f llospitable. 7** Parcicular 
about small matters. 

rudadh, (AC) a. Obstinate. 

rùdail (DMK) s.f. Rumbling noise in the bow- 
els—Caithness, 

rudainnte,* see rndanach. 2a. Particular, . 
som»what oll, 3 Done. 

rudan, -alo,-an, s.m., dim. of rud. Little thing, 
trifl 3, 

rùdan, -ain, pl. -an [& -ain**,] s.m Knuckle. 2 
Pasteru—che part uf a horse’s foot. between 
aukle and hoof. 3 Ten lon. 

rudan, n. pl, of rud, Things. 

ruiai,** -ain, s.m, Little thing. 2 Pudenda 
juvenis, 

ich, -aiche, d. Odd, queer, comical. 2 
lt 3 Abounding in trides. 4 Particu- 
ar. 

rù lanach, -aiche, a. Knuckled. 2 Having 
larze or strong knuckles. 3 Of, or belonging 
to, a knuckle, 4 sinewy, strong, robust. 

rù lanacha tn,(AH) s.m. Visticuffs. 

rudanacid, s find. Pragmwicaluess. 

ete v.d. Dress. 2(Atl) Engage in fisti- 
CU Ia, 

rüdas,(AH) s.m. ** Push,” enterprise. 

ach,(AH) a. Uuduly enterprising—Argylé. 

rüdh, rüidh, s.m. see ru. 

rudh, see rü»n. 

rudha, $.m. Point of land, promontory. 2ffsee 
rudhada. Feuch am fuar thu 'n rudna, 82» »f 
you can weather the point ; cuirida seo rudh» 
seachad, this will serve for our turn ; mar a’ 
chuan air ruadh r., like the sea on a brown 
promontory. 

rudh-Ailpeach,§ s.m, Alpine meadow rue—tha- 
b ctruin a pinum. 

rudhach, -aiche, æ. Abounding in points of land 
or promontories. 2 Blushing. 3 Causing 
blushes. 4 Blooming, rosy, ruddy-cheeked. 

rudhalh, -aidh, s.n. Blush, erythema», Ze 
H inging. Ni mò bha r. air an gruaidh, 
neither was there a blush on their coun endice. 

rùdhag, -aig, -an, s.f. Crab. 

ach, -aichs, a. Abounding in crabs, 

rudhag.il,* sf. Por-ft, shift. Thaegu mash r., 
he ws pretty thrifty; g ar. féin, to his own 
thrift. 

rua lhaglach, a. Thrifty. k 

rulhain,** a. Musty. Bruchd rudhaia, the 
acid return from the stomich. ) 

ru lian, -aia, -an, s$. m., dim. of rudha. Little 
hea lland or prowontory. 

rüdhaa, -ain, -an, s.m. see rùghan. 

s; ach, see rüghauach. 

rudhar, see ruamnar. 

rüdh-beag,$ s.m. see rü-beag. 

rüdh-bhallaidh,$ s. m. see rü-bhallaidh. 

rüdh-gharailh, see rü-gharai Ih. 














rüdhlach, Kintyresfor ru lara-h. 


rülhrach,** a. Searching, groping. 2 Scrim- 
biing. 3 Long, straigüt. 

rùdhrach, -aich, s. m. see rülhrachadh. 2 
**fenans, sojourner, 3 Darkeuiug, darkness, 


rùdhrach 
4**Gloomy conntenance. 


ridbrachailh, -aidh, s, m. Searching. 2 Act of 
of coníus n2 
A’ r—, pr. pt. of rùda- | 


searching or gropiug. 3 Act 

things in searching. 

raich. 
rudhrachas,** -ais, s.m. Length. 


v.a. Search for, grope. 
searching. 

se, past pt. of rùdhraich. Searched. 
Confused or disordered by searching. 





rug, -a & -uig, pl. -annau, s.m. Wrinkle. 2 Plait. 


3 Old man. 4 One having a wrinkled face. 
rug, (given by 
but it is à different worl.) Bare. 
position air, 
** Caught, overtook, seized. R. 


1,19; 
ruga,* s.f. Rough cloth or female. 
rucaco, -aicha, ~. Wrinkled. 
adn r., a wrinkled face. 
-——., -aich, s.m. Old man, 


rugadh, (given by grammars as past pass. v. beir, 
2 (with 
the prep. air) Was caught or unlertaken. R. 
air, he was caught ; o 'n r. mi, sence I was 


but itis a diferent word.) Was born. 


bora, 
ruvad, -aidh, s. m. Greedy grasping of any- 
thing. 2**Rush tovards any cominon pro- 
ov,  8**0heap purchase, good bargain. 


ruvacdh, 
wrinxled faca. 


rugaid, -3,-can, s.f. Long neck. 2Old cow. 3 


Worthless female. 

aach, eenz, a. Having a long neck. 

rugair, -can, 8. m. Drunkard, tippler. 2 
raagair, 








taverns. prov. 


ru:ania, -ainte, a. Strong, stous, able, museu- 


lar. £**loagn. 5***fala of good metal, 





Toughness, 
ruz, see ru. 
rùgh, s.m. Small stack of peats—Suth'd. 
rugna, seerudha, rudhadh, rudh & ruadhadh. 
ru;lach, -aiene, a. seo rulhach. 
rughadh, seo rua (bach & rudhadh, 
ruzhaich, see ruadhaich, 
ràürhan, -ain,-An,  $. it. 
corn or peats, 


ruziinach, -3ic ;e, 4. Aboun ing in sma'l stacks 


of hay, coru or poet. 
rü-znàrai'h,$ s. m. Common rua, 
ruzhveachn, v. see ru iiacu. 
ruibe, see rib». 
ach, sve riobach. 
ruibeag, see ri» +g. 
Tuibealiaich, sm. Lío»inger. 
ruibean, see rioban., 
ach, see riobanac^. 
—ich, see rioba nich, 
¢ruibh, -e, S.f. Suiphur, 
ruibh, see ruith & ribh. 
truibhne, -achan &-aa, & f. Lance, spoar. 
^ Lancet. 














sp-ar. 


3 scrongly gu rded. 


` 


2 Obscurity. 
rùdhraich, pr.p!. a’ rüdurach & a’ ra thrachadh, 
2 Confuse things in 


ruiceach, @. 


rammars a3 past.inl. of v. beir, 
2 (with prz- 
either simple or compoun led) 
iad clann, 
they bare children ; r. i uvn, sre yean?d » r. i 
meann, she kidded ; r. i cuileanan, she whelped 
or cubhed ; r. i searrach, she foaled; r. i ugh, 
she laid an egy; r. i uirc2anan, she farrowed; 
r. sinn oirre, we overtook her ; r.e air bhuain, 
he laid holi of it out of my hands ; r. a bhan- 
righ air an ugh, the quaen seized the egg—W.H. 





2 Plaited. Agh- 





-aidh, sm. Old porsou, person with a 


see 








eachd, s. f. ind, Tippling, frequenting of 


chd, s.f.iad. Stouuness. 2 Siraeugth. 3 


—-— 


Small stack of hay, 


ruit', 
rui de, see rilir. 
conntrv. | eur, 9. rrer 
man's treacle herb of grace—ruta grav oleas. 


ach, -aichne, @. Armed with a lanceor 
2 Of, or belongiag to, a lance or spear. 


mig 


truibhneach, ** -ich, s.m. Snear-man, lancer. 
ruic,** sf. Fieecs. 


; 2 (DU) Fussy fawning, 
making much of one in a demonstrative tash. 
ion, the fuss or demonstration arising out of 
sincere pleasure. 'sS ana ort tha 'nr. ! what 
a fuss you are making ! 


ruice,** s, f. Kepruach, rebuke. 2 Defeat. 3 Red 


shade. 4 Blash occasioned by shame, Nach 
ann air tha 'n r. ? ishenotign-rantly proud; 
Reproaching. 2 Rebuxing, re 


roving. 3**txatong, lifting 


n Lë 
ruic2an, -ein, -an, s.n. Pastule, rad pimple,acne, 


2 Pim dly-iaced person, prov. 


ruichealt,** -eilt, s. Close concealment. 
ruideach,** a. Giib, flowing. 

ruideag, T -eig, s.f. Kitsiwake, see seagair. 
ruileaza,$ s. Stone-bramble, see caora-bad 


miana. 


ruideal, s. & v. see rideil. | 
ruideal, -eil, s.m. Tae herb robert, see righeal- 


cuil. 


ruidealach, see ridealaca. ae 
roidaaladh,** s.m, see ridealad 
ruidesalaich, see ri l-i'ich. 


——te, see rileilichte. 


ruilesalair, see ridealair. 
ru dean, pd. of rùdan. 
ruid rs, -5i3, s f. Sportive mood, frisking, caper- 


ing, leapiaz. 

.eh, -aiche, æ. Sportive, playful, frisky, 
guuvolling. Bar gamhainn is laoigh, p'ay- 
rial were tue scies ad calves, 


riilis, s.f see ruideas, : 
rai l-ghuilbnaeach,(AF) s. Bur-tailed godwit. 2 


Stunted curlew. (rid-ghuileanacn) see cam- 


ghiaa.) 


ruidia, see ruith. 
riidhe,** s, 
fruidieadh,** -idn, $. f. Reproof, censure, 2 


Dairy. 2 Sheiling. 
Ray. 


ruidhadh, -sidh, see rughadh, 
ruü.dliceaen,* see ruiteach. 
ruidhil, s»e ridni'. 


each, -viche, see rilhleach 
vata, see rithleadh. 


rui lrteach, see rilileacu. 
vuiihlean, see riiblean, 
ruiihíi^3s,** a. Very feithfns 
riuitilich an, seo riiäleacaan, 
rui thie, see ruite, 

rurintear, see ruicear. l 
ru.datearach, see ruitearach. 





ltr s./, see ruivearachd, 


ruidh‘eiraica, see ruitearaich, 

rdidhiire, see raidhtear, 

eil Ah, -e, a. Merry, giad, frisky, cheerful, 
ruitidh:acht,** et 


Giaduess, cheerruinsss, 
morriness. 


see riteil, 


Roach, extend to, 2 Reach, ar: 
3 Attain to. 4**iold forth, stretch 


rive at, 
6 (with Las) Neal, must, 


out. 5 Border. 
needs, . . 
Ac-ive Voica. 
IND. pas', và nig mi, &., I, dc. reached. 
„ fut. ruigidh mi, &., l, £c. shat reach, 
INTERROG, & Neu. past, (an P uach P ea) 
d' rainiy mi, &e., ded 4, &c. (not) reach Et 
su, aid not reach. 
„ fut. (a1 ? nach P cha) ruiz mi, &c., 
shall L «c. (no?) reser, 1 dre. shall not reach. 
Subs. rast. ged) ruigiun, (£«0ugh, L woud 


reach ; (ged) ruig amil, (Roush) w would ` 


sibh, iad, 


reach ; (ged) ruigeadli tu, e, Ln 
(eg 


(though) thou wouldsi, he, s*, you, 


seg 
awe mi "e Peete ae 


mna 


gg CUm 


— 


rulg 


would reach. 

» Jut. (mi) ruigeas mi,&e., (77) I, ereach. 
IMP. 1st. per. s/n]. ruigeam, let me reach. 
INFIN. a ru ghe«ehd & a ruigsinn t^ reach. 
PRES. PART. a ruigheachd & a ruigsinn, 

reaching. 

Passive Voice. 
IND. past, ràinigeadh mi, 
reached. 

» Jul.ruigear mi, &c., I, Ze, sall be reach- 


&c., I, £c. was 


ed. 

INT. & NEG. past, (an ? nach ? cha) d' ràinig- 
eadh mi, de, was I, &c. (not) reached ? 1, 
«£c. was not reached. 

» fut. (an? nach ? cha) ruigear mi, &c., 


shall 1 &c.(not) be reached ? 1 £e. shall not be 


reached. 


SUBJ. past, (ged) ruigteadh mi, &c., (though) 


I, &c. should be reached, 


» fut. (ma) ruigear mi, de, if 1, de, shall 


be reached. 
PAST PART, ruigte, reached, 
R. an seo, reach here, extend your hand to 


this ; ràinig mi air, 4 reached a’ it; an ruige 


&n nochd P will he arri: to-uwht ¢ cia fhad’ a 


ruigeas tu ? how far will you go ? cha ruig mi 
air, 1 cannot attain to it ; cha ruig thu leas a 
bhi aig do dhragh, you need not trouble your- 
self, '5 nach ruigeamaid leas a bhi’feitheamh, 
and that we did not reguire to wait ; ruig Tor- 
mad Dòmhnullach, go to Norinan MacDonald; 
cha ruig greim de 'n fheòil sin sinn, a bit of 
that flesh will not sufice vs; gach ni air an 


tuigeadh iad, everything that they could s-ize. 


uig, prep. (zu ruis, properly gu nu g) Do, un- 


til. 2 As far as. Gu ruig seo, to this place; 
gur. an taizh, as far as the house, 

Tuig,-eachan, s.m. Halt-castrated ram (ridgling) 
or other animal, 

ruige, see ruig, 

ruigeachd,** sg Castration. 
castrated, 8 see ruigheachd. 

ruigeam, 1$'.per.sing.nup. of rug. Let me reach. 

aid, Ist. per. pl. past sub). of ruig, 
would reach. 

Tuigear, fut. subj. pass. of ruig. (Ma) r. e, if it 
be reached. iad 

tuigeas, fut, sub). act. of ruig. (Ma)r. mi, (if) 
I reach. 

ruigh, see righe. 

e, SP see righe. 

=—— each, see righeach. 

ruigheachas, see righeachas. 

ruigheachd, s.f.ind. Reaching. 2 Act of reach- 
ing. 3 Kxtending to, arriving at. 4 Attain- 
Ing to. 5*Arrival. 6 Mental trial. A’ r—, 
pr.pt. of ruig. Air dhuinn r., on our arrival; 
a’ ruigheachd air, stretchiny (his hand) towards 
it. 








Tru gheachail, -e, a Pertinent. 2 Accessible. 


rui;hean,-ein, s.m. Wool-roll ready to spin, 


 ruigheanas,** Ais, s.m. Brightness, 


Tuizhe-mheas, s.m, see righe-mheas, 

ruighinn, s.f. & pr.pt. of ruig, see ruigheachd. 

ruigninn, s»e righinn. 

Truighneachd,(Ms) s.f. see rizhneachd. 

ruighteach,** o Blank, | 

ruigidh, fut.af.a. of ruig. Shall reach. 

ruiginn, /st.per.sing.past subj. of ruaig. I would 
reach. 

ruighteach,** o, see ruiteach. 

ruighiecn.(CR) s.f. see rig iich. 

ruigleachan,** s.m. Castrated ram. 

tuizlean,**-ein, s. m. Rilgzlin:, half-eastrated 
goat. 

-——ach,** a. Ot, like, or belonging to, rid- 

güngs. 3 Castrated. 


Digitized by 


SUED aie Nm ptn: 
d L DN . 3 E H D L V 


777 
| ruigsinn, s.f. Arriving, roaching. 2 Attaining. 


2 State of being 


We 





ruis,$-e, -ean, 


ruisean 


3 Arrival. A'rc-—, pr.pt. of ruig, 

—each, æ. Accessible, attainable, 

ruizte, past pt. of ruig. Reached. 

ruigteadh, past s^). pass, of ruig. (Ged)r e, 
(though) it should be reached, 

ruileag, -ciz,-an, $./, Roll. 2 Polite term for & 
falsehood. 

ruim, g’n.sing. ofrum. 

ruimhe,**s.f. Reproof. 2 Reproach. 

ruimneach,** -ich. s.m, Marsh. 

ruin,$ s. Yellow bedxtraw—galium verum. 

rùin, gen.8ing. & n.pl. of rùn. 

rüine, pl. rùintean, 8.f.ind, Secrecy, mysterg. 
2 Private intimation, 

rüinean, Gin, Am, ¢.m. Darling. 

truinidh, s.pl. Secrets. 

ruinigil,** s.f. Dangerous navigation, 

ruinigin, see ruinigil 

ruinn, prep. pron. seerinn. 

ruinn, -e, -ean, S.T see roinn. 

ruinu-bhior, -a, -an, s.m, see rinn-bhior. 

——————ach, -aiche, a. see rinn-bhiorach, 

rüinne, see ròin, 

ruinneach, -eicha, æ. see rinneach. 

truinneach, -vich, s.f. Grass. 

ruinneadn,** -idh, sm. Consumption, 
sion, cleansing. 

ruinn-gheur, -éire, d. see rinn-gheur. 

ruinnich,tf pr.pt. a’ ruinneachadh, v.a. Point, 
sharpen. | 

ruiunleachadh, (MS) s.m. & pr.pt. of ruinnlich, 
Rumple. 

ruinnlich, væ. Rumple. 

ruinn-rulse,§ s.m. Male pimpernel, poor man's 
weather-yvlass, see falcair. 

ruinns, v.a@. Gaelic spelling of rinse, 

ruinnse,-an, S.f. Lonx stick or stake. 2 Tail 
of à" auimal. 3 Rump, the part immediate- 
ly above the tail. 4 seourge,whip.  5ffsee 
roinns'ar.o*Auythinxzlong, 7ttDraggled skirt, 

ruinnseach, icht, -eiehean, see ruinnse. 

- —, -leh, -icivan, s.f. Base or worthless 

Woinan, a term of contempt. 3ftTLall vulgar 

female. 

-—, -iche, o Having long sticks or 

stakes. 2 Havinz a draggled skirt. 

- adhi, -atln, s.n. see roinuseachadh. 

ruinnsear,** Gaelic spelling of rinser. 2 Search- 
er. 3If Ganger. 4 Base or worthless fellow. 

ruinnsien, v.g. Rinse, scour, 2 Whip, scourge. 

——-—— te, past pt. o£ ruiunsich. see roinnsichte, 

ruiunsinn,** Gaelic form of rinsing. see roiun- 
seachadh. 

ruinnte, see roinnte. 

ruintea'as.$ s.m. Darnel- 
brevillean. 

rùintean, n. pl. of rùn. 

rauipleacnan,** -ain, s.m. Gorbellied fellow. 

ru -rai, Argyllshire for rù-rà. 

ruire,** s.m. Knight, cham»ion. 2 Lord. 

——ach,** -aich, $. m. Champion, kaight. 2 
Exile. 

—ich,** a. Famous. 

—achail,** o, Championlike, knightly. 2 
Famous. 

— ichas, ** -ais, s.m. Lordship, dominion, 2 
Renown. 3 Bravery. 

ruis, -e, -ean, s.f. Way, road. 

ruisea/lh, s.m. Dash forward, (rush.) 

s. f. Common elder—sambucus 

t2 Name for the the letter R. at 





2 Deter 











or rye-grass, see 


nra. 
R ish. 


fruisceanta, see ruisgeanta, 


ruisevluchd,** s.f. Hastiness, rashness. 2 Dis. 
order. 
truiscan,** -ein, sm. Luncheon. 
il TTD 
UNIVERSITY OF IL 


ruiseanta 





610. Ruis. ^ 
ruiseanta,** a. Hasty, rash. 2 Disorderly. 


ri Re v æ. Rash, hasty, precipitate. 2 Disor- 

erly. 

rùisg, pr.pt. a’ rùsgadh, v. a. & n. Strip, peel, 
make bare. 2 Fieece, shear sheep, 3 Cnafe 
the skin, as by friction. 4 Disclose, reveal, 
discover, expose. 5 Undress, exeoriate. ` 6* 
Gall, denude, unsheathe. 7 Shave.  8'* 
Tear, rend, 9 Clip, strip. 
R. ain buntàta, pel th» potatoes: r. a’ chraobh, 
strip the tree; r. do chlaidh amb, wnsheath thy 
sword ; r.e a ghàirdean, he made bare his 
arm ; nar. do dhearas do d’ nàmhaid, do not 
reveal your defects to your en-my ; rüisgidh 
brù bràghad, the belly will strip tne neck. 

ruisg, gen.sing. & n.pl. of rosg. 

rùisg, -e, €. see rùisgte. 

fruisg, -e, -ean, s.f. Vessel malo of bark. 2 n.pl. 
of rùsg. Peeliags. 

ruisg, $.f. Fray, skirmish. 

truisg, v.a. Smite, strike, pelt. 

rüisg-chómh.lach, -aich, sm. Incrustation. 

ruisg-chomidaich, v.a. Incrust. 

ruisgeach,** a. Caustic, escharotic. 

riisyean,(DMy) pl. of ruisg. 

ruisgean, -ein, s.m. Vessel made with the bark 
of Lrees. 

ruisveunta,** o Fond of fighting or frays, quar- 
relsome. 

ruisg-eorna,(DMy) s. Twelve sheaves of barley 
in a semi-circle instead of six pairs of sheaves 
of oats in a stra ght liue—Lewis. WC says 
teu sheaves of barley. 

rüisgidh, fut.af.a. of rùisg. 

ruisg--hüileach, see rosg-shüileach. 

ruis.-shul, s.pl. Hair of the eye-'i ls, eye-lashes. 

rüisgte, a. & past pt. of rùisg. Naked, bars, ex- 
posed. 2 Stripped, peeled, maids bars. 3 
Fleeced, shorn. 4 Chafed. 5 Disclosed, re- 
vealed, discovered. 6 Shelled, uasheathed. 
R. agus lomnochd, stripped and nake i. 

rüi«gteachd, er (ad, Obuoxiousness. 

ruit,* -e, -ean, $.f. Rakish female. 2 Javelin. 

ruite, s.f.ind. Gluttony. 2 Revelry, rioting. 

ruileach, -eiche, a. Ruddy, florid, rosy-chseked, 
2 Flushing, blushing. 3 Apt to blush. 4 Flor. 
iferous. 5 Blo»ny. 6seeruitheach. Bha. e 
T. he was ruddy. 

wes |, ** s.f. Ruddiness, floridness. 

ruiteacian, -aia, pl. -ain & -an, $.2n. Ruby. 

ruiterchas, -als, s.m. Ruddinass. 

ruiteachd,** s.f. Ruddiuess, fluridaess. 2 Fresh- 
ness. 

ruiteag, -eig, -an, s./. Roe-buck berry. 2 Blush. 
3 Redness, slight tinge of red. 

ruiteaz ch, -aiche, a. Blushing. 2 Rudy. 

ruitean,** Fetlock. 2 Pastern. 3 Ankle-bone. 
4 Dirt-grovelling cild. 

uitear,* -ean, £. M. 


778 


ouser, reveller. 

ruitearach, -aiche, 2 Rerel- 
rous. 3 Drunken, 

ruitearachd, s. f.ind. Gluttony, 2 Revelry, 
riot, carouse, druukenness. 

ruidhtearaich, v. Carou«e, 

ruith, pr.pt, a’ ruith, v.n. Run, race, rush, 2 
*Melt. as lead or suet. 8 Flow, asa stream, 
4 *Speak fast. 5 *Chase, 6 *Distil. 7 Rotreat, 
8 *Run over, look over. 
Re he ran : r. an fhuil, the blood lowed; r. 
e as mo dhéidh, he chased m? ; a’ r. ceud thar- 
ruing ; distilling low urinis ; r. orra, run super- 
Jicially over them ; r. e mach, it waservhaues’ ed 
or expended ; is ma.h ar. sibi ! how well you 
ran! 

ruith, -e, 3.f. Running, act of runnin», 2 Race, 
rushing,chase. 3 Flowing, act of flowing asa 
stream. 4 Pursuit, flight, as of au army, 
5 *Fast speakiog or talking. or Treat:nent. 
7 Slight arrangement.  8*In line with, pair- 
allel, | 9, The diarrhoea, flux [with tue ar- 
ticle æn.) 10**Army. l1**rroop. 12 Rata, 
full speed. 13 Dysentery. litfAverage, ra- 
tio. 15 Course. A’ r—, pr.pt. of ruith. 
Esan 'na r., he at full speed ; air an r. cheu l- 
na, a! the same rate; air a’ chearvr., at pre- 
cisely the saine rate ; thoir au aon r. dhaibh, 
give them the same treatment ; air r. an taign 
seo, parallel with this house ; thoir r. cladaich 
dhith, run her aground ; r. na teanga, a com- 
plete scold ` leig r. dua, let it run, let it flow ; 
gille-r., a footinan, runner, forerunner ;r uu 
cubhaige, an April fool’s errand ; r. air theas, 
running to and fro, as cattle in hot weather ; 
thoir r. orra (or dhaibh), give them a slight 
adjustinent, make the numbers run ; is iom- 
adh uair a thug mi air ruith, many an hour I 
Spent on runiainy ; is iomadh uair a thug mi 
ruith air, many a tune L made him runis iom- 
adh uair a thug mi air à ruith, mony an hour 
I spent chasing him ; ruith air falbh, or ruith 
leis, running before the wind. 

ruith-analach, -aieh, san. Breathlessness. 

ruilh-chiadaich (WC) st Running ashore of a 
vessel. Thainig r. oirnn, we had to run as 
ground ; r. ort ! bad luck to you ! 

ruith-chuim,(WC) s.f. Diarrhoea, [With the 
art. an.] 

ruithe, s f. Dairy. 

ruitheach, -+iche, a Running. 2 Flowing. fluent, 
3 Moving, on the marcu. 4 Running. 5 
Slippery, as shot. Uisge r., jlowinj water. 

, -elen, s. f. Hand-cuff. 

ruitheacud,( MS) sf. Curreucv, 

ruithean, ** æ. Red-hot. 2 Blazing. 

——- ——, -ein, s.m. Delight, pleasure. 

-—as,** ais, s.m. Brightuess, splendour, 
glitter. 

ruith-auaa, s, pl. The ‘ runs ”’ 
of the old fol«-tales, 

ruith-fuual,|s.f. Diabetes [with the art. an.] 

ruivh-fola, s.n. Hamorrhoids, piles. 

ruith-:gu-cladach,[ s.f. Diarrhoe. [with art. an.) 

ruithicue,(M3) eum, Poster (m in.) 

rutühil, -thle, -thlean, s.m. see righil. 

ruith-iouzrach, -aich, zum Ichor. 

ruithleach, -eiche, a. Flowing. 

ru'thleada,** s.m. Advolution. 

ruithlean, -ein, -an, s.m see roithlean. 

acn,** g. Having wheels or rims. 2 

Having little wheels or rins. | 

ruith-leümnacb,-aiche, a. Running and leaping, 
2 Rampant, in heraldry. 

rui h-marv,(WO) s f. Heavy wave. 2 Heavy sea. 


ruithteil 


a. Gluttonous. 











or quasi-rhymes 





— 4 


Rake, abanloned man, |ruicnusadi, ** -idh, sm. Flame, 


drunkard. 2 Glutton. 3 Riotous liver, car- | ruithveil,-e, a. Lickerous, 


` t i 

LIC L 
T Fa | TT An H Ly 
V — M nu I- PHI VI 
ITERNET ARCHIV 


E 


t 
| 
| 
| 
f i 
D 


ruith-sgiùrsadh 


779 


rù gadh 





ruith-sgiùrsadh, ** -aidh,s.m.Running the gaunt- | trün-airm. s.m. Council cnamber, 


let. 
ruithteach, see ruitheach & ruiteach. 
—il, see ruiceacud. 
fruitin,** e, Hucklebone, 





2 Ankle, 3 Pastern. 


Room, place, space. 2 Room, cham er. 3** 
Floor, R. beoii, @ front room ; dean r., make 
room. 


rumach, -aich, -aichean, St Marsh,quagmire, 
puddle, slough. | 

rümachadh, -aich, s.m. Act of making room or 
enlarging à spaces, A’ r—, pr. pt. of rümaich. 

rumachail, -e, 2. Marshy, boggy. 

rumaich, -aichean, $.f. see ruinach, 

rümaich, pr.pt. a’ rümacnadh, v.n. Make room, 
enlarge a space, give plac^, stand ai le, 

rumail,** Coavulsion. 2 Rumbling noise, 

rümail,-e, a. Roomy, spacious, 2 ranked. 

rümalachd,* s.f. Spaciousness, Fum ness, 

ramball, -aill, -an, s.m. l'ail. 2 Rump. 3 Dock- 
ed tail. 

ach, -aiche, a. Having a large rump. 2 

Pertaining to a rump. 
rumhar,** -air, s.m, Mine, 
rump,* see rumball. 
ruimpull, -uill, -an, see rümball. 
rùn, -üin, p/. (-àntan, -üinte &] -hintean, s.m. Se- 
eret, mystery, secrecy. 2 Inclination, bent, 
disposition. 3 Regard, love, foadness, de- 
sire, affection. 4 Object beloved. 5 Person 
beloved. 6 [ntention, puroose, desizn, deter- 
mination. 7 Wish. 8**Acvoril. 

Tha r. an Tighearn aig an dream d' an eagal 
e, the purpose of the Lord is with them that 
Sfearhim "de tha 'n adr. P what do you mean ? 
'dé an r. am bheit e dhuit ? how ts he disposed 
towards you * tha e an r. nan buagh dhomn, he 
would wish to cut m» down ;an r. num biodag 
d' a chéile, at da jjers' drawing ; na innis do 
r. do nàmhaid ghlic no do charai ghorach, do 
. mot reveal your business to a wis’ enemy nor 
| toa foolish friend ; tha, a rùin ! yes, my love! 
' mor. a tighinn, my love coming ; chan 'eil a’ 

bheag de w’ r. dhuit, you have nought of my 





j love; tir mo rùin, the land of my affection; a 


dh’ aon r., of one mind, unanimous ; ma ni 
thu r. orm agus gu'in faigh mis’ e, if you will 


n privately arrange with me 80 that I can get it; 


" 


k 


tha r. orm, [ suppose or intend. 
rùnach, -aiche, a. Beloved. 2 Lovely, partial, 


fond. 3 Confident, trnsty, trustworthy. 4 
Dark, mysterious, myxtica!, secret. 5 Paur- 
posing. 


rùnach, -aich, s.m. Beloved person, 2 Confi- 
dant. 3**Mistress, 4 Secret code of writing, 
cipher. 

—— —àdlh, -aidh, s.m. Inclining. 2 Act ofin- 
clining or wishing. 3 Act of das gainz, pur- 
posing, intending or determining. 4 Loving. 
A’ r—, pr.pt. of rünaich. 

runag, Ai, -an, sf. Beloved woman. 2 Little 
sweetheart. 

runaich, pr.pt. a’ rùnachadh, v.a. & n. Incline, 
wish, desire. 2 Resolve, purpose, design, in- 
tend, determine. 3 Propose. 

,-ean, s.m. see rùnach. 

——e,** s,m, Confilant. 2 Discreet person. 
3 Beloved person. | 

—te, past pt. of rùnaich. Desired, wish- 
ed. 2 Resolved, fixed upon, designed, defini- 
tive, 

rün-aimhleis, s.m. Intrigue, 

rùnair, -ean, s.m. Secretary. 

—eachi, s. f. ind. Secretaryship, office of 

secretary. 








NTERNET ARCHIV 


tTerün-»5a2cau,** -ain, s.m. Pretence. 

rün-chéireaci, -icil, s.n. Secretary, 
secrotary. 

—— —, s.f.ind. Business of a secretary, 

rün-chiéirsneachd,** s./,ind, Secretaryship, 4 
Private seccetaryship. 

ruün-diomnair, -üin-, pl. -üin-, -hintean & -üntaa- 
dìomhair, s.m. Secret purpose or intention, 2 
Mystery. 3Necret. 4 Private intention. 

——- ————« ach,** a. Mysterious, mystical 4 
Plottius. 

rün-fa!aichn, -üia-fhalaich, s.m. Secret love. 

runga3, see ronxas. 

runua, see reannag, 

ruunach, see rumach, 

runnag, see revunag. 

runnsa, 8, soe ruinnsa. 

rünussa.(M3) s.m. Ramp. 

rün-phàirteach, -e ca», a. Communicative,realy 
to commu iicite, communica»le. 2 Apt to ra- 
veal seerets. 

—, -ich, s.m. Partaker of a secret ot 


2 Privata 





mystery. 

rün-phàirteachadh, -aidh, s.m. Communicating 
2 Act of communicating secrets, 3 Consult 
ing. 4 Act of consulting together, 5 Par 
Ding ofa secret. A’ r—, pr.pt. of rün-phàir- 

ich, 

rüa-pnàirtich, pr.pt. a’ run-phairteachadh, v.a. 
Com:auaicabe or disclose secrets. 2 Deliber- 
ate, consult together. 3 Partake of a secret, 

run-phairtichte, a, & past pt. of rün-phairtich. 
Communicated, disclosed. 2 Communicable. 

rünrach,* s.m. see rüdhhach. 

ruuraich,* v.a. see rudhraich. 

rün-ràite, -üin, pl.-üin- & -untan-raite, $.f. Ba 
solution, solemn vow, prov. 

rün-sheómar, -air, -shedmraichean,s.m. Council 
chamber. 

runtan, one of the pls. of rùn. 

rupail,** s.f. Rumbling sound, continued rumb 
ling. 

Steet, s.m. Scandalizing—Suth’d. 

ra-ra, (CR) «iv. Jumoled, confused, mixed up 
— W. of Ross-shire. 2 Topsy-turvy—Arran. 

rurach,tt o see rùdhrach. 

rürachadh,ff-Aidh, s.m. see rüdhrachadh. 

rüraich, see rüdhraich. 

rùraich, see rü lhrach. 

rurgaid, s.f. Rhubarb. 2 prov. for purgaid. 

rurgaideach,**@. Abounding in, or like,rhibarb, 

trus, -uis, sm. Knowledge. 2 Skill. 3 Wood, 

rüsail,ff v. see rusal. 

rüsal, pr. pt. &' rùsladh, v. a. 
over things. 2 Scratch, scrape. 

rusar, See ra sar. 

rusg,** v.a. Beat, strike, pelt. 

rüsz,-üi:g,-an, sm. Kxteraal covering, rind, 
skia, husk. 2 Barkofa tree. 3 Fleece of 
wool. 45həll. Neòil 'nan rüsgaàibh bana, 
clouds in white fleeces. 

risgach, -aiche,a, Having a covering, as a rind, 

_skinor husk. 2 Fleecy. 3 Fleecing, that 
fleeces, peels, or takes off the covering or husk, 
stripping. 4 Having many rinds, as an onion. 
5**Crustaceous. KReiths garbh-risgach, @ 
thick-AL»eced ram. 

rùsgadh, -aidh, s.m. Peeling. 2 Act of peeling, 
flsecing,or taking off the bark or any covering. 
3 Discovering. 4 Act of discovering, disclos- 
inr or revealing. 65 Driving thatch off. 6 
Snelling. 7 Fleece. 8 Husk. 9 Stripping. un- 
dressing. making bare or naked. 10 Un- 
sheathing. A’ r—, pr.pt. of rùisg. 

ruszadh, -aidh, s.m. Chafiag (also fuithein.) R.- 
clebin, hearsen-ss ; r. air basaibh, EM 

202 





Search, turn 


— - o — 


rùsgadh 
on the palms. 


rusgail,** a. Epispastic. 


rusguir, -ean, s.m, Strong clumsy fellow, prov. 













wegen ne strength, prov. 


611. us,an 6. 

risgan, -ain, -an, S.M., dim. O 
or thin covering, as a riad or husk 
of skin paeled ond. 3 Little seca. 4 Cirentar 
dish made of roots, used to measure Meal, Ke. 
5 Small boat made of bark. 6 Kiad of bas- 
ket (ill. by M. McD.) 

rùslach,** a. Scratching, excoria.ing. 

rusiaih, -aidh, s.m. Soarching. 4 Avo of search- 
ing or overturning thiugs in Ssvarching. 3 

Scraping. 


f rüsg. Any little 
v "2 Disco 


~ 
d 


4 Act of scraping or scratcaing. 
A’ r—, pr.pt. of rà al. 

frustach,,a. Kade, ciownish, G 
tic, 

frustach, -aich, -aichean, sS. m. Boor, churl. 
Gaelic form of rustic. 

rustag,** -aig, s.m. Bear. 

rustan, -ain, -aa, sn. Lump. 2 Hillock, heap. 

rut,* pa, Rust, corrode—Arran, 

rita, rùtan, -cuan & rubaichsan, 4. M. Ram, 
2 Riighng, tup. see ruig. 

ruia,”* 5.m. Herd, rout. 2 Tribe of 

rücadh, -aidh, [ people. 

fucach, œ. Abounding in ram. 

rusichd, sf Rucvving. 

ru.ailu, œ surly, butting, 
ram-iike,. 

Tüuvan, -ain, in, $.m.dim. of ruta. Little ram or 
ridgiiug. 2 Horn of à roz-buck. 

Futas, s.m. Greed 

gath, (AU) s. Desire, genesis, generation, pro- 
creation. 2 Prosperity. Car. Gad. 2, 164. 

ruth,** s.» Chain. 2 Link. 3 (Ar) skate, 
thornback, 4**Salary, wages, hice. 

ruihi, -caaa, $,n. see rudha. 

rüihi, chau, sa. (Al Hedgehog. 2 see sor- 
nan. 

rutnach, -aiche, a. see rudhach. 

ruthadh, -aidn, -aidhean, 8.72. see rudhadh. 

ruthag, -aig, -an, s./. see rüdlhag. 

rüihau, -ain, see rùghan. 

rutharach, -aiche, a. Quarrelsome, 

rutharachd, s.f.ind. Quarrelsomedess. 
tinued or frequent gaung. 


aelic form of rus- 


bumping, bumptious, 


fighting. 
2 Con- 





S sS 

8, (Suil,willow-tree) the 16th. letter of the Gaelic 
alphabet now in use. It has two souals— 
lst., small like sh, in sheet. when, ii the same 
syllable, it is preceded or follows òy 2 or i, 
as, bris, break ; séimh, quiet ; sniomh, twine ; 
stéidh, foundation, 2nd. broad, like s in sun, 
this, in all other situations. iixceotions—is, 
am, proa. iss) ; SO, this, (pron, 810, and ac- 
corlin;ly spelt seo in this work) ; sul, yon, 
(pron. shoo’, and according'y spelt siod in this 
work.) 3, when aspirated, is like A in him, 
as, shuidh. sat (pron, hooie) ; shrann, snorted 
(Arawmn.—a às 00 1n brown.) Before l aad 
n. shis almost, if not altogether silent, as, 
shlanuich, healed ; shnioma, twisted. SS, fol- 
lowed by a mute consonane is never aspirated. 
S, when preceded by the letter t with a hy. 


RT ao "e We 
d Ch d a Ié Al H VM 
SS 5 — LI 3. "s 






780 sàbh 


en is silent, as an t-sluaigh, of the people 
(pron. an t/ooay.) 'S in expressions such a3 
""se s829 an da ne," is sounded as sh. 

The slender souad of sis heard in Arran ^n 
iseal (ào«al, dow,) and treise (treasa, stran jer), 
eaan, (pron. eisean) pseir (peaso.) uirsina 
(door-post,) dais (rea ly.) dli» fwthful,) frit- 
eis (3 iadow.) ‘Chere is no s sound in Arran 
and Kintyre in the combinations rd anl rt, 
as, bord, mart, cairt, &c. ln rtl, neither $ 
nor ( i3 hearl as, circle, Turi, An 
seo, au sin, an siol, are som-tim'3 pro“ 
nounced an t-seo,an t-iin, An art, Al soma- 

times ann aseo, ania sin, anna siol; ant 
an an seo, ana aa sin, aan an iod. Iui- 
tial sr has no inserted t, as, srath, srata (uot 
strath, struth), except strvc (to tear) sirat, 
(to stroke) and strub (a spout.) Some dir- 
jects, on the contrary, have strath, stron, &e., 
bu; srac and srub. Bofure /, followed by a 
slender vowel, as, slighe, slevmbuion, s has 
its sh soual, wud not, as iv soni? districts, 
its broad sonn f, 

"a, cont, for a-us, 


ph 


'S their thu, and thon shalt 
say ; là dena iàithean 's aw fam air bho "o 
bhaile, on» day when the giant was from hom». 

's, cont, for is, v. "Si tis she ; 'se, it is h*;’s 
ean, it ts he hims-if; 's mor t fnacal, 08- 
tentatious is thy word. 

"a, contr. for anns. “Sa C 
an tzeineit. 

a, cont. for seo. 

a, cont, for -3v, -san and -se. 
ia l-s’ tor iail-san 

-ga, Emphatic adjection usel in connection 
with possessive pronouns and ad joined to the 
noun following them. ‘Li the nona is follow- 
el by ana ljective, the s-llablo -st is placed 
after the adjective, thus, do lam -st, thine 
own hand ; do làmh ghealsw thine own 
white hand. Ib becomes -ne when usal in 
connection with ar. our, as, ar n-athair-na, 
our own father ; and -san when ia connection 
with an, am, their, as, an taigh-san, their own 
house. 

sa, Emphatic syllable used i 
the personal pronouns. It becomes se atter 
a small vowel (ne iu the 1st. per. pl.) and san 
in the 3rd. por. sin). & pl. Mi, wis: ; thu, 


thusa ; e, esan ; 1, 136 ; sinn, sinne ; sibh, sibie 
sa cheò, in the 


se ; iad, iadsan. 
‘sa, cont. for anns an. In the. 

mist, inamaz ment. 2 cont. for anns, prep» 
and a, pers. pron. 

ga, prov. for seo. (Used as a suffix.) 

tsab, a. Strong, able, 

tsiub, s. m. Death. 2 Bolt, bar. 

sabadh,** -aidh, s.7n. see sibaid. 

Sàbaid, -e, -ean, $+”. The Sabbath. 

sabaid, -e, -ean, $.f. Brawl, quarrel, fight, fray, 


row. 
each, -eiche, q. Brawling, quarrelsome, 


given to firhting or strife. ` 
sàbaideach, -eiche, @. Sabbatical, of, or belong- 
ing to the Sabbath. à 
d, s.f. Sabbatis:u. 
s1baideichi,* s.f.ind. Quarr elsomeness. 
gabaidiche, s, Brawler. 
sibail,** s.f. see sabnal. 
Sabailt, s.f. see Sabaid. 
Sabainnd, see Ki vid. 
voh, s.m se: sami. À 
SAD -àibh, -an, s.m. Ointment, salve. 2**Spit- 
tle. 3** bolt, bir of a gate. {tsabh.] ` 
sàbh, -àibn, pl. -aibh & -an, s.?n- KL? S.-laimh, 
or S-Szriob, @ haad-saw ; s..luirn. @ whip- 
saw, kand-sa:0 ; a.m", two-handled saw for 


hed, in the mist, in @ 


Thus’ for thus v; 


n combination with 





i —— 





f 


Original from 


N LIEER ETYM FS 
L d V E bé B1 t i 


E pus Eam 47 
VI Da G 
= KA Bud TA 


I 1 

V A jg TT - 

"Fw A nj | Ai FN 
Li J ri * H N hed Ch | L3 d 


| EN EN Pi 
A [A L3 


sàbh 





use in à :&er-pit. 
sdn, -vioh, -au, ef. see samh. 
vi? pr.pt. & sàbhadh, v.a, Paw, cut with a 


sabhach. -&iche, a. n Ae bo, saws, 2 
Cutting, as a saw. 3 Of, or sage Sé to, oint- 
meat ur Silves. e Wn ea.lag omi- 
meits 5 Likea de, ointment, 

Bavhach, -aiche, d. seesimhach. 2**Quarrel- 
some. 

savhadair,® «ee sahhdair. 

eabhadair, -ean, s.m. Sawyer. 

mehil, s. f. ind, Occupation of a sawyer. 
2 Process of sawing. 

eabhadh, -aidh, s.m. Sawing. 
A's—, pr.pt. of sabh, 
muileann sàbhailh, @ saw-niii ; 
axih, a saw-pit. 

sabnadh, -aidt, s.m. see samh. 2 Quarrel. 

sàbüalg, v. see sàbh. 

—— — —eadh, s.m. see sàbhadh, 

—te, see sabhta. 

ea 5 hail, pr.nt. a’ sàbhaladh, v.a. Save, rescue. 2 
“pare. 3 Protect, defend. 4 Preserve, use fru- 


2 Act of sawing. 
Air a Sh., 9«wn; 
glac-sàbh- 





EA 

svb)ail,** v.a. Store up in a barn. 

Ss: b ail, en. sing. of sabhail. 

sabi iail, x 8f. Saving, protecting, sparing. 2 
Protection, 8 Fru.a'iLy. 

each, ** a. see sablivailteach. 

. eachd, see sai: hailteachd, 

Sàbhailich, see s&ohail. 

Sibha lich, -ean, £& m. Preserver, one who save 
or rescues, 2 Economist, fruzal persons. 

g&bhailiche,** gm. Frugal man, economist, 2 
Preserver. 

Sàbhailt, -e, a. Safe. 2 Saved, rescued. 
ed. v Protected, defended. 

e, past pt. of sà^hailt. 

ee ees -eiche, a@ Saving, rescuing. 
Sparing. 3 Protecting, defendiug. 4 E al 
economical 

eachd, s.f. Security, safety, safe state or 
condition. 2 Saving disposition. 

sabhair, see gàbhadair. 

€ AODA, see sàbhadaireachd, 

eabhairle,** Mastiff, cur. 

——an,(AF) s.m. Mastiff. 

gabhal, -ail,pi. -an & saibhlean,s.m. Barn, gran- 








8 Spar- 








ary. 

——ach, nose Of, or belonging to barns. 2 
Like a barn 

sabhalach, see sibhailteach. 

&&bhalachd, see sabhailteachd. 

&Abhaladh, -aidh, s.m. Saving. 2 Act of saving, 
res'uing or sparing, salvation. 3 Protecting, 
defending. 4 Preserving. 6 Retrenchment. 
6 Preservation. 7 Frugality. A’ 3—, pr.p!. of 
sàbhail. Is mór an s. siu, that is a great re- 
trench ment. 

gabhalaich, see sabhailiche. 

———e,** s.m. t'rugal person. 2 Protector, 
"derre: , Saviour. 
6a haltachd, Ze rag 

sabhaltas, -ais, s.m 
economy. 

"n see samhan. 2;(AF) Mastiff, cur. 

n 

sabhan, -ain, pl. -an & -ain, $.m., dim. of sàbh, 
Little saw. 

sabhan, n.pl. of sàbh. 

Sàblanach,* ‘a. Pertaining to a little saw. 2 Like 
a little saw. 

Tsabhas, -ais, see sabhs. 

tsa bhasair, -ean, see sabhsair. 

B3 bhd, -a, -an, s.m. Lie, fable, prov. 

eabhd, a. Straying. Cù s., a stray dog ; chaidh 


see sàbhailteachd. 2 
**Parsimony, frugality, 


gre 


Di EIZE Diy 
INTERNET ARCHIVE 


781 
e air 8., v» eir. td gira 


sacar bharig 


s: badw h, -aicoe, a. Lying, fabulous, 
sabhAag, -aig, - on, a.f. aid dim, af 
tle lie, fib, pro». 
sabhdezacii, -aiche, a. Telling little Ties. 
acohdair, oan, 5.» Liar, fabulist, foolish talk- 
oF. 2 Stroller, lounger, 
saba lairerchd, af, (abit of tving. 2 Lieg fool- 
ish talk. 8 Strolling, lounging. 
sàbh- -duirn, em. Whip-saw, 2* Hand-sw. 
vAbhiach.** a. Healing, like a salve, unctuous, 
gàbhlach, ** mich, s.m. spittle, 
gà bladh,** -aidh,8.75. Salve, haaling ointment. 


Lit- 


2 Stirrin ng up. as of corn in a barn. 

sàbh-mór," s.m. Whip-saw 

sabhs, saibhse, An. s.m. Sauce of any kind. 9 
*Gravy. 3 (DU) Water in whic fish. hag been 
boiled. 8. diag, jlsk-sane-. 

sabhsach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to sauce, 
2 Like sauce. 3 Abouading in fish-soup. 

sabhsachadh, -aidh, s.m. Seasouing. 2 Act of 


seasoning with sauce. A’ s—, pr.pt. of sabh- 
saich. 

sabhsaich, v.a. Season with sauce. 

WE "2 past pt. of sabhsaich. Seasoned 
with sauce. 

sabhs ir, -ein, s.m. Sausage. 2**One who makes 
sauce, 

sabhsaireachd,** s.f. Sauce-making. 2 Sausage 
making, 

sành- shùil, -Aibh-, -an-, s.m. Eye-salve. 

sa hstair, see sa bhsair. 

sabhuil, see sabhal. 


Sàboian, | Lewis for Sàbaid. 


3aboiund, 

S16, -aic, pl. -aic, & -an, s.m. Sack, bag. 2 
Burden,load. 3 Horse- load, cart-load. 4 
(DC) Asthma—Uist. 5 Measure of corn (5 
bushels.) 6**Measure of coals (3 bushels.) 7 
in derision, Short, fat fellow. Tha a air, he 
hax asthma ; s, mine, à, sack of meal ; 8.3inine, 
a meal-sack ; s. droma, a back-load, a man’s 
load ; s. imrich, a load of furniture ata flit- 
ting; S. uis;e-be atha a pack-srdd'e with a cask 
of whisky on each side ; s. -shrathalr, @ pack- 
saddle. 

Sac, PO. see Sicaich. 

sacach, -aiche, a. Having sacks or bags. 2 Hav- 
ing many sacks. 3 Like a sack or bag. 4 Car- 
rying à load or burden. 5S{that burdens or 
loads. 6**Short an l corpuleut. 

sacachadh, -aidh, s mv. MW $ 
ing on of a burden. 3 Act p 
bag. 4 Putting up in a bag or sack. 
pr. “pt. of sveaich, 

sacadh, s.m. d pr.pt. of sac. Same meanings a8 
Sac: chadh. 

sacaich, v.a. Load, lay on a burden, as on a 
horse. 2 Press or put into a bag or sack 3** 
Fill to satiety. 

sac ichte, past pt. of sacaich. Loaded. 2 Press- 
ed into à bag, as grain. 3 Filled to satiety. 

sacall,**-ean, s.f. Little bag or sack. - 

sacail, -e, a. Like a sack or bag. 2 That loads 
or presses by weight. 3 Heavy, burdensome, 

sacail, s.f. see sacachadh. 





2 Act of lay- 
ressing into à 
A’ 8—, 


tsacair, ** om, Priest. 
sacan, -ain, -an, s.m., dim. of sac. Little sack 
or bag. 2 Little load or burden. 3 Trifling 


fellow. 4 Unmannnerly or impudeat fellow. 
5**short, corpuleut fellow. 
sicanta, -ainte, a. Likea bag or sack. 2 Corpus 
lent, squat. 3 Trifling. 4 Impudent. 
sacantachd, s.f. Corpulency, squatness. 2 Ime 
pudence. 
sac-aodach, -aich, s.m. see aodach-saia 
sacarbhuig,** sf. A confession. 


saebut 78? 


sicbut, Gaelic spelling of sackdul. 

f3acn, v.t. Sack, bes!eve, 

Sich ur, e s.f. see sàmh hair. 

Sachasan, -ain, -a, s.m. San i-eel, lesser launee. 
sachasan ich, -aiche, a. Of,or belonging to,sand- 


eels. 2 Abouidiag in sand-eels, 
gacac 
sachil, } se: sae. 


suchdachadh, see sacachadh. 

sachda ln, see sacach uin. 

sachdaich, see sacaich. 

Sacian,** san. Standard. 

s crai th, s.f.coll. Burgage, luggige, 

sacraigh, see sacrailı. 

sacrail,** s.f. Sacrifice. 

sacram iil, -ean, s.f. Sacrament. 

sàcramaiideach, -eichs, a. Sacramental. 

Sacr vuriind. sse sacra naid, 

Sic-Sirathair, -thrach & -e, p. -exn, GE Pack- 
S vlde, 

Bid, -aid, s. m. Small dust shaken out of any- 
thing vy strixing or beating. 2 3mart blow, 
thud, dump. 3 Dislike, aversion. 4 (JM) 
5 seedad. 6 Seel—Lewis. 7 (DU) Water 
splashed about, froth of waves, 8 Tue sea 
breaking over anything. 9 M^al-dust. Ghabh 
e s. daeth, he conceived a d:slik” to it. 

Sal, pr.p'. ai sadadh, v. @ Shake or brush off 
dust. 2 Beat, thump, fustig ve 3(DO)Tüurow, 
ex peats or stones—Uist. 4 *Dash upon, as 
dust. 

sadach, -aich, s.f. Meal-dust. 2 Mill-dust. 3 
Saw-dust. 4 Dust of any description. 5 Small 
drizzliau rain. 

sadach, -aiche,a. Of, or belonging to, small dust. 
2 That shakes out, or shakes off dust. 3 
Causing dislike, aversion or nausea. 

gadachaith, -aidh, s.m. d pr.p!. ot sadaich, Same 
Meanings as sadadh. 

sadach-shibhaidh, s.f. Saw-dust. 

saidadh, -aidh, sm. Brushing. 2 Act of brush- 
iag otf dust by striking. 3 Beating. 4 Ach of 
beating or thumping. — 5**Wnisk. 6 Sowing 
of seed, — W. of Ross-shire. A’ s—,pr.p!. ot sad. 
'Ga sh. "oam shùilean, dusting it in my eyes. 

sadaibh, (i, e. an sadaibi) ad». la (unge, 

sadaich, -e, -ean, S.f. Brush. 2 Anything to 
strike or beat od dust, whisk. 

2 Beat dust out of cloth. 


————, v.a. Dust. 
Dusted. 2 


te, past pt. of sadaich. 
Brushed. 

gadanach, -aiche, @ see soideanach. 

sad-bhuille, -au, s.f. Smart stroke, thump. 

sad-bhailleach, -eiche, æ. Giving smart blows or 
5inimos. 

sailhail,** a. Pleasant. 

salhail,** sf. Neglect. 
house. 

sadhal,** .ail, an, s.n. Saddle. 

saihalach 1, see sodhalach. 

sadharean, (AF) s.n. Lapwing, see adharcan- 
luachrach. 2 Grey plover. i 

sa:luich, see sadaich. ' 

Fsaeth, s. Labour, tribulation, disease. 

saf,( MS) s. Zaffar. 

Psacan, -ain, -an, s.m. Roundel, circle. 2 Fold 
ofaserpent. 3 Spire. d 

sagart, -airt, -an & airtean, s.m. Priest. SES 
Churchman. Ciod is fhiach s. gua chléireach ? 
of what useis @ priest without a clerk ? cha 
bhi düthehas aig mnaoi no aig sazarb, neither 
a woman nor o priest mty have any local 
ties—they must go where the necessities of hus- 
band or church demand, ` ` J 

savart, s.m. Ram with one of its testicles want- 
ing—Lewis. 

gagartach, -aiche, d. see sagartaiL 





2 Delight. 3 Good 


Digiti e T[ 


NTERNET ARCHIV 


saidir 


——— 


| sagartachd, s.f./nd. Priesthood, ` | 
sag vtail,-e, @ Priestly, priestlike, clerical. 2 


rarly Pious, holy. 
savartalach L, s.f.ind. Priestliness. 
fsacsh, sdizh, s.f. Bitch. 
fsish, po, Drink, suck" guzzle. 
«rn, see sath. 
saghach, see sathach. 
sazhaidn, -e, -ean, see saobhaih. 
saghail,** eg, Attack. 
f34zhaia, see samaan. 2 see saigh. 
saghal,** a. Nic», tender. 
saznalachd,** 8.7. Delight, content. 
Luonusness. | 
sagnarlachd,** s. f, Deligh6,satisfaction,coaten^. 
sagh'ic-tire,( AF) Woif. 1 
T:aghinhnair, s.m. Sink, kennel, 
sàibn, gen.sing. of sàba. 
saibuiu, see samhan. 
saibhir, see saoibhir, a. & saoibbrich, v. 2(M9) 
æ. Able. | | 
saibhir,(M 3) a. Lascivious. 
saibhir, -ean, s.f.  Watereour:» blog a roa 
for à stream to run through, covered wita 
stone liutels, asa sawer, cond tit. 
saibhire, comp. of saihhir. 
saibaireach, see siwibhreach, 
Svibhireachd, see saoibhreas. 
saibuleach,tt a. see sabiualach. 
saibülean, n.pl. of sabhal. 
saibhlich,(M 3) v.a. Garner. 
sainareach,(MS) @ Auspicious, 
saibhreachadh, see saoibüreacha 1h. 
3aibureach4, see savibhreas. 
salbhreas, see sacibhreas. 
sàibureas,(M3) Auspiciousness. 
saibarich, see saoibhrien. 
saibhrichte, see saoibarichte. 
saic, gen.siny. & no, of sac. 
saic-dhiollaid,** s.f. Pack-saddle, 
saiceau,-ein,-an, $.m. see sacan. 
saic-é:deadh, -idh, see aodach-saic. 
Saic-eudacn, see aodach-saic. 
tsaich, s.m. Plenty, enougn. - Bellyful. 
saich,** a. Sated. (sàthach) 
saich, (CR) a. UL bail in hevlth—Perthshivre 
tsaide, s.f. Seat, couch. 
saidealach, see soidealtach, s. & soidealta, d. 
saidealachd, see soidealtachd, 
saidealta, -vilte, see soidealta. 
saidealtacn, see soidealtach. 
gaideaitachd, see soidealtacnd. 
saidealtas, -ais, Sea soidealoa3. 


saidh, -e, -ean, s.£. Any uprigut beam, 
post. 2 Droe of aship or boat. 
Handle of any instrument. 4 The 
part of any blade that is inserted in 
the handle. 5 Chevron in heridr:. 
6 ** Bitch. 7**Mildness. 8**Lreasury. 
9 Edge. 10 Brach. 11 see saoidh- ` ` 
ean. 612.SaidA,5. 


saidhbhir, see saoibhir. 
gaidh-dheireadh,* s.f. Stern-post ofa boat, ses 


O 1, p. 73. : 
andthe: &. HER Hay.  Feur-saidhe, grass kept 


for hay ; 2 hay. 
Pa tier <0 -ean, s.m. Mower, hay-cutter. 


saidhean, -ein, s.m. Coal-fish in 2nd. and 


s, saith, see saoidhean. ; 
edit a pr see saidh-dheireadh & saidh-thois- 


2 Volup- 


ich. 
bree Re, a SE d 
idhlieh,(MS) v.@. i 
mrp eet s.f. Stem-post of a boat, see N 1, 


p. 73. E 
fsaidir, -e, see laidir. 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


LU R B A NA F M HA M P A | D N | 


sai 15e 


@aidse, -an, s. f. Sound of a falling bo:ly. 2 Crash. 

$aidse,DMK) s. Hurry, haste. Cues. ris au 
teine, blow up the fire and add fue! to it; 
chuir iad s. risa’ bhuain, they expedited the 
reap'ng. 

@ridse,§ s./, Chives, see feuran. j 

sS3ids'ach, -eich, a. Making a noise, as a falling 
body, crashing. 

Sardseach, -ich, s.f. Beggar’s mantle, prov, 2** 
Wallac. 

s^idsevr,* s.m, Heavy, clumsy man 

‘saifewr, -eir, 8.74. (teic form of sapphire, 

saifearach, a. Abounding in, or like, sapphires, 

Saige wn, -eiu, -an, s.m. Corpulent, little man, 

BSiigeainach, -aiche, a. see Svigeanta. 

saigeanach, -aich, s.m. see saigean, 

gaireanna,** see saigeauta. 

s.igeanta, -einte, æ. Short and corpulent. 

Saigaantach, a. Short and corpulent. Duine 8., 
a short, corpulent man. 

gaigeantachd, s.f. Corpulency and shortness of 
stature. 

Saigh, -e, -ean, s.f. Bitch, female dog. 12 Sharp 
elge, sharp point. 3 see sa»sihean. Cuimh- 
mea an t-32igh earblacn dhonn, remember the 
brown bitch with the bij tail—L. na F. 199.3, 
?0) a, 2, 

8:izn-chulannch, see saigh. 

sasish l,* v. see saighead. 

sa'ginle, gen.sing. of saighead. 

saighdeach, -eiche, a. Arrowy, like an arrow. 2 
Furnished with arrows. 3 Pointed. 4*Pierc- 


ing. 

sulehdeadh. -eidh, s.m. Darting, act of darting 
forward, as an arrow. 2* Popping or dashing 
forward. A’s—, pr.pt. of saighead. 

eaighdean, n.pl. of saighead, ; 

eaighdear, -eir, -an, s.m. Soldier, 2 Brave man. 
3 Active, mettlesome fellow. 4 The sign Sa- 
gittarius ( 1 ) in the zodiac. 
8.-coise, infan'rymun, foot-soldier. 
8.-eachraidh, cavalryman, dragoon. 
8.-fairge, a marine. 
8.-mara, à marine, 
8.-tochiaidh, a pionzer. 
Saighilearan dearga, red-coats, a name given 
to the governm nt soldiers in the risings of 
1715 and 1745, in contra-disiiiciion to the 
supporters of the Stuart caus», who were gen- 
er ly known as '' svigh levran dubhs,” 

gaizhdearach, -aiche, a. Of, or belouging to gol- 
ders. 2 Military, mareial, 

giigndearach'l, s f. Soldiers ip, soldiering, the 
pro'ession of a s» lier, the army, 2 Bravery, 
heroisin. 3 Agilitv, activiiy. 

gai ;h l»arvchd, et Archery. 

Saizhdeireil, o, a. Sollier-like, brave, warlike, 
martial, 2 tegimestal. 

Baizhead, sigle, elen, s.f. Arrow, dart. 2 
Stitch. 5. neiinhe, æ poison-d arrow. 

83i:h»?ad, v.n.Dart forward, as an arrow. 2 Move 
swiftly. | 

siignieidach, -aiche, a. se» sii zhdeach. 

Siigueulsir, sm. Arrow-miker, 2 Archer. 3 
see saigh leur. 

— —— —.-.—each. @. Of, or belonging to, arrow- 
makers, or 2 archers. 

si'yheid-shith, s.f. Fairy-arrow—the popular 
niine for the flint arrow-heads so much 
vrizel by antiquar!es. 

6a zhe ig, -eis, s.m. Axe, old age. 
oidness. 

g2izheil, -e, æ. see sòghail. 

Si ghein, sve saoidhein. 

8 iganen, ** -ein, s.m. Lightning. 2 Hurricane. 

sàig (teach, o. Piercing, cutting. 

Gail, -e, -ean & sailthean, s.f.Beam, joist, log of 


2 Antiquity, 


| 


i $ 

cr Fab = pe A Pan d i , — 

i, r mpm LI m ii. [ri = i — 
— à = i + uu 


783 sailleadh 


wood. Crùth sailthean, beams with engraved 
figures.—Syewlaiche-nan-caol. 
ts4il, -e, -ean, s.f. Willow-tree. 92 The letter S, 
sail,* s.m.ind. se sal, 
sail, see taileidh, 
fsail, v.a. Salute. 
sail, e, **sàl & silach, pl. -ean & -ltean, 8. f. 
Heel. S. beinne, the foul of a hill. 
sail, v.a. Provide with heels, as shoes. 
tsail, st Guard, custody. 
sail-bnreaznadh, -arlh, s.m. Rejoicing. 
cs EH s.f. Front cross-veam of a cart- 
sles. 
Sàil-bhrüth, see sail-bhrathwth. 
sail-bhrathadh, -aid^, s.m. Bru'se on the heel. 
sail-bhuinn, e, -e.n-b-, $./. 1he sole. 2 Lower 
beam of à particion. 3 Lower cross-bar of 
"erann-deilbne," 
sàil-bhuiun,$ -e, -ean-b-, s.f.Grouudsel, see bual- 
an. 
sailche, comp. of salach. 
sailchead, -eid, s.m. Dirt, degree of dirtiness, 2 
l1fDrossiness, 3 Defilement. 
sailcheas, -is, s.m. Bad taste. 2 Musty smell. 
sail-chuach, -aich, -an, s.f. Do:-violet, see dail- 
chuach.  2**Pansy. Coille is guirme s., @ 
wood where the violet is bluest. 
sail-chuachach,tt a. Ab uuding in dog-violete. 
_2 Pertaining to dog-vioulets. 
sadl-churchag, -aig, s.f. Young dog-violet, little 
dog=violet. 
sail-iheiridn, s.f. Hind cross-beam of a cart— 
Isles. 2 Box of a cart. 
tsaile, $.f. Saliva. 
Séile, see sal. 
sáileach, -eiche, a. Pertaining to a heel. 
salach. 
83; leadh, see taileadh. 
saileay, -eig, -an, s.f.,dim. of sàil. 
2 Heel-step. 3 Heel-piece. 
gaileag, -e'g, -an, s.f. dim. of sail. 
2 Little willow, young willow. 
sàileazach, -aiche, a. Abounding in creeks, bays 
or inlets of the sea. 
sailean, -ein, -an, s.m. Willow—Arran. 
Sailen, ein, -an, s.m. Little inlec or arm of the 
gea, deep bay. 
sailewnach, œ. Abouadinz in little creeks or ine 
lets. 2 Like, oc of a bay or firth. 
sàileauta, æ. Brinish. 
tsailear, -eir, -an, s.m. Cavern, grotto. 
sàilear,( MS) s.m. Sailor. 
sailcas, ais, s.m. Salt water, . 2 The sea 
siileid, s.f. Gaelic form of salad. 
Sailstheach, (AF) s. Hind. 
sail-ghilie, Au, s.m. Footman, page, 
sailich,(M-) v.a. Heel, as shoes. 
Siiliun, pl. -tean, see sàilean. | 
saill, -e, $.f. Fatness. 2 Fat, blubber. 3° Suat. 
greas2. 4 Pickle, brine. Saill nan dubhan, 
the fat of the kidneys ; fillean saille, collops of 
fat. 
saill, pr.pt. a’ saillea lh, v.g. Salt, season, cure 
or pickle with salt. 
sailleach, -eiche, o. Having fat. 2 Fat, corpus 
lent. 3 Greasy. 4* Fall of suet, 
sailleach, -ich, s. 2ee seileach. 
stilleachan, -ain, -an, & m. Salting-tub, 2f? 
Beef-stand. 
sailleich L,** s.f. Fatness, fat. 
Corpulence. 
saillea lair, -ean, s.m. Salter. 2 Fish-curer, 
———- -erchd, s.f.ind. Process of salting or 
curiu ; with sa'b. 
sailleala, -idh, s.m. Salting, act of salting. 2 
prae 3 Salt, saltness, A’s—, pr. pt. of 
saill, 


Little heeL 
Little beam. 


2 Greasiness. 3 


sajlleann 784 sainre 


heels. as shoes. 


sailleann, -inn, s. m., Weaver’s paste, used to | 


smoothe tue thread. 

saillear, Ar, -an, s.m. Salt-cellar, tub or cask. 2 
Celiar for storing salted fish. Btt Salier, fisb- 
curer. 





, a, see sailleir. 
, fut.nass. of saill. Shall be salted. 
—————-áach,** a. Of, or belonging to, a salter or 








sail-uriair, 8, f. Nummer, the central beam of a 
floor that receives the joists. 

1saim, a. Rich. 

sa mbhir,? s. Samphire—crithmum maritimum., 

saimh, -e, s. f. 
2 Sensuality. 3 Peace,peacefulnsss,juietness, 
stillness. 4**Joy. 5 Quiet spot. An lear an 


pickler. s. shuaine, the sea in profound repose, 
achd,** s.f.ind. Business of a salter or | saimh,** g. Quiet, still. 2 Mild, pleasant, 3 
pickler. Sweet. Ri oidhche s., on @ quiet nijht. 
sailleil,** a. Unctuous. tsaimh, s.p. Twins, pir, brace, couple. 
Bailleir,tt a. Fat, fed. 2 Greasy. 3 Corpulent. | saimh. g’n.sin). of samh. 
4 Lusty. "oer -bhreitheach,** a. Twin-producing. d 
gaillmhor, -oire, a. Fatted, fat and full,  2|sàimh-bariathar, -air, -thran, s. m. Katering 


Greasy. 3 Pickled. 
sàil-lom,l s.f. Flat foot. 

Saillte ro d past pt. of saill. Salted, seasoned, 
pickled. 2 Salt, tasting of salt, briuy. Buin 
S., salt-water. 

gailiteach, see saillte. 

—d, s.f.ind. Saltness. 2 MS) Brine. S. 
t' uisgeachan, the saliness of thy waters. 

RAilm, -e, -ean, $.f. Decoct*ion. 2f Oak-bark de- 
coction to staunch blood. 34 Consumptive 
pectoral. S. uchd, q pectoral givin in @ case 
of consumption, made of rose leaves and su- 
gar-candy. 

, gen.stng. d: n.pl. of salm. 

-dharaich,** sun, Decoction of oak-bark. 

eachd,** s.f. Psa/mody. 

-uend,** sm. Ointmezat of which fresh 
butter and healiug herbs are the principal 
ingredients. 

gail-mhullaich, s.f. Upper cross-bar of crann- 
deiibhe. 

8ail-spiorad,** and s.m. Guardian spirit. 

gàilteachadh,** s.n. Tracing or following foot- 
steps, 

SAllteachd, see saillteachd. 

Bàiltean, n.pl. of sail. Heels. 
3 Vestiges. 

&allteart. ert, see saltairt. 

Bgàiltheach,Tf a see sàileach. 

&xiltheach, -ich, -ichean, s.7. Dig, fat or lusty 
housewife. 

















2 Steps, footsteps. 


worl or speech. 2 Smooth langnage. 
~aimh-bhriathrach, -aiche, o Flattering, cajol- 
ing. 





——as,** -ais, s.m. Cajoting lang- 
uag. 

xà mhche, com». of sàmhach. 

- ———— al, -eid, sm. Degree of tranquility. 

sdim)-ch aly, -eneilg, s.f. Hypocrisy. [McL & 
D gives saimh-cheilg as nom.] | 


'sàitah-chealgach, -aiche, a. Hypocritical. 


saimhe,f s.f. Luxury. 2 Sensuality. 





pleasure. 
tsaimheach, -eiche, a. Pleasant. 
saimneachas,** -ais, sm. Luxury. 2 Fondness 
oí ease or pleasure. 
saimheactid, s.f.ind. Love of pleasure. 2 State 
of luxury or pleasure. 3 Luxurious habit. 
sàinhear, -ean, s.m, Sensualist. 
saimh-zhrios,** v.g. Allure, entice. 
ach,** a, Alluring, enticing. 
saimh-guirivsadh,** 8. m. Enticemeut, allure- 
meant. 
saimhiche,** s.m. Votary of pleasure. 
sàunhiche, como. of sànliach. 
saimhich,(MS) v. Allay. 
fsaimhiu, -ean, sm. Bait, allurement. 
saimhneachadh,** xm. Yokiog, coupling. 
sainhnich,** v.a. Yoxe, couple. 
—te, past pt. Yoked, coupled. 
fsaimhrighe, s.pl. Lovers of plea-ure. 











gailtheach,** a. Beamed, joisted. 2 Like a beam saimhrigneach,** a. Easy, satisfied, content, 2 
or joist. Quiet. is | CONS 

sailthean, pl. of sail. S.a shedmra, the beams| ^. . d,** s. f. Hase, satisfaction, 2 
of his chambers. Quiet. ` ` P 

sailthean-mais, s.pl. Stots of a cart, see p. saimbhsealair, -ean, s.m. Counsellor, 

— — "ürialh 152. saimir, sf. Trefoil clover. 

gailtich,** v.a. Provide with beams or joists. sain, ** œ. Soun 1, healtüy. 

gailtichean, s.pl. Hatches of a ship. 2 Steps. Fon n-ehreach,** a. Healed, sound. 

Bailtichte,** past pt. Provided with beams or | 9indrcan,"" s.m. Scat. 2 Society. be 
joists. KAA Ki m. Edge cii pe S 21 ME 
àilti v y 1 i i saine, $.f. Variety, variation. oundness. 

Bailtichte,** past pt. Heeled, provided with Geilitinn. AE 

S ` saineil,** a. Graceful, beautiful, handsome. 2 





Various. 

sain-fhios, -a, -an, see sanas. 

sainis,Tf -e, -ean, see sanas, 

each, -eiche, see sanasach. 

sainn,(AC) s. Coveting. 

sainnseal, eil, -an, 8. m. New year's gift. 2 
Handsel. 

-—ach, -aiche, a. Be'onging to a handsel, 
or New year’s gift. 2 Sending New year's 
GE 

Besos pr. pt. a’ sainnsealachadh, v. o. 
Give a New year's gut. 

aiche, -an, s.m. Giver of a New year's 








gift. 
sainnt, see sannt.. 
sainntreabh, see saintreabh., 


,sainre,** sf. Reddish purple, sanguine colour. 


OH igit al trom 
UNIVERSITY OF 


HBRBANIA-SCBANMDAIGN 
Pé Fa DEA aoe Ok at 
- LII Tä ka if Lh rn Be 


LLINOIS A 


Luxury, pleasure, delight, ease. , 


ach,** a. Luxurious. . 2 Fond of ease or 


/ 


A "p 


sainre 78 





2 Flesh colour. 

gaintrenbh.** e, Family, house, 

saip it (AH) s.f. Full meal, 

s»ip'ir, see sapair. 

saipleis, MS) s. Suds. 

sàir, gen.sinj. & n.pl. of sar. 

Suirse,** s.f. Sieve. 

sà rbhrigh, -e, -ean, 8. f. 
bhrigu.] 

sàir-chiail, -chéille, 8.f. Good sense, 

sàirdeal, -eil, -an, see sàr:lail. 

ach, see sardaileach. 

sàir-eólas, -ais, ssm. Great skill, 

Sair-fiiios, see sàr-faios. 

satr-ghniomh, -a, -ara, s.m. Noble action. 

saisd,$ s.m.(7.**) Garden sage, see athair-liath. 

saisdeich,** a. Of, like, or abounding in, sage. 

saixde bheag,** et, Smull garden sage—sadvia 
hortensis major vulgaris. 

sài- dlə cnuuic,$ sm, Mo intain-sage—salvia al 
Pond. 

Sà'«de-coj'le.3 s.m. Wooil-sage--£»ucrium scoro- | 
dunia. [** „ives salvia ag. estis.] 


Attribute. [also sàr- 








i $ 
614, Samh. 
sSài-do-fiadhain,§ see sàisde-coille. 


613. Saisde-coille. 


ruiteacn, see sàthach. 

saith, -ean, s.m. The backbone. 2 Joint of the 
neck or backbone. 5**Multitude. 4**Pierc- 
ing. 5**Space.  6**íIaft. 7**Treasure, a- 
bundance of money. 8 see sath. 9 (AF) see 
saigh. 10 pl. Stakes, 11 Swarm of bees. 

saith,** æ. Vulgar, vile. 2 Cheap. ` 

saith,* s.f. Bellyful, satiety—Jslay, 

saitheach, -eiche, a. see sàthach. 

saitheachd, s./.ind. Satiety, repletion, gorman- 
dizing, freque..t stuffing. 

Saithean, fl An. -an, s.n. Stake or pole driven 
into the ground. 

Saitheas, -eis, s.m. Vileness, badness, 2 Cheap- 
ness, 

saithich, see sàthaich. 

te, see sathaichte. 

saithte, see sàthta, An sleaghan saithte ’san 
leirg, their spears thrust in the plain. 

saitse, see saisle. 2(AH)s,f. Hatch of a ship. 
"Sau loingeas daraich a’ crionadn, dh’ óilte 
Don air an saitse, and their oaken ships decay- 
ins, wine was drunk on their hatches—Ian Loin 





p. ó6. 
sài, gen. sàil & sàile, s.m. "Thesea. 2 Sea- or 
Silt-water. A’ leum thar an t-sàl, bounding 
over the sea. 

Sal, sail, sm. Filth, impurity. 2 Mud. 3 Dross, 
refuse of anything. 4 Dust. 5 Spot, blemish. 
6 "cum. 7 Coomofa wheel. 8 Wax of the ear. 

9 Willow, s-e seileach, 10 (AF) Eggs of the 
moth. 11*slimy dirt. Airs, an raoin, on the 

dus’ of the pain. 

salach, -aiche & sailche, o Foul, dirty, filthy, 


H 


Digitized by 


MKITCORICT ADC Ar 
N IERIMEI AML V 


D 


saltrachadht 


nasty, unclean, polluted. 2 Troubled, agita- 
ted, as a fluid. Cuan s. nan garbh-thonn, the 
ud bitlowy ocean ; fuil sh., polluted or foul 
OOM. E 

salachadh, -aith, s.m. Defiling, act of deflling, 
polluting, rendering unclean, sullving,soiling. 
2 Filth, defilement, 3 Adulteration. A’ s—, 
prt. of salaich. 

salachar, -air, an, s.m. Filth, filthiness, gross- 
ness, nastiness, impurity, corruption, dross. 2 
Dirt, dung, exere. ient, 

achd, s,fiind see salachar. 

sàlag,** At, -an, ët Heel-piece. GO 

-——in,(CR) 8m. Pyrosis, water-brash—Loch- 
broom § Lewis. 

salaich, pr.p!. a’ salachadh, v.a. Defile, pollute, 
sully, contaminite, spoil, soil, make dirty. 
Sh. thu ain paipear, you soiled the paper. 

— — — $e, past nt. of salaich. D»filed, polluted, 
soiled. contaminated, spoiled. 

salaid, Gaelic form of salad, 

salaiun, gzn.sing. of salann. 

each, -eich», a. Abounding in salt, salt- 

2 Communicating a salt taste. 3 Brin- 











ing, 
ish. 





eachadh, -aidh, s.m., Salting, act of salt- 
ing, pickling, seasoning. A’ s—, pr. pt. of sal- 
ainnich, 
ich, pr.»t. a’ salainneachadh, v.a. Salt, 
eure or season with salt, pickle. 
ichte, past pt. of salaiunich. Cured or 
seasoned with salt. 
salana, ninnu, s.m. Salt. An Fhairge Shalaiun, 
the Sa't Sa ; po'l--alaion, a sali pit. 
ach, see salainneacn. 
au, ain, -an, s.m.  Salt-pit or -pool, 
Vault. 
salann-fuail, s.m. Sal-ammoniac. 
salann-na-groide, s.m. Alkali. 
salann-tàtuaidh, s.m, Borax. 
sal-bhodach, s.m. Diustman. 
salchadn, -aich, see salacha lh. 
salenar,** see salachar. 
sal-cluaise,** s,m. Cerumen, ear-wax. 
Sài-chuach, see sail-chuach. 
Sal-fàchd,(AH) sn Distasteful and offensive 
memento. Dh’fhag e sal-facid glan aig a 
charall, he gave his friend a fine memento at 
parien] (ironically.) 
tsail,** ail, s. am. Bitterness. 3 In- 
vective, lampoon. 
tsallan, -ain, s.m. Singing. 2 Harmony. 
salldair, -e, -draichean, s.f. Chalder, Scots mea- 
sure of 16 bolls. 2 Chaldron, imperial inea- 
sure of 36 bushels. 
salm, sailm, s.f. Psalm. 2* Anthem. 
salinach, -aiche, e. Singingpsalms. 2 Abounl- 
ing in psalm; or psabn-tunes, 3 Like a psalm. 
salmalair, -ean, s.n. Psalm-book, psalter. 2tf 
Psalmist. 3{fsongster, ehorister. S, chraoibu 
dhiuth-dhuillich, the songster of the leafy tree. 
eachil, s.f.ind. Psalm-sivging. 2 The 
office or business of a clerk or precentor. 
salmair,-ean, s.m. Psalmist, songster, precent- 
or, clerk, chorister, 
eachd, see saimadaireach l. 
tsalt, -ailt, -an, s.m. see sult. 2**Colour. 
tsaltair, -ean, s. m. Psalter. 2 Psaltery. -3 
Chronicle. 4 Salt-monger. 5** The title of 
certain Irish traditional records, as, S. na 
Teamhrach. 
saltair, pr.pt. a’ saltairt & a’ saltradh, po, d n. 
Tread, trample. 2 Tread, walk. 
saltairt, s.f. Treading, act of treading or tramp- 
ling. 2 Act of treading or walking. A’ s—, pr. 
pt. of saltair. 
salurachadh, -aidh, s.m. see salbsirp, 





2tt 





2 Satire. 


saltrachd 


saltrachd, (MS) s.f. Insult. 

saltraich,** s f. Tr ading, trampling. 
ued trampling. 3 Tramp, tread. 

saltraich, v. sev saltair. 

te, zast pt. of saltraich. Trodden un- 
der foot. 

aaltraidth, fut.aff. a of saltair. 

t-àm, s. Rest, ease. 

tarn, Sam. Sun. 

saman,$ s. 5n. Wood-loosestrife.yellow pimper- 
nel, see seamrag-Muire.—Mid Highlands. 

saingaich,** v.a. Sprawl, 

samh,§ -aimh, -an. s.m. Common sorrel—runve 
acetosa. 2} That part of the sheep’s sorrel 
(rumex acetosella) (hat bears seed. 3 see seam- 
rag. (ill. on p. 785.) 

samh, amb, an, s.m. Stink, 2 The suffocating 
smell oceasioued by exc-ssive heat or close- 
ness of air in à room.. 3 Clownish or rustic 
person. 4 savage. 5 (AC) Flock, fol, Ierd, 
6(AC) Fish. 7 Giant, strong person, a god. 
s rarely, The sun. 9 The sea—Suth’d. 10 (A 
F) Pig. N. éisg, fish odour ; 3. trom éisg, a 
strony smell as from a lage body of fish at sea. 

samh, (AC) a. Fat, rich, productive. 

samh, s.m. Surge, agitation of waves on the 
sea-beach. 2 Crest of whitened billows—Sar- 
Obair. 

sàmh, -àimh, see saimh. 

sámh, see sàbh. 

samhach, -aiche, o, Abounding in sorrel. 2 
Rustic, clownish. 

sàmhach, -aiche, a. Qniet, still, calm, serene. 2 
Peaceful, undisturbed, at rest, easy. 3 Silent. 
4 Mild, pleasant. 5 Peaceable, peaceably 
disposed. Feasgar s., a calin still eveming ; 
bithibh s., be siill ; fan s., keep quiet. 

samhach, -a/ch, -aichean, s.f. Wooden haft or 
handle of any instrument, as an axe or ham- 
mer. 2** shaft. 3**Edgeof a weapon. A" Axe, 
hatchet. Chaidh an tuagh bhàrr a s., the axe 
went of its handle ; s. sgéin, the haft of a 
kni fe. 

samiiachair, see sàmhchair. 

samhachan,** -ain, s.1n. Soft, quiet person. 

samhadh, -aidh, s.m. Wood-sorrel, see seamrag, 

samhadh, Ain... Edge, as of a hatchet. 

¢samhadh,** -aidh, s.m. Congregation, 

samhadh-caora,$ s.. Sheep’s sorrel, see ruan- 


2 Contin- 





aidh. 

sainhaich,(MS) v.a. Helve, furnish with a ban: 
dle, as an axe. 

samhaicheadas,(M%) ais, s.m. Quiet. 

samuail, a. see samnuil & sambach. 

samhailt, see s:mnuiib. 

sambaip, see :àimnh. 

Samhainn, see Samhuinn, 

sim)aircean, -cin, -au, s.m. Primrose. 

samhaisg,(AF) s. He-fer. 

sambaltan, -ain, -an, S.M, 
phic. 


Emblem, hierogly- 


—ach,-aiche, s.m. Emblematical,having 
emblems or hieroglyphics. 

samhan,-ain,s.m. Saviu—juniperus sabina. 2 
(AC) Female dog, biten. 3 Little giant. 4(A 
F) Horse. 5 Large river trout— Fáiite na 
Morair. 

samhanach,” -aich, s.m. Savage, giant, monster. 
Cnuireadh tu eagal air na samhanaich, you 
would frighten the very savages—an Islay say- 
ing ; mbarbhadh e na samhanaich, it would 
kill the savages—3aid of something very over- 
powering or unwholesome—N.G. P. 

samh-an-aithreach, -eich, sm. Punishment. 2 
Sore produced by rubbing off the skin in one’s 
sleep.  3* Cause of regret. 4* Object of re- 
grete 





D 


.ITCORICT AGS LJ 
JI FRE! AHI ul 
LEN Ex mai yS Y 


samhragach 


—— ——— —————————— 
———— 


samharcan,** -ain, sm. wee sambaircean. ` 

tsamhas, -ais, -an, s.m. Delignt, pleasure, satis 
faction. 2 Ease. 

t———— ach,** a. Causing delight or pleasure 
2 Agreeable. 3 Causing satisfaction. 4 Uz: 
disturbed, at ease. 3 

: aiche,** s.m. Sutter. 
sàmhchair, -e, s.f. Quietness, tranquility, rest, 
repose, ease, alraxy, calmness, composure, 

————— each, -eiche, a. Quiet, tranguil, peace- 
ful, undisturbed, 

—-eachd, s.f. see sàmhchair. 

samlila, see samhiadh. 

sainhiach, -aiche, a. Likening, comparing. 2 
Eb ein ‘tical, typical. 3 Ghostly, spectral. 4 
Aliegurical. Dath s., copying ink ; fasgadh 
S., Q copying press. 

-—————— ailh, -aidh, #.m. Comparing, act of cour 
paring er likeu ng. 2 Comparison, simiie, i.i- 
age, type, analog., emb!ein. 3* Layiug som+ 
thing bad to one's charge. <A’ s—, pr. pi. ot 
samhlai«h., 

-—ail, -e, a. see samhlach. 

-——————aàn, see Sail Lal, 

AS, see samhladh. 

samhlach i, s.f.ind. Comparability, state of 
beme com -arabie. 2 Aciinivy. 3, MS)Uraugh& ` 

samhla lair, ein, $.m. Im tator. 

samhladh, -aidh, -aidhein, s. m. Appearance, 
shape, form, re:embiance, likeuess. 2 Pattern, 
sample, copy, anlilype. 3 “Apparition, spec 
tre, vhost. 4 Proverb, by-word. 5 Exaup:e 
6 Allegory. 7 Act of *‘ evening.” 8 Keseinb- 
ling, cumparing, comparisou, analogy, simili- 
tude. 9 Slender person. S. na h-altaract, 
the puttern of the altar ; 8. nam briathar fab 
lain, the form of sound words ; baotn-sh. nam 
marbh, (Ae dr ad. apparition of the d-ad ; is 
trian suiridhe 8., to be evened, or coupled in 
conversation as a likely maich, isa third of 
courtship. 

samhlaich, pr.pt. a’ samhlachadh, v.a. Compare, 
liken. 2 Allegorize. 3 Assimilate, r semble, 
4 v.n. Lay to one’s charge. Na s, an leithid 
sin riumsa,do not lay such things to my charge, 

—te, past pt. of samiataich. Likensd, 
compared, 

gimhiu-:Ladh, see s: mhlachadh. 

samhiuica, sve samilaich. 

—te, see samniaichte, 

samh'uth,** a. Brisk, active. 

Samhna, gen.sing. of Samhuina. 

samhnach,* s.f. see s.unnnag. 2 Deer-park, win- 
ter park. 

samhnachan,(AF) s.m. Large river trout. 

samnnadh, see Samhuinn, 

samhnag, -aig, -au, $.f. Bou-fire or torch kindled 
on Hailow-eve 2 (AF) see simhnachan. 

—— — ach, -aiche, a. Having many bon-tires or 
blazing with bon-fires on Hallow-eve. 

sawhna.ch,* v.a. Winter. 

Sainhnan, -ain, -an, sm. Large river-trout,pov. 
for sanihnaenan. 

samhnas,™* -ais, s.m. Anger, 

samira, see simhradh. 

samhrach, -aiche, see samhrachail. 

—ail, -e,a. Summi ire, of,or belonging 
to, summer. 2 Brinjii; summer, | 
samhrauh, -aidh, -à.dh«an, s zi. Summer. Seoui- 
ar sambiaidh, a summ-r parvour ; taigh-sa un- 
raidu, a swmmer-house ; toiseach au Us.ma- 
rai ln, the beginning of summer ; 2 the Monti 

of May. 

tsamarag, -aig, -an, sf. Clover, trefoil, suam- 
rocx. 

















ach,** œ. Abounding in tre.vil or suai 





rock. 


al from 
N rpm mT a e I 
A d V F - Lal Y l J k- 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


BE La - Au 
VI i" | sm Lt I 
M ÀA Fe 


samhraith 


samhraidh, gen. St. of samhridh. 

gamürail, -6, @ see samaraciuail. 

gimhsa, see samhsadh, 

gunbsach,** a. Aboun ling in, of, or like sorrel. 

fsainns win, s.m. Sorrel see I. 

gamit (Ck) sm. Thud. 2 Very stout person. 

sambthach, see samhach. : 

gumaui!, -mnia, -ean. s.m Likeness, image,copy, 
resemblance, match, representation, 

$amuuil,** @ Like, as, such. Be 

Simhuilt,-e,-ean, s.f. (ie. mac-samhuilf, son 
of the image.) Precise resemulance, image, 
apparition. 2** Slender person. S. aithue 
orm:a, unrecoynized by me—you have the aid- 
vantage of me. BA s. aithne aige air an 
duine, or bua e ’deanainhs, air an duine, (he 
knew that he ought to know the man, but 
could not recall who he was) —Arran. 

Sam iuivn, gon.sing, Samhna, s.f. Hallow-tide, 
tae feast of All-souls, Let, Noy. 2 Themonih 
of November. [Preceded by the art. an t-. | 
O Bheallcaian gu S., from May-day to Hallow- 
tid’ ; siubhal na Samhua dua, may he never 
return /—i.e. may he pass as Hallowinass 
passed ; coltas na Sam'iuinn, like about Hal- 
lowt:de—a deprecative kind of remark applied 
to the weather in summer when cold aud wet. 

gaiman, ò -alu, Sm, see seamray-Muice. 

samplair, san, s.m. Copy, pattern, 2 Example. 

sampuii, -uill, änt, s.m. Example, Ball sam- 
puiil, an object or example. 

§ inrag, see Seamrag. 

'S an, contr. for anns an. 
house ; tha e 'staigh, itis indoors. 

'S An, And the. 

“gin, emphatic adjection, see note under -sa, A 

^ enuid-san, Ais own properly ; 'eicu-san, his 
own horses. 

fsan, a. iloly. 

tsàn, v.a. Release, dissolve. | 

tsinada, -aidh, s.m. Releasing, dissolving. 

sanarc,** -aire, sm. Rel orpiment. 

sanas, -ais, -an, sm. Whisper. 2 Advice, sug- 
vesiion, Warning, hint, alarm. 3 Secret. 4 
Greeting, salutation, salute. 5 Knowledge 
science. 6 Ktywology. 7 Notice, placard,a.t- 
verüsement, 8 Mark, proof. 9 Low soun t. 

' J0 Peace. 11 Auzury. 12 Glossary.  13^* 
Private sign, Bhair e sanas le 'chois, he will 
give a hint with his foot ; mar sh. do gach tir, 
as a warning to every country. 

fsauas, -a!S, -au, sm. Dictionary, | l 

suuasach, -aiche, d. Warning, giving hints or 
cautions, hinting, whispering, 2 Allusive. 3 
Greeting, saluting. 

Sanasaich,** v.a. Allude. | 

——e, s.m. Etymologist. 

ganasail, -e, @ see sanasacn., 

sanasair, -ean, s.n. Suggesver, 
Advertiser. 

sauasiu,** -ain, s.m. Glossary. 2 Etymology. 
3 Private hint, low whisper, warning. 

——— —aiche.** s.m. Ktymolozist. 

*t«anet, Ga^lie form of Latin sanctus. 

fsinuccair,** s.m. Sanctuary. 

sanilan, see sàrdail. 

81iünadn,** -aidh, s.m. Loosening, looseness. 2 
Separating. 

saundag, see sachasan. 

sanni, -ainnt & -a, s.m. Inclination, desire. 2 
Covetousness, avarice, gereed. 2 Ambition. 4 
*Lust. "has. orm, L imiend ; S, gniomn, in- 
clinaiion to work ; s, gun sonas éir;dh an don- 
as dna, hopel-ss greed wl betides ; esa e du’ 
fiuathaicheas s., he that hates covetousness ; 
ma tha s, sin air, if he has æ desire for thal ; 
o sh. a’ muiliteir, from the partout of tue 





2 Monitor. 3** 





Digitized by 


ATEDBIET ADLI 
UI Ln An V 


787 


'S an taigh, in the 


saobh-chomhrnidecach 


d.stroyer. 

sanutac:,-aiche, @ Desirous, keenly desirous. 
2 Cores us, greedy, avaricious. 3 Lustful. 4 
** Ambitious. Duine s., œ cov/ious mun ; S. 
air buannachd, greedy of jain. 

"P -a'cn, sm. Covetous man. 

ih, -aidh, s. m. Covetiug, covetous- 








ness. 2 Act of coveting. 3 Lusting. 4 Lust, 
desire. Air s.dha, after he coveted. A’ s—, 


pr.pt. of sanataich. 

sinatachd, s,f.ind. Covetousness, greediness. 2 
Ambition. 3 Lustfulness. 

sannucaieu, pr. pt. a’ sanntachadh, v.a. Covet, 
desire, long for. 2 Lust after. 3*Inciine, Ma 
sh. thu, ef you inclined or coveted ; saantaich- 
idn e gu mor, Ae will cov-t greedily. 

————le, past pt. of sanniaicuü. 
desired, 2 Lusted after, 

sanntair,* -ean, s.m. Covetous man. 

3anutalaend,(M 3) s.f. Avariciousness. 
sauüntuich, see sanntaich. 

sant, s.t, Squelch. 

saütair,** 8m. Stroller. lounger. 

eachd, s.f. Strolling, lounging. 

sanuis (DC) s.f. Uist for sanas, s.m. Thig an 
t-s. 03 cionn bùird, the whisper gets above 
bourd. 

sanus, see sanas. 

air, see sanasair. 

Sä IA, TT vain, s.m, Swing. 2 Swinging or way- 
ing to an Í fro. 

ach,** a. Swinging. 2 [iWea swing. 

achadh,** -aidn, s.m. “Swinging, as on a 

rope. 

achd,** s.f.ind. Jactation, swinging, as 
on à rope. 

—— —aich,** v.a. Dandie. 2 Swing. 

——aicn,** 8.7, Swinging, as on a rope. 

aichte, past pt. of saobauaich. 

s20bh, -aoiba, s.n. Dissimuiation, hypocrisy. 

saoba, -a & -aoibhe, a. Silly, foolish. 2 Mad, 
deranged. 3 Wrong, erroneous. 4 Unfortun- 
ate. o Dim, blind. 6f Apt to err. 7*Eddy- 
ing. S.-suruth, an eddy-tide. 

saobh, pr.pt. a’ saobhadh, v. a. Turn aside or a- 
way,mius.iead, lead astray. 2 Lufatuave, charm, 
amuse. 3 Go aside, go wroug, err. 4 Dissem- 
ble. 6 Prevaricate. o(Ms) Linprecate. Sh. 
iid, they erred. 

saobhach,tf a. Dissimulating. 

saoohadu, -aidh, s. n. "LIuroing aside, act of 
turniug as'de or misleading. 2 Infatuation, 
act of infatuating. 3 State of becoming silly. 
4 Act of going wrong. 5 Uissempling, act of 
disssmbliug or prevaricatinz. 6 [mprecation. 
7 Foolishuess. 8 Error. 9 Amusemeut, 10 As: 
servation, A S—, pr.pt. of saobh. 

saobhaidh, en, s.f. Theden of a wild beast. 2 
Litter and den of a fox. 

saobhail, @ Ervon2ous— Dàin I. Ghobha. 

saobhal, SutA'd. for saogual. 

saobn-aoradh,** -aidh, s.m. Superstition. 

saobh-chainut, -e, -ean, s.f. Foolish or imperti- 
nent talk. 2 Prattle, gabble. 

—each, -eicue, a. Prattling, gabb- 
ling, talking foolishly. 2 Fond of idle or fool- 
ish talk, 

S1obn-char, -chuir, see saobh-ghnothach. 

saobh-cuiall, -chéiil, s.f. Nouseuse. 2 Folly, 
stupidizy. 


Coveted, 
































S ach,** -aiche,a. Foolisa, nonsensical, 

cupid, 

savbn-choire, -an & -achan [**-choirichean, |s.m. 
W hiripool. 

ach, a, Having whirlpools. 

sacba-chomheada, Sse 380vi1-Chalunt. 

savbu-cud.uoraideach,-eicie, see s100hb-chainnt- 








j 


} 
saobh-chomhraideach | 


each. 

saohh-chràbhach,tt -aich, sem. Hvpocrite. 

ganbh-ehrabhich, -aiche, a Superstitious. 2 
Insincere, f ise. hearted, hypocritical. 

gAo^h-chràbbadh, -Aidh, -aidhean, s.m.) Super- 
stition. 2 False devotion, hypocrisy. j 

saobh-chràbhair,** s.m. Hypocrite. | 

&guobh-chrenieach, see saohh-chreidmheAch. 

gaobh-ehreidiene,** s.m. Superstitious br eredu- 
lous person. 2 Heretic 

saobii-chreidinh, s m. Superstition. 2 Hetero- 
doxv, hecesy. 3°*Wild opinion, 

saobh-chreilmieach, -eiche, a. Superstitious. 2 
Heterodox, hereiical. — ^ | 

eerie reegen 7 sl, ` E: f. Superstitieds 
person. 2 Holder of heterodoxy or heresy, 
heretic. 

Sa ;bh-ehireidmheachd, s.f. see saobh-chreidimh. 

siobh-fhàidn, -ean, s.in. False prophe». 

—--—erchd, s.f. Fals: prophecy. 

siobb-ghlor, -dir, s.m. Vain-zlory. 2¢}see saobh- 
chainnt. 

——ach, -aiche, a. Vain-glorious. 
saobh-chaiunteaeh. 

savbh-ghnothach,t{ -aich, -aichean, s.m. Job. 

saobh-léigh, s.m. Quack, 

gaobh-mhiann, -a, -an, s.m, Foolish or vain de- 
sire. 2 Dishonest or iniquitous wish. 3 False 
appetite. 4 Punctiliousness. 5 Idle ambition. 

saobh-mhiannach, -aiche, a@, Desiring vain 
things. 2 Having iniquitous wishes or de- 
sires, 3 Having a false appetite. 4 Punctili- 
ous. 5**Foolishly ambitious. 

saobh-nos, -dis, -an, s. 9n. Bad habit. 2 Bad 
breeding. 3 Anger, indignation. — 4 Foolish 
habit. 

saobh-nósach, -aiche, a. Having bad or vicious 
habits, 2 Unmannerly, ill-bred. 3 Angry. 4 
Morose, peevish. 

gaobh-sgeul, -sgedil, s.% Idle talk, 2 Romance, 
fiction. 3^**Imvrobable tiction. 

saobh-sveulach,-aiche,a@. Telling tales or roman- 
ces. 

saol.h-sgeulachd, -an,s.f. Idle tale, fiction, 2 
Telling of tales, . 

saobh-sgeulaiche, -an, s. m. Teller of fictitious 
tales, romancer, novelist, 

saobh-sgriobhadh, -ailh, -aidhean, 8$. m. Bad 
writing. 2 Libel, libellous composition, 

gaobh-sgriohhair, -ean, s.m. Libeller. 

s2obh-sheacdh, see saobh-sneagh. 

ach, see saobh-sheaghach. 

gaobh-sheagh, -a, -an, s.m. Equivocation, 

saobh-sheavhach, -aiche, @& Equivocal. 

saobh-shruth, -a, -an, s.j, Eddy, eddying tide. 
2 Contrary current. 

saobh-shruthach, -aiche, æ. Abounding in eddy- 
ing tides. 

saobii-smavoin, see saobh-smuin. 

gaobh-smuain, -tean, s. m. Vain or foolish 
thought. ? Wicked or dishonest thought. 3 
Whim. 4 False conception, idea or conceit. 5 
tt Distraction, ! 

saobh-smuaineadh, see saobh-smuain. 

gaod, -aoid, s.m. Care, attention. 2 State,trim, 
condition. 3*Prosperous condition, 4 Hope, 
expectation. 5 Track, journey. 6 Good hu- 
mour., 7 Expedient. 8ttActivity. 91 Inten- 
tion. 

Cuir s. air. put it in æ likely or prosperous 
condition ; 'dé'n s. a th' ort ? how do you do ? 
gun s. air dol as, without an expedient to eg: 
cape; feumaidh sinn s. a chuir air, we must de- 
vise an expedient to accomplish it, or we must 
put him in good humour. 

saodach, -aiche, @. Careful, attentive. 2 In good 
condition. 3 In good health, strong. 4** 





2 see 











Digitized by 


NTERNET ARCHIVE 


788 


gnoibhreag 


Driving, as cattle. 

sa^dacbadh, -ailh, s.m. Driving. 2 Act of driv- 
ER cattle to pasture, or to a resting-placs fur 

"ne night, 

**Tiking evre of. A’ 8—, pr. Di, of saod uch, 

sa d “ich, pr.pt. a’ svodacha th, v.a. Drive catt e 
or flocks to pasture, or to à resting-place for 
the wight. 2 Conduct. 3 Tenl, take care of. 
d (MS) Run. 5* Coax away in good humour, 
[t gives saodaidh for No. 1j | 

saodaichear, fut. pass. of saodaich. 

saodaichte, past part. of saodaich, Driven to 
pa-ture, or to a restinz-plaee ror the night, as 
cattle or flocks. 27lended, taken care of. - 

gaodail, tt a. Active, careful. 

saodar, see saodmhor. 

s20 nan, s.m, see sioidhean. 

fsaodh, s. Pain, 

saodmhor, -oire, @ In good conlition. 2 Well, 
in good health. 3 Prosperous, successful. 4 
ARE 5* On good terms, 6* Well-plan- 
ned. i 

saodmhoireachd,** s.f. Prosperity. 2 Good con- 
dition of heaith or fortune. 

saoduchadh, see saodachadh. 

saodu ch, see saodaich. 


saoghal, -ail, -an, s.m. The world, a world. 2 


Age, generation. 3 Life, lifetime. 4 Means, 
wealth, substance, riches. 5 Business of life, 
occupation, pursuits, 6 Subsistence, livin. 
l'eadh an t-s., throughout the world ; fad do 

shaoghail, durin your life-time ; s. tala (huic! 
long life to you ! droch sh., bad times; mo 
chuid de’n t-s.! my dearest dear ! (lit. my. 
all); ma gheibh mi s., if I live; wa bhitheas 
s, agam, or ma gheibh mi a, if I live; gu s. 
nan s., heveforti and for ever; an saoghal 
salach, the deceitful world ; air son an t-saogh- 
ail. for the whole universe; c' ait’ air an 
t-saoghal am bheile ? where in the world ùs 
he? cha bu sh. dhaibh am beatha tuilleadh, 
their life was life to them no more ; cha 
mhath an s. an t-sealg, Auntiny ts a poor liv- 
inj ; cùram an t-saoghail worldly care ; air 
fad an v--aoghail, or air feadh an t-saoghail, 
throughout the world, It is said of auyoue 
who is prospering in the world, Tha 'n s. aiga 
air sheot, he has ihe world by the tail—DMK. 

saoghalach, -aiche, a. see ssozhaltach, 

saoghalachil, see saoghaltachd. 

saoglia'an, -ain, s.m. Old man. 

saogüalra,-ailte, a. Worldly, of the world. 2 
Devoted to the world, covetous. 8 Impious, 
ungodly. 4 Secular. 5 Terrestrial. 6 Long- 
lived. Foghlum s, worldly wisdom, 

saoghaltach, -aiche, q. see saoghalta. 

saoghaltachd, s.f. Love of worldly things, con. 
formity to the ways of the world, worldii- 
ness. 2 Longevity. 

saoi, see saoidu. 

sioibh,-e, @ Foolish, senseless. 2 Peevish, 
morose. 3**Mad. 

saoibh-chleasachd, an, sf. Buffoonery. 

saoibhir, -e & -bhre, a. Rich, wealthy, opulent, 
2*Plentiful, pretty full. Còta s., a pretty-fuit 
coat, an easy coat; bliadhua sh.,a plenitfud 
year ; duine s., @ rich man. 

saoibhneach, -eiche, æ. see saotbh. 2**Joylexs. 

saoibhneas, -eis, s.m. Dulness, heaviness, pse- 
vishness, sorrow, moroseness, joylessness. 

saoibnneasach, -aich, a. Causing dulness, hog- 
viuess, sorrow, moroseness or joylessness. 

saoibhreach, see saoibhir. 2 Enriching, fertile. 

saoibhreachadh, -aidh, s. m. Enriching, act of 
making rich. 2 Prospering, state of prosper- 
ing, prosperity. A’ s—, pr.p'. of saoibhrich. 

saoibhreas, -eis, s.m. Wealth,opulence, AL denga, 


Original from 


| II ZEE | "PAK TA EB E EK E08 DE A 
VUE II | " i E- f P n E | 
UN EAS T Or ECLI d Lilo A 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


3 Conduetinz,zuiling,tenling. 4. 


i 
at 


E 


| 


gaoibhreas 


2 Prosperity,success. 3 Plenty. 4(M3) Bliss- 
fulness, 

saoibhreasach, see saoibhir. 

saoibhreasaich,(MS) v.a. Elate. 

Baoibhrieh, pr.pt. a’ saoibhreachadh, v.g. & n. 
Enrich, make rich. ? see soirbhich. 

—te, past pt. of saoiuhrich. Enriched, 
made rich. 

sroibhsgeul,** -sgeòil, s.m. Fable. [also saobh- 
sgeul—with hyphen.] 

eaoidh, -ean,s.m. Goo, worthy or deserving per- 
son. 2 Righteous min, 3 Generous, brave 
or magnanimous man. 4 Warrior, hero. 5 
Learned man, man of letters. 6 Tutor, pre- 
ceptor. 7 (AF) Mare. 8*"Nobleman. 9 see 
savidhean. 10**Worthy. Saoidhean Mhanuis, 
Manus’ warriors, 

sa idh, -e, a. Good, worthy, deserving. 2 Gene- 
rous, brave, magnauiinous. 3 Godly, pious. 4 
ileroic. 

saoidh, (CR) sm, Tub—Arran. 

si0:dn,** s.f. Hay. S. loin, meudow-hay; muinn- 
tir na gehat, the hay-makers Feur-saoidhe, 
natural hay that grows on alluvial soil—not 

1v adow-hay—(DMK.) 

gacidh-dana, s.m. Poet. 

sxoidh-dhearg, s.f. Sainfoin (plant.) 

savidheaiair,** -ean, $n, Hay-cutter. 2 Hay- 
maker. 





—-eachd,** s.f. Hay-cutting. 2 Hay- 
making. 
sSxoidhealachd,** s.f. Generosity. 








615. Saoidhean. 


gaoidhean, -ein, -an, 3. m. The coal-fish, saithe. 
Nained according to itsage as follows :— 
Ist year, Siol or siolagan. 
tnd. year, Cudaig, cudainn or saoidhean. 
3rd. year, Smalay, cuideanach or saoidhean. 
4th. year, Saoidhean or piocach. 
5tn. year, Saoidhean dubh or saoidhean mór. 
6th. year, Ucsa or ugsa. 

[1st. year, Cudaig ; 2nd. year, Smalag ; ard. 
year, Saoidhean ` 4th. year, Saoidhean mor ; 
after 4th. year, Ucas- —Lewis, (DMy.)] 

Bu mhath a’ chudaig far nach faight’ an saoidh- 

. eau, the cuddy is good when no saithe can be 
got. The young saithe is called cuddy in some 
parts of Scotland, and pod/y in others, Itis 
sillock in Shetland, Raasay people are nick- 
named ‘ na saoitheanan.' 

gaoidhean, n.pl. of saoidh. 

saoiiheanach, -aiohe, a. Abounding in coal-fish 
or Saithe, 

820idhean-dubh,(AF) s. m. Coal-fish in its 5th, 
year, in some places erroneous!y called lythe. 

saoidhean-mór, see saoidhean-dubh. 

gaoidhear,** s.m. Hay-maxer. 

saoil, -e, “ean, s.f. Seal, see seula. 

saoil, pr.pt. a saoileadh, v.a. see s»ulaich. 

saoil, pr.pt. a’ saoilsinn, a’ saoiltinn, & a’ saoil- 
eachdainn, v. n. Think, suppose, imagine. 2* 
Seem, Sh. mi, I thought or imagined ; ans, 
thu ? do you think ? sh. e gur e nàmhaid a bh’ 
ann, he thought he was an enemy; nach s.thu ? 
do you not think ? shaoileadh duine, one would 
suppose ; ma shaoileas tu,if you think or jug»; 
€ ait’ an deach e; saoil thu ? where do you | 
think he has gone ? 


789 gaor 


saoilea: Phdainn, -«an, s.m. Suppositi um. 2 Think- 
ing, ty hought, refl:ctioa. Prov. A’ s—, pr.pt. o£ 
saoi 

panei h, -aidh, s.m. & pr.pt. of savil, see seul» 
adn 

saoileam h, v. ** Methinks.” 2 Ist. per. sing. imp. 
of sav iil, Let me think.’ 

saoile r,4** ful.vass, of saoil. 

saoilidh,i iu fu’ CH a. Of saoil. 

saoilnea: -eis, - m. Opinion, supposition, 

saoilseanjach, A gt j sinneach. 

saoil«inn , -e, 8.7. Thinking, act of thinking,sup. 
posing,c im igining or judging. A’ s—, pr. pt. 
of s oil. 

saoilsinn:pach,** a. Deducible. 2 Imaginant. 

saoilsinn: as, ** xin. Deducement. 

Salt, sye sulta. 

saoiltiun, i-e, See saoilsinn. 

saoiltinn as, -eis, see savilneas, 

saoimeacl ,** g. see svimeach, 

— LL see soim-achd. 

savineil, a. Well-seasoned—Dain I. Ghobha. 

sa vi-vileant, a, -einte, a. Well-trained, educated. 
2 Well-br d. Each s. sith- fhada, æ well-traim- 
ed, bouny ny steed. 

saoir, g^ yb. of saor. 

saoire,* a. f.i Ch»apness. 

saoire, vlr of saor. Na’s s., cheaper. 

saoire,"* $.7p/. Festivals, holidays. 

sa iread, SN s.m. Degree of cheapness. A’ dol 
aD S., gett iny cheaper and cheaper, . 

saoilreal,* Yu sm. Freestone. 

wel x 
J. 





9101; shean (MS) s.n. Liberality. 
saoirse, 8.f. j See Saorsa. 

Ach,*!* -aich, s.m. Freeman, 
ach, j-aiche, see saorsachail, 
SH see Saorsachd. 











saoirsinn, skee saorsainn. 
savirsinneadhd, see saorsainneachd, 
saoirsne,( M! ) 8. Allowance. 
gaoirsneach , see saorsainneachd. 
saoith, * * spe saoidh. 
saoith, see ‘sùith. 
saoitheag, see sübhag. 
saoithealactad, see saoidhealachd. 
saoitheil,** «ww. Expert. 2 Generous (saoidh). 8 
Skilful, f| Learned. 
saoithreach, ‘a, see saothrachail. 
saoithreacb, js. see saothraiche. 
saoith'reach, 1in Mackintosh's G. Proverbs is for 
soradh, gru dying, 
saoithreacha: h, see saothrachadh, 
saoiuhreachai|l, see saothrachail. 
saoithrich, sete saothraich. 
—e, jn saothraiche. 
saonas, tf -ais , sf. Vexation. 2(WC) Offence, 
Ghabh e s.,, he took offence, j 
ach,** @. Peevish. 
———achd, s).f. Peevishness. 
saor, -aoire, «y. Free, at liberty, not enslaved. 2 
Uucompellerd, unrestrained, free from engage- 
ments of ang kind. 3 Permitted, allowed. 4 
Freed, set ajt liberty, delivered. 5 Exempt, 
clear. 6 Fr\ee, gratuitous, not purchased. 7 
Free, liberali, frank, not parsimonious. 8 Free, 
unrestrained], unrestricted. 9 Cheap. 10 Free, 
familiar, unreserved. 11 Free, without ob- 
structions or} impediments, 12 Easily split or 
broken, as wibod or stone. 13*Absolute. 14 
15 Ransomed}. 
Sometimes} used before its noun, as, saor- 
thabhartas, db free offering. Buntàta s., cheap 
potatoes ; clalnu na moa saoire, the children of 
the free womdin ; s o'u mhionnan, free from 
the oath ; s. o) 'n alladh sin, free of that asper- 
sion ; aia is’ a mach saor thu, Z shall take 
| you out sree! of expense ; bheir mi dha gu s., 















E ee E 
J shall give hin freely ; clach sh., fre 
ùine sh., vacaion, holidays; saor chaitt-tealan, 
free lodgings. it 

gaor, pr.pt.a saoradh, oa, Free, deli, ver, res- 
cue, liberate, 2 Save, redeem. 3 EX,:cept. 4 
Acquit. 5 Set at liberty, disentaug:e. €; Cneap- 
en, make cheaper. 7 Absolve, 8*P urge, 9 
(AH) “ Ship," as an oar. 10* Free oid as)er- 
sion or calumny. S. am  boireaun|,ch geo, 
clear this woman (from scandai); | cha sh. 
mi thu, Z will not acquit you; 8. do ràimh, 
“ship,” or take in your oars. 

aor, gen. & pl. -aoir, dat. pl. saoir, s.m.': Carpen- 
ter, joiner. Tuagh an làimh an t-saor r, an aze 
in the carpenter’s hand. 
g.-bhataichean, æ boat-builder, 2 @ 8) rip’s car- 

penter. 
s.-chairtean, a cartwright. 
s.-charbad, a coach-builder. 
s-chlach, a stone-mason, slone-hewen: and pol- 
isher. 
s.-chuidhlean, a wheelwright. 
s.-fheuna, a cartwrivht. 
s.-lninge, æ ship-builder. 2 a ship's 
s.-mhuilnean, @ millwright. 

tsaor, -aoire, a. Noble. ; 

3aor, conj. Except, save. Saor o dh'fthis, except 
Zo, persons, save (wo perso A8 ; 8. op na dh’ ith 
na h-òganaich, except that which) the young 
men have eaten. h 

saorach, -aiche, a. see saothrach. t»**Freeing, 
ransoming. 3 Exeinpting. 4 Chea/peaiug. 

saorachadh, -aidh, s. m. Cheapen ne, act of 
cheapening or making cheap^r  A**Freeing, 
setting ab liberty, ransoming. 3 | Acquittal. 
A’ s—, pr.pt. of saoraich. i 

saorachd. s.f. Freedom state of ux ig free, ac- 


carpenter. 


quittance. 2 Chearness. 

saoradair, -ean, 8.m, Liberator. 

saoradh, -aidh, s.m. Freeing, act of | freeing, de- 
livering, rescuing, liberating, libe'rarion, free- 
dom. 2 Deliverance, rescue. 3 Sajving, act of 
saving, redeeming, redemption. 4/Acyuitiing, 
act of acquitting or absolving. 5f Act oftis- 
entangling or setting at liberty, elnancipation. 
6 Cheapness. 7 Discharge of a sofi iier, 8 Ran- 
soming. 9*Hxemption. 10* Absudution. 11'/D 
Mu) Oath, impreca:ion. Fire ukair e leis na 
saoraidhean bu mhó, he answered with the 
strongest imprecations—-Suth'd. | A’ s—, pr.pt. 
of saor. 

gaoragan, see sadharcan. 

saoraich, pr.pt. a’ saorachadh, el a Cheapen, 
make cheaper. 2 Rescue. 3 Acquit, set at 
liberty. 4-'Affranchise.  5** Hansom. [tt 
gives s. for saothraich.] 

ett see saothraicae. 

te, past pt, of saoraich. Chéapened, made 
cheaper. ( 

saoranach,** -aich, 
independant man, burgess, at in denizen. 

saoranachaith, s.m. Deuizaiion. 

saoranachd,** s.f. State of being free, condition 
of a freed man or burgess. | . 

ng. 2 Cheapening. 











saoradh,tf -aidh, s.m.  F'reei 
3 (MS) Answer. i 

gaoranaich,** see saoraich, 4. 

gaor-bhàta:chean, s.m. Boat-builder,shipwright. 
2 Ship's carpenter. hé A 

saor-chairtean, s.m. Cartwright, 

saor-chlach, s.m. Mason. 

saor-chlann, s.f. Fr»emen. l 

parchenn, -ais, s.n. Unrestrained liberty,free 
will. 

Saor-chridheach, -eiche, qd. 
did. 2 Unbetrothed. 

saor-chridheachd, s.f. Candour, 
candidness, 


Free-hearted, can- 


\ 
ingenuousaess, 


Diait 


EITCORICT ABI ki 
Ak |= FT A Y 


— 


Le V 


s.m. Free mån, freed man, 


790 saothail 

sıor-chuairt, -8, -ean, sf. Circulation, free cir» 
eu'ariou, S. na fola, the circulation of the 
b/ood. | 

|815r-ehuidhlean, sm, Wheelwright. | 

saor-ihail,** s.f. Acquittance. 2 Cheapness. 3 
Freedom. 

saor-dhalach,** a. Cheap. 2 Free. 

saor-dhionadair, -ean, s.m. Volunteer (soldier.) 

saor-dhnais, s. Premium (in commerce.) 

saor-fheuna, s.m. Cartwright. 

SAOrzan, s.m. Peewit—Arran. 

saor-inntinneach, -e:che, o Having'an easy 
mind. 2 liaving freedom of thought or liber- 
ty ofeons^ience. | 

d, s.f. Ease or quietness of mind, 

2 Liberty of thonght or of conscienee. 








| Saor-inntinniche,** s.m. Free-thinker, ` 


SAor-ioingeis,* san. Ship-builder. - 

saor-luinge, sm. Ship-builder. 2 Ship's carpen- 
ter. 

TTE s.m. Mill-wright. [saor-mhuil- 
inn 


saorsa, s.f. Liberty, freedom. 2 Deliverance. 3 


Redemption. 4*Cheapness. 5* Abatement, 
S.o 'n ole, freecom from evil; 3. an ni seo, 
the cheapness of this thing ; is mór au t-suim 
air an do cheannaich mi an La seo, great vs 
the sum with which I purchased this freedom. 
saorsach, -aiche, see saursachail. 
adh,** -aidh, s.m. Cheapening. 
ail, -e, @ Free, unrestrained. 2 Giving 
freedom, 
d, see saorsa. 2 see saorsainneachd. 
saorsadh. -aidh, see saorsa. ! 
Ssaorsaiich,** v.a. Atfranchise. 2 Chenapen. 
SAorsaiun, see svorsadh. 
--vachad, s.f. Carpentry, joinery. 2 Of- 
fice of a deiiyerer or releemer. 3 State of 
being redeemed or saved. | 
Some terms used in Joinery Ze 
Fiacaill, duve-tail, 
Fiodh grobte, grooved timber, 
Glaodhadh, gdueing, 
Grobadh, grooving. 
Ite, feather. 
Locrach. planing. 
Peang. tenon. 
Jarc-ph sang. mortice 
'Ta: ih, splicing. 
‘Lruain, screw. 
saorsanach, -aich, sm. He!perat work, 9 Fr 
labourer, unhired worker. 3tt Free man. 
saor-shealbhadair, see saor-sheilbheadair, 
saor-shellbh, --a", sf. Fre»houl4 poss-ssion, 
——edair, ean, 8 m. Freeholder, one 
having a freehold possession. | 
saor-thabuairt,** s. f. Giving freely or volune 
tarily. 





——— 








———ear, -ir, -an, $. m. One who gives 
freely, voluntarily, liberally or gratuitous!y. 
Sior-thabhartas, -ais, -an, s.m Free gift, froe- 
will oifering. 

saor-thio:n'ae, -ean, see saor-thabhartas. 

saor-thoil. -e, s.f. Free-wiil. 

saor-thoileacn, -ich, s.m. Volunteer. 

saor-th. irbheartas, -ais, s.m. Free gift. 

saor-Lhoirt, see saor-thabhairt. 

s20r-tliüis, e, -ean, $.f. Krankincense, 

tsaoth,-aoith,s.f. Lx op, 2 Tribulation. 3 Pun- 
ishment. 4 visorder, disease, evil 5 Priuce. 
6 L fe, existence. 

tsaoth, v.a. Castigate, punish. 

saothuch, see soitheach. 

saothach, a. Casligatory. 

saothachan,** .ain, see soitheachan., 

saothadh, -aidh, s.m. Castigation, exculpating, 
exculpatiou. | | : 

saothail,** -e, a. Laborious, toilsuuine. 2 Paias- 

Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF 


| r3 E ^ RI Pi g | nh NEEDS AER 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


A. mg 


EFI É okies ATI 
LLI N Lila H, | 


eaothai! 


t^king. 

sacthair, gen. -thrich fsvoithreach,**] -thraich- 

. etn, s.f. Labour, toil.work. 2 ‘Travail, pins 
ef cunill-bed. 3** Ado. 4** service Work, 
arudgery. iss. leis, he thinks i£ a hard mat- 
tr;s. chloiune, travail, labour of child-ved ; 
he iworan s., with much toil ; deanaibh s., la- 
bour, toil ; gabh s., bestow pains, tol for it; 
luach savthraca, what it is worth one's while 

or pains ; eha'n fhiach dhuit do sh., it is not 
worth your while; air bheagan s., without 
much trowole ; taileamh mo shaothrach, the 
yesu't of my toil; an s., in great travail, la- 
bour of child-bel adi aindeoin do shaoth- 
rach, in spit» of a'l your labour. 

S&othair, [saobh-thir] s.m. False-land, side- 

dand, iow promontory covered at high-water, 
thes milar bink between an Eilean Tioram 
aniline mainland. | 

Sa»'tiir,** van, Punisher, torturer. 2 Diseased 
mun. 

8A..hair-Ihvmh,(AF) s.n. Labouring ox. 

Baotnalireuch, æ. see saotharach. 2 (MS) Ad- 
vencurous. 

saoth iire^»cnai!.** see saothrach. 

exotharieh, -aich2, a. se» saothrach. 

Siotharcan,** , n. sse sadharcan. 

Saolhargan, see sa. lhiarcan. 

820 hmor,** æ. ‘Loilsome, !aborious, grudging. 2 
Dithenlt, 

——achd,** s.f. Toilsomeness, 

saoth-phort,** -phuirt, s.m. Imposthume, 

840: hracn,-aiche,a. Laborious,ta «ine great pains, 
bestowing much labonr. 2 Diffi:ult. 3 Uthat 





cossmuch paius or labour, toiigome. 4 Ser- 
vie. 
&ithrach.$.. Labour, fatigue, work. 2 gən. 


of svothaiv. | 

saothracha.th, -aidh, s.m. Labouring, act of la- 
bourinz, bestowing pains or care, 2 Working, 
ploduing, 3 Toil, tillage. A’ S—, pr. pt. of 
saothraich. 

Sa thracnail, a see saothrach. 

84 ihriich, v.a. n. Labour,work, bestow pains. 
2 Piod. 3 Labour, till ground, dr.ss, as s. il. 
4 Mi=) Manufacture, An nia shaothraich mi 
air asnon, what I toild for ; sh. mia nuas, 4 
prim self to the trouble of coming down ; tiu. 
tou orm saothracnadh, you put me tothe trou- 
bie of coming; S. am fearann, labour ihe 
ground. 

——_———e, -an, 8, "m. Labourer, workman, 
working-mau, 2 One who takes much pains, 
ploduer. 3 Churl. [| MeL& D gives mom. 

-siothraich, g u. -e, s.m.] 

Svochruich, S :e Sivuthraich. 

sapair, s. Gaelic form of sapphire, 

———each,** a. Pertaining to, or abounding 
in, sapphires. 

sàpheir, -eau, 8m. See sànair. 

sar, An augmentative prefix, expressing a creat 
devree oi any quality, — S. enothrom, an rg- 
cli^nt opportunity ; s. gha-sgeach, a comolete 
hero ; s. cla, q dog, every inch of him; s. 
shiaolair, @ mos’ «oandoned villain ; ** Sar 
Oonir nam bard Gàidhealach ” the Beauties of 
Gaelic Poetry--—a well-known collection of G. 
posms, [Always placed before its nouus, and 
aspirates a all aspirabie consonants, i.e. all ex- 
< s, followed by any cousonant except l, n, 
(E 

fa, a. Excellent, matchless. 2 Noble, brnve. 

sar,** v.a. Apprehend, 

Bar, Ar sm. Hero, brave warrior. 2 Wor- 
tny, excekent man, Cha robh eagal air sàr 
riami, a true hero never knew fear ; chualas le 
8. à ghuth, & hero heard his voice ; a S:àr | O 


791 


càr-laoch 
MM — H— —— —— — 
hero! . 

Sar, ica) s.m. Oppression, violence, 2 Distress, 
difficu'jty, 3 s»e sàradh. 4 Stoppa ze.hinder- 
aCe, p Ir»vention. Cuir s. "aan obair, put à 
stop to | the work. 

sar, -Alr, j-an, sf. Tick, sheep-louse. 

Sarat, S» sar, 


sar-ab,* s. Chief abbot. 

sar abnicin.** æ, Quire ripe. 

sarach,(A 4F) s. Salmon. 

saracn, "Ache, o, A bounding in sheep-lice,lousy. 

sarach, $.72n. see sàrachadh. 2 Opposing, putting 
a stop tch. 

sàraciadij -aidh, sm. 





] Oppressing, act of op- 
pressing, distressing or doing violence to any- 
one. 2| tlaras<ing wearying, fatiguing. 3 
Wronzinlg, act of wreng'ng or injuring. 4 Act 
of rescu 1, violently or illegally. 5 Oppress- 


ion, viol? nee. 6 Strait. 7 Fatigue, 8 Infringe- 


mn, 9\Perplexing. 10 Conquest, vietory. 
dt tf;xtort iion. A’ s—, print. of sàraich. ’G 
am 3h., 0?pp;^$ssing Or harrassing me. 


sàraciail,-e| a. Oppressing, using violence. 2 
Haras ing), fatiguing, wearying, wearisome, 
buriensonhe, oppressive, tiresome. 3 Wrong- 
ing, 1"J"ITAng, that injures. 4 Onerous, re- 
quiring pons or trouble. 

sà achair,** 1s. Oppressor, harasser. 2 Con- 
queror. 3 JExtortioner. 4Infrin,er. 6 One 
who rcs uei, violently or illegally. 

ai lhean,s.m. \rrestment for debt, 
2 Obstaele, opposition, impedi- 


sàradh, -aidh 
distraiuing), 
3ffionsamption, 4 Broaching—sar- 


ment. 
Obair. 

:arag, -aig, "hn, s.f. dim. of sar. Little louse. 

3sarag.** -aig, et Gloss. 

yaragaci,”* (y. Lousy. 

sàraich, pr.pv, a’ sàrachadh, v.a. Oppress, dis- 
tross, use Violence. 2 Harass, weary, fatigue, 
vex, trouble, 3 Wrong, injure, deal unjustly 
with one. "4 Rescue violently or illegally. 6 
**Uonquer. 6 Put to trouble. 7* Burden. $* 
Overcome. 

sara.che, "Af, b.m. Oppressor. 2 One who har- 
arses, WeAaTIe s, fatigues or troubles, 3 One who 


wrongs Or IDures, 4 One who rescues violent- 
ly or illegally 

sarvichte, pis^. pt, of sàraich. Oppressed. 2 
Wrong d. injured. 3 Harassed, wearied, fa- 

4 Rescued violently 


tigueu, vexed), troubled. 
or illegally. 5**Gonquered, 6 Perplexed. 7 
8* Beaten, 


* Exhausted. 
-Àr-bhau,** s.f. Excellent woman. 
sàr-bheachd.** s. f, Good thought, deep thought. 
sar-bhuilie, ** s.f. Heavy blow. 
sar-bhuillerch,** o. Heavy-handed. 2 Giving 

heavy blows. ` 
sàr-chiù. (MS) ».m. Acclamation. 
sàr-chumpach, |g, Well-shaped. Na laoigh òga 

Sliosrach, dìreach, sàr-chumpach, the young 

glossy wei-et, Shapely calves, — Dvnn. Bàn, p.60. 
sàrda:l, -ean, SJ Sprat. 2 (AF) Sardine. 7 
sardaileach,** a.' Abounding in, or pertaining to, 

Sprals. A 
sar-\hochar, 21 an. ssm. Excessive hurt. 
sàr-dhuine, D/. -dhaoine, s.m. Excellent man. 

(For the ditferénce in meaning between duine 

and fear, see diine.] 
sàr-fhear, -fhir,| s. m. Excellent individual, 

worthy. 
sar-fhios, -a, 8.m, Certain knowledge. Tha s. 
agam, I know quite well. 
rach, -ai¢he, a, Having complete or per. 
fect knowledge, 
sàr-ghoileach, -eiche, a. Insatiable. 
cic NEGAC f.ind. Insatiableness. 
sar-laoch,** -laoich, s.m. Great hero. 






sar leat i 
sar leat, for soraidh leat. J 
sàr-lion, v.a. Incre se. | 
sar-mhaise, s.f. Great beauty or han Ia Amen zeg. 
-—ac, .eiche, a. Exceadiagly vjesutfu:. 
sàr-mhaith, a. Exevredingly good, exellent, 
gàr-ogan,** -ain, s.m. Excelleat young’ woman. 
sàr-righ,** s.m. Czar. | 
saruchadh, -aidh, see sàrachadh. 











saruchail, see sàrachail. 

Saruich, ses sàraich. 

te, see sàraichte., 

sàr-ümhal, aile, a. Very obedient, veiry submis- 
sive. 

gas, -àis, s.m. Straits, difficulties, ad'versiby. ? 
Confinement, bondage, 
durance. 3 Hold, grasp, grapple}, 
tress, trouble, Thae’ns. he is iry eus'ody ; 
air dha vhi an s., having happened to be in 
durance ;isma han s. thu fhéu ain sin ; you 
yours-lf are wel equal to that ; thia thu daonn- 
an an s. an rud-eigin, yov are always busy al 
somethin}; an s. teaun, in sore raubas tha 
na balaich an s., the boys ër: fighting or wrest- 
ling ; tha 'n crodh an s. a chéile , the cattle ave 
pushing each other. 

gàs,** a. Fast, laid hold of, 2 Straijtened. 3 Dis- 
tressed. 4rarvly, Capable. Th ’n casin an 
S., their feet are fast (ensnared ) ; chaidh an 
snàthad an sas 'nam chois, the needle pierced 
my foot ; chaidh e ’n sas (in Suth "d cha’ 'sàs) 
he stuck fast. 

gàs, -ais, -au, s.m. Instrument, engíine. 2 Means. 
3 Cause. 4** Arms, 

gas, v.a. Lay hold of, sieze upon. 
adhere to 3** Grasp, grap le. 

gàásich, -aiche, a. Apt to grasp, 3 hold of or 








2 Fix upon, 


fasten upon. 2 satiatiug, satisf ving or glut- 

ting, 3 Satiated, glutted. 4**O/f a grasping 
disposition. 

sasachaith, -aidh, s,m. Satiating, 
ing, filling or cloyisg. 2**Ciree 
pr. pt. of sasaich. A's. na f 
the lusts of the flesh. 

sàsachil, sto, Readiness to grfasp or lay hold 
of. 2 Abundance, satiety, clofyment, su/tici- 
ency, repletion, saturation. S[Greediuess. 4 
tt Bonds, fetters, res raint. 

sasadh,** -aidh, s.m. Satisfaction, comfort. 2 
Content. 3 Sufficiency, fu.n Aas, 

Basag, -aig, -an, s.f. Straw-chir, a rude chair 
made of twisted straw. 2 Vejs-l, se» bra. No. 
12, p. 112. (DMy says s. is [the large basket 
into which the meal goes through the hand- 
sieve, the coarse or bran ldft in the sieve 
being emptied 1nto the rusganf J] 3 ( WC)Cush- 
ion made of straw. 

sasag, s.f. Kin! of basket suae shape as the 
rusgan (which see) but of dt diderent size— 
Lewis. id 

sasagaeh, -aiche, a; Having stijaw-chairs. 2 Of, 
or belonging to, straw-chaivss. 3 Clumsy awk- 
ward. 4 Corpulent, thick-sot. 

sàsaich, pr.pt. a’ sasachidh, v .a. Satisfy, fill, sa- 
tiate, cloy, glut ergo 2(/MS) Bestick. 3** 
Saturate. 4*improperly usljed for sas, as sh. e 
orm, he attack d ine tooth cond mail. 

te, past pt. of sasaich.4, Satisfied, filled, 
satiated, sated, cioved. 

Basamh,** s. m. Pleasure, satisfaction. 2 
Amends, i 

sàs la, sàiste, a. Easy, comforti able, satisfied,hav- 
ing peace of minl. 2* saujcy, contemptuous, 
3**Grateful. 4**Abt leisure] 5**Kasy-minded. 

sasdach, -aiche, see sasila, 

——-d, s.f.ind. Easiness 
comfort, peace of mini, co 
ciness, pride. 3**Indoieuce 

Sàsdadh, see sàsdachd. 


Digitized by 


NTERNET ARCHIVE | 


ES of satiat- 
ness. A’ s—, 
20la, satisfyiny 









y 
j 












of circumstances, 
ntentment 2*sau- 


79? 





sas budh, see sàsda. 
sisdis, -ais. ses sàs lachd., , 
, Sàs- uhort, -mhoirt, sm. Massacre, revengeful 
inurder. KE 
-————ach,** a. M»ssacring, murdering from 
revenge. | 
Adh,** -aidh, s.m. Massacre, reveng ful 
murder, 
air,** s.m. Murderer, reveng#fu! mut, 





derer. 
sast i, past pt. of sis. Fixed, fixed upon. 





sasia, @ Neat, hindsome, elegant. 
| sasiciadh, see sàsachadh. 


sàsaich, see sasaici. 


restraint], custody, | SA.h,(A F) s.m. Cattle, drove. 
4**[)is- | Sach, -àith. s.m. Plenty, g eat abundance, en- 


ou2h, as of meat or drink, surf. it, fill, satie v, 
Cha'n ith a sh. ach an cù, none but a dog «a s 
his fil; tesnn-sà n, fuli-f-ed ; is mor s a’ 
choin ghortaiciie, great ig the gorge of a jam- 
ished doy. 

Seachd szadain, sath bradain ; 

Seachd bra lain. s. voin ; 

S-ACc vd ron, s. m ic? mara bhig ; 

S:acad mucan-mira baagi, s connain crò: 
seachd eionnaia ero, s. miol-mhdir a’ chuain 5 
s ven herrings, @ full va! for a salmon ; 
seven salmon, a full mei fora sea’: 

seven sals a full meal for a small whale ; 
seven small whales a full meal for a larg» whales 
Seven iare whales, a full mea! for a bull whale; 
sev bull whales, a full meat for the L-viaihan 
of the sea. [Uh s proverb ein only apply tig- 
uratively to the comparatiye amount of food 
re ju. red to satisfy diferent sizel fishes for n») 
Whale could swallow anythiag nearly So large 
as n s:al. ' 

Sàth,** s.an. Stab, thrust. 2 Push. Fear toir- 
eadh nan s. 's gearradh nan cnàmh, a man to 
give thrusts wiih his sword and cut bones 
through with it—Chaidh na fir a dh’ òl (oid 
pi baireacid. ) 

Sath,(U it) san, Ill, in the phrase ** cha d thubh- 
airt e mith no S., he said neither good nor il— 
Arran, 


sith, pr.pf. a’ sàthadh, v.a. Thrust, 2 Transfix, 
| 3 Pus), syueeze. 4** Stab, perce. Sh. o 


’dhubhain annam. he transdced his clutches in 
me; Sh. e ana e, h^ thrust tt into him or ti > 
sathar sleagh troimhe, Ae shall be pierced 
through with a spear ; s. a staigh e, pus’ it in, 

sàthach, -aiche, @. Filing, Satiaving. 2 Caus- 
ing satiety, eating io suliecty. 3 Natiated, fiill- 
ed, satisfie l, as with food or drink. 4tfCorpa- 
nt. 5 Thrusting, giving thrusis, stabbiag, 
piercing. SN. agus acrach, full and hunyry ; 
builleanach, gwing thrusts and blows. 

sathach, see soitheach, 

sàihachadh, see sasichadh. 

sàthadh, -aidh, San, Thrust. 2 Push. 3Stab, 
4 Pierce. 5 Act of thrusting, pushing or stab- 
bing. 6 Piercing. 7 (DU) Thrust with a cas- 
chrom, spade or peat-knife, A' s—, pr.pt. of 
sath, Thug e s., he gave a thrust, 

sathaich, see sasaich. 

-———te, see sisrichte. 

fsathail, e, @ see sathach, 

sà'har, see sath. 

sath-oide,** s.m. Preceptor. 

Sathuirn, -e, s.f. (i.e. Di-sathuirn,) Saturday. 

Sathuirn, see Sa hair: 

sb For words beginning with sb, see under 

S Sp- 

sc, For words beginuing with sc, see under sg. 

gear s. Broad Seots. [Nou a good 
w ord. 

sd, For words beginning with sd, s»e under st. 

’se, (for is e, he or it is.) || Used iu answer te 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS. AT 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 





fe Kl 


di 


's e 


793 


seach 


eeng 
questions, as, An e seo e? 's e, is this he? | seabhag-riabhach,f s. f. Goshawk, see glam 


y?s. 

so, p^rs.pron, He. 

“se, emphat, poriicle, see -8a 

8e, Qd. Six. Se taighean, six houses. 

sea, Q. 82e Se. 4 

sèb, (DU) s.m. (monosyllable) Great quantity 
of food taken atone meal. 2The repietion 
or suifeit resulting therefrom. 

Scab, v.a. j' n. s:e siab. 2 see sèap. 

——ach, See séupa^n, 

Sei bah, see séap:vlh, 

Seabair, see seapair. 

eachd,** see séapaireachd, 

seabh,* v.n. Stray. 
'* sym. Quid of tobacco. 

ach, -aiche, a. Neat, tr m prov. 














— ——M o0 





616, Seabhag. 
Seabhag, -ais, -an, s. f. Peregrine falcon —falco 


pergrinus, Ceare-sheabhaiz, a fowl puid of 
old to the falconer of the lord of the soil as a 
yearly tax. Isduilehs. a dheanamh de ’n 
ch!amhan, the carrion kite will make a bad 
haw, 

seabhag, aig, -an, sf. +The spleen, 

ach, -aiche, @ Abounding in hawks or 
falcons. 2 Like, or pertaining to, a hawk or 
falcon. 

———ail, -e, a. Falcon-like, hawk-like, fierce. 

air, -eau, $n. Falconer, 

aireachd, sf.ind. Falconry, business of 

a falcouer. 

an,** -ain, s.m. Call of a hawk. 2 Place 
where hawks are kept. 

seabhiag-dhearg-chasach,] s. f£. Red-footed fal- 
con— falco rufip.s. 

seabhax-fheasgair,] s. f. Hawk-owl, ses seabh- 
ag-oilhehe. 

gea bhag-zliéarr,s. f. Ger-falcon, see géarr-sh 2abh- 











ag. 

S-abhag-zhorm,f[ s. f. Peregrine falcon, see 
seabiiag, 

seabhag- ;horm-an-fhraoich, T s.f. Merlin hawk, 
Sse m-icneal. 

seabhas-Lochlannach,%s f.Icelan.l faleou—falco 
18 aaudicus. 

seabig-miidr,Y see glas-sheabhag. 2 see gèarr- 
sheabhig, 

seabhay-mhor-bhan,7 see seabhag - mhór - na- 
seilge. 

s2abiag-mhor-ghorm, see seabhag. 3 see seabh- 
ag-Lochiannach. 

8 avna r-Mmhór-na-seilge, T s.f. Ger falcon —falco 
grernlandicus. 

s-abhag-ian-uiseag,] art Hobby falcon, see 
gormag, 

rege) 8. f. Peregrine falcon, see 
s-abhag. 

geabhag-.idhehe, T sr Night-hawk, see sgraich- 
eag-oidhene, 2 Hawk-owl—surnia funeres. 


Digitized by 


a oo An Tr 
N E r rm EN DN i V 


achas, -ais, s.m. Trimuess, nea: ness, prov. | 


sheavhag, 
seabhag-sealgair, see seabhag. 
eabhald, -e, -ean, s. f. Error. 2 Wandering, 
going astray. 3**Range. Air s., astray. 
sabhail, v.a. Wander, go astray. 2 Run hith- 
er and thither. 

—each, -eiche, a. Wandering, excursive. 2 
Apt to wander or go astray, straying. 3 Err- 
ant, erratic. i 

——eachil, s.f.ind. Habit of wandering. 2 
Aptness to wander or go astray. 3 State of 
being astray. 

seabhaidich, see seabhaid. 

———e, -in, s.m. Wanderer. , 

seabhais, see seanhas, 

seabhaiseach, se seabhasach. 

—— i, see seabhasachd, 

seabhaltrach,* aan, Straggler. 

seabhas, -ais, -an, s.n. Wandering, 2 Fatigue, 
weariness. 3**Labour. 4**Strojling, stroll. 

séabhas,(CR) s.m. Meaningless talk, nonsense. 

—ach, a. Meaningless. 

seabhasach, -aiche, à. Wandering, straying. 2 
Weary, fatigued. 3**Laborious.  4**Discur- 
sive. 5**Meaningless. 

seabulasachd, stad Wandering. 
go astray. 3 Weariness, fatigue. 
ousness, 5**Ntate of being astray. 
sgith le s., Iam tired of wandering. 

tseabhrach, a. Certain, sure, true. 

seac, pr.pt. a’ seacadh, oe d£ n. Wither, cause 
to wither or fade. 2 Scorch, dry, parch. 3 
Wither, become withered, fade, decay, waste, 
blasi. ‘hae air S:arcach, it is withered. 

seat, -a, @.. Withered, decayed, shrivelled. 2 
Blighted, scorched, dried, parched, 3 Sapless, 
without substance, Meanglan s.. withered 
branches, 

s ac, s. Bucht, 

Seacach, -a.che, a. Withering, causing to with- 
er. 2 Apt to wither. 3 Withering, fading. 4 
Parched. 

seacachaith, -vidh, see seacadh, 

seacicud, s.f. ind. State of being withered, 
dried up, scorched or parched. 2 Dryness. 

seacadh, saidh, s.m., Withering, act of withering 
or causinz to wither. 2 State of withering or 
fading. 3 Scorching, act or state of scorching, 
drying up or parching. 4 Wasting, state of 
wasting or decaying. 5**Scorching heat. 6** 
Scorcheit or withered part. A’ s—, pr. pt. of 
seac, Airs, nan raon, on.the withered surface 
of the upland fields ; air 8., withered. 

Seacaich, v. see Seac. 

Seacaichear, fut.pass. of seacaich. 

seacaiente, pist pt. of seacaich, see seacta. 

seacaidh,(DU) a. Withered. Buntàta s., æ withe 
ered pola'o. 

svacaireachd,(MS) s.f. Dryness. 

tseacamh, -aimh, -an, s.m. Helmet, headpiece. 

seacantia, -aiute, aw see seacach & seacta. 

seacantaehd, s. f. see seacachd. 2 Aptness to 
wither, 

seac l, see seachd & seac. 

seacilach, see seacach. 

S:acdudh, see seacadh, 

seacdaich, see seacaich. 

Seacduichte, see seacaichte. 

Seaca, -a, -an, s.m. Turn, alternation, Fas., or 
mu s., alternately ; gach aon mu seach, each 
on? alternately, | 

seacn, alv. Past, gone by. 2Away,aside. 3 
In comparison of. 4 In preference to. Chaidh 
e mu seach orm, I missed it ; it did not occur 
tom»; tha mise los sin uile/a thoirt leam, 8. 
a bhi ’fagail pàirt dheth uar déidh, k intend 

E" `. a 
Iriainal tror 














2 Aptness to 
4** Labori- 
Tha mi 


seach 794 


to take all this with me, rather than leave part 
behind us ; ded-gréine a chaidh s., æ sunbeam 
that has gone by. 

Beach, ** v.a. Shun, pass by. 

Seach, prep. Past, beyond, farther than, 2 
More than, rather than. 

S an dorus, past the door ; cha téile s seo, 
he will not pass this, or here; s. aon eile, ra- 
ther than anyone else, s. leigeil da dol seach- 
ad, r «ther than he should pass by ; do aon S. 
aon, to one nore than to an tr; s. a chéile, 
on from another , 2 on» past the other ; fear s. 
fear, one man more tham another; cha'n aithne 
Gghomh aon seach a chéile, 4 do not know one 
From the other; s innseadh air, rather than 
injorm aja'nst him, cha téid e s, am baile 
Seo. he will noi go beyond this vi/lcge; S. e fhéin 
a mhilleadh, rather than spoil himself ; tha 
Sinne gu mith dheth s. siuagn bochd nan 
Innsean, we are well oy in comparison tn the 
poor people of the Indies ; tear mit s., man by 
man, one by one, each in rotation ; uair mu s., 
time about ; grathniun mu s., wAile about ; a 
là, st! alive; am bheil e seach ta inathast ? 
is he still alive ?—Suth'd. Seach is ussl asa 
prep. in two ways,as Seach gu'n iarradh iad i. 
seein that they would look for her ; and, s. iad 
*ya h-iarraidh, rather than that they should 
look for her—C tic Review, xii. 357. (Eollow- 
ed by the nom. case.) 

Seachal, adv. By, along, on, onward, forwarl. 
2 Aside. 3 Out of the way. 4 Past. 5 Be- 
yond, more. 6 Gone by. 

A’ dols., passing by or along ; a’ dol s. air t’ 
ais 's air t aghaidh, not callin), passing and 
renassing; an laa’ dol s., the day passing ; aw 
cur s. na h-üine, passing the time : cuir s. seo, 
pul this by ; s. oirnn, past us ; na cuir s, orm e, 
do not put it by me, 2 give me the opi ion (of re- 
fesin it) ; cha chuireadh e ole seachad orm, 
he would always charge me with wrong-doing ; 
thig e s. orm-sa, Be will come past me ; leigidh 
sinn sin s., we will let tha! pass, cuir s. air- 
giod, hoard money ; theirig s., pass by ; cha’n 
‘ell s. air fichead ann, there are not more than 
twenty in it; s. air mile, more than a thousand, 
more than a mile , tha e deich bliadhna agus 
s., he is more than ten years of age ; 19 math 
s, e, itis as well to be done with it ; it is well 
to have it laid by ; tha e deich bliadhna agus 
S., he ts more than ten years of age ; labhair 's 
an dol s., speak in passing. 

seachad ! int, By with you ! away with you! 

seachad, pr.pt. a’ seachadadh, v. a. Hoard, lay 
by. 12 Deliver, surrender. 

seachadach, -aiche, a. Hoarding, laying by, fru- 
gal, parsimonious. 2**Traditionary. 

seachadachd, s.f.ind. Hoarding, laying by. 2 
Disposition to hoard or lay by. 3 Frugality, 
parsimony. 4 Tradition. 

seachadadh, -aidh, s. m. Hoarding. 2 Act of 
hoarding or laying by. t3 Tradition. A’ s—, 
pr.pt. of seachad. 

geachadaich,** v. a. 2 Avoid. 3 
Hoard. 

geachadail, -e, a. Past. 

seachadas,** -ais, s.m. "Tradition. 2 (MS) Pre- 
teriteness. S. dhaoine, the traditions of men, 

geachaid,** pr.pt. a’ seachaideadh, v.a, Lay by, 
store, hoard. 2 Deliver, surrender. 

-each,** a. Laying up, storing. 2 Fru- 

gal. 3 Delivering, surrendering. 

eachd,** s./. Disposition to hoard. 2 

Frugality. 3 Hoarding. 

. geachain, pr.pt. a’ seachnadh, v.a. Avoid, shun. 

2 Spare, dispense with. 3 Want. 4 Lend. 5 

Abstain. 6 Stay, prov. 7*Keep ata distance 


Put aside. 








seachd-shiisnvach 


— — — — 


from. S. an t-oie, avoid ^» ; au s. thu seo f 
can you spare or dispense wiih this? mholainn 
dhuit mis’ a sheacinadh, Z would adviss yor 
to ke»o ma’ arms' (atb, | 

seach:in,** s.pl. Idletalas. 3 Allegory. ` 

seachinte, a. & past of. of seacha:n. Shunned, 
avolled. 2 see seachanta. . 

——, comp. of seachanta., 

—acil, -eiche, @ seo seachanta. 

fseacuai, prep.»ron. Beyond me, past me. Fme 
phatic, seacham-sa. | 

seachamh-inntinn,(CR) s. Gr tification, «aii 
factiou. Thug siod s. gu leòir dp. that sai s- 
fied him fully. 

seachanva, -aiute, œ Shunning, avoi liag. 2 ro 
bs shunned or avoiled. 3 Shinned, avoil:l 
4 Uniuexy. 5 Allegorical. 6 Dismal, ont: 
nous. 7 Kvitable. 8 Wandering, straying, 
9^ Avoidabie, guarded aghinst. Là s. na 
bliadnnua, Childvrinas day; là s. na seachd- 
uiu, Feta, 

seachaniach, -aiche, a. see seachanta. S. air dl, 
gurda ag vnst drunkenness. 











eachanutaehd, s.f.ind, Shunning, avoiding. 2 


"Avoidableness. 3  Unluckiness, un>ropi-i- 
ousness. 4 lenloney to wander. 4* Conun- 
ued precaution to avoid. 

seAchara i, -ain, -an, see seachran. 

staciono, see seachlach. ` 

seach-bhriathar,** s.m. Allegorical saying. 

seachd, v. & Q. see seac., 

ssa^"hid, a Seven. Ré sh, bliadhna, during 
seven years ; gabhaidh tu uan s»ach.laibh ia !, 
thou shat taxe them in s-vemws ; seachl fir 
iech za, t renty-sev-n men; s. sgìth, compl-te= 
ly ‘tired. tshould be seac-sgith.] 

seachdlacn, ene, q. see seacach, 

seach.lachadh, see seacach dh. 

seachdadh, see seaeaudu. 

seachdaich, v.d. see seacaich. 2 Arranze in see 
vens, septimate, septuplicate. 

seachdaichear, fut. pass, of seachdaich. 

seachdaichte, past pt. of seachilaich. 

seachdain, see seachduin. 

—each, see seacbduineach. 
seachdadaireachd, see seacaireachd, 
seachdamh, a. The seventh. [7mh.] 28. The 

seventh part. Ans. la, the seventh day. — 

seachdamh-deug, a. The seventeenth [17mh.] 2 
s. The seyenteeuth part. Au seachdamh- 
taigh-deug, the seventeent^. house. 

seachdaran, (MS) s.m. The bear (constellation.) 

seacehdarran,( MS) $8.29. Pleiades. 

seachd-ieug, œ. Seventeen. seach! craobhan 
deug, seventeen trees. 

seachd-dubailt,** a. Septuple, sevenfold. 

seachd-fillte, a. Seven-fold. 

seachd-fillteach, a. see seach 1-fillte. 

seachd-mhios, -a, s. m. ‘The seveuth month, 
July. [* gives ‘‘ September,” but the seventh 
month is always understood to mean July now 
in spite of the literal ineaning of the uame. } 

seachd-mhiosach, -aich, s.m. Child born in the 
seventh month of pregnancy. 

—— ——, à. Bornin the seventh month 
d aber Leanabh a, a seventh-month 
child. 

seachdnar, $. coll. Seven Ee to persons 
only. Followed by the gn pi.) 

seachdran,ft -ain, s.m. Tne Pleiades. 

seachd-reultach, (an t-) $. see seachd-reultan. 

seachd-reultan, (na) s.pl. The Pleiades, 
seachd-rinn, see seachd-reultan. 

ort as a. Nauseating, utterly disagree» 
able. 

seachd-shlisneach, a. Heptagonal. 

» “eich, -ean, s&./. Heptagon. 











1 


seachd-«hli«noag 105 seagalah 


seach {-shlisneag, -eig, -&n,&.f. Heptagon. ` dh’ imich an luchd-turuis air rathadaibh s. 
seachd-siona, AC) Tne seven elem^n' s (fire,air, the tiaveliers walked through by-ways ; reulta 
earth, water, ice, wind and ligh ain” ) s. wandering stars ; comets. 
Boachl-thaobhach,* see seachd-shlis:.eath. s-achranach.tt -aich, sm. Wanderer. 
seacnduan,** -ain, s.m. Fold. seachranachadh,(MS) em. Bearing in hand, 
seachduin, -e, enn, s.f. Week, seven days. S. |seachranaend, s.f.ind. State of being astray. 2 
bhovadh-nad-gad, rovatien week; s. bho 'n| Aptness to stray. 3 Error, proneness to error 
diugh, this day se'ennight (forwards) ; s. gus or sin. ` 
an dé, vesterday s" ennight (past time) ; uair 's | Seachranaich, -ean, s. m. Wanderer, one who 
an t-s., once a week ; s. mu seach, week about, | strays or is strayed. 2 One apt to go astray. 
æ week in rotation ; gach dara s., every alter- 3 Sinner, one that errs. 
nate week ; s. na luaithre, ember week ; eadar | Sseachranaici, v.&. Bewilder. 
geo agus ceann seachduin, in æ week's time. seach-ra.nad, -aid, -an, $.m. By-way. ; | 
seachduineach, -eiehe, a. Weekly. 2**Hebdom- -—ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in bp- 
&dal. 
sench-labhair,v.2, Allegorize, speak allegorical- 


ways. 
seach-ród, -oid, see seach rathad. 
seach-ródach, see seich-rathadach. 
fseacht, see seichd. 
tseacuftar, see seachdnar. 





ly. 
geach-labhairt, -e, d Speakin:allezorically, 2 
Act of speaking allegorically, a.lezorizing. 3 
Allegory. A’s—, prapt. of seach-labhair. seach-theinu, see s-ac-thinn. ? 
peich-iabhvach, -riche, a. Allegor cal. 2 Speak- | s-ac-mharbh, DU) a. Completely dead, in a cone 
ing allegorically. 3 Prone to speak allegori- dition of rigor mortis. ] 
ca'ly. | ,* v.a. Kill outright. S. ei, he killa 
geacii-labhra‘th, -aidh, -aidhean, gan, Allegory, ed her outright. i 
allegorical speaking. seac-thinn, -e, -ean, 8.f. Severe illness, disease, 
geschlach, -aich, s.f. Cow that has been two, mortal sickness. 2 Consumption. EV 
vears without a calf. 2 Heifer that continues -—, a, Mortally sick. 2 Severely indis- 
barren when of the age to have a calf. 
seachlag,** s.f, Park. 
seachlaimh, -a, a. Remaining, "7 bydand,"— the 
motto of the Gordon Wigalanders. 2*Iu store. 
m -—— , -e, &.f. ‘That which has been preser- 
ved or saved, savings. 
seachlan, -ain, sm Any insignificant worthless 
thing. 2 Warren. 
-peach-laovhach, -aich, -aichean,s. see seachlach. 
 geach-luidh,^* vn. Lie apart, lie aside, 
—— ——--—e,** s.m. Lying apart, 
f¢seachmhal,-ail, -an, s.m. Forgetfulness, obliv- 
. jon. 2 Digression. 3 Partia ity. 
¢seachmhalla, see seachmhallach. 
geachmhallach, -aiche, a. Forgetful, oblivious. 
2 Digressive. 
&each-inhallachd,** $. f. Oblivion, forgetfulness, 
geachmh-inntinn,(CR) s.m. Gratification, satis- 
faction—Suth’d. (seachdamh-inntinn) 
¢seachn-ab, -a, s.m. Prior. 
seachnach, -aiche, a. Avoiding, shunning. 2 
Avoidable. 
¢seachnach, -aich, see seicneach. 
—aih, Same meanings as seachnadh., 
A’ s—, pr. pt. of seachnaich. 
seachnadh, -ailh, s. m. Avoiding. 2 Act of a- 
voiding or shunning. 3 Lending: 4 Act of 
lending. 5 Wanting, missing. 6*Sparing. 7* 
Act of sparing. A’ s—, pr. pt. of seachain. 
Beachnaich,** pr. pt. a’ seachnachadh, v. a. 
Avoid, shnn. 2 Miss. 3 Escape. 
geachnaichte, past pt. of seachnaich. Avoided, 
shunned, 2 Lent. 
. geachnair,** s.m. Avoider., 
¢seachrach,** o, Dirty. 
seachrain, v.n. Err, go astray, wander. 
——-.———, gen.8ing. of seachran. 
seachran, -ain, -an, sm. Wandering, going as- 
tray. 2 Transgression, error. Air a, @siray, 
out of one's course ; S. a’ mhiann, the wander- 
ing of desire ` mo sh., my error. 
seachran, -ain, s.m. Wandering. 2 Act of wan- 
dering, going astray or erring. 31[[rausgress- 
ion. A’ s—, pr.pt. of seachrain. 
~  geachranach, -alche, a. Straying, going astray, 
hi wandering, 2 Apt to wander or go astray, 3 
Misleading, causing to wander or stray, 4 Er- 
ring, sinning, 5 Apt to err or sin, 6 Causing 
to error sin. 7 Wrong, erroneous, 8 Pri- 
vate, unfreyuented. Rathad s., œ by-rvad ; 


EE 











pose 1. 
seac-Lhinneach, -eiche, a. Severely ill. 2 Labour- 
ing un.ler a chronic illness. 2 Consumptive, 
3 Causing a severe or wasting sickness. 4 
Mortally sik, 
seac-thinneas,** -eis, s.m. Severe iliness, mor» 
tal s.ckness. 
seachuin. see seachain, 
geacta, past pt. of seac, Withered, dried up, 
shrive.led, parched. 2 Wasted, decayed, 
séad, -a, -an, see seud, seòd & séada, 
tsead, s.m. Likeness of a thing. 2 Seat. 
Séa/l, son. Way, road. 
seada,(AF) s.m. Deer, 
seadair,** s.m. Dolt. 2 Sneaking fellow, 
seadaireach, a. Sneaking. 
Svadaireachd,** s.f. Sneaking. 
tseadal, -ail, san, Short space of time. 
fseal-gabhla, s.m. Increase. 
Seadh, int. Yes, it is, just so, just aa 
you say. 2 Yes, indeed, truly, furthermore. 
S., a Thighearna ; yes, Lord ! s. gu dearbh,yeg 
Just 80 ; seadh, seadh ; just so! truly ! really L 
ma seadh, if so, if it be so, likewise : Moire S, 
yes, indeed, by Mary it is so. 
seadh, -a, -an, s.m. see seagh. 
tseadh, -a, a. Strong, stout, able. 
fseadh, -a, s.m. Strength. 
fseadh,** v.g. Esteem, prize, value. 2Saw, 8 
Plane. 
seadhach, -aiche, a. see seaghach. 
seadhachalh, see seaghachadh, T 
seadhacnail, see seaghachail. 
seadhachas, see seaguachas. 
seadhaich, see seagaaich. 
seadhail, sea seaghach, 
seadhalachd, see seaghachas, 
seadhan,* -ain, s.m. Rogation. 2 (DMy) Puff» 
ing with exertion. Thug siod s, ort | thaé 
mode you puff ! 
seadhar, see seaghach. 
arachd, see seaghachas, 
Seudhmhor, sve seaghach. 
seailh-suiridih, see seagh-suiridh, 
soafald, (AE) s, Heifer, 
seugud,** a, Sixty, 
seagaid, see seachlach, | 
seagair, am. Kittiweke—larus tridactylue, 
seagal, -ail, 8m, Rye—secale cereale. 
s2ugaluch, -aiche, @ Abounding in a 2 Por- 
3 rE a 





Ted 


seagalach 
taining to rye. 


geagh, -a, -an, s.m. Meaning, senso, purport,im- | 
un.ler- Í 
5 Es- seatbhacesl, «f. see sealbhachas. : 


| 


port 2 Discourse, dialogue. 3 Sense, 
standing. 4 Cause, reason, purpose. 
teem, value, respect. 6 Crop of à bird. Dé 
is s. dha ? what is the purport of it? s. na lice 
geo a dh'fheóraich, to enquire into the import 
of this tombstone ; gabh s., pay atten ion. 

[Seadh is the form used in the Bible and 
in the dictionaries, but seagh is better. 

seagha,** a. Curious, ingenious, 

geavhach, -aiche, a. Discreet, sensible, prudent. 
2 Weighty, important, having much meaning. 
3 Sagacious. 4 Fit, proper. 6 Courteous, 
respectful, of gentle manuers. 6** Attentive, 
heedful. 

seaghachadh, -aidh, s.m. Act or state of signify- 
ing. 2 Holding forth, showing, importing, 
meaning. A’ s—, pr.pt. of seaghaich. 

seaghach,(AF) s.m. He-goat. ` 

seaghachail, -e, a. Implicatiye. 

seagiiachas, -ais, s.m., Sense, intellect, under- 
standing. 2 Sagacity, acuteness, nenetration. 
3 Courtesy, gentleness. 4 Atteniiveness, 

seavhaich, v.a. Signify, import, imply. 

seaghail. -e, a. see seaghach. 

seachalachd, s.f. sce ssaguachas. 

seaghar, -aire, see seazbach. 

S^agi'as, see s2aghachas. 

seaghas,** -ais, s.m. Wood. 

seaghlan,** s. Column, post. 2 King. 

seaghlan,** s.m. Olu man. 2 Infirm person. 3 
Pithless person. 

seaghlanwh,** a. Infirm, stif. 2 Columnal. 

seazhmhor, -mhoire, see seaghach, 

seaghmhorachd, s.f. see seaghachas. 
geagh-suiridh, -a-, -an-suiridh, s.f. Love-token. 

Beagsaid, see sea-saich. 

Sea til,* see seagal. 

Seal, A. -an, s.m. While, space of time, season 
2** Glimpse. 3 Course, turn, 4 Spot. 5 see 
seul. 6 (MS) Mean. Car s., or re S., for a 
while. 

sealach, -aiche, a. Momentary, of short contin- 
uance, transitory. 

sealacha;(CR) s.pl. Seals. 

fsealadach, -aiche, a. Alternate, by turns. 
Transitory. r 

sealaidheach,** a. Transitory. 

sealaidheachd,** s.f. Transitoriness, alternation. 
2 Vicissitude, change. 

sealan, -ain, -an, s.m.,dim. of seal. Little while. 
2 Halter or rope for exe^u:ion. 

séalan, -ain, -an, s.m. Sheep-louse, tick. 

séalanach,-aiche, a. Abounding iu sheep-lice 
or ticks, 

gealanach,** -aich, s.m. Executioner. 2 Villain. 
3 Meagre man or beast. 

sealanach,tt a. Of short duration. 

sealanta,**a. Rigid. 

sealantas, -ais, s.m. Rigilness. 

gealastair,(DC) s.f. Uist for seilisteir. 

sealbh, seilbh, -an & -ean,s.m, Possession. 2 In- 
heritance. 3 Cattle, drove, stuck. 4 Field. 
5 Luck, good luck. 6 (AC) Corn. 7 rarely, 
Pretence, colour. Gach s. a th’ agam, every 
living creature I possess ; thuair e s. he got pos- 
session; fad-soalbu, infeos'ment ; thoir fad- 
sealbh. in/eoff ; gu 'n gléidh an S. mi! for- 
tuns preserve m^ ! s. chaorach, a stock of 
sheep ; s. chrodh, æ possession of black cattle. 

gealbhach, -aiche, a. Fortunate, lucky. 2 Pros- 
perous. 3 Posseswive. 

sealbhachadh, -aidh, s. m. Posses ing, act of 
possessing, enjoying. 2 Act of acquiring, or 
"winuing property, inheriting. <A’ s—, pr. pé. 
of sealbhaich. 


2 


D 


5 = UtaSi ei ÁR- a 

"i L- ka AIE d i; i 
i ipi rat ME 
— 1 — 1 H "- c 


796 


seal-coise 


sealohachail, -e, a. Inheritavle. 
sealbnachas, -7is, s.m. Iucxiness, state of being 
lucky, fortunate or prosperous, 2ZffF3tock. 


seal) hadair, -ean, s. m. Possessor, owner, pros 
prietor. 2 Occupant. 
eacnd, s,f. Ownership, possession. 
sealbhadh,** -aidii, s.m. Possessing, inheriting, 
2 Possession. 
sealbh»g,$ -aig,-an, S. f. 
sami. ha’ 
sealbnagach, -aiche, a, Abounding in sorrel. 2 
Of, or like sorrel. 
ealbhag-ua-fiodha,$ s.f. Wood-sorrel, see seame 
rag. : 








Common sorrel, see 





617. Sealbhag-nam-fiadh. ` 
scalhhag-nam-fiadh,? s.£. Mountain sorrel—ozy- 
ria reniformis. 
sealbhag-nan-caorach, sf. Sheep-sorrel. 
sealbha ch, pr.pf. a’ sealbhacha‘lh, v.a.Possess, 
inherit. 2 Enjoy, own. 3 Gain, acquire, 
win. 
sealbhaiche, -an, s.m. see sealbhadair. 
sealbhaichear, fut.»ass. of sealbhaicn. 
sealbhaichte, past pt.\of sealbhaich. Possessed. 
2 Won, acquired. 
sealbhaidh,** s.f. Encounter, encountering. 
sealbhan, -ain, -an, s.m. Herd, drove, number of 
cattle, or of small cattle (sheep, goats, &e.) 
2 Multitude, company. 3 The throat,throttle. 
AC AR) Tocher, possession of cattle. 5 Little 
possession, little inheritance. Au s. a cnéile 
air uchd an t-srutha,at each other's throats on 
the breast of the stream ` bha e s. uairean an 
seo, he was here several times. 
sealbhanaciadh, -aidh, s. m. Act of seizing by 
the throat, throttling. A',s—, pr.pt. of sealbh- 
anaich. 
seal hanaich.pr.pt. a’ sealbhanachadh,v.a.Seize 
by the throat, throttle. A 
-——te, past pt. of sealbhanaich. Seiz- 
ed by the throat, throttled. | LM 
sealbhar, aire, a. sce sealbhmhor. A 
sealbharach,** s.m. Prosperousne s, propitious- 
ness, good luck, 2 Possession of property. 
sealbharachd, see sealbhmhorachd. 
sealbh-dhlighe, s.f. Inheritance. - 
sealbh-shlacadair, ean, s.m. Impropriator. 
sealbh-ghlacadh, -aidh, s.m. Occupancy.. 
sealbhmhor, -oire, a. Having mauy or great pos- 
sessions, rich. 2 Prosperous, enjoying pros- 
erity. 3 Lucky, propitious. Ged a bhith- 
inn cho s. ris, though 1 were possessed of as 
much property as he. 
sealbhmhorachd,s.f.ind. State of being wealthy 
or rich. 2 Wealth, riches. 3 Prosperiiy 
state of being prosperous. 4 Fortune, goo 
lucx, prupitiousness. 5 State of being lucky 
or fortunate, 6**p.ss^ssion of property. 
seal-coise, S.-M. Foot-pvard or treadle o£. spin- 





Q- 
Géi ER ie 


ës. 


> 


— 


2 
E 
a 
E 
a 





seal-coise 


ning-wheel. 
sealg, pr.pt. a’ sealg,v.a. & n. Hunt, chase,fow], 
hawk. 2 Lay snares for, lie in wait. 
Watch narrowly. S. dhomh sithioun, hunt 
venison for me, 
sealg, -eilg, pl. -a & -an, s. f. Hunt, hunting, 
fowling, hawking, the chase, 2*Milt of swine. 
8 Spleen of man or beast. 4 Bellyache. Is 
aoivhinn «n obair an s., the chase is a joyous 
occupation, 
sealgach, -aiche, a, Hunting. 
Fond of hunting or fowling. 
Spleen, spien.-tic. | 
sealgadh, -ai4ih, s.m. Same meauiags as sealg. 
A’ s--, pr.pt. of sea'g. 
gealzag.$ s.f. Common sorrel, see samh. 
Sea gair,-ean, sm. Hunter, hunts:nan: 
Fowler, falconer. 3 Sportsiaan. 4 Gamekeep- 
er, 5 Forester. 6 balcon, see seabhag. 7* 
Sneaker. S. a theab, æ unsuccossful hunter. 
sealgaireach.** a. Like, or p.rcaining Lo, a hunt- 
er or huatsman. 
eealvaireachd, s.f.ind. Hunting, hawking, fowl- 
ing 2 Business of a huntsm xu , gamekeeper, 
hawker or fowler 3* Watcliiuz narrowly. 
Se:lgair mór, (an), s.m. The constellation Orion. 
Tue emos (Oricn's belt) is made up of three 
stars of a good second magnitude, 
ag, (ihe dirk), iss'ung from two of these ; it 
snows as three smail stars with a larger one 
at the end of the sheath. Au sporan, is sus- 
pended from the other, and Am breacan- 
pene is blowiug away on the breeze to the 
eft. SE 
. gealg-bhata, -aite, -aichean, s, m. Hunting pole. 
sealghay, Lewis for sealgag. 
.Seal-iomairt, -e, -ean, SE Temporary conveni- 
ence. | 
seal-iomairteach, -eiche, a. Affording temporary 
convenience, | 
seall, pr.pt. a’ sealltainn, v.a. See, look,behold. 
2 (CR, Show—W. of Ross. Seallaidh mi dhuit 
e, I will show tt to you ; seall orm, look at me; 
Dia s. oirnn ! God have mercy on vs ! am fear 
nach s. roimne, seallaidh e as a dhéidh, he 
nat will not look before him must look after 
im. | 
seail ! int. Look ! see ! behold ! S, an gaisgeach 
treun a’ teachd, see the conquering hero comes! 
seallach,tt a. Seeing, viewing. 
sealladh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Sight, spectacle, 
- view. 2 Compass of vision, extent to which 
one can see. 3 Sight, eye-sight, power of vi- 
sion, 4 Look, cast of the eyes. 5 Sigbt,glance. 
6 Vision, dream. 7**Supernatnura! sight. 8** 
: - Short while. t9 Cell. 10(MS) Air. Fear- 
seallaidh,g seer; s, cùil, a back-look; s.-taoibh, 
a side-look,side-glance ; le s.-tacibh bu mhór 
an aire, with side looks they waiched atten- 
tively ; s. annasach, or s. nósaci, @ Taree- 
show ; s. gobhlach, a squint ; a’ dolas an t- 
sealladh, going out of siht ; as mo sh., out of 
my sight; s. nan sul, eyesight ; a réir au t-seall- 
aidh seo uiie, accordim] to al! this vision; s.- 
cùil, a back look, looking behind ; chaill e a sh., 
he lost his eye-sight ; iad nio sheailaidh, the 
extent of my view. 
geallagan, -ain, -an, s. m., dim. of sealladh. 
Peep, glance, glimpse, view. -> 
- Seallam, Ist.per.sing.imp. of seall. Let me see, 
Scall-fhios,** s.m. Ocular proof, certainty. Tha 
S. agam air, I am quite certain of it, 
seallan, see sealain. 
seai-mara, s. Space from which the tide has re- 
ceded. 2(DMy) The period of about six hours 
of flowing to ebb and vice versa, A’ dol do 
*n t-seal-mara, going £o look for whelks, seg- 


2 Hawking. 3 
4** IIaviug 


9t* 


{ 


Digitized | 
NTERNET ARCHIVE 


797 


3* 


A’ bhiod- | 


séamhsail 


ware, &c. 

sealltach,** a. Looking, gazing, staring. 2 Cau 
tious, circumspect. 

sealltainn, s.m.Looking, act of looking, seeing, 
viewing. 2 Observation, view. 

—each tt a. Careful. 

sealtuidh,** san, Sheltie, Highland pony. 

tsealtuir,** sa. Sword. 

tsealuidhvachd, s.f.ind. Course of time. 

sèm, -4, -an & -annan, s. m. Hook, peg, pin 
2 Mote. 

séam, pr. pt. a’ séamadh, v.a. Forbid, prohibit. 
2 Enjvin, warn, caution, b «lye, 

seam, $.f. lintreaty, earnest p-tition, request. 
Is iom dh s. a thug mis’ air, many an earnest 
request. | mate, 

seam,** s.m. slube, atom. 2 Any small object 

seamach,** a. Warning, nintinv, winking. 

seaniadair,* -ean, s.m. Petitioner. 

seamadh,** -aidh, s.m. Caution, warning,wiuk- 





ing. 2 Act of warning or cautioning. 3 For- 
bidding. 3 Act of furbiddiug or prohibiting. 


A’ S—, pr. pt. of seam. ‘Tha mi a’s. dhuio, 
I give you warning ; thug mi s. dhuit, I gave 
you warniny. 

seama-guad,* s.m. Shuffle, quibble, 

seama'de,$ s. Blades of grass, 

seamair,* s,f. see seamrag. 

seawiair Muire,$ see seamrag Muire. 

séaman,-ain,-an, s.m. tatile stout person. 
Small nail riveted. 3**Pin. 4**Nail. 
seaman. | 

———-ach, -aiche, a. 
8** Rivetced, as a nail. 

—— arh, s.m. One sturdily indifferent to the 
rights of others. S. balaich, æ rough, churlish 
bullyiny character. 

seamanach, (AF) s.m. Wasp. 

séamanach/, s. f. ind. Stoutness. 
cheerfulness. 3fttInattentiveness. 

seamann.(Al') s. Small snail. 

Seaumar, see seomar & seamrag. 

3eamasan,* -ain, see seamsan. 

—Aach,* -aiche, a. see scamsanach. 
achd,* see seamsanachd. 

———-——-àüàchadh, see seamsanachadh. 

—aich,* see seamsanaich. 

séamh, -å & séimhe,a. Peaceful, quiet, tranquil, 
calm. 2 Mild, modest, gentle. 3 Small,slim, 
slender, tender. 4* Knchantment to make 
one's friends prosper. [**seamh.] 

seamhach, -aiciie, a. see seamh. 

—d, s.f.ind. Peacefulness, tranquility, 
quietness, mildness,modesty,gentleness,calm- 
ness, 2 Smallness, thinness, slimness, tender- 
ness. 3 **Comeliness. 

seamhaich,tt pr. pt. a’ seamhachadh, v. n. Be 
quiet. 2 Calm, tranquillize. 

séamhaidh, e, o Discreet, prudent. 2]lSlen- 
der. $**Subtle. 4 see séamh. 

eachd, s.f. see séamhachd. 

sé:mhai!, -2, a, see séamhaidh E seamh. 

séamnalachd, see séamhachd. 

séamnas, -ais, sm. Good luck, chance, prospere 
ity. 


2 


Stout. 2 Jolly, cheer- 


2 Jollity, 

















—ach, -aiche, @ Fortunate, lucky, pros- 
perous, | 
puce MA am s.f. Luck. 2 Continued good 
uck. 

air,** s.m. Lucky or fortunate man. 
———ar,** a. Lucky, fortunate. 2 Bringing 
San luck. 3 Boding good luck. Gu s., luck- 
ily. 
seamh-mheas,** sm. Mellow fruit. 
seamhrag,** -aig, s.f. Small nail. 
9 Suo seamrag. 
séamusail, -e, «, see séamhasach., 


2 Small peg. 


[also ` 


seamhsail 


a 

geambksail,* e, a. Fortunate, lucky. 

aéamhsaiaehd,** s. Fortunateness, luckiness. 

Beamrnsar, -aire, a. see séamhasach. 

geamlach, -aich, -aichean, s.f. Cow that gives 
milk without her calf beside her. 2* Cow that 
allows another cow’s calf to suck her. 3 Im- 
pudent,tzoublesome fellow. 4 Silly person,one 
easily imposed upon. 

seamlachas,*-ais, s.m. Imposture. Chuir thu 
an orra-sheamlachais orm, you duped me. 

geamlachadh,*.aidh, s. m. Dupiug, imposing 
upon, A’ s—, pr.pt. of seamlaich. 'Gam sh., 
duping me. ; 

searlaich,* v.a. d a Dupe, impose upon. 





618. Seamrag (2%.) 619. Segmrer bhàn. 

geamrag, -aig, -an,s./. Shamrock, trefoi!, clover. 
Breac le seamragan is neòineanan, studded 
with clover and daisies. 28 Wood-sorrel—oza- 
lis acetosella. 

ach, a. Abounding in shamrock. 2 Per- 
taining to shamrock, 

seamrag-an-deocadain, see seamrag-an-deocain. 

seamrag-an-deocain, (AC) st, Four-leaved or 
five-leaved shamrock,see seamrag-nain-buadh. 

seamrag bhàn,$ s. f. White or Dutch cloyer— 
trifolium repens, ['This name is never applied 
to wood-sorrel.) 








620. Seamrag bhuidhe. 
eeamrag bhuidhe,$ s. f. Yellow clover or hop 
trefoil—trifolium porcumbens. 
seamrag chapuill,§ s. f. Red clover, purple tre- 


foil—tri folium pratense. 
seamrag còig-bhileach, see còig mheòir Muire. 
seamrag chré,§ s.f. Common speedwell, see 
lus chré. 
seamrag dhearg, s.f. Purple clover— Colonsay. 
seamrag gheal, st White clover —Colonsay. 
seamrag Muire, s.f. Wood loose-strife or yellow 
pimpernel—lysimachia nemorum. 
geamrag-nam-buadh, s.f. Four-leaved clover, 2 


798 





seanachaidh 





621, Seamrag chapui/l, 625. Seamrag Muire. 
(AC) Five-leaved elover. 

seamrag-nan-each, s.f. (AC) Four- or five-leaved 
clover, see sea'/nrag-nam-buadh. 2 Knap- 
weed, hardl-heads— Colonsay. | 

CHEN see seamrag-nau- 
each. | 

seamsag,** -aig, s.f. Small nail or peg. 2 Wood- 
sorrel—ozalis acetosella. 

Seamsan, -ain,-an, $ ?«. Hesitation. 2 Delay. 
Sham. 4 Quibble, to gain good time or ends, 
quirk, stupid evasion. 5 Laziness, indol-nce. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Hesitating. 2 Delaying, 
3 Lazv, indolent. 4 Evasive, tricking. 5* Ab- 
surd in the extreme. 

——— achadh, -aidh, s.m. Tricking, deceiving. 
A’ 8—, pr.pt. of seamsanaich, ’Gam sh. air 
au dòigh sin, tricking me like that. 

seamsanachd,* s.f. ind. Kva.iveness, quibbling, 
quirking. 2 Shamming habits. 

seamsanaich,* v.. & n. Sham. 2 Shuffle, e- 
vade. 3 Coax one out of his right. 

—————— ,'-e, & f. Hesitation. 2 Delay. 8 
Laziness, indolence. 

sean, Ist. comp. sine, ?nd. comp.sinid, 3rd.comp. 
sinead. Old, aged, ancient. C’ ar son a dh’ 
fhàsas iad s. P why do they become old ian & 
sruthan sin, thet ancient stream; o sh., an- 
cient/y, of old ; fhuair e bas 'na sheann duine, 
he died an old man; cha sean do m' shean 
agus cha 'n og do m’ og thu, you are neither 
old with my old not young with my young— 
ie. as you are not related to me I will have 
nothing to do with you. [Sean does not Se: 
pirate a word following if if begins with d, 
sort. It is pronounced and spelt seann when 
preceding à noun beginning with d, s,t, l, n, 
orr, but spelt sean and „pronounced seann 
when placed before a nonm beginning with 
any of the other letters.] 

tsean, -a, s.m. Supper. : 

tséan, ëm. Prosperity. 2 Happiness. Cuir a 
sh., squander. 

sean, A, A0. $.m. see seun, 

——, v.G. see seun. 

seanacach, -aiche, o Sagacious. 2 Knowing, 
crafty, wily. A ? 

seanacaidheachd, s.f. Sagacity. 2 Craftiness, 
wiliness, 

seanacar, -air, @. Sagacious. 2 Old-looking, 
old-fashioned. 3**Prospective. 





—achd, s.f.ind. Sagacity. 2 Oldness of ` 


appearance. 

seanacas, see seanachas. 

seanach,** æ. Crafty. 2 Lucky. 

seanachadh, s.m. State of becoming old. A’ 
S--, pr.»t. of seana'ch. 

seanachaidh, -ean, s.m, Reciter of tales or stor 


8 ` 


WK Se ih 
| E Sc 


seanacnaidh 


799 


seanganach 


jes. 2 Antiquarian, one skilled in ancient or | sean-aosach (MS) a. Antic. 


remoteuistoty. 3 Historian 4 Recorder. 
keeper of records. 5 Genealogist, Bhae na 
sh., he was a recorder. : 

een each, -eiche, a. Versed in tales, his- 
tory or antiquities. 2 Fond of, or reciting, 
tales or antiquities. 3 Like a reciter of tales 
or stories. 4 Skilled in genealogy. 

geanachar, see s»a'((car, 

achd, see sexnacarachd., i 

geanachas, ais, -an, 8.13 Tale, story, narration 
2 Conversation, discourse, talk. 3 Speech, 
language. 4 Tradition, chronicle, history. 5 
A history. 6 Antiquities, 7 Genealogy, 8% 
Biography. 9* Talk about old stories, Tha 
droch sn. aige,Ae uses bad language; cron sean- 
achais, an ana^hroniain., 

gea 1Achasach, -aiche, a. Abounding in conyersa- 
tion, talkative, having many tales, narrative. 
g Of, or belonging to, speech. 3 Couversable. 
4 Skilled in history, genealogy or antiquities. 
5 Fond of reciting tales, Scorie3 or genealo- 
gies. 6 Traditiouary. 

S:anacha«ail, see seanachas ich. j 
eana-cheann, -chinu, s.m. Wiss or experienced 
persun. 2 Luiicrously apptied to extraordin- 
ary intelligence or sagacivy ia early youth. 2 
Precocious person. 

-— —— —ach, -aiche, a. Wise, sagacious. 2 
Exnerienc^d. 3 Precocious, : [uesa. 

Svanachd, $.f.vl. Antijuity, ancientness, old- 

sernachd see seunachd. 

seanachrionta.* a. Long-herled. wise, sagaci- 
ous. 2 Experienced, 3 Precocious, old-fash- 
ionel, too wise for one's years. 

seanadair, see seun"dair. ` 

enchd, see seunadaireachd, 

seanadh, see seunadh. | 

seanadh, -aidh, -aidhean, $.m. Senate, synod. 

Seanagar,(CR) a. see s-anaear, 

seanivaira, -aire, a. Old, old-like, 
ous, Wise. 

—— — Chd, s.f.ind. Old appearance or look. 
2ttSagacity. 

seana-ghille, -an, s.m. Old bachelor, 2 Youth 
arrived at the age of puberty. 

——achd, s. fant. Bachelorship. 

geanaich, pr. pt. a’ seanachadh, v. mn. Become 
oid. 

seanaiche,** s, m, Senator, member of parlia- 
ment. 2 Member of a synod. 3 Antiquarian 

seanaid,"* s,f. Synod, 2 Senate. 

each, a. Senatal. 2 Synodal, 

séanail, see seunail. 

seanailtireas, -eis, s.m. Decree. 

sean-aimsir,** sf. Olden time, 

-—eil,** a. Old-fashioned. 2 Antique. 

seanair, -ean, 8. m. Grandfather. 2 Elder. 2 
**Ancestur. 4 Presvyter. 5 Member of Par- 
liament, senator. 6 (MS) Alderman. 7 An- 
cient bard. 8** Druid, S, an t-seanair, a 
great great grandfather. 

seanaireach,** ech, s.m. Presbyterian. 








2ffragaci- 





- 














—— -, -eiche, a. Senatorial. 2 Presby- 
terian, 

aoe th —d, sf. Presbytery. 2 Presbyerian- 

ism. 3 5th. stage of human life, from 54 to 81 


years of age. 4**Bird-catchiog. 5**Ancestry, 
6 (MS) Primogeniture. 
seanait,** see seanaid. 
seanalair,* -ean, s.m. General. 
seanamhair, s.?1. see seanmhair. 
sèanan, see seunan. 
seanan,(AF) s.m. Kite. 
seananach,** .aich, $.7n. 
sean-aois, -e, 8.f. Old age. 
age. 


Wasp. 
'Na s., in her old 


sean-ar ** san. Old land. 
séanar, s. m. Six. [Applied only to persons 
and is followed by the yen. pl.] S. mhac, siz 
sons. 
seanarasg.** -aisg, s.m. Proverb, old saying. 
seanas, -ais, s.n, — Cicoly. 
seanas, see seun. 
seanas,** -iis, s.m. Shortness of sicht, 
——-—ach,** @ Genealogical. 2 Sxilled in gen- 
ealogy. 
seanasan,** -ain, s.m. Etymology. 
sean athair, -achar, -athraichean, 8,m. see sean- 
air. 
—— —— ——enachJ. see seanaireachd. 
sean-bhean, mhnà, dat. -mhnaoi, n.pl. -mhnath- 
an, s.f. Old woman. 2 Often applied to the 
oldest woman in a village. An t-sean-bhean 
bhochd, po:tica; name for Ireland ; 2 name of 
a patriotic Irish sony. 
sean-bheauachü,** s.f. Anility, 
Seauchaidh, -ean, see seanachaidh. 
seanchar, -aire, see seanachar. 
seauchas, -ais, -an, 32e seanachas. 
——-— ach, see seanachasach. 
sean-cheann, see seana-cheann, 
ich, «es seana-cheannach, 
sean-choinharra,** gan, Old token. 2 Monu- 
ment. [** gives sean-chomhar, gen. -air.] 
seai-chu:miine, s.f. Tradition. 2 Genealogy. 
sein-chuimineaeh,** @ Traditional. 2 Genea- 
logical, 3 Having old acquaintanceship. 
seanda, «e^ sea'in lai th. | 
seandach 1. s, f. 1. see seann lachd. 
eandaidh,* a. see seann laidi. 
seandidheachd. see seanndachd. 
sean hacal, -ail,-an, s.m. Old saying, proverb, 
by-word, adage. 
sea ifhaclach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to, pro- 
veros, proverbial, 2 Fond of proveros. 
sean-fha-anta, a. Old-fashioned, 
seau-fhas intachd,(MS) s.f. Autiqueness, 
sean-fhecar,** -(hir, s.m. Old man. 2 Elder. $- 
Presbyter | 4 Dotard. 
—— —— —aclul,** s.f. Presbyterianism. 2 Do- 
tage. 3 Senility. 
seans,(AC) s Roebuck, deer. 
seany,** v.a, d' n. Make or grow slender or slim. 
seang,-a, @. Slender, lank, slender-waisted. 
slim. 2 Hungry. 3 Lean, hungry-looking, 
gaunt, 4** Small-bellied. 5**Nimble, agile. 
A choin sh., his lean dogs ; a s, chorp, her slen- 
der body ; each s., séiteach, a smali-bellied, 
snorting steed ; cha tuig an sathach an s., the 
well-fed do not understand the feelings of the 
famished. 
seangach,** a. Slender in body. 2 Slim. 3 
Causing bodily slenderness. 
seangachadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of making slender 
or attenuating. 2 State of becoming slender. 
x e ER in shape. A’ s—, pr.pt. of seang- 
aich. 
seangachd, s.find. Slenderness. 2 Leanness. 
3 Hungry look. 
seangaich, pr.pt. a’ seangachadh, v.a. & n.Make 
slender or slim. 2 Reduce in bodily bulk, 
3 Become slenler, grow gaunt, a 
seangiichie, past pt. of seangaich, Made slen- 
der, attenuated. 
tseangal, a. Wise, prudent. 2 Shrewd. 











seangan, -ain,pl.-an & -ain, s.m.Ant, pismire. 2 


Mean fellow. 3 Cross fellow. 4 Cloven stick 
placed on the tail of a dog suffering from 
rabies. 5 in derision, Slender person. 6} 
Small yellow clover—trifolium minus. Imich 
chuin an t-seangan, go to the ant. 
seanganach, -aiche, o Abounding in ants or im 


seanpganach 


2 Smal! yellow clover. 3 Like anant. 4 Of 
ants. 

sea calach. (MS) s.f. Slenderness. 

tseangan-mhàthsir, s.f. Great-g andfather’s or 
or great-grandmother’s mother. 

seanyant, o. Wily. 

sea garra, -airre, a. Old-lixe, having an old 
apsearance. 2 Becoming old. 3 Sagacious. 
4* Withered in person. 

seang rrachd, s.f.ind. Oldishness, old appear- 
ance, 2 State of becoming old. 3 Sagacity. 

scang-bhec,(AC) s.m. Roebuck. 

s-ang-f iadh, (AC) s.m. Roebuck. 

Tseanzhain, s. m. Conception, child near the 
time of its birth. 

sean-2hall (DU) s.m. Wiseacre. 

sean-ghille,* see seana-ghille. 

———-——achil, sve seana-ghilleachd, 

sean-ghna hach,( Vis) a Antique. 

sean-:peuiach,( MS) o Antique. 

sean-giin, s.m. tr f. Child begotten in old age. 

sean-lith, s. Happ ness. 

seanmhair, -ar, -airean, $.f. Grandmother. 2 
2 Aged mother. 3 In some pla^es applied to 
a brood sow. Am fear adh’ itheas a sbean- 
mhair, faolaidhe a h-eanraich Ol, he that eats 
his graidimother may sup her broth. Wher 
Farquhar the leech had tasted the ‘‘ bree ” of 
the serpent, his master, who knew that his an- 
prentice now had his eves opened to see the 
secrets of nature, and his ears to understand 
the language of birds, threw the pan at him 
in wrath, crying, ** Ma dh’ òl thu an sùgh, ith 
an fheo 1," 4/ you have suppedth2 juice, eat the 
Jfiesh —N.G.P., 

seammhàthair, -arach & -ean, & f. 
mhair. 

séanmhor, see seunmhor. 

seann, @ Old, aged, ancient, antique.  [AI- 
ways precedes its noun, see note under sean.] 

seannuach, -aich, s.m. see sionnach, Cha mhair 
an s, ri shìor ruith, the fox cannot hold out a 
chase for ever. 

seannacaaich,** v, Play the fox. 

seannachail, e, a. see sionnaciail. 2**Meagre. 

seannachan,** -ain, s.n. Wiiy fellow, term 
te personal contempt. 2(AF) Young or little 
0X. 

seannail,** a. Sweepy. 

seannda, a. see seaun laidh. 

geanndachd,** sr, Antiquity. 2?ffSeniority. 3* 
Aged appearance or look, oldness. 

seanndaidh,** o, Old, antique, old-fashioned. 2 
Oldish. 

--—eachd, see seanudachd. 

seann-duine,** s.m. Old man. 2 The oldest man 
in a village. Na seann-daoine, the old men ; 2 
men of old ; tha e 'nà sheann duine, Ae ts an 
old man. 

seann-n0s,**s,m.Old custom, old habit or usage. 

seann-nòsach, -aiche, a. Old-fashioned, fond of 
old customs, retaining old habits. 

Seann-radh,** pl. seann-ràite, s. m. Old saying, 
alage, proverb. 

geann-ràite,s.pl. Old sayings. 2 The Book of Pro- 
yerbs. 

seann-ràiteach, a. Proverbial, 

seanns, see seamhas. 

seanusa,** s.m. Luck. 

seann sail, -e, a. see seamhasach. 

seannsar,** a. Lucky, prosperous. 

seannsair, s. m. Chanter. 2** Droneof a bag- 
pipe. 3 Pipe.  A' gleusadh 'sheannsairean, 
tuning his pipes—Donn. Ban. 

seannsaireach, a. Supplied with chanters, 

—<d,** &.f. ind. Chanting. 


see sean- 











D || ` t | i 

LIT ARIT A m Lg 

ITERNET ARCHIV 
— i — i i he Wy 


Ei 


Sear! hach 


seannsalair,** s.m. Chancellor. 

———— ——eachd.** s.f. Chaucellorship. 

seann-sg^ul,** -sgedil,s.m, Old tale, legend, 

seanu-syeulach, -aiche, a. Legendary. 2 Arcnæ 
ological. 2 Of, or belonging to, old tales or 
legends. 4 Skilled in old tales. 5 Fond of re- 
citing old tales or legends. 

seann- geulachd,** s» find. Old tale, tradition, 
legend. 2 Archeology. | 

seauu-:geulaiehe,** s.m. Archeeologist. 

seann ach, see seanndachd. 

seann-talamh, -aimh & talamhainn, s.m. Fallow 
field, land long unn" onghed, * old lea.” 





Sea n-l'iomnadh, -aidh s.n. The Old Tes: ament,. 


seann-turach, -aiche, @ Well acquainted. 2 
Frequentiug a particular place. 

séan'a, see seunta, 

seantaidh, a. Senile. 2**Primeval. 
tive. 

— —eachd,** s.f. Primitiveness, 

seanntur, -uir, -an, s.m. Old acquaintance. 2 
Old acquaintance or familiarity. 3 Frequ:nt- 
er of a place. l 

seap,(M MeD) s.m. Gaelic spelling of shane. 

sèap, Dm. dm. Elinch. 2 Sneak, slink. 3 Drag 
or draw off privately. 4** Pursue closely. 5 
**Crouch. Nh. e air falbh. he slunk away. 

sèap, -a,-an, s.m. Long tail. 2 Anima's tail 
hanging down, as a dog's when cowed. 3° 
Stealthy, skulking, 4 (DU) Slow person. 5% 
Skulking or slinking out of battle, Nach b’e 
tu an S. ! what a slowcoach you are ! [tsean.} 

séapach, -aiche, a. Having a long or hanging 
tail. 2 Tawdry,slovenly. 3 Sneaking, slinke 
ing. 4 Sly. 5 Clandestine. 6**Crou.hing. 
7**Flinching. 8 (DU) Slow. 

séapach,* -aich, Sr, Sly, slinking female. 2 s.n. 
Sly, slinking fellow. 

séapachas, -als, sm. & f. Tawdriness, slovenli- 
ness in dress. 2 Habit of sneaking or slinke 
ing. 

seapachd, s.f. see séapachas. 

sèapadh, -aidh, s.m. Flinching, act of flinching, 
2 Act of sneaking or slinking. 3 Act of drag- 
ging away by stealth. 4**Crouching. A’ s—, 
pr.pt. of sèap. 

seapail, Gaelic spelling of chapel. 

seapair, -ean, s.m. Sneaking, stinking fellow. 2 
Mean, sheepish fellow. 3 Crouching fellow 
4*Poltroon, deserter. A sh ! thou s/inking fel-* 
low ! cha'n fuuiriech ach s., none but a slinke 
ing fellow will stay. 

seapaireach l,8.. (2:1. Habit of sneaking or slink- 
ing. 2 Meanness. 

séapaiche, $.f. see séapachas, 

seapan, see seipeinn. 

sear, s.m. See ear. 

searach,tt -aich, s.m. Six-months old beast. 

searadair, -ean, s.m. Towel 2% Hand napkin., 
3* Drudge. A’ brath s. a dheanamh dhiom, 
meaning to make me his drudye. 

sea-ramhach, see sé-ràmhach. 

Tsearb, seirb, ssm. Theft, larceny. 

fsearbaid,* s.f. Boat-thwart.; 

searbh, v.a. & n. Sour, embitter, acilulate, 2 
Grow sour. 

searbh, -a & -eirbhe, a. Bitter. 2 Disagreeable, 
intolerable. 3 Grievous, distressful. 4 Sour, 
pungent, acrid, tart. 5 Disgusted. 6 Sharp, 
severe, harsh, 7 Sarcastic. Measan searbha, 
bitter fruits ; tha e s., tt is pungent or acrid ; 
gnothach s., æ disagreeable business ; tha mi 
s. dheth, I am disgusted with it; 'nuair a bu 
sh. leam éisdeachd ris, when 1 found it in- 
tolerable te listen to him. 3 

gearbhach,** a.. Causing sourness or bitterness, 


3** Primi- 





Original fror 


UNIVERSITY OF I 


rary A kh ? jg "NEP — M 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


NOM INE 





searbhach 
PEN ee 


2 sharp, severe. ; 

ad eng -aidh, s.m. Act of making bit- 
ter. 2 State of becom ng bitter. 3 Ac: of 
making or growing sharp or severe, A’ 8—, 
pr.»t. of searbhaica. ` 

searbhachd. s.f.in i. Bitterness, acidness, sour- 
ness, 2 Harshness, severity. 3(MS) Gall. 

genruhad, -nid, s.m. Degree of bitterness. sour- 
ness, harshness or S:verity. A’ dol an 8., 
growing more and more sour, 

searbhadh, -ai lh, s.m. see searbhachadh. 

&»arbhadair, ep, see stara lair, 

searbhadas, (MS; -ais, s.m. Gall. 

8:irbhadas, -ais, s.m. Bitterness, sourness. 2* 
Disgust, dislike. di:pleasure, 3 Severity, snarp- 
ness. 4 Harshness of taste or souud. Pìob 
ris., a pive making & harsh sound. 

searbhag, (CR) s.f. Sm vll-pale-green,gorrel-tast- 
ing trefoil growing in cool, shady places— W. 
ot Ross-shire. ; 

ge'rbhag, -aiy, An, sf. Bitter draught. 2 Re- 
fuse of liquids. 3 Acid. 4* Pickle. 5**Bit- 
ter, sircastic female. 6 (AH) Toil, travail, 
struggle, difficulty, tough Job, perplexity. 


j es 





"623. Searbhag mhilis. 


&earb! ag mhilis,ts./. Woody nightshade, bitter- 
swees —solanum dulcemona, 

Searbhiich, pr. pt. a s arbhachadh, va. & n. 
Make bitter, embitter. 2**Acidulate. 3 Be- 
come bitter. 4*Visgust. 5 *Tease. Sh. e 
mi, he disgusted m», teased me or embhittered 
my life. b 

gearbhaichte, past pt. of searbhaich. Embit- 
tered, made bitter, become bitter. 2* eased. 

age ga muc,§s. Endive, see eanach-ghar- 
aidh, 

searbhalachd, see searbhachd. 

searbhan,** ent, Oats. 2(WOC) Disgust. Chuir 
e s. orm, he disjusied me. 

— t -ain, s.m. Tribute. 2(DU) see searbh- 
acnd. 

Searbhan-muice, see eanach-ghàraiih. 

S»arbhanta, -n, 8.7. Servant. 2 Mail-servant, 
indoor or outdoor, S. Mhic Dhòmhnuill 
Dhuibh, (Lochiel’s servant)—a name applied 
to those dry easterly winds which often pre- 
vail in September, and are such a go i-send to 
the farmer whose harvest is late. The origin 
of the connection with Lochiel is not clear. 

--—chd,* s.f.ind. Service, 2 Oifice ofa 
maid servant. 3** Handiwork of a female 
servant, 

 Searbhas, see searbhachd. 

searbhasachd,** s.f. Sourness, bitterness, asper- 
ity. 2 Harshness, severity. 

Searbh-bhriathar,** -air, s.m. Bitter saying. 2 

Sarcasm, 
searbh-bhriathrach,** o Bitter in language. 2 
Sarcaaiuic. 





801 


searganta 





searbh-chainnteach, -eiche, a. Maledicent, 

———— ——- d,** s f. Maledicency. 

searbhda'ch,* v. see searbhaich. 

————— — te, see searbhaichte. 

searhh-dharach, -3ich, san, Cerrus. 

searbh-yh'oir, -e, s.f. Vain-bousün x, vain-glory. 
2 Raillery. sarcastic languag», cacophony. 

euchd, s.f./n !. t1abit of boasting, 

searbh-ghióracau, -aiche, a. Boasting, vain-glor- 
ious, 

searbh-ghuthach, -aiche, a. A'sonous. 

searbhlachd s.f. sse s:arbhach l. 

searvh-luibh.§ s. 7 Wormwood, see burmaid. 
F'orinerly used instead of hops to increase the 
intoxicating quality of mait liquors. Chuir è 
air mhisg mi le searbi-luibhean, he made me 
drunken with worm vool, 

searbhos,** -òis, s.m. Deer, roe, stag. 

searbh-radh,** pl. -raite, s.m. Bitter saying, 
sarcasm, cacoph my, 

searbh-ra:ivach,** a. Bitter in language. 2 Sar- 
Cas: ie, 

searbh!a, past nt. of searbh. 
ed, acidulated. 2 Pickled. 

searbhtach ** a. Causiug soucness,embittering, 
aci lulating, 

searbh-ubh .1,** -u^hlan, s,m. Tart apple, crab- 
apple, coloqui tida. 

searbós, see serrbhos, 

searc, -eirc, see seirc. 

fsearc, v.a. Love, 

searcadh, -aidh, see seargadh. 

Scarcag, -aig, -an, s.f., see seirceag. 

seareail, see seiresil. 

searcall,-aiill, s.m. Flesh. 2 Delicate meat, 
best part of fl sh-mvat. 

Searcan, -ain, -au, s.m. see seircean. 2(AC) see 
seircean-mór. 

searcoll,(AF) s.m. Flesh of the woodcock. 

Seardair, sev searadair, 

tsearg, s. Consumption. 

searg,* a. Dry, withered, shrivelled. 

searg, -eirg & -a, pl. an, s.m. Trifliag,insignifi- 
cant or puny man or beast. 2 Person or beast 
shrıvelled with age or infirmity. 3*Shrivelled 
or decayed person. 4 (DU) (an t-searg) Dis- 
ease common to sheep. | 

Searg, pr.pt. a’ seargadh, v.a. £ n. Dry, wither 
fade, scorch, cause to dry, wither or fade, 
blast with heat, drought or cold, decay, 
shrivel. 2 Fade, wither, pine away. Sh. na 
lusan, the herbs withered. 

seargach, -aiche, a. Fading. 2 Causing to fade 
or wither, blasting, scorching, withering. 3 
Apt to fade wither or become blasted. 4tf 
Withered. 

seargacnadh, -aidh, s.m. & pr. pt. of seargaich, 
see seargadh. 

seargadair, -ean, s.m. Languisher. 

seargadh, -aidh, s.m. Withering, act of wither- 
ing or causiug to wither, falle, decay or pine 
away. 2 Blasting, as of corn. 3 Scorching, 
4* Fading, pining. A's—, pr. pt. of searg. 
Air s., withered ; tha "n duine sin a’ s. air 
falbh , that man is pining away. 

seargaich, pr.pt. a’ seargachadh, v.a. & n. Same 
meanings as searg. 

-———— ear, ful.pass. of searzaich. 

-—te, past pt. of seargaich. 

seargair,* -ean, 8$. mM. Pining person, withered 
or puny persoa. 

seargan, 8.7m, see searg. 

searganach, -aiche, a. Withered, dried up, 2 
Causing to wither, that withers, 

searganach, -aich, sm. Person of shrivelled ap- 
pearance, . 

searganta,ft ad. see searganach. 








Soured, embitter- 





seargta 


seargte, past pt. of searg. Dried up, withered, 
faded, consttmed, blasted, shriveiied. Fraoch 
s.. withered heath. 

parmar, W. of Ross for seamrag. 

iearmaid, see searmon. 

searmon, -oin, -an, s.f. Sermon. discourse, lec- 
ture, pleading. 
they preach ? 

searmonach.tf a. Abounding in sermons. 

searmonachadh, -aidh, sm. Prevenisg, act or 
business of preaching. A’ s—, pr. pt. of sear- 
monaicn. 

searmonaich, pr.pt. a’ searmonachadh, v.a.&n, 
Preach, perfurm the act or oflice of pieach- 
inz, Jecture. disconrse, 2 Harmonize. 

searmonaicie, -An, s.m. Preacher. 

searmonaichte, past pt. of searmonaich. Preach- 
el, 

gearn,** v.a. Loose, untie. 

,** s.m. Youth, stripling. 

fsearnach,** a. Dissolvent, 2z Separable. 

tsearnadh,** -aidh, s.m. Dissolution, separation, 
loosening. 2 Yawning,stretching of ihe limbs, 
extension. | 

searpan,** -ain, s.m. Order. 2 Custom. 3 Swan. 

searr, -a, -an SE, Sickle, reaping-hook. 2 Scy- 
the. 3 Saw. 4**Phial. [** gives s.m.] 

geàrr, pr. pt. a’ seàrradh, v. a Cut, hack, as 
with a knife. 2 Reap,mow,shear. 3 Slaughter, 
kill, make havoc, massacre. 4**Yawn. Dër 
Stretch the limbs. 

searr, (AF) s.m. see searrach. 

searrach, -aich, s. m. Foal, colt. 2 (DO) Colt 
till housed—Uist. 3 Filly. [A Gael consi- 
ders ita bad omen to have a back view of the 
first foal or young of any grazing quadruped 
of that season he sees in any year.] Deich 
searraich, ten foals ; camhail le 'n searraich, 
camels with their foals ; chuunaic mi s. "ag 
chulaibh rium, Z saw a foal with its back to 





me. | 

gearrach,** a. Edged, pointed,sharp, like a hook 
or scythe, 

eearrach-ruadh.(AF) s. Buzzard. 

gearrachach, -aiche, æ. Abounding in foals colts 
or fillies. Corres. uanach, a dell where foals 
and lambs aboun i. 

searraciatl, -e, a. Lixe a foal. 
3 Slender-footed, as a foal. 
foals. 

searradh, -aidh, sm. Cutting, act of cutting or 
hacking, as with a knife. 2 Reaving, act of 
reaping or mowing. 3 Slaughtering, act of 
slaughtering, 4(UMy) (searra lh) Stretch of 
the leg. A’ s—, pr. pt. of seàrr. Fichend 
troida searradh an fhéidh is troidh thar fhich- 
ead s. a’ mhial-choin, twenty feet the deer’s 
bound and twenty-one the greyhound's. 

searrag, -aig, -an, sf. Bottle flask, phial, stoup. 
2 Leathern bottle. 3**Cup. 4 Bundle of hay. 
This is simply a translation of the English 
phrase "ra bottle of nay.” (ceannae fheòir.) 

searri gach, -aiche, a. Of, or bslonging to, bot- 
tles or phials. 2 f.ike a bottle or phial. 3 
Fuil of bottles or phia!s. 

searragaich, sf, Pilewort, *cole-wort—ranun- 
culus ficaria. 

gearragaich,*" v.a. Bottle, lay up in bottles, 

-—te, past pt. Bottled, laid up in bot- 


2 Slim, small. 
4 Abounding in 





tles. 

eearrag-phócaid,* s.f. Flask. 

P: SS -aill, -an & fhiaclan, s. f. Sharp 
tooth. 

geàrr-fhiaclach, -aiche, a. Having sharp teeth. 
2**Having teeth like a sickle. 

searr-shuil, -shula, -ean, s.f. Squint-eye, 

searr-shuileach, -eiche, a. Squint-eyed. 


802 


seasgach 


o_o oe ee 


, Sears, v.a. Gaelic form of charge. 2* Drandish 
i scarsadh,** -aidh s.m. Charge, as of a gun. 
| Sé wrsainn,”* v.a. Charge or Jord a gn. 
Bees ing eh (OR) 8.). Notice to quit — PertA- 
s^. iras. 


a | Se irsimveh,f -aich, s.m. Sheri f-officer, 
Cionnas a ni iad s ? how can | searthonn,** -uinn, s.m. Chief poet, 


2 Prinz. 

3 Art. 4 Kaowl>dge. 

seas.** s.m. Plank for stepping into a buat. 2 
Bench made on a hay-rick by cutiing od 
part of the hay. s 

Seas, pr.pt. a’ seasimh,v.a, & n. Stand. 2 Maiu- 
tuin. support, defend. 3 Continue, endure. 4 
Profit, avail. 5*Stop. 6**Lust. 7**Stand by. 
8ttüause to stand. An s. thu 'nam fhianuis ? 
will you stant in my presence; có a sheasas tu P. 
who witl support you? s. an còir, maintains 
their rtjyhts; a ch’ aindeoin có a sheasada 
tu, in defiance of ai that will tak» your part ; 
cha n urrainn mi seo a sheasamh, J cannot 
endure this ; seasaidh mis’ thu an còir 's aa 
eucòir, Z will support you, right or wronj. 

seasich,* -aiche, a. see seasiahaen. 

seasachail,** a. Ascititious. 

sea-achas,** s.m. Truce. 2 Sitting. 3 Standing- 
room, | 

seasasth, -aidh, see seasamh. 

seasanica, AF) ge Barren cow, barren cattle, 

seasnida, fut.af.a. of seas. 

seasaluh, (AF) see seasaich. 

seasaimh, see seasamu, —— 

seasaireachd,* s.f.ind. Penance in church. 

seasam, Ist.pers.sing.imn. Of seas. iet me stand. 
2 Ist.sing.ful.af. of seas. I wid stani. 

seasainain,** Gaelic form of jessamine 

seasamh,** v. Stand. 2 Rise up. 3 Stop, en- 
dure, last. FA VIN 

seasamh, -aimh, s.m. Standing, act or posture 
of standing, 2 State of enduring or continu- 
ing. 3 Maintaining, act of maintaiuing, sus- 
taining, defending. 4 Stability, firmness. ő 
Station. 6**Footing. 7**Cessition, 8 Last 
ing. A’s—, pr pt. of seas. 'Na sh., he siani- 
ing ; `na 3., she standing ; cha bhi s, an droch- 
bheart, there is no stability in mischief: 8, 
chlaidheimh, stan linj on one’s head ; dean s, 
stand up; air droch sh. chas, on uncertain 
footing. 

seasamhach, see seasmhach. ` 

seasamnachd, see seasmhach I, 

seasaothar,** -air, sm. Seat iu a boat. 

seasxuih-claidh»amh, AH) $.3à. Act of standing 
on one's heal. 

seasda,** s.m. Defenco^. 

r,** -air. s.m. Defence. 2 Peace, rest, ree 

. pose, comfort. 3 Pallet, pillow, place where 
on to rest. —Sár-Ohair. 

seasdan,** -ain, s.m. Shout, 2 Hunter's cry. 

seas-dubh, -duibh, -an-dubha, e m. Ink-stand, 

seasg, A soisye, @ Barren, unproliic. 2 
Yielding no milk, dry, not giving suck. 3 
Addle. Ni sam bith s. 'nad thir, anuyihing 
barren in thy land ; clocha seasza, dry 
breasts ; ni mó bhios e 3., n-ither will he be bar- 
ren; crodh 8S., barren eattie, catile that yield 
no milk. | | 

seasg,* s.» Barrenness. 

seasz,* s.m. Nedge,water-sedge. 2 Burr-reed. A? 
buain s., cutting sedye. [** &tf gen. seisg. ] 

seasyach, -aiche,@ Causing barren ess. 2 Bar- 
ren, sea seasg. Beinn sa. nam fuaran, the 
barren moun/ain of springs, 

seasgach, -aich, s.m.col. Cows giving no milk, 
farrow cattle, barren cattle. 2 Resdv place. 
3 (DMK) Bachelor. 4** Dry cow. 5 (DU) 
(an seasgaca, s.coll.) Young cattle kept ou the 
bill all summer. 





seasgachas 


Geasgachas, -ais, see seasgaiche. 
geasgachd, £f. Barrenness, 2 Herd of barren 
eattle, 
seasgad, -aid, s.m. Degree of sterility. 
aexsgadh.(M MceD) s. m. The part of an oar be- 
tween the box and feather. 
g»as zaich,** s.f. Barren cow. 
Beasvaicue, s.f.ind. Barrenness, sterility, stato 
of being barren. 
easg vich?, comp. of seasgach. 
&234Sszair, e, a Ab ease, in easy circumstances, 
quiet, comfortable, snug, warm, dry and soft. 
2 Sheltered, protectal. 3 Hifeminate. 4* 
Settled, still, as calm weather. Bi s., be quiet; 
fau s., keep quiet. ; 
seasgair, eat, 38.0. Ona in comfortable circum- 
stances, cosy person. 2 Lazy person 3 Ef- 
feminate person, — 4**3helter 5**One who 
threshes corn by the bulk. Is s. thu ri fuachd, 
thou art a shelter in the cold. 
sasgiireach, -eiche, d. see seasgair. Gu s.,com- 
| fortaily snitjly. 
&esgaireAch d, 8$. 
n2s4 snugiuess, angues 
cosiness. An 3, OI ease ; iu 
tin easy circumstances, 





f. ind. Comfort, ease, quiet- 
peace, warmth, 
chd na s., people 


4m 

we 

ne [E 

"igno nA 
Adee Se 
i gënt i. 


ONSE COM 


t 


RE 
| Lat 
ad 


E 
E 


Ir uuieggr geg 
sah 


uim 


= = 
t 
T 


» 
ONG 








625. Seic, (ill. by 
M McD.) 


624. Seasaan 16.) 
Beasvan, -ain & A, -an, ? m. Shock or handful 


of glewned corn. 2** Gleanings of corn. 3 
Yruss of gleined corn. 4 Moorish ground, 
fenny country 5~*Lanit tha' has been glean- 
el 5$ Reed-grass -arundo phragmit-.s. 

Seasgan&ch, -aiche, à. Inhanilfulsor shocks, as 
gleaned corn. 2 Aboun ling in gleaned corn. 

—, aich, $n. Bachelor. 

-—d,** s.f. Celibacy. 

asgaun, see seasgan 

—-ach,** a. Marshy. 

gpasvar,** -aire, qd. Soft, effeminate. 2 Still, 
calm. 3 Comfortable. 4 Dry and warm,snug. 
{also seasgair.] 

seasg-bhd, -bhoin, $.f. Barren cow, heifer. 

seasz-chorp,** -chuirp, $. m. Barren body. 2 
Coustitutional barrenness. 

Seasg-chorpach, -aiche, a. Barren, farrow, un- 
prolific. 

seasg-chrodh, s.f. see crodh-seisg. 

seasglach,** -aich, s.m. Barren cattle. 

Seasglaich,(AF) s. see seasglach. 

seas-ghrian, -gnréine, 8. m. The solstice. 2 
Equinoctial line—Sar-Obair. 

G@easzrach, see seasgach. 

seasyzta, a. Juiceless. 

seasmhach, -aiche, a. Firm, steadfast. 2 Fixed, 
established, firm, constant, durable, persever- 
ing, enduring, steady, settled. 3 (MS)Agree- 











803 


seicheach 
able. 4 Positive, in grammar 5 (DU) Re- 
liable. Daine s., œ man of his word, àite- 


còmhnuidh s., @ fixed abol»; bithidh gach 
facal s., every word shall be established. 

seasmhachd, s.7.ind. Firmness, steadiaess, sta- 
bility, steadfastness, constaacy, durableness, 
2 settled starve, as of weather. 

seasrach,** -aich. s.m. Lad, youth. 

seasunta,** a, Prosperous 

seasuntachd,** s.f Prosperity. 

Seat,** -a, s. m. Satiety of food, bellyful. 2 
Qu-an. (seid.) 

seaihadair,** -ean, s m. Skinner. 

Seathadh, see -éathamh, 

Tscathadh,** -aido, san. Skin, hide. 

seathaid, s 7% Sucking ewe. 

séath imh, (6mh.) a. The sixth 

seathamh-deug, æa ‘The sixteenth The sub- 
stantive is placed between the component 
parts. as, an t-seathamh chearc deug, the 8x- 
teenth hen 

seathan,(CR) s.m Panting, hard breathing. Tha 
s. air, Ae ts panting. he i$ out of breath.— W. of 
Ross-shire 

tseathar, a. Strong, able. 2 Good. 

tseathar, -air, s.n. Library, stucty. 

—— ——aàch, a. Divine, 

seath-bhaist, -e, -ean. s.f. see seabh vist. 

seath-bhaisteach, -eiche, a. see seabhaisteach. 

seathinar, see seanar, 

seath-buog,$ -bbuig, s.f. Marjoram, see oragan. 

Tsecc, a. now Seac, 

secel, -eil, Gaelic spelling of shekel. 

se-chasach, a. Six-footed. 

sé-chearnach,** a, Hexangular. 

sé-chéarnag,** -aig, sf. Hexangle, hexangular 
figure. 

tsed, (AF) Standard of cows or cattle by which 
prices &c. were determined, i.e. one milen 
cow Sed bo dile, a standard made up of dif- 
ferent kinds of live stock. 

tsegh, (AF) s. Wild ox, buffalo. 2 Moose, elk. 
3* * Milk. 

seib $ s. Buck-bean, see ponair-chapuill. 

szic,(MMcD) sf. Bag of eight pecks for hold- 
ing grain or meal, made wholly of reeds or 
sioman luachair. A rope was rove through 
the handles when full and the mouth brought 
close together. Lt was like a 2-boll bag of 
meal in shape— Lewis. (ill. 625. 

seic, -ean, s.m. Flier of a spinniog-wheel, the 
part umed with teeth by which the thread is 
conducted to the reel. (aiso teic.) 

seic, -ean, s.m Rack of a stable, manger. 

seic, -e, -ean, s.f. See seiche. 2 Bag made of 
hide or skin 3 Che peritonium. 4 ‘The exter- 
ior or interior membrane surrounding ths 
brain. 5**Sack-wine 5**Bone.  Mam-seic, 
a rupture, In Argyllshire, peritonium is sic, 
and rupture màm-sic. S. au tairbh, the skin 
of th» bull; adh’ aindeoin do sh., in spite of 
your skin 

seiceach,** æ. Having a thick skin or hide. 2 
Of a skin or hide. 

seiceal, eil, -cle &-clean, s.m. Heckle for dress- 
ing flax. 

seicean,** s.m. Membrane that covers the in- 
testines. 2 Pellicle. 3 Film. 4 The skull. 5 
The pellicle of the brain. 

seiceanach,** a. Filmy, having a pellicle, 

seich, see seiche. 

tseich, s.m. Combat. 2 Adventurer. 

seiche,(AF) s, Selling cattle. 

seiche, -an, -eannan [& -eachan,ff e.g. Gairloch 
—DU]s.f. Hide, skia. Ð. eich, o horee’s skin; 
s. mairt, acow’s skin. i 

seicheach, -eiche, a. Of, or belonging to, hides 


IRBANS-CHAMPAIGN 


seicheach 


or skins. 2 Like a hide or skin. 

seicheadair, -ean, s.m. Skinner, currier. 

seicheadaireachd,tt s.f. Skinniag. 

seichearnach,* -aicn, s.f. Tan-work. 2 Cube. 

seichim,** an. Shechem-wood. 

seicil, s. ** vae. 2rFIleckle for flax, flaxcomb. 

seicil, pr. pt. a’ seicleadh, v.d. Dress or comb 
flax. 2* Beat or scold lustily. 

Seicilte, past pt. of seicil. Heckled. 

seicie, s. Flier of a spinning-wheel. (also séicle) 

seicleadh, -eidh, s.m. Dressing, act of dressiug 
flax. A’ s—, .pt. of seicil, Lion air a 
Gneagh sh., fav well dressed. 

seiclear, -ir, pl. -an & -eireau, s.m. Flax-dresser. 
hackler. 

-, fut. pass. of seicil. Shall be combed or 

dressed, as flax, 

achd, s.f. ind. Flax-dressing, hackling. 

Seicilte, past pt. of seicil. Dressed (of flax.) 

Seicne, -an,s.f. see seic. 

seicueach, -eich, s. m. Stout or corpulent man. 
2 Stomachful, full meal. 

seid, -e, -ean [& -eachan**] s.f. Tympany, swell- 
ing of the body from flatulence. 2* Swelling 
in à person from luxurious living and deep 
potations. 3 Full meal. 4 Bellyful, surfeit. 
5 Bed spread on the floor, pallet, shakedowa. 
6 Truss of hay, grass or straw. 7 Bench or 
form to sit on, made of grass or heath. 8** 
Voluptuousness. 9 Load. [WO gives séid for 
Nos. 5,6 & 7.] Nach anu a tha 'n t-seid! how 
the follow is puffed up! fnuair e a sh., h^ got his 
fill; "na luidhe air s., sleeping on a pallet ; s. 
luachrach, æ bed of rushes ; sop as gachs., @ 
wisp from every truss, 

séid, pr.pt. a’ séideadh, v.a. & n. Blow, as the 
wind, 2 Breathe, breathe upon or into. 3 
Blow, drive away by blowing. 4 Paut, puff. 
5 Fiatter, swell by flattery. 6 Inflate. 7*In- 
stizate, prompt to evil. Sh. eis sh. e, tt blew 
ani it blew ; it blew intoa hurrican? ; is tus’ 
a tha ’ga shéideadh, it is you that instigate 
him; sh. e an cumnelnibh a shròine anail na 
beatha, he breathed into his nostrils the breath 
of life Sa suas a’ phìob, p’ay the pipes. 

Sé, -ean, s.m. Blowing, puff. 

seideach, -eiche, a. Swollen by tympany. 2 Fat, 
corpulent. 3 Having trusses of grass, hay or 
straw. 4 Like a truss. 5 Having beds spread 
on the ground, 6 Having benches or forms of 
grass or heath. 7 Lazy, indolent. [WC gives 
séideach for Nos. 3, 4, 5 & 6.] 

séid each, s.m. Snorting. 

séileach, -eicne, a. Blowing, that blows. 2 











Boisterous, stormy, win ly, blustering. 3 
Fiattering, blowing up by flattery. 4 Inflat- 
ing. b Puffing. 6(MS) Fustian. 


séideadh, -idh, s.m. Blowing, act of blowing. 2 
Act of breathing upon or into. 3 Act of blow- 
inzaway or driviag away by blowing. 4 Act 
of panting for breith. 5 Breathing. 6 Act of 
flattering or sweliing by flactery, 7 Inflating, 
act of inflating. 8 Storm, blast, wind. Or? 
Puffing. A’ s—, pr. pl. of séid. 

geideag, -eiz, -an, s.f. dum. of seid, Little bed 
spread on the floor. 2 Small bench or form 
made of grass or neather. 3 Small truss of 
grass, hay, or straw. 

séideag, -eiz, -an, s. f. Light breeze, gentle 
blowing. 2 see seudag. 

seideagach, -eiche, a. Having small beds spread 
on the grouud. 2 Haviug small forms or 
benches of grass or heather 3 Having small 
trusses of grass, hay or straw. 

séideagach,** o Blowing gently. 

sé' dean, -ein, s.m, Blowp:pe. 2**Blowing. 8 
Blow, pu, panting, auhelation. 


Diail | 
NTERNET ARCHIVE 


804 


__ Seileach-Frangach 
fseidean, -ein, s.m. Quicksand. 

séideil, see séidea Ih. 

seileir,"* s.f. Cid»r. d» 

each,** o, Abounding in cider, 2 Of ci- 





der. 


seidhir, pl. -dhrichean, s.f. Gaelic form of chair. 
2**Chaise, S. reidh, æ hired chaise; s. da 
làimh, an arm-chair. | | 
seidhre, gen. & pl. of seidhir. 
seidhreach, s.m. Settee. 
seidhrichean, p/. of seidhir. ` 
séidich, v.g. dn. Aspirate. 
séilich,** s.7. Blowing, panting. Ka 
séididn, fut.aff.a. of séid. 
seidir, -ean, s.m. Lumpish fellow, corpulent or 
clumsy fellow. 2 Lazy, inactive fellow. 
séidir, -ean, s. m Swell, puifed up fellow. 
Svidireachd, 3.f.end. Lumpishness, stupidity. 2 
Corpulency, ciumsiuess, 3 Laziness, inace 
tivity. 125 
seilirneach, -eich, s.m. see seidir, 
—d, see seidireachd. 
seidrich, v.n. Snort. d 
séidrien,* s.f. Hissing of serpents. 
sei irich, s.f. Snorting of a horse. 2 Blowing. 
breathing hard, panting, anhelation. 8** Blus- 
tering, as of wind. Self 
séidricu,** o. Asthmatiecal. “4 
séilte, past pt. of seid. Blown. 2 Blown as 
way. 3 Putted up by flattery. 4 Inflated. 5 
**Blown up. 
fseig 1, -ean, s.f. Hawk. 
fseigheann,-<inn, s.m. Champion, warrior, 
ts:ignear, -eir, -an, s.n. Falconer. ! 
tseighnean, -ein, s.m. Hurricane, tempest. 2 
Lightning, ` KA 
seilbh,(CR) s. 7% Herd cf cattle at grass, (not 
used of a drove in W., of Ross-shire.) 
seilbh, -e, -ean, s. f. Possession, property. 2 
Herd or «drove of cattle. 3 Farm-stock. 4 
Propinquicy,uearness. 5 see sealbh. Gabh s., 
tate poseession ; rach ‘na sh., take him or it 
m hand, OC 
seitbh?ach, -eiche, see sealbhach. 
sei'bhaeachadh, -aidh, see sealbhachadh. 
seiluheachatl, -e, æ. Possessive. 
seitb'ieadair, San. Abider. | 
seitbh-ghabhail, see s:albh-ghabhail. 
seillohicu, v see sealbnaicu. 
-—te, see s:albdhaichte. 
seilche,(AF) s. Tortoise, 2 Turtle. 
seilcae, comp. of salach, see sarlche. 
seilcheag, -eig, -an, s./, Snail. 2 Slug. 9 in de- 
rision, Inactive person. 
-—ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in snails, 2 
Like a snail, snailish. 
- w1,** n.pl. of seiicheag. 
seilcheag-chlaiseach,(AF) sf. Striated snail. 
seile, -an, s.in.u1, (**f.] see sile. 2(AC) Placen» 
ta, after-birth of a hind. 
seileach, ** see sileach. 
seileach, -ich, -ean, s.m. Willow—saliz, 2 Wil- 
low cupse. 3. Place where willows grow. 
Slat seilich, @ willow switch. (ill. 626 is saliz 
alla —white willow.) | J 
seileachan,$ -ain, s.m. Mountain willow —epilo- 
bium montanum The older name eilig was 
retained as well as sei/euchan in Glenlyon 
antc elsewhere, one of the hills in that glen 
eiag called Creag-eilig from the plant. (ill. 
677.) 
seileach-an-t-sruth,§ s.m. Babyloinan willow— 
saliz babylonica. xe 
seileachau-buidhe,§ s,m. see lus-na-siothaimh. 
seileacaan-Franzach.$ s.m. Rossabay—epwobsum 
eugwustrfolium. (ill. 628. 
seileach-rangach,ft s.m. 














) 
Freuch willow—saitz 


teilen ch-Francach RIS | seinn 


aquaticg. iris, yellow wa'er-Hag or sedge. 
l , seii!ean.-eiu, -au, s.m. Dee teach or field-bee. 2 
Teasıne request or repetition. 
s -avha l^, a field bee. 
s.-iiombhainu, a dione or idle bee. 
s.-lunndach, a drone bee. 
s.-moór, & bumble bee. 
8.-nimh, a hornet. 
s.-se mhid, a sail, 
seilieauach.-a che, a Full nf bees. 2 Teasing, 
importunate 3 Capricious, flighty 
se`ileanacid, s.find. Caprice. 
seilleann,(AF) s Kel, sheep-louse, tick, see 
séalan 
ach. see séalanach 
| seillrunn,** -uinn, s.m see sealan., 
seilm:ger,(A F) s m. Imperfect ram. 2 contempt. 
v0usly, Useless man. 
seilt,** s.f. Dropping 2 Drivelling. slavering, 
mucous salivation, 
seilteach,** a, Slavering, causing salivation,mu- 
cous. 
seilteachd,** s.f. Infirmity of slavering, course 
of salivation. 2 Oozivess 
seiliichean, s pl. Scrofulous sores. 
seil uisge, 8. Leecn 
seim,-e, s f. Squint, 2 Squinting S. shuil- 
each, squint-eyed. 
Tseim, e, s.f Publishing. 
seirmeacht, s.f, und. Sonorousness, 
sèimh, e, @ Mild, tranquil, placid, smooth. 2 
AfHable, gentle, soft, kind 3 Delicate. 4** 
Comely. 5** rarely Little. 6**Single. 7** 
Quiet. 'San thairce sheimh, £n the calm sea: 
s. yu'n robb do thàmh, soft be thy repose ; gu 
s.. quivtiy, softly ; na's sèimhe, more mild. 
(also séamh.) 
| xé mhe., s f. «d. Mildness, gentleness, quietness, 
calmness smootiness 2 kindness 3** Soft- 
ness aiiis da 
i seimheach, -eiche, n. aking calm, producin 
628. Seileachan- Franaach. 629. Seamhean. calmness. % Quiet, calm, mild. 3 ae d rts 














seileanchd,( MS) s.f. Defluxion. sèimheachadh, -aicth,s.m. Calming, act of caim- 
Seileach-geal, s.m. Sallow. ing, quieting or soothing. A’ s—, pr. pt. of 
selleach utsge, s.m. Osier — Colonsay. seimbich. 
seileadach, -aich, see si'eadach. eeimbheachd, sf. see sèimhe., ; 
seileadaecn,-aieh, s.m. Pocket-handkerchief. se'mhealachd,(MS) st D:spassion, coolness, 2. 
Seileadan,** see seileadach. 2 spitting box. Delicacy 
seileay, eg, an, s.f, see si'eag, seimhiean § -ein, sm. Bog-rush—scheenus nigri- 
ach, see sileagacii. cans 
seileann, inn, ‘an, see séalan. - seimheanachd,* s.fimnd, Indulgence in ease. 2 
——ach, -aicn, see séalanach, Chambering. 8 Efteminate conduct, 

seilear, -ir, -an, s.m. Cellar. |"* gives seileir as | séunhich, v.a. & n. Calm, make calm or placid, 

nom, | smoothe 2 Become caim. 3 Adorn, A 
———ach, -aiche, a. Cellared. 2 Cellular, Soothe. 5 Grow kind, soft or gentle. 
seilear-bidh. item, Pantry ———te, past pt. of seimhich. Caimed, stilled. 
seilear-dibhe,* s.m.Spirit cellar. ? Public house ! :eim" ide, au s.f Snail 
seilear iochndrach. [ft s.n. Under cellar. seimbidh,(AF) s.f Snail, slug. 
seilear-lair,* s m. Vault semmhidh, a Subtile 
seileicheag, see seilcheag. seimh- mreas,™” son. Mellow fruit, l 
seileid,** s.f. Bellyful, surfeit. 2 Big belly. seumnilear, etc. -an, sam see similear. i 
Seiler. see selear. — — —ach, aiche, a see similearacn. 

each, see seilearach. — ——aich, v à, {see simiearaich. 








 &geilg,* -e, s. f. Hunt, chase, punting. 2 Venison. —aichte,past pt of se,mileara!ch, see simi- 
3 What is hunted. Luran oa seilge, the hunts learaichtue, 





man, seine, see sine. 
——, gen.sing. of sealg. seimmeach,* s.m. Pad, donkey. Cha mhò orm thu 
seilich, see alen. na s mo air s. a mhathair, I care as little for 
seilicheag, see seilcheag. i you asa donkey cares for his mother. 
—ach, see seilcheagach, seing, see seang, 
seilide,** s f, Snail | seiniolach, (AF) s.m, Nightingale. 
seilidh, see seilcheag. seinn, pr.pt. a’ seinn, v.a. & n. Sing, chant,carol. 
Beilisdeir, -ean, s.m. Yellow iris, sedge, gellow, 2% Play on an instrument, 3 Ring asa bell. 4 
warer-flag see bog-u'sge. . Report, promulgate, proclaim. Na h-eòin ai 
geilisileir-nan-gobhar, s. im. Great wood.rush— | seinn, the birds warbling; sh. e an fhiodhall, 
Colonsay. he played upon the violin ; air a’ chlarsach, on 


&eilisdeireach, -eiche, €, Abounding in yellow! the harp ; s. an clag, ring the bell—Inverness 


seinn 


[gliong an clag— Argyll ] ; air à sh. feadh na 
dùthcha, reported through the country ; droch 
sh., bad melody, bad church music. 

seinn, -e, s.f. Singing, act of singing. 2 Act of 
playing upon a musical instrument. 3 Ring- 
ing, act of ringing, as a bell. 4 Reporting, act 
of reporting, spreading a report. 5 Warbling. 
Là s. do chluig, the day of thy bell-ringing 
CE A’ 8—, pr.pt. of seinn. [** gives 
s.m. 

seinneadair, Irish inflection of seinn. 

seinneam, Ist sın}. imp. of seinn, Let me sing. 

seinnear.** fut. pass. of seinn. Shall be suug. 

&einnibh, 2nd. per.pl.imp. of seinn. 

&^innim, (for seinnidh mi) L will sing. 

&einnlean, (CR) K«ncardun-0on-Oykel & Creich, 
Suth'd for seillean 

seinnlear,(CR) Rogart for seillean, 

seinnsearachd, see sinnsearachd. 

seinntig. v. Gaelic form of change. 

geinse, s. Gaelic form of change. 
a chanye-house, 

6éip. v.G. & n. see sèap, 

seipealach,** a. Having chapels. 2 Of, or relat- 
ing to, a chapel. 

Beipear, see seapair, 

seipeil,f s.f. Gaelic form of chapel. 
chre. 

seipeinn, -ean, s.m. Choppin, quart (liquid mea- 
sure.) [** seipinn.] 

seipeinneach,** a, In chopins, 2 Containing a 
chopin. [** seipinneach. } 

seipeireachd, see seapaireachd., 

seipinn, see seipeinn. 

seirbh. see searbh. 4 

seirbhe, comp. of searbh, 2 see searbhachd. 

seirbheachd, see searbhachd., 

seirbhead, see searbhad. 

—as, see searbhadas. 

geirbhe-ciüil,** s. Dissonance. 

seirbhis, e -ean, St Service, work, labour. 2 
Advantage, profit. 3 Use. S. chruaidh, hard 
or grievoi's Service, 

&eirbhiseach, Ach, 8. m. 
Domestic. 

seirbhiseach, -eiche, a. Performing work. 2 Use- 
ful, profitable, alvantageous. 

seirbhiseachadh, aidh, s.m. Serving. act of serv- 
ing or acting asaservant. 3 Working, act of 
working. A's—,pr pt. of seirbhisich. 

seirbhiseachd, s.f snd. State or condition of a ser- 
vant. 2 Business of a servant 

seirbhisich, pr.pt. a’ seirbhiseacha‘h, v.a. Serve, 
attend upon, as a Servant. 2 Work, perform 
work 

seirc. e, s.f. Love, affection. 
charity, the Christian virtue. 
Ball seirc, a beauty spot. 

eeirceach, -eiche, see seirceil., 

seircealachd, s.f ind. Lovingness, charitableness, 
amiableness, benevolence, kindiiness. 

eeirceag, ep, -an, s.f Beloved female. 2 Bene- 
volent female. 3 Mis ress, sweetheart. 

Beircean, ein, An, 8 m Belovel person, 2 Bene- 
voleut person. 3**Jerkin. A s.searug i, the 
beloved (choice) one of her who bore her.—Song 
0f Solomon. 

geircean-mor,S 8 m. Burdock, 
suirich., 

seircean-suirich,§ s.m. Burdock, see suirichean- 
suirich, 2% Cleavers—Colonsay. 

Seircear, see seircean, 

seirceil, e œ. Affectionate. loving, fond. 2 
Benevolent, charitable. 3 Dutiiul. Gu s.. 
charitably. 

+seircin, -e, -ean, s.f. Gaelic form of jerkin. 

geirdean,** -ein, s.m. Pilchard, 2 Sardiue, 


Taigh seinse, 


2**Sepul- 





Servant, employée. .2 


2 Benevolence. 
ott Beauty. 


see suirichean- 


808 


séis 


seirdin, see seirdean. 

tseire,** s.7. Food. 

seireacan,(AF) s.m. Silkworm, 

fseireach,** a, Liberal of food. 

seirdeanach,**a,A bounding in pilchards. 8 ta 
a pilchard, 

seirean, -ein, -an, s.m. Shank, leg, particularly à 
spare or slender leg. 2 One having spare or 
slender legs. 3(CR) Ankle—Strathtay & Loeb 
Tay. 4(MS) Pastern. 

séirean (AH) s.m. Wheezing noise made ig 
breathing by an asthmatical person, or by a 
person running hard. 

REESEN -aiche, a. Having small or slendge 

egs. 

seirg, gen.sing, of searg. 

tseirg, s. Red clover, see seamrag-chapuill. 

seirge, comp. of searg 

seir e 8,7. see seirgeachd, 

seirgeachd, sf. Withereduess, dryness. 

Soit An. -ein, -an. sm Witnerel or snrivelled 
person. 2 Sickly or consumptive person. 3** 
Shrunken form. 4**Jerkin. 

Seirgleach s m. see seirgean, 

seirglidh. -e,@ Withered, wasted, 

——.———,** s.m. Withered person, 

seirglidheachd, $.f.ind. State of being withered 
or wasted. 

seirgne, see seirgneach. 

seirgne,** a. Sickly 

seirgneach, -ich. -ichean, s.m. Sickly person, 
oue worn down to a skeleton, 2 Skeleton, A 
*^Consumptive person. 

seirgniche, see seirgneach, 

seiric,^* a. Strong, able. 

semic, -e, s.f Silk, superfine silk. 

seiriceach,"* a. Silken, silky. 

tseiricean,** -ein, -an, s.m. Silk-worm., 

seirgníche, see seirgneach, 

seirm, -e, 8 f. Noise, musical noise, noise of mu 
sic, 2 Music, melody. 3 Skill, dexterity.art, 
4 Manner appearance, attitude. 5*Tune, tone, 
*trim. 6**Peal of bells. Cuir air s., attune, 
tuno, trim , am bheil au clàrsach air s. ? is the 
harp n tune ? 

seirm,f v. Ring, as a bell. 

Sein (AC) v. Follow, Bitheadh e soilleir no 
doilleir ri seirm, det st be bright or dark (for 
u$) to follow 

seirmeach, -eiche, @ Making a musical noise. 
2 Musical,melodious, sweet. 3 Skiltul, skilled, 

seirinea«lair,* -ean, s.m. Precentor 2 Tuner. 

seirmeil, .e, æ. see svirmeach. 2* In trim, tun- 
ed, attuned, 3* In a business-like manner, 
séirs,* see seurs. 

séirsealach, -aiche, d. Strong, robust. 
ealach ] 

—— —— .— , :8ich, s.m. Strong, robust man. 

——d, $.find Strength, vigour, robust- 
ness. 

séirsean, -ein, -an, 8.m. see séirsea!ach. 

ach, aen, s m, see séarsanach. 2** 
Auxiliary, unhired workman 

seirt,** -e, $.f Strength, power. 

seirteil,** o, Strong 

seis, ean. xm. Anything grateful or pleasant 
to the feelingsor senses 2 Sufficiency,enouzh. 
3 One's maten or equal. 4 Friend, compa» 
ion. 6** Satisfaction, 6** Treat, entertaia- 
ment. ?**Company 8**Anything that agrees 
ill or well withone. 9t* Pleasure, delighi, 
Cha d’? fhuair fiona a sheis riamh, F. never 
met his match ; tha do sh. an taic riut, your 
mach $ in contact with you; barrachd 8a sha 
more ihan his match. 7 

séis. -ean s.m. Tune, musical air. 2 Nois?. tne 
mult, bustle. 3 (AC) Dirge. Séis-bhia:s, dcatA- 


(fseirs- 








séi? 


807 


seo 





dirge. 
séis (OR) s.m. Humor buzz made by wild bees 


in their nest when dđisturbed— W.of Ross-shire. 

- 2(WC) Any hissing sound. 

fseis, -e, -ean, 3.f. Skill, knowledge. 

seis,(MMcD) s, Kind of chest, see ciste-chaol. 

séis, v. W. of Ross for séist. ; 

góisd, -ean, s.m. [s.f.**] Siege. 2 see séist. Cuir 

a, besiege ; fo sh., under a siega. 1 

géisd, pr.pt. a’ séisileadh, v.a. Besiege, invest. 2 
Straiten, reduce to difficulties. 

séisd, -e, -ean, $.f. see séid. 

séisdeach, -eiche, a. Besieging, investing. 2 
Straiteniug, reducing to straits or difficuliies. 

-d,** s.f. State of bing besieged, siege. 

2 Act of reducing to straits or difficnicics. 3 
Act of sivroun ling or besetting. 4** Frequent 
or continued besieging, A’ s—, pr. pl. of 
séis l. 

sé.4 lea th, -idh, s.m. Besi-ging, s'ege. 2 Act of 





surrounding or besetting. A’ s—, pr pt. of 


séisd. 
Séi sd ^ar,** s.m. Besieger. 
svisleil, a Mild, 


séisdeil ff -e, «. Of, or belonging to, a siege. 
S8ig.lich,, MS) v.a. Beleaguer. 
emise,” see seis. 
sdiseach, -eich, -ean, s.m. Timber couch or ob- 
~ long woolen chair to lean upon, sofa. 
Sviseaci, -eiche, ga. Pleasurable, agreeable. 2 
Satisfying. 3 Cneerful, delightful, 4 Libidi- 
. nous. 
Siis»ach,** -eiche, œ. Noisy, tumultuous. 
@viseachadh, -aidh, s,m. Act of satisfying, as 
with food. 2 Act of entertaining or treating. 
3 Matching,àct of matching or being suitable. 
A’s—, vr.pt. of seisich. | 
sSeis»achd, s. 7. Sufficiency, 2 Entertainment, 
treat. 3** Pleasure, delight. 4**Sedsuality. 
séiseach l,** s.f. Noisiness. 
$3seisea lh, a. The sixth. 
seisean ein, -an, s. m. Kirk-session, a petty 
court in the kirk, consisting of the minister 
who presides, the parish schoolmisier who 
acts as clerk, and the elders, the lowest ec- 
elesiustical court. 2 Court assizes. 3 Session 
of a college.  Cuirair au t-seisean, summon 
b»for» æ kirkesession. } 
ach, a. Pertaining to s^ssions or assizes, 
Seisear, s.coll. Six persons, see seatnnar, Bir- 
eadh s, ghleusta, Lt siz active men rise—Mac 
Maigh. Alasdair. 





s-iseil,** oe Pleasant. 2 Humane 3 Mild. 
fseiseilbh, s.f. Taik, discourse. 
seisg,} et Sedge, bog reed—carez. 2 (AC) see 


EEN 

seisge, $£. Dryness. 

seisgeach,** a. Sedge, abounding in bog-reeds. 

ssisgeach, see seasaich., 

Seisgead,** -eid, s.m. Barrenness. 

Svisgeann,** .einn, s.m. Fenny country. 2 Ex- 
tended marsh. 3 Bog-reed. 

Szisg-madaidh,$ s.f. Upright bur-reed—sparga- 
nium simplez. [**Great bur-teed—sperganium 
erectum.] 

seisg-mheirg,$ see seisg-righ. | 

Seisg-righ,§ s.f. Branched bur-reed, bede-sedze 
—8sparganium ramosum. 

seisich, pr.pt. a’ seiseachadh, v.a. & n. Satisfy, 
as with food. 2 Entertain, treat well. 3 
Maten, cause to fit. 4 Match, suit. 

seisichte, past pt. of seisich. Satisfied, as with 
food. 2 Entertained, well treated, 3 Match- 
ed, fitted- 4 Matching, fitting. 

geisir, see seisear, 

seis-mailraidh, see seisg-madaidh. 





í 630.8 423 -mada lh. 
reducing to straits or duficulries. 3 Act of | seisreach, à 


, 631.Sess7-rijh. 

“ich, chean, s. f. Plough with six 
horses. 2 Team of horses. The team was re- 
dnead succ-ss:vely from six to four, and then 
to two, and the word keeping pace with the 
reduction is now anpliel e.g. in Arran, W. of 
Riss Lorn, &e.t) a pair of horses. The six-horse 
plough was in usein Ireland about 1000 A.D. 
and was employed in Scotland till a compar- 
atively recent dato». It was also in use iu 
Englan:l ia the lifetime of persons now liv- 
Ing. — The wooden plough continued in use 
well within living memory, but that was pro- 
hably of an improved type. ‘Nhe horses were 
yoxed abreast in th» same manner as in tha 
four-nors* vioughs used in Sutherland and 
Caithness in th» middle of the 12th. century, 
The el.or-wood was considered superior to all 
other kinds for making the working parts of 
a woolen plough, S, fearainn, a ploughland. 

se:sreach, Al’) s. Allowance of milk for six per- 

sons —one gallon. 

seisrea lh, see seisreach. 

seisreinn,(CR) s. f. Carucate, plough-land, as 
much lant as can be tilled with one plough in 
à year. 

8élst, -ean, s.m. Melody of a tune, 2 Chorus or 
rofra n ofa song. 3 Tune, ditty, 4 Sneer. 
Oran ur an t-séist cheudna, a song set to the 
sane tune, 

seist, -ein,** s.m, Bed, couch. S. luachrach, 
a bed of rushes, 

séisteach, eiche, at, Melodious, sweet, as a tune. 
2 Having many tunes or ditties. 3 Fond of 
singing tunes or ditties, 4 Sneeriug. 

séit, see séid. 

séiteach, see séideach. 

seiteach,** -eiche, s.f. Wife. 

seiteicean,(AF) s.m. Silkworm. 

seithe, see seiche. 

szithir, -thre, -thrichean, s.f. see seidhir. 

séitrich, e s.f. see séidrich. 

tseo, sm, Substance, 

seo, dem. adj. This, these. An duine a, this 
man;an nighean S., this girl ; na daoine s., 
these men.  |Generally spelt so, but as seo re- 
presen.s the modern pronunciation aad is the 
old form, it is used in this work. ] 

seo, pron. & int. Here,see here, take it, used in 
han ling or ofering anything to another, also 
used in aidressins ons when a thing is about 
to be done or attempted. [Generally spelt so, 
but as seo represents the modern pronuncia- 
tion, and is vho old form it is used in this 
wor«.] 

Seo, $30, falbhamail, com, come let us go ; 

rinn mi mar S20, Z acted thus ; œ ar son seo? 
why 80 ? mar seo, in this manner ; an seo,here; 


seo 


gluais as an seo ! leave this place, be of ! ; mar 
seo is mar siod, in this way anil that way; «ug 
an seo, till now ; gus an seo bu treun e, till 
now he was valiant ; o ’n am seo, Aencefor- 
ward, hence ; seo agad e ! here you have him 
(or it); thoir á seo e, take him hence (or away); 
seo mar à ni thu, thus will you do ; an seo 's 
an siod, here and ther». 

seobhag, see seabnag. 

sedbhgan, for seabhagin—Oran nam fin»achan. 

seoc, -eoic, -an, see s-sócan. 

seocach,** a. Plumad, plumy, as a helmet. 

seocail,-e, @ Active. 2 Por:ly and tall. 3 
Having a proud gait. 4 Precocious. S. air 
mo chasan, active on my feet. 

socair, -ean, s.m. Portly fellow. 

seocair,(Ms) s m. Falconer. 

seocalaend,* s.f.ind. Portliness and tallness. 

$20can. -ain, -an, s.m. Plume of a helmet. 2 
Helmst. S. air aghaidh, onge (or veil) on 
his face. i 

Seoc-da-leig,** s, Kind of clasp-knife. A cor- 
rupvion of the name John de Liege its invent- 


or. 
seocnaidh,(WC) a. Lazy and canny. 
seochlan,-ain,-an, s.m. Feeble person, one who 
erforms auy service feebly or awkwardly. 2 
ivhless fellow. 3 Old man. d4ttstaggering 
person. 

ach, -aiche, a. Feeble, pithless. 2 Per- 

forming any service feebly or awkwardly. 3tf 

Staggering. 

achd, s.f.ind. Feebleness. 2 Performing 
of any service f:ebly or awkwardly. 3 Pith- 
lessness. 4+tSctaggering. 

820d,-oll, eum Jewel. 
ifero, valiant man, chief, warrior. 
Jow as property. 4 Cow with calf. 
Deer. 

seòl, see seud. 

seo l-ghabhta, (AE) s.m. Cow with calf. 

seog (AF) s.f. Little falcon. 2 Merlin. 

Be5z, pr.pl. a’ seog vIn,». t. Swing to anl fro. 2 
Dandle,. 3 Jog. 4** Shake laterally, 5**Hob- 
ble. 6 (CR) Fly—Arran. 

——ach, -aicüe, a Swing ng anything to and 
fro. 2Dandling 3 Penduious 4 Shakiog, 
5 Vibrating. 

——Adh, -aidh, s.m. Swinging, act of swinging 
to and fro. 2 Dandling, aet of dandliug. A’ 
S—, pr.pt. of seog. 

Beogain, see SO, 

Seogat, -ail, see seagal. 

Seozr4n, -ain, s.m. Swinging or pendulous mo- 
tion. 2 Hobbling. 

seóganach, see seogach, 

—d, s.f. Sum» m2anings as seógan. 

sedvanaich, -e, s.f. Same meauings as seógan. 

tseoid,** o, Strong. 
3o0id, gen sing. & n.pl. of seòd. 
nom. too.) 

seòighn, a. Rare, superior, out of the common 
order, eccentric—Sar-Obair. | 

Beoiun, s. Feast —Swuth'd. 

seòl, -oil, -an, s. m. Method, mode or way of 
doing a thing. 2 Way, means, opportunity 
3 Aim. 4 Direction, instruction, guidance. 5 
Expedient. 6**Shawl. Air s. eile, by an- 
other method ; gun s. air dol as, having no 
wa of escape ; ans. ceart, the proper m’thod; 
S. labhairt, à manner of soeech, an idiom ; air 
an t-seòl seo, in this manner ; cuir s, air, œr- 
range, make preparation, s’t in order , thoir 
S. dha, direct him; s.teichidh, @ way to escap»; 








0 often Ayuratively, 
f2 (AF) 
5 (AF) 





L** gives if as 


chan eil s. air biadh fhaotainn, there is no 


way of getting food. —W. H., 1. 17. 
seòl, siuil, siùil, s.m. Sail, 2**3hip. 


Digitized | 

KIrërtfztabilferër: AIC 1 
i rM Pil i =! Li 
ITERNET ARCHIV 


808 


seol-mara 


Braigh-sh., a top-sail ; chunnaic sinn 8., we 
sıw @ sail ; s.mullaich, top-galiant ; sg. 
spreòid, a jib ; s. beag toisich, æ jib ; priomh- 
su. or S. Mór, a mtinsail ; s. toisich, a fors- 
sail ; siùil daalla, topsail and jio ; Ss. uachdr- 
ach, topsail ; s. meadhonach, a mainsail ; m? 
anam mar sh, 'sau doinioun,my soul like a sail 
in the storm; cranu-siüil, @ mast ; thog iad 
au siùil, they hoisted their sails ; s. ciun, jib. 
NAMES OF PARTS OF A SAIL :— 
[Gaelic names not m wked are from DMy.] 
1l Awm pic, an cvise gaf 








2 Lubach. Cainb-1’-mueurain,(AH) cringe. 
3 Sgòi thoisich, clew. à 
4 Boan, foot. 

6 Ceann, head. 

6 Taom, luff. 

7  Ceanglaicueam, reef-points. 

8 Cranu-syoide. sSlat-bhuinn,(AH) boom. 

9 Balltoisieh. Cluas an t-siüil, (AH) tack. 
10 Ball deiridh, Leud deivridh (A H)ajterleech. 
11 Sgod dheiridh, clew-piece. 

12 (MMcD) Corse, the part between upper 


reef-points an l yard — Lewis. 

13 (MMcD)Durinz very bad weather when the 
eni of the yard is. tied to the foot of the 
mast and the point of the yard hoisted, it 
is called a’ chrois— Lewis. 

sòl, pr.p'. a’ sòla lh, v.a. Sail. 2 Navigate, 
giude a vessel. 3 Float. 4 Direct, guide, 

con luct. 5 Instruct. 6 Point oub, show. S. 

ai rathad dha, show him the way ; sh, sian, 

we sailed. i 

tseòl, -oil, -an, s.m, Weaver's loom. 2 Bed. 3 

Pasture. 

seòlach, -aiche, @. Having many sails. 
seo!ta. 

s20.ach, tf -aiche, a. Guiding, directing. 2 Will- 
ing to guide. 3 Having many expedients, in- 
genious, shifty. ! 

seoladair, -eau, s,m. Sailor. 2 Steersman,navi- 
gator. 


2 ses 





each, -eiche, a. Nautical. 

~-achi, s.f.ind. Sailing. act or process of 
sailing, 2 Seafaring life. 3 Art or business 
of a sailor. 4 Navigation, steering, sailing. 
Bhi s. cunnartach, sailing was dangerous. 

seòladh, -aidh, s.in. Sailing, act of sailing. 2 Act 
of guiding or navivating a ship. 3 Directing. 
4 Act of directing,teaching, pointing or show- 
ing. 5 Lustruccion, direction, 6**First semi- 
metre of a verse. 7 Floating. A’ s—, pr.pt. 
of seòl. 'Gam sh., directing me; air s. afloat, 

seòlaid, s f. Pier, haven. 2 Passage for yes- 
sels —Dain I. Ghobha. 3 Anchorage, harbour 
—Sar-Obair. 4(DO)l'airway in the sea— Uist, 

sedlaireachd, Same meaniugs as seòladaireachd, 

seolam, Ist. sing. imp. of seòl., Let me sail. 

sedlaim, frish form of fut. aff. a. (for seòlaidh 
mi) { will sail. 

seoias, (DMy) s. m. Passage for boats cleaned 
of stones, 

seòl-bhacadh,** s.m, Embargo. 

seòl-bhàb,** -aichean, s.m. Pilot-boat. ù 

seol-bhat,** -aichean, s.m. Goad, staff for driy- 
ing cattle, 

sedl-chrann, -chroinn, $.m. Mast. É 

sedl-chrunnach, -aiche, a. Masted, having a 
mas; or masts 2 Haviug high masts. ` 

sedi-cuois, s. Footboard or treadle of spinning 
wheel. , 

sedllair, see s»óladair. 

seóllairt, s.m. Phrase in gram, 





 830l-m aura, -üil-, pl, sitil-mh or -An-m-, s.m. Side 


current. 2**BPide. 3(WO) Ebbtide. 4(WC) 
Full tide. Fad an t-sitil-mara, the whole time 
of the tide. 


Irievimz nen 
ingina | | UIt] 


UNIVERSITY OF 


: LLINOIS AT 


| r^i ri A a D drem ARST i i p - d 
rim DL 5-1 CR GON i 
oe Bel r 4 Boni mi ra Lu 


-meadhon 


geòl-meadhou, s.m, Mainsail. 

ach, see seòl-mealhon, , 
seòlta, a. d past pt. of seòl. Instructed, direct- 
ed. taught, guided. 2 Methodical, set in or: 
der, arranged. 3 Ingenious, having expedi- 
ents. 4 Prudent, wise, cautious. 6 Cunning, 
crafty, artful, wily. 6 Skilfal, Gu s., w ely, 
rudently ; buineamaid gu s., let us deal wise- 








y. 
seòltachd, s.f.ind. Method, arrangement. 2 In- 


genuity. 3 Prudence,caution. 4 Craftiness, 
wiliness. 5 Skilfulness, skill. 


seoltaiche,(AC) s.m. Cunning man, 

sedltair.(MS) eu, Lagger. 

seolt-charach, -aiche, æ. Iusinuative, 

«eoma-guad, see seama-guad, 

sediniair, gei.sin. of seomar. 

eachd, see seóma laiveachd, 

seomalta. @ sec somalta, 

seòmar, -air (& -mrach—not a good form.) pl. 
-mraichean, 8an. The apariment or division 
of a house among the poorer Highlanders 
considered the principal oue, ''the room." 
2 Cham' er, room. 

—— — -aghaiih, sm. Front room. 2 Ante-cham- 


-aoidheachd,ff s.m. tining-room, ban- 


quet-room, | n 
-——— -andachaidh,** san. Vestry, robing room. 
—— — -àraich, s.m. Nursery for children, 
——— -biadhtachid,* s.m. Dining-room. 

—— -beoil, s.n, Front room, 

—— -bidh, s.n. Larder. 

—— — -cailail,* x.. Bedroom, 

-cloin‘ie, s,m. Nursery. 

——— -cuilenchd,* s.m. Drawing-room, 

—— — -cuii,* s.m., Back room, 

—— -culaidh, s.m. Vestry. 

—— -diomhair, s.m. Consulting room. 

——— -éididn, s.m. Dressing-rooin, 

——— -fedla, s.m. Larder. 

wes -gnothaich, s.m. Business-room, office. 

-leabhraichean, s.m. Library. 

——— -leapach, s.f. Bedroom. 

——— -luidhe, s.m. Bedroom. 

——— -marsantachd, ssm. Shop, ware-room 

—— -móid, s.m. Court-room, court of justice. 

—— -mullaich, s.m. Upper rovin, garret, 

-—— — .samhraidh, s.m. Summer pariour, 

-stuidearachil, s.m. Study. 

-suidhe, san, Sitting-room. 

-taobh, s.m. Ante-chamber. 

—— — -toisich, see seomar-taobh. 

seomarach, -aiche, a. Having many rooms or 
chambers. 2 Celluiar, vascu'ar. 

--d, s.f.ind. see seómradaireachd. 

seòmrach, see seómaraeh. 

seomraadair, -ean. 3.2n. Chamberlain, treasurer. 

2 Intriguer, rake, chamberer. 
-—————-—eachd, s.f. Ottice of chamberlain or 

treasurer. 2 Chambering, rakishness, 
seoniraichean, pl. of seomar, 
seonadh,** -aidh, s.m. Augury, sorcery. 2 

Druidism. Martin says that Seonaidh is the 

name of a water-spirit which the inhabitants 

of Lewis used to propitiate by a cup of ale in 
the following manner, They came to the 
church of St. Mulway, each man carrying his 
own provisions. Every family gave a pock of 
malt, and the whole was brewed into ale. 

One of their number was chosen to wade into 

the sea up to his waist, carrying in his haud 

a cup filled with ale. When he reached a 

proper depth, he stood and cried aloud *'Seon- 

aidh, I give thee this cup of ale, hoping that 
thou wilt be so good as to send us plenty of 
seaware for enriching our ground during the 























809 


sésean 


coming year." He then threw the ale into 
the 8-8. This ceremony was performed in the 
nigut-time, On his eoming to land, they ail 
repaired to church, where there was a candle 
bureing on the altar. There they stood still 
for a time, when,on a signal given, the candie 
Was put out, wud straightway they adjourned 
to the fields where the night was spent 
mirthfully over the ale. Next morning tuey 
returned to their respective homes, in the be- 
lief ihat they had insured a plentiful crop for 
the next season. 


| seona-savbha, see seonadh, 


seorast, s Prop. 

seorbh. see searbh. 

seorpan,(MS) s.m. Politician. 

seorsa, -chan, s.m. Sort, kind, genus, species. 

seorsach,tt v. Abounding in sorcs. 

—— ——uih, -aith. s.m. Arranging, act of ar- 
ES or classifying. A’ s—, p..pl. of seòrs- 
aich. 





632. Seòrsa còinnich. 

seórsa còinnich,$ s. Mossy cyphel—cherleria 
sedoidvs, [Plentiful on Beu Lawers.] 

seòrsaich, pr. pt. A seòrsachadh, v. a. Arrange, 
classify, sort. 

te, past pt. of seorsaich. Arranged, 
classified, 

sedrsiia, see seorsa. 

scot, -a, pl. -aichean & -achan, s.m. Short tail, 
stuinp of à tail that remains after docking. 2 
Kurumbrancs, impediment. 3 Lean beast, 
“bet,” rejected animal, the worst beast. 4tf 
Refase of sheep. 

2 Pick the 


seot, ^d, d n. Sprout, as greens. 
best. Sh. an eal, the greens sprouted, 

seotach, -aiche, og, Having a short or docked 
tail. 2 Embarrassed, encumbered. 3 Untidy, 
slovenly. 4 Lazy, iudolent. 5 Dull. 

seotaiche, s.f.ind. Untidiness, slovenliness, 2 
Laziness, indoience. sloth. 

seotair, -ean. s.m. Slovenly or untidy fellow, 2 
Lazy fellow, drone. 3 Lounger, 

—eachd, s.f.ind. Slovenliness, untidiness. 
2 Laziness, indolence. 

seotal, s.m. Small receptacle in stock of spin- 
ning-wheel in which the first filled pirn ig 
Kept till the other is ready for being reeled 
with it. It is also used for other purposes. 
(shutti^.) 3(DU) Small box-shaped compart- 
ment with a lid, in one end of a trunk or 
chest, for ket ping papers, &e. 

seotanachd, Same meanings as seotaiche. 

seotauta, -ainte, a. see seotach. 

cad, see seotaiche. 

s^othag, -aiz, -an, s.f. see seabhag, 

seothan,(CR) Arran for seathan. 

sé-ràitheach, (CR) s.m. Gimmer, six-quarter-old 
sheep —W. of Ross-shire, 

sé-ramhach,* -aiche, a. Six-oared, 

——— — ——,*.a:ch, s. m. Six-oared galley, fe- 








lucca. 
TS?rg, see soarg. 
sésean, sm. Dawn, Bha miair mo = ang. 
| 9 


sésean 


na maidne, I was up at dawn—Lewis. 

-pé-shlisneach, a. Hexagonal. 

—— ——— --——,** sam. Hexagon, cube. 

&6-shlisneag, -eig, -an, 3. Jf. Hexagon, hexagonal 
figure. 

eto. (i.e. gu seth) adv. Severally. 2 Moreover, 
also, likewise. 3 (with a negacive precedinz) 
Neither. 

seth, MS) s. Purport. 

sé-thaouhach, s.m. Cube, hexagon. 

————— , a Hexagonal. 

senbh, see seabh. 

seubhas,* -ais, s.m. Wandering, as beasts. 

seuchil, -a, -an, s.m. Mantle, cover ng, tunic. 

seud, pl. -an & seòid, sm. Jewel, precious stone, 
2 Darling. 3 Reward. 4*Th' ng, nothing. 5 
Hero. 6** Instrument. 7**Way, path. Cha 
"n 'eil s. math air, it is nut worth anything ; 
gach s. a th’ agam, everything I have; cha 
bhi s. ort, nothing will be wrong with you ; s.- 
suiridh, a dove-token ; mar sh. ghointe, dike a 
destructive instrument ; seudan oir is seudan 
airgil, jewels of yold and jewels of silver. 

seudach, -aiche, a. Abounding in jewels, jewel- 
led. 2 Like a jewel or precious stone. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Adorning. act of adorn- 
ing witn jewels. A’ s—, pr. pt. of seudaich. 

-——— A, -ain, -an, s.m. Jeweller. 2 Jewel- 
box. 3 Jewel-house, museunr. 

seuilag. -aig, -an, s.f. Little jewel, charm, 2 Ex- 
cellence. 

—-—ach, A ele, a Abounding in little jew- 
els. 2 Like a little jewel. 

seudaich, pz.pt. a’ seudachadh, v.a. Adorn with 
jewels, garnish, bestud. 

te, past pt. of seudaich. Adorned with 
jewels. 

seudail,ft a. Abounding in jewels. 2 Pertain- 
ing to jewels. 

geudair, -ean, s.m. Jeweller, 2 Cedar-tree, 

——-eachil, s.f.ind. Setting of jewels. 2 Mak- 
ing of jewels, occupation of a jeweller. 

seu: i-Chalurm-Chille, s.m. St. John's wort, see 
eala-bhuidhe. 

seul-ghlasaidh, -an-g-, s.f. Locket. 

seud-lann, -ainn, -an, s.m. Jeweller’s Shop. 2 
Casket. 3 Jewel-house, museum, 

seudraidh, s.f.coll, Jewels. 2 Collection of jew- 
els. 

¢seughal, -ail, sce seula. 

seul, see seula. 

seul, pr.pt. a’ seuladh, see seulaich. 

seula, -n chan, s.m. Seal, stamp. 2 Impress- 
jon ofa seal. 3.Any mark or impression. 4 
Resemblance, likeness. 

seulach, -aiche, a. Sealing. 2 Having seals. 3 
Like a seal. 4 Ofseals. 5 Sealed. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Sealing, act of sealing. 
A’ s—, pr.pt. of seulaich, 

seulaich, pr. pt. a’ seulachadh. v.a. Seal, mark 
witha seal. 2 Mark,bestow a mark, 

ear, fut.pass. of seulaich. Shall be seal- 

ed. 




















te, past pt, of seulaich. Sealed. 

seulta, past pt. of seul. Sealed. 

geum,* see sóam. 

geumadajir,* see séamadair. 

geumaich,* see seam, v. 

seumalair, see seumarlan. 

geumar, ses sedmar, 

seumarlan, s. i. Factor, Gaelic spelling of 
chamberlain, 

—achd, s.f. Factorship. 

Seumasach,** am. Jacobite, 

geumas ruadh, s,m, Putfin--Barra. 
Coulterneb. 

goun, v.g. Defend by enchautmont. 2 Avoid, 





9 (AF) 


810 


seusrach 


shun, 3 Forbear, refrain. 4 Refuse,deny. 5 
Cross, make the sign of the cross. 6 Bless, 
7 Make sacred. 8 Coneral. 9(MS)Admonish, 


10**befen.| from the power of enchantineat.-. 


11(MS) Recant. Sh. na hÒ ghian, the ngid 
ens forbore; sh. a gnealach i féin fa neulaibh, 
the moon concealed hers+if und- a cloud. 

seun, -a, pl -an & -tan, sn. Charm for protect- 


lon, svell, charm, amulet. 2 Protee ion. 3 
Denial. 4 Sign of the cross. 5**Prvsperity, 
good luck, 


seunach, -aiehe, a. Of, or belonving to charms 
or enchaniments. 2 Like a charm or amulet. 
3 Having magical power or virtno. 4 De. 
endiag by enchan.ment, or 5 frm enchant- 
ment. 6 Concea'"ng. 7 Ant to conceal one’s 
self, 8 Denying, ap; to deny or refuse. 9 A. 
voiding anyth n«;as if enchant+d. 10 Forbear 
ing. Lit Conjuring. ^ 
d, s.f.ind. The power of charms or em- 
chantment. 2 Defence by enchantment. 3 
Defence from enchantment, 4 State of being 
defended by euchantment, 5 Refusal, de. 
nia). 6**iorbearance. 
seunadair, -van.s.m, Charmer, one using charms 
or enchanfinents 2 Conjurer. 
refuses. 4 Defen ler from enchantment. 
——eachd, s.finid. Usiug of incantations, 
conjuring, euciantmeat, charming. 
seunadh, -aidh, -aidnean, s.m. Act of defending 
by charms or enchan ment. 2 Defending 
from euc:antiuent, charming, augury, drai- 
ism. 3 Act of avoiding anything as if defeni- 
ed by incantations. 4 Denial, re'usal. 5 Act 
of denyiug or refusing. 6 Hiding. 7 Act of 
concealiig. 8Sense, intellect. 9 Meaning. 
10 Blessing. 11 Forbearing. A’ s—, pr.pt. of 
seun. Tha mi’gam sh., / am crossing my- 
self ; cha ghabh mi s. no àicheadh, J will be 
neither refused mor denied. 
seuuail, -e, a. Happy, prosperous, fortunate. 
2 Like a charm or incantation. 3 Happy, 
prosperous, [or lucky. 
seunalachd, s.f.ind, State of being prosperous 
seunan,(i.e. breac-sheunain) s.pl. Freckles, 
seunas,* -ais, s.m. Beauty-teeth. 
seun-bholadh,** -aidh, sam. Stench. 
seun-Chaluim-Chille,(AC) s.m. St. John’s wort, 
(St. Columba’s charm.) 
seuninhoire,** comp. of seunmhor. 
seunnihor, -oire, o. Enchanted. 2 Having ma- 
gical or enchanting power. 3 Using charms 
or enchantment, 
2 State 


-— —— —-achd, s.f.ind. Magical power. 
of being enchanted. 

seunsail,(DC) a. Risky, open to the influence 
of enchautment. — Uist. 

seunta, a. & past pt. of seun. Enchanted de. 
fended by enchantments or charms, charmed, 
bewitched. 2 Defended from enchantment. 
3 Avoided as being enchanted. 4 Blessed, sa- 
cred. 5 Concealed, hidden. 6 Denied. 7 
Fortunate, lucky. 8 Auspicious,in a super- 
stitious sense. 

seuntachd, IT s.f.ind. Inviolability. 

seuntas, -ais, 8 m. Charm, enchantment. 2 
Magical power, 3 State of being defended 
by charms or enchantment, 4 Propitious- 
ness, in a superstitivus sense. 5** Denial, 
concealment, 6**Stench, 

seup, v. see sóap. 

seurs, V. S68 sears, 

seusar," -air, sm, Acme, perfection, height or 
utmost point, Ans, a’ chluich, in the heart 
or iniddle of the thing, 

seusrach,* icho, a, Mettlesomo, in high oon. 
dition, as à horse. 


Original from 
LU N | V E R E 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


—— d a7 ET a A as 
I* OF ILLI WO 5 


3**One who ` 


d E | 
e | 1 





` 


's fheudar 


p fd 
's fheudar, v. impers. & def. past. It behoveth, 
it mus6 be, it must be so. See also éigin. 
sgà, see sgàth. 
sgab, Gaelic form of scab. 
sgab, see sgap. 
sgabach, -aiche, a. Seabby, scabbed. 
tsgabadh, -aidh, see sgapadh I 
sgabag, -aig, -an, s.f. Cow killed for winter pro- 
vision. 2 Beef prov | 
an, n.pl. of sgabag. Beeves. 
baiste, -an, s.m, Anything pounded, macera- 
ted or hashed, 2**Robbery, felony, rapine. 
(** sf.) 
ach, -eiche, a. Pounded, bruised, hash- 
ed. 2**Committing robbery or rapine, feloni- 
ous. Gu s., feioniously. 
achadh, -aidh, s. m. Pounding, act of 
pounding, beating down, mashing, A’ s—, pr. 
pt. of sgabaistich. 
sgabaistich, pr. pt. a’ sgabaisteachadh, ~v. a. 
Beat down, pound, mash. 
-—te, past pt. of sgabaistich, Beaten 
down, pounded, mashed. 
sgaball, -aill, -an, s. m., Helmet, head-piece, 
hood. 2**Guard for the shoulder used by the 
ancient Caledonians. 3**Scapular. | 4**Caul- 
dron. [* gives s.f. for No. 1.) 
ach, -aiche, a. Wearing a helmet hood or 
headpiece. 2 Like a helmet. 
-ach,** -aich, s.m. Wardrobe keeper. 
sgabar,** a. Thin. 
sgabard, -aird, -an,8.m. Gaelic form of scabbard. 
(truaill.) 
ach, -aiche, a, Having à sheath. 2 Like 
a sheath 
sgabh, -aibh, s.m. Saw-dust. 
ach, og Abounding in saw-dust, 
sgabhaiste, s.f. Good. 12 Advantage. 
sgábhal,** -ail, -an, s.m. Scaffold. 2 Booth,hut, 
E 8 Screen covering the entrance to a 
oor. 
sgabhal,** -ail, -an, s. m. Cauldron, kettle. 2 
Baking-trough. 3 Large bowl. 
sgabhrach, -aich, s.m. Club-footed man. 
—————-—, -aiche, a. Club-footed. 2 Splay- 
footed. 
ils s.f.Infirmity of a club-foot or splay- 
oot. 
sgabhrag, -aig, -an, $.f. Splay-footed woman. 2 
Club-footed woman. 
sgabhraiche, s.f.ind. Club-footedness, 
szabull, -uill, see sgaball. 
sgabullach, see sgaballach, 
's gach, And each, and every. 
's gach, In each, in every. 'S gach am, always, 
at every time. 
sgad, -aid, an, s. m. Loss, mischance, misfor- 
tune, grief, woe, ruio. 2seesgat. Mos,! 
woe's me! my ruin ! 


























` egadadh, -aidh, 8,1. Scissure. 


sgadan, -ain, s m. Herriug—c/vp»a harengus. 

8. bleac, pale or shotien herriny. 

& blia, see s. bleac. 

s. garbh, large herring, '* alewife," 

S, gearr, spral. 

s. goile, gut-pock herring. 

s. mhòrlanuach, pilchard, see seirdean, 
8. Sligeach, pilchard. 

sgadanach, -aiche, a. Abounding in herrings.. 2 
Like a herring, 

sgadariach, -aich, s.m, Set oflow persons, 2% 
Anything seatterel. |sgadarcach—f{j 

egaf,** Gaelic form ot ski?’ Cock- boat. 

Sgafair, -ean, s.in. Courageous, stout or brave 
man. 2 Haudsom: wan. 3 sovldig man, 
4ttBo!d hearted maa. 4 ! 

sgafal,** Gaelic form oi scaffaid. 


811 


ggàil 

sgafald,** -aild, Gaelic form of sca//old. 

sgafaldach, a. Scaffolded, having scaffolds, 

sgafaldaich, v.a, Erect scaffolds, 

sgafall,"* -aill, s.m. Gaelic form of scaffold, 9 
Booth, hut, shop. 

ach,** a. Scaffolded, full of scaffolds. 

achadh,** -aidh, s.m. Act of erecting a 

scaffold. 

achd,** s.f. Scaffolding. 

aich,** va. Erect a scaffold. 

sgafalt,** Gaelic form of scaffold. 

sgafanta, -ainte, see sgafarra 

chd, see sgafarrachd. 

s,** -ais, s.m. Boldness. 2 State of being 
in good spirits. 

sgafarra, -airre, a. Spirited, manly, brave, 2 
Handsome. 3**Hearty. 4**Active, alert. 5 
*Vehement in speech. 5*Venomous in scolu- 
2; 7*Emphatically speaking. 8** In good 
spirits. 

chd, s.f.ind, Manliness. 2 Spiritedness. 
3 Handsomeness, 4*Vehemance of speech. 6 
*Quality of scolding keenly, 

sgafart,* st Scolding female. 

sgag, pr.pt. a’ sgagadh, v.a. & n. Split, eause bo 
split or crack, as from heat. 2 Crack, shrink, 
3**Chap. 4 Filter, strain. 5 Winnow. 6 Be- 
come lean or starved. 7 Burst. 8 Cleanse. 
9* Chop. 

ach, -aiche, o Full of splits, chinks ot 
cracks, 2 Full of chaps. 3 Apt to split or 
crack, as tne surface of anythiug. 4 Causing 
tosplit or crack. 5* Chinked, cracked, 6 
Filtering, straining. 7 Winnowing. 8 Lean, 
emaciated. 9**Cieansing. ‘Teas s. samhraidh, 
the crackina heat of summer, 

sgagadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of splitting or crack- 
ing. 2 State of cracking, chinking or burst- 
ing. 3 Act of filtering or straining. 4 Acs of 
winnowing, 5 State of becoming lean or ema- 
ciated. 6 Split, as on the surface of auy- 
thing, chink, cranny or crack. 7**Cleansing. 
8**Filtering.  9**Filter. 10**Winnow. A’ 
S—, pr.pt. of sgag. 

Sgagaid, -e, -ean, $.f. Split, crack, as on the 
surface of deal, cleft, fissure. 

each, -eiche, @. Abounding in splits, 

cracks, clefts or fissures, 2 Causing splits, 
cracks or clefts. 

sgagaidi,(DMy) a. Tusipid. Iasg s,, a tasteless 
Déb one neither fresh nor staie, 

seazaidh, fut.a/f.a. of sgag. Shall split, Ze 

sgagair,* s.m. Poltroon, coward, one that chinks 
at appearance of danger. 

eachd,” e fum, Cowardice, unfounded 
fear. | 

svagait,** see sgagaid. [s.m.**]} 

— — ——e,** a. Split, cracked, burst. 2 Clean» 
sed. 3 Filtered. 4 Winnowed. 

sgagaiteach, see sgagaideach. 

sgagta, past pt. of sgag. Split, cracked. 2 Fil- 
tered, strained, 3 Winnowed. 4 Become lean 
or emaciated. 

sgaifean, -ein, An, see sgaipean. 

ach, -aiche, a see sgaipeanach, 

achd, see sgaipeanachd. 

tsgafir,** sf. Stern of a ship. 

sgaift,” v.n, Burst through eating too much, 

,* à f, Notorious bellyful. 

sgaignnean,** ein, s.m. Hand-winnow, winnow- 
ing-fan. 

sca gie, see sgasta. 

sgail, -e & -each, pl -ean & -eachan, s f Shade, 

shadow. 2 Veil, curtain, covering, mask, 3 

Example, pattern 4 Ghost, spectra. 5 Pre- 

tence. 6 Bower. Fo s. do sgéic he, under the 

shadow of thy wing ; an sgaileachan, their cur- 
































8 112 


IL HANBA-UmHA 


sgail 
tains ; s. a’ bhais, the shadow of death. 

——, pr.pt. 4 sgàileadh,v.a. Shade, overshade, 
darken, cover, as with a cloud. 2*Sprinkle. 
3** Eclipse.. 3* Approach. Chas. seo air, 
this will not come nar the thing ; cha dèan e 
& air, iL will no! go near it. 

tszail, -e, SE Splendour, brightness. 2 Flash. 
flame. 

spail-vbothan, -ain, -an, s.m. Arbour. 

sz til-bréige,-ean-, s f. Mask, visor. 

sgaile, -e, ean, 8. f. Smart Kuock or blow. 2 
sound of a blow, report of à shot, 3 Good 
fuil draught of any liquid. 4 Bumper of any 
spirituous liquor taken before breakfast,dram, 
* morning,” see under friochd. 5 Baldness of 
the head. 6 Pate—Dain 1. Ghobha. 7**Loud 
momentary noise, smart report, Tarruing 
s alr, gevehim a smart blow, 

sgailc.* v.a. Pelt. 2 Beat in a masterly manner. 

Sgailceach, -eiche, a. Bald 2 Giving smart 
blows. 3 Making a loud and sudden report. 
4 Drinking full draughts or bumpers. 

——— — — Qd, $ fini. Sleekness, smoothness. 

Bgailceaz, -eig, -an, s. f. dum. of sgaile, Slight 
knock. 2 Low sudden sound. 3 Small bump- 
er or draught. 

sgailceanta, -einte, a. Giving smart blows. 2 





Making aloud and sudden report. 3 Smart, 
activo. 4 Passionate. 5tiElasvic. 6**Explo- 
sive. 





-—chd, s.find. Smartness, agility. 2 
Passionateness. 38ttKlasticity 

Sgailcear,** -ean, s.m. Bald-headed man. [sgail- 
cire—*] 

sgailcearra, @ see sgailceanta. 

—chd, see sgailceantachd. 
sgailc-mhullaich,* $.f. Dandruff, 

szailc-sheide, s. f. Dram taken in bed before 
rising in the morning—Sar-Odarr. 

sgaile, ach, pl. -an & -achan, s.m. see sgàil. 

sgaile ** s.f, Printing type. 

Sgaileach, -eiche, @ Shadowy. 2 Affording a 
shade, shading. 3 Veiled, covered. 4 Ghost- 
like, unsubstantial, spectral. Ott Full of 
ghosts. 6**Masked. 

sgaileach.* ech, s.m. Veil, curtain. 

-— ———-aàaüdh, -aidh, see sgarieadh, 

»— ——— —A11,(M 3) a. Subtile. 

sgaileachd, $./ «ni. Shadiness, darkness. 2 State 
of being veiled or masked. 3* Sprinkling, 

sgaileadair, -ean, s.m. Any object that shades, 
masker, shader. 2 Masquerader. 

sgàileadaireachd, H er Shading. 

Svaileadan, -ain, -an, s.m. Bower. 

sgaileadh, -eidh, $.7n. Covering, act of covering. 
shading or obscuring, 2* Sprinkling. 3 Shad- 
ing, shadowing, veiling, masking. 4(M3)Air. 
A S—, pr. pt. of sgàil. An s.a’ lugha, the 
least sprinkling or shade ; neul ‘ga s., @ cloud 
veiling it. 

Bgaileag, -eig, -an, $. f. dim. of sgàil. Little 
shade or shadow. 2 Thin shade, veil. 3 Para- 
sol, umbrella. 4 Arbour. 5 Cottage, booth. 
6 Awning. 7**Fan S8**Little dish. 9**Plate. 
l0(CR) Passing shower—W. of Ross-shire. 

an, -ain, -an, sm. Fan. 2{fUmbrella. 

sgàilean, -e1n, semn. Same meanings as sgaileag. 

ach, -aiche, a. Shady, veiling, like a 

shade or veil, 2 Like an umbrella, or parasol. 

3 Full of arbours, 4 Likean arbour. 5 A- 

bounding 10 cottages or booths, 6 Like a cot- 

tage or booth, 7** Filmy. S8tf Full of fans. 

9** Like a fan. 10ft Full of umbrellas or 

shades. 

achd,** s.f, Shadiness. 2 Shadowiness. 
3 Filminess, 

sgaileanta, -einte, e, Vain. 











812 


egeinneart 


sgailean-uisge, s.m. Umbrella 
sgailear, -eir. an, see sgaileadair. 
sgàile-bhothan,** s.m Arbour. 
sgàile-gréine, s.f. Sunshade, parasol. 
sgailich, v. see sgàil. | | 
— ——— te, past pt. of sgailich Veiled, masked, 
shaded, covered, obscured, 
szall-ionad, aid, -an, s m. Bower. 
sgaill,(DU) s. Bald patch. 
sgailleag, -eig, An. s. f. Smart blow slap. 9 
Quick and loud sound. 3* Smart slap on the 
cheek, 4**Slap with the palm of the hand. 
sgailleagach, -aiche, a. Giving smart slaps or 
blows, 2 Making a loud and sudden sound. 
3** Striking with tne palm of the band, slap- 
ping 
sgailleas, -eis, s.m. Disdain. 
——ach, -aiche,@  Disdaintul. 
dainfully. 
achd,** eg Disdainfulness. 
tsgailp,** -ean, $.f. Den, cave. 
each,** a. Abounding in dens or caves. 
sgailt, v. see syald. 
e, past pt. Scalded. 
each,** a. Scalding. 
ean, see sgoiltean. 
sgaillteil,** a. Calid. 
szail-thaigh, sm. Porch, grotto. 
sgail-uisge, $.f. Umbrella 
sgain, pr.pt. a’ sgaineadh, oo & n. Burst, burst 
asunder, cleave, rive, rend. 2 Cause to burst 
or rend asunder, S, e, it burst asunder. 
Syain,* $ Complete bellyful, surfeit. 
sgaindear,** -eir, 8 m. Division, dissension. 
sgaine, s.m. see sgaineadh. 
sgàineach, -eiche, see sgàinteacb. 2ftRending. 
sgàineadh, -idh, s.m. Bursting, act of bursting 
or causing to burst, 2 State of bursting or 
bursting asunder. 3 Rending, act or state of 
rending asunder. 4 Rent, cleft. 5 Splitting, 
cleaving, 6 Burst, split.  7**3ally, attack. 
8**Flaw. 9 Laceralion, A’ s—, pr. pt. of 
Soin. f 
sgàineadh, $rd. per.sing. & pl.imp.of sgain. S, e, 
let ut burst. 
sgainne, -an, s.m. see sgàineadh. 
sgainne,** s. f. Sudden irruption orsally. 2 
Attack, 3 Flaw. 
sgainneal, -eil, -an, s.m. Scandal, reproach, cal- 
umuy. 2 Slander, false reproach. 3 Disgrace, 
matter or cause of reproach. Thog thu oirnn 
8., thou has! calumniated us. 
ach, -aiche, a. Calumnious, raising cal- 
umnies or false reproaches. 2 Disgraceful, 
shameful, reproachtul, slanderous. 
ichadh, -aidh, s.m. Calumniating, act 
of calumuiating or raising scandal against one, 
slandering, reproaching. A’ S—, pr. pt. of 
sgainnealaich. 
achd,** s.f. Abusiveness. 
sgainnealaich, pr. pl. a’ sgainnealachadh, v. a. 
Slander, calummiate, raise false reproaches 
asainst one, scandalize, reproach 
— te, past pt. of sgainnealaich. Cal- 
umniated, accused of anythiug scandalous, 
scandalized, reproached. 
sgainnearach, -aiche, a. Scattering, dispersing. 
2 Having faults or blemishes. 3** Scaring, 
persecuting. 4 see sgaiunir. 
d, st Abusiveness. 
sgainnearadh, -aidh, s. m. Scattering, act ot 
scattering or dispersing. 2Scariug. 3 Per- 
secuting, persecution, 4**Sudden «dispersion. 
A?’ s—, pr. pt. of sgain»ir, i 
sgainneart, -eirt, -an, sj. Dispersion, scatter- 
ing. 2 Contest, engagement. 3**Swing. 4 
Persecution, 6 Trial of strength. Faiceamaid 





Gu s., dis- 


























f | sgainneart 


"e 
s. glan, let us see a fair trial of strength. ` 
ggainneartach, -aiche, a Scattering, dispersing. 
2 Contending, struggling. 8**Persecuting. 4 
**Powerful. 

sgainnir, v.a. £ n. Scatter, disperse. 2*Stroll. 
3**Persecute. 4(MS) Abuse. S. sibh jad, 
you dispersed them. 

sgainnir, -e, -ean,s.f. Blemish, fault. 2 Scat- 
tering, dispersion. 3(MS)Shame. 4 Persecu- 
tion. (MS) Prate. 6 see sgainneal, 

each, -eiche, see sgainnearach. 

ich, v.a. Vilify, abuse. 

te,; past pt. of sgainnir. Scattered, dis- 
persed. 

sgàinnteach, Ach, -ichean, s.f. Corroding pain. 











2 Pain occasioned by excessive fatigue, asin 


walking. 3* Rheumatism. 
——all,” a. Rheumatic. 
sgàinte, past pt. of sgain. Burst, burst asunder, 
A Rent, rent asunder. S. o chéile, burst asun- 
er 








> : ach, -eiche, a. Causing to burst, rend or 
split. 
Ghinky. 4 Bursting, splitting, cleaving, tear- 
ing asunder, riving. 

egaip, see sgap. 

—ean, -elu, -an, s.m. Dwarf, ninny, term of 
personal contempt. 

-——eanach, -aiche, a. Dwarfish, ninnyish. 

-——eanachd, s.f. Dwarfishness, ninnyism, futil- 
ity, trifling talk. 
aipte, past pt. of sgap, see sgapta. 

vg ach, o. nor qo. roa 2(MS) Rife. 

achd, s.f. Diffusiveness. 2(MS) Rifeness. 
3(MS) Revery. 

sgair, see Sgar, [dry. 

sgair, s.f. Any place where à thing is laid to 

agair,*-e, -ean, $s.f. Stitch, 2 Seam. 3 Splice. 
4 Nails, see ta'rngnean-sgair, p. 77. 

sgàird, -e, sf. Flux, looseness, diarrhoea. [with 
the art. an.) 2**Loose stool.  3**Skit, 4** 
rarely, Smock, 5(DMK) Scree, shingly slope 
— Gairloch. 

each, -eiche, o Affected with flux, di- 

arrhoea or-dysentery 2**Habitually loose in 

the bowels. 3 Squirting, pouring, sprinkling. 

4 (DU) metaphorically, Worthless, contempt- 

ibie person. Peasan s.. æ worthless wretch ; 1s 

minig a bha laogh math aig boin sgairdeich, 

Q skittering cow Jos often had a good calf. 

eachd, s / ind. State of being affected 
with flux, diarrhoea or dysentery. 

sgairdeadh, dh, s. m. Squirting, syringing, 
pouring, sprinkling 

sgairdean, ein, -an, s.m Trifling or nasty per- 
son, a term of contempt. 

sgairdear,*" sam One afflicted with weakness 
of the bowels. 2 Squirt, syringe, water-gun. 

sgaireab,** s. Lavishness. 

sgaireach, see appendix. 

Sgaireach, -eiche, a. Prodigal 2 Cold and 
windy, threatening rain, as weather 

, eich, s.m Prodigal. 
d, s.f. Crying, shrnieking. 2 Creaking. 

ee etek) s.f. Passing shower—W. of Ross- 
snire. 

egaireag, EI see sgarbh.  ? see seagair, 3 
Young scart, one-year-old gull. (sràireag— 1. | 

sgaireag,"l eg, -an, s. f. Lesser black-headed 
gull—larus fusus. 

sgaiream, (CR) à. m, Idle talk— Skye. 

sgdireanaich,(AC) s.f. Sound of the flapping of 
wings. An sgiathan a’ $., ther wings lapping. 

sgaireap,-a, sf. Lavishness, profusion, prodi- 
gality. 2 Weather with whistling wind, 
threatening rain. 3 Sudden skirl, as of bag- 
pipes. 4 Extravagance, 














813 


2 Apt to burst, rend or split. 3. 


sgairtich d 


—ach, -eiche, a. Lavish, profuse, extrava 
gant. Gu s., lavishly. 

sgaireapail," -e, a. Whistling, gusty and threat- 
ening rain. 

sgairg,(AF) s.f. Scorpion, see sgairp. 

svairg,** $.f. Stony. gravelly bottom. 

sgairlup, see sgairean. 

sgairn, ean, sm. Howling of dogs or wolves, 2 
Loud murmuring noise. 3 Noise of stones 4 
**Shriek. 5 see sgairt. B’ fhad chluinnte an 
8., their howling was heard afar off. 

sgàirneach, -eiche, æ Crying aloud, shouting. 3 
Shrieking. 3 Howling, as dogs or wolves, 4 
Making a loud murmuring noise. 5 ttRum- 
bling noise. 

-—, -ich, $m. Continuous heap of loose 
stones covering a hill-side 2 The sound of 
such stones falling along a steep and rocky 
hill-side, 3 Continued bowling. 4*Deserted 
quarry. 5 Great number of stones, like a de- 
serted quarry, on a hill. 6tt Large heap of 
stones. [Nos. 4 & 5, s.f.—") 

—————-—, -eiche, a. Abounding in heaps of 
loose stones. 2 Like a rocky hill-side covered 
with loose stones. 

sgàirneil, e, s.f. Shrieking, crying out. 
sgàirneach. 

tsgairnigh, e, s.f. Separation. 2 Broken pieces. 

sgairp, -e, -ean, s.f. Scorpion. 2 The sigu Scor- 
pio (M), in the zodiac. 

sgairpeach, ** oa Like a scorpion. 2 Full of 
scorpions, 3 Of scorpions. 

sgairt, s.f Flux—Dain 1. Ghobha. 

sgairt, v, see sgairtich, 

sgairt, -e, -ean, s.f, Loud cry, roar or shout. @ 
Shriek. 3 Strength, vigour, activity, bustle "4 
The midrift [with the @rt.} 5 Diaphragm op 
caul covering any of the intestines or viscera, 
6 Energy, business. 7 Appearance 8 Author: 
ity. G*Smart breeze, 10 War. 11** Tuft of 
trees, shrubs, branches or bushes. 12*%* bush, 
Dean do ghuothach le s., do your business 
with energy ; le s. de ghamth tuath, with q 
smart breeze of northerly wind; 3 an cridbe, 
the caul of ther hearts , thainig e le s.,he came 
with a bustle, 

each, -eiche, a, That bawls aloud, shout 

ing. ? Shrieking. 3 Acrimonious, 4 Roar- 

ing, clamorous 5 Active, bustling, 6 Hav- 
ing à caul. 7 Like, of, or belenging to, à caul, 

8** Having a large caul. 

eachadh, -axdh,s. m. Shouting, act of shout- 

Ing or crying. 2 Shrieking, act of shrieking 

or roaring 3 Bustling motion. <A’ s—, pr.pt. 

of sgairtich. 

eachd, s.f Same meanings as sgairteach. 

adh, Na tannaisa’s. the spectres shrieking; 

s. ghcur, & piercing shriek or cry. 

eadh,** -ernlh, s.m Shouting, roaring, 
bawling, shrieking. 2 Bustling noise, 3 ** 
Busthog motion 

sgairte falaich, see sgarta falaich. 

sgairtealachd, s.fand. Vigour, livelineg3, acti- 








21]seo 














vity. 2° Half stormy weather, 3 Boldness of 
manner. 4 Vigorousuess. 5** Bustling mau- 
ber 


sga'rtear, Ap, -an, s.m. Crier, one who cries or 
bawls 

b achd,tts.f. Business of a crier, 

sgairteil, -e, a. Brisk, vivacious, lively, vigor- 
ous, 2 Loud, sorill, sharp 3 Busiling, acute, 
energetic. 4 Bold in manner. 5* Breezy, 
Duine s., an en-rgetic person, an là s., the ha. f- 
stormy or blowy day. | 

sgairtich, pr. pt. a sgairteachd & a’ sgairteach- 
adh, v.a. Shout, cry aloud, utter a loud and 
piercing cry, shriek, 


sgaiste 


sgait, s.f. See sgat. 

saite, sve sgaithte. 

svaite. -an, x f. see sgaiteachd. 
sgait,t s. Pickle. 

sgaite,** s.f. Short angry rebuke. 


snarl. 4 in derision, Short-tempered person 


Thug e s. orm, he rebuked me angrily, he 


snarled at m». 

sgaiteach, -eiche, 
keen edge. 
piercing 
bitter language, cynical 
ous, 6 Destructive 7 Active, lively. 8 A- 
bounding ın skate (fish.) 9 Like a skate. 10 
Biting, as a dog. 11** Shabby 
Penetrating. 13** Energetic. 14**Angry Gun 
na s., @ penetratiny gua ; mar chlaidheamh 
S., like a sharp sword ; gu S.. sharply, cutting- 
(y . gaoth s., @ perang wind ; cainnt s., cut: 
ting ian juage ; iathaidu bilean dearg daithte, 
teangaidhs., lom, gheéarrta, red lips may sur- 
round a bilter, cuiting tongue.—R.6L. 

8z4iLeachas, -ais, $a. Same meanings as sgait- 
eachd. 

sgaiteachd, $.f ind. Sharpness, keenness of edge. 
2 Sharpness, keenness, as of cold. 3 Bitter: 
ness of speech 4 Raillery. 5 Storminess, 
boisterousness. 6 Liveliness, activity. 7 As- 
perity. 

Seaiteay, -eig, -an, S.f. Little skate. ; 

Sgaitear, -eir, -an, $.m. Cynic. 

syaitean, s.m., dim. of sgat. 

sgaith, s.f (AC) Roof-tree. 

tsgaith, sr Flower. 

szarithean, -ein, -an, s.m., dim. of sgàth. Small 

»shadow, 2 Smali shade, parasol. 

Sgaithleach, see sgaiteach. 

Sgaithte, past pt. of sgath. Lopped off, cut off, 
pruued. 2 Bitten. 3 Stung. 4 Destroyed. 

sgaitichead,** s. Acrimony. 

isgal, 8.1m. Man, hero, champion. 2 Scorching. 

sgal, -a, -an, $. M. Shriek, yell, loud shrill ery. 
2 blast, sound of high wiad. 3 Appearance of 
the sea in a squall. 4 Howl of a dog wien 
hurt ; or when hunting. t5 (AF) Calf. 6** 
Skirl of the bagpioes. 7 see sgaladh. 8(DU) 
Outburst of speech, crying, &c. 9(DU) Spell 
of any form of activity. 10* Sudden, quick 
ery S. a chuilein, the howl of his doy ; s. 
gaoithe, a squall of wind ; s. air càineadh, air 
iomradh, air itheadh, &c., a spll of scolding, 
rowing, eating, &c.—Garrloch., (rz tray 

sgal, -ail,s.m Meal-trough, 2 Daking-trouzh 3 

sgal, pr pt a’ sgalatih, a’ sgalart & a’ sgalart- 
aich, v n. Howl givea shrill cry,squall,shriek. 
2 Shriek or squeal suddenly. 

sgala, -n, S.m. lll-shaped hood or tunic. 

sgalach, -aiche, a. Loud, shrill, sonorous 2 
Shrieking, yelling, howling. 3* Shrill and 
sharp 4**Apt to siriek, howl, yell or squall. 

sgàladh,** -aidh, sm. Meal-trough, kneading- 
trough, 2**Large bowl, kettle, cauldron. 

sgalag, -aig,-an, s.f, Workman, farm-servaat, 
2 Plougiman, 3**Slave, 4ff Rustic. [s.m 
—McL & D.| 

ach, -aiche, a. Having many male farm- 
servants, 2 Of, or belonging to, a male farm 
servant. SttRustic. 

—--—avhag, -ais, s.f. The occupation of a male 
farm-servant, 

achd,** ert Slavishness. 

sgalaiche, s m. Man ready to raise a hue and cry 
against his neighbour.—Sar-Obair. 

s.alaichean, Gaelic form of scales ` 

sgalaid,$ e, -ean, $,f, Shallot—a/ium ascaloni- 
eum, 2"*"Noise. 


pt 


2 Cutting. that cuts. 3 Keen, 








T F 
QAIFTMT ARS 7 
AINE T AP W 


aM 
l 
rri 
I] 


814 
teg iste, s.m. Robbery, rapine. 















2 Cnt. 3 


-a, (& Sharp, having a 


4 Satirical. using cutting words or 
5 Stormy. boister. 


12 (DMK) 


sega lp^ n 





sgàlain, s.pl. Scales for weighing. 2**Weights. 

sgalair, -ean, 8$. m. Squaller. 

sgalais,* s. f. Jeering, gibing, continuous jeer- 
ing. 

sgalan. -ain, -an, s.m. Stage, scaffold. 2 Hut. 
3 Rostrum 4 see sgàilean 

sgalan,** -ain. s m. Goviet 2 Knee-pan. 

syalanach, a Abounding in stages. scaffolds,&c. 

sgalanta, :ainte. a Loud, shrill sounding, sono- 
rous Piobs., a loud-sounding pipe. 

chd, s.f ind. Loudness, shrillness of 
sound, 3onorousness. 

sgalar,(AF) s.m. Hounds’ cry when hunting. 

sgalart, see sgalartaich 

aich, e, ean, $.f Shrieking, act of shriek- 
ing or yelling. 2 Howling, act ot howling. 3 
Howl. 4 Yell. A’ s-—, pr pt.*of sgal. 

sgalartaiche, -an, s.m. Bellower. 

sgalb, see sgolb. 

sgalbhai, (CR) st Continued barking of a dog 
— Suth'd. 

sgalcairneach, ech, s.m. see sgailc. 

sgald, v.a. Scald, burn with hot water. 2 Wash 
with hot water. 3 Pain, torment, torture, 

-——ach, -aiche, &. Scalding, that scalds or 
burns. Painful, tormenting, causing torment. 

tsgaldach, -aich, s.m Stubvule. 

sgaldadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of scalding or burning 
with hot water, 2 Act of washing with hot 
water. 3 Act of tormenting or torturing. 4 
Avguish, torment. A' s—, pr. pt. of sgald. 

sraldruth,"* s.m Fornicator. 

sgaldua, past pt oi sgald. scalded, burnt with 
hot water 2 Washed wilh hot water, 3 Af- 
flicted, tormented. 

sgal-fhar, see syal-fhart, 

sval-fhart, -alrt, -au, s.m. Howl, loud barking, 
See sgalarlaici. 

--——aich, -e, s.f. see sgalartaich. 

sgall, -aill, ai, s. m. Baidness. 2 Scall, scab. 
3 Bald head—Dain 1 Ghobha. 

smAll,** v.a. Scald 2 Trouble. disturb 

-galla,* s, f Old hat 2 Large wooden dish 
cut out of a tree. 

sgallach, -a:che, @ Bald. 
Impertinent. 

————an, -ain, sm. Bald-headed person. 2 
Unfledged bird, Scofs, scatdie. 

d, s.find. Baldness. 2**lroublesome- 

ness. 3** Disturbance. 

sgalladh, -aidh, s.m. & pr.pt. of sgall.gsee sgald- 

adh. 

tsgallagach, -aich, s m. Bird-seed, 

sgallaid, -e, -ean, s.f see sgalluas. 

sgallais, -e, -ean, $.f. lusult, contempt, derision, 

mockery, ridicule. 2 liattery. Rui s., derid- 

ing. 

sgallaiseach, -eiche, «a. Insulting, showing con- 
tempt, deriding, mocking, ridiculing, oppro- 
brious. 2 Given to mockery, 3 Flatterius. 

-——adhb, -aidh, $. m. Deriding, aci of de- 

riding, ridiculing or wsulting A’ s—, pr, p’. 

of sgllaisich. 

-—<l,** s. f. Practice of ridicule, 
sgallaisich, pr. pt a’ syallaiseachadb, v.g. De- 
ride, ridicule, iusult. j 
-———— te, past pt. ot sgallaisich.Derideg, rici 

culed, insulted, 
sgalld, see sgald. 
achan, see sgllachan. 
adh, -aidb, soe syald al, 
sgalldair. (MS) s.m. Brawler, 
eachd, s f. Bad language. 
galit, see sgaid., 
——a, a Bald, bare. 
-——ach, see sgaldach. 
sgalpan, (OR) sm. Chati—Lewis, DMy, says S 


il TTC 











2 Troublesome. 3 

















2 see sgaldta. 


Jriai 


UN Y. 


J a, 
M d al - " 
|I ID!DÀDIPZANMDGA e n RADA Droe 
rr ek nb -1 UN Eug KA DNR X 
"ma" ^ ës I [| | 1 n m , LI E d i a, 


erh rt) 


sralpan 
comes off oats only—calgan is the barley 
beard. 1 

@gam. -àim, sm, Spot. 2 Spot on linen. 
mould 

sgamal, -ail, s.f. Scale. à 

,-ail, an, s& m, Exhalation. effluvia. 

Phlegm. 3**Scum. 

ach, -aiche, o Scaly. 2 Alounding in 
phlegm. 

sgamh, -aimh, $m. Lobe of the lungs, lights. 
[s..—*] S.-eighe, file-dust, filings. 

sgamh,** s.m, Wry mouth. 

ach,** a. Having good lunga. 
pulmonary 

—— —Aag.** -nig, s.f. Wry month. 

—-——ainn, pr pt, a’ szamhnadh va. Build up 
corn Or hay in a barn.— Gairloch, cde. 

sgamhan, ai, an,sm. The lungs, the lights. 2 
Liver 3 Dolt, blockhead. 4 Refuse. dross. 
6 Appellation of extreme contempt. 6 Villain- 
ous person. 7 Corn or hay built up in a barn. 
& -coirce, oats buill up ina barn. 
s.-eorna, barley 
g.-fheóir, hay s de 

sgamhanach, -aiche, a. Waving large or strong 
lungs. 2 Pulmonary, of, or belonging to lungs 
or lights ; or 3liver. 4 Roan, drab, of the 
Arad of lights. Aodach, s., roan-coloured 
cloth. 

sgamhanach, (DMy) s. m. Feeble man whose 
breath shortens at a little exertion. 

Bramhanaich,*;see sgarthanaich. 

sgamhar, air. s.m. Saw-dust. 

sgamh-chnuimh, -e, s.f. see sgamh-ghalar. 

egamh-chridhe,* s.m. Caul. 

sgamh-ghalar, -air, 8. m. Consumption in the 
lungs. 

¢sgamb-ghlonn, s. m. Vile prank, vicious deed, 
shabby action. 

egamhnadh, -aidh, s.m. Building up of corn or 
hay in a barn. A’ s—, pr.pt. of sgamhainn, 

egamhnaidh, fut. of o of sramhainn., 

&gann, -ainne, s.m. Multitude. 2 Herd, drove. 
3ttSwarm of bees. 4**Parcel. S. fhiadh, a 
herd of deer. | 

ezann, -ainn, -an, s.m, Membrane, 2* Hand. 3 
Multitude, swarm. [s.7.—*] 

~—ach,** a. Membranous. 2 Filmy. 3 Swarm- 
ing, in swarms or multitudes. 

sgannal, -ail, -an, s.m. see sgainneal, 

ach, æ. see sgainnealach. ` 

sgannairt,(AH) s.f. Wreck, ravages, devasta- 
tion— A rgyll. 

sgannan, -ain, -an, sm., dim. of seann. Little 
herd or drove. 2 Thin membrane, caul or 
film, pellicle. 3 Gristle. 4 Reticle. 5**Group 
of people. 6**Little parcel. S. salle, a caul. 

——ach,** a. Membraneous. 2 Reticular, 

sgann-sgriod,(AF) s.m. Herd of cattle. 

sgànrach, ** a. Dispersing, scattering, scaring. 
routing, terrifying. 2 Like a dispersion 
rout or persecution. 3 Persecuting 

sganradh, -aidh, s. m. Surprise, fright. 2 Dis- 
persion from fright or terror. 3 Act of dispers 
ing or terrifying into dispersion, scaring. rout 
ing, scattering, dispelling, 4 Rout, confusion. 

 6**Frightening of cattle. 6**Persecution. A’ 
S—, pr.pt. of sganraich. A’ s. doinionn, dis- 
pelling the storm, 

sgànraich, v. a. Scare, affright. 2 Disnerse 
through fear, rout, scatter. 3**Persecute. 

e— ———te, past pt. of sgànraich. Scared, af- 
frighted. 2 Scattered or dispersed through 
fear, routed. 

no icu for sganraichidh, fut. af. a. of sgàn- 
raich, 

—,** $.f. Dispersement through fear or 





2 Iron- 











2 Of lungs, 


»* LAJ 





Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 
J L L i E k H 4 — i mi k ld VM — 


815 


$g»aoilteach1 





astonishment 2**Defamation. 3 Sudden dise 
persion, 4 Astonishmens. 

sgang, -ao.z, -an, s.m. & f. Foolish, fickle or 
gilly young woman. 2 Giddy or unsteady 
person generally. 


9) -— ach, -aiche, a. Giddy, inconstant, volatile, 


flighty. 

-——arh8, -ais, sm. see sgaogachd. 

sgaogachi, s.f.tnd. Giddiness, levity, volatility, 
inconstfancy, 

sgaogg, -aig. -an, 8. f., dim. of sgaog. Giddy 
girl, 

8raogaiche, s.f ind. see sgaogachd., 

sgaogan, -ain, -an, s. m. dim. of sgaog. Giddy 
youth. 

—achd, see sgaogachd. 

sgaoil, pr pt a’ sgaoileadh, v.a. & n. Stretch 
out, extend, 2 Scatter, disperse, spread. 3 
Enlarge, dilate, expand. 4 Dismiss, send 
away, give leave of departure. 5 Divulge, 
publish. 6 Loose, dissolve, untie, 7 Uusew, 
8 Be unsewed, 9 Unfold. 10 Be unfolded. 
11 Destroy. 12tt Fray. 13**Dishevel. S. e 
a làmhan, he extended his hands ; s. iad feadh 
an t-saogbail, they dispersed throughout the 
world ; s. e an sgoil, he dismiss-d the school ; 
s, au t-sreang, wntie the cord; s. e an naidhe 
eachd, he divulged the news ; cuir fa sgaoil, re» 
lease ; S an eaglais, the congregation dispersed, 

sgaoil,* s.m. Liberty, freedom. Mu 3., at liber- 
fy; cuir wus, set sat, weigh anchor. 

sgaoile, see sgaoileadi.  2**3cattered state. 3 
** Looseness. 

—aen,** a. Causing to spread or scatter. 2 
Diffusing. 3 Dishevelling, loosening, unfold- 
ing. 4 Divulging. 5 Diffuse. 

sgaoileath, -idh, s.m. Spreading, act of spread- 
ing, stretching out, extending, 2 Scattering, 
act of scattering or dispersing. 3 Dispersion, 
diffusion. 4 Dishevelling. a Enlarging, act 
of enlarging, diiating or expanding. 6 Dis- 
missing, act of dismissing, sending away or 
giving leave of departure. 7 Act of divulging, 
revealing, promulgating or publishing, 8 
Loosing, aet of loosing. 9 Dissolving, 10 
Untying. 11 Unsewing, actof unsewing. 12 
State of being unsewed, 13 Rent in cloth or 
lea her. 14 State of being unfolded. 15 La- 
ceration. l16ffFraving. 17**Destroying. A’ 
s—, pr. pt. of sgaoil. Theab e s., he nearly 
burst (with iauyhter); bu chian ar s., far a- 
part wer? we dispersed. 

sgaoilear, fiul.pass. of sgxoil. Shall be spread, 

sgaoilidh, fuf. aff.a. of sgaoil. 

sgaoilte, pas! pt. of sgaoil. Spread, stretched, 
extended, expanded. 2 Dispersed, scattered. 
3 Dismissed. 4 Divulged. 5 Loosened. 6 
Dissolved. 7 Untied. 8 Unsewed. 9 Dis- 
hevelled. 10(DU) Loose-witted. Cuirms., @ 
banquet svread. 

sgaoilteach, -eiche, a. Spreading, that spreads, 
scattering. that-scatters. 2 Divulging spread- 
ing abroad. 3 Diffuse, liberal, profuse, boun- 








tiful. 4 Scattered, in a scattered state. wide, 
spread. 5*Unguarded, imprudent. 6 Apt to 
loosen or dislodge. 7ttFraying. 8**Apt to 


spread or scatter. 9^*Apt to divulge. Cainnt 
s, unguarded expressions ; diffuse language ; 
fear b’ fhad s. cliù, @ man of widely-spread 
fame ; duine s., æ lecherous man. 

—, -eich, -ean, sf. Ground on which to 
spread anything to dry, e.g. peats or nets, 

—ail, -e, a. see sgaoilteach. 

—d, s.f. ind. State of being spread or 
scattered. 2 Tendency to spread or scatter. 3 
Readiness to divulge or publish abroad, 4 
State of being divulged. 6 Diffuseness, liber- 


il TTOT 


UNIVE TY 


U 


RSITY OF ILLINOIS 


Fi D Bb 1 GES ARAM A Tee 
Al D r à d e » L H H, " B8 =, L J J 


i i 
La 
A 


sgaoilteachd 
ality, bountifulness, profuseness. 


£16 





sgat 





ing 


Braoiltcas,** -eiz, s.f. Sheet. 2 Windling-sheet. | sgarachduinn, s.m. Separating, act of sev-arat 


sgaoim, -e, pl. -ean & -annan, s.f. rigat, sud- 
den terror, Alarm. 2 Starting or sudden move- 
ment from fear or terror, 3*3itlishness, as 
of a horse or beast. 4* Terror from false alarm. 

sgaoimeach, -eiche, a. Apt to be frivhtened. 2 
Restless, unquiet. 3 Terrified, timid, skit- 
tish. 5 Causing to start. 

— d, $.f.ind. Aptness or readiness to 
be terrified. 2 ''imidity, skittishness. 3 Rest- 
lessness. 

sgaoimealachd,* see scaoimerrachd. 

sgaoimear,** a, Timid. 2 Skittish. 

sgaoimear, -eir, -an, s.» Coward, timid fellow. 
2 Restless fellow, 3 Any shy creature. 

—achd, s.f.ind. Cowardice, timidity. 2 

Shyness. 3 Restlessness, 

sgaoimeil, see sgaoimeach.. 2* Skittish. 

Sgaoimeiche, see syaoimeachd. 

Svaolar,** a. Coy. 

achd,** s f. Coyness. 

sgaoll, -aoil, sm. see sganim. 

———alr, -ean, s.m. see syaoinear. 

air, -e, a see sgaoimeach. 

aireacht. see sgaoimeach'l. 

mhor, -oire, a. sve sgaoimeach. 

mhorachd,** $.f. Timidity, shyness. 

Sgaoman uisge,(CR) s.m. Light shower—Loch- 
broom, 

sgaoth, -a, 20. s.m. Swarm, great number, mul- 


titude. 2 Flight of birds. 3ttFlock. [g»». 
evaoith--**] 
—--ach, -»iene, a, In swarms or multitudes. 
—-—-aich, v.a. & n. Crowd, 
seaothan,** -ain, s.m. Chamber-pot. 























s;ap, pr.pt. a’ sgapadh, v. a. Scatter, spread, 
disperse. 2 Squander. 3 Afflict. 4*Hack, 
hash. 5* Distribute profusely. 


sgapacii, -aiche, @ That scatters or disperses, 
scattering, spreading, squandering, diffuse. 2 
** Api to sevtber, spread or syuan:ier.* 

gcapadair, -ean, s.m. Scatterer, oue who scat- 
ters, disperser, <lisseminator. 2* Hasher. 

Sze path, -aidh, s.m. Scattering, act of scatter- 
ing dispersing, spreading or routing, dispers- 
ion. 2* Hacking, hashing. <A’s—, pr. pt. of 
sgap. <A’ s. càise, hacking down cheese. 

, 3rd. pers. sing. § pl. inp. of sgap. S. 

e, let $t scatter ; S. iad, let them scatier. 

, past pass. of sgap. Was scattered or 
dispersed. 

sgapaidh, fut.af.a. of sgap. 

sgapair, ean, see Sxapaidair. ; ) 

eachd,** s.f. Scavcering,dispersion,rout- 
inv. 2 Extravagance. 

svap-litir, sf. Handbill. 

sgapta, past pt. of sgap. Scattered, dispersed, 
routed, 2 Squandered. 

sgaptach, @ see sgaipteach, $ 

sgar, pr.pt. a’ szaradh & a’ sgarachdainn, v.a. 
separate, disjoin, sever, disunite. 2 Lear a- 
sunder, pull asunder, split. 3 Torinent,afilict, 
harass, gall. 4 Divorce, part. 5*Secern. 6** 
Unfold for drying. 7**Wouud. 

sgar, -air, -an, sm. Knot onthe surface of wood. 
2 Fissure in wood. 3 Seam or joint, as in a 
boat. Tàirnean sgair, seaming nails ; s. an 
droma, or S. an leigeil, rebate, see bata, A 3, 
p. 73. 

sara, see sgaradh, ug ie 

sgarach, -aiche, a. Knotty, having ‘knots or as- 
perities on the surface. 2 Having fissures (of 
wood.) 3 Separating, disjointing, severing, 
disuniting, schismatic. 4 Tearing asunder. 5 
Jormenting, harassing, galling, afflicting. 6 
Distinguishable—Dain I. Ghobha. 7**Wount- 

1 








D DILL E I 


a Lope ue n 
1 i p 1 i 
L = H d — i 3 D S e V 


ing, disjoiuius, severing, disuniling. 2 Act of 
learing or pulling asunder, 3 Woundiurz, 4 
Harassiug. 5* Separation by force. 6**Dis 
sension, division, faction, schism. Tha s. ‘nur 
measg there ure divisions among you. A’s— 
pr. pt. of Scar." Dorm | 

sgaradair,** s.m Separator. 2 Tearer asunilers 
3 Harasser, tormentor. 

eachd,** s.f. Separation, schism, separ 

abiliiy. | 

sgaradh, -aidh, s.m, Same meanings as sear- 
achduinn. 42 Faction, divisou. 3 Shed of the 
warpin weaviug. 4 Mark, as ofa blow. 5 
Torment, woe. 6* Ruin. A’ s—, pr. pt. of 





(MS) -aidh, s.m. Aperture. 
lint. Imprecatiou, expression of iil- 








will, 

sgarag,(A F) see sgabag, 

sgarail,** a, Separable, 

sg rait,** s f. Lah'e cloth. 

sgarar, fut.pass. of sgar. 

sgarbh, -airbh, pl. -an & -airbh, 8. m. Corwo- 
rant, shaug—phalacrocorax carbo. &** Bittern, 
see corra-ghrian, 3**l[eron, 4** Shallow wa- 
ter, ford. 
an loch, the women d/svuting who shall hava 
the scart, and the scart out on the loch —i.e. dis- 
posing of the hare before it is caught. 

Sgarbh,** v.a. Wade. 2 Cross a riv. r by a ford. 

sgarbh-a'-bhothain, see sgarbh-an-sgimain,. 


syarbhach,-aicie, @ Abounding in cormorants. ` 


2 Like a cormorant. 3 Of a cormorant. 

sgarbhan,** -ain, s. m. Little cormorant. 2 
Young cormorant. 

sgarbh-an-sgumain,§ -airbh-, s.m. Shag, green 
cormorant—phalaciocorax erisbantus. 2(AK) 
Crested scart, 

svarbh-an-ucud-ghil, see sgarbh-an-sgumain. 

sgarbli-buill, see sgarbh. 

syar-bhoc,** s.m. Scurvy. 

ach,** a, Scurvied. 2 Like a scurvy. 

sgard,** v. Squirt, pour, sprinkle. 

sgàrd, see sgàird. 

-——ach, see sgairdeach. 

—ailh, see sgairdealh. 

sgardach, -aich, s.m. Buach of furze or thorns 
placed before the tap in a mash keeve. 2 
Vomiting. 3 Squirt. 

sgardair, see sgairdear. 

sgardan, (CR) s. m. Scree, continuous run of 
stones on a hill-sile—W. of Ross. 

sgàrlaid, -e, s.f. Scarlet colour. 

———— , a. Scarlet. 

each, a Scarlet. 

sgarmaich, s. f. Flux of stones on a hill-side 
—Hudenoch. (sgairneach. ) 

sgàrnal, -ail, see sgàirneil. 

sgarrag,(AF) s.f. Skate, ray-fish. ! 

sgarrthach, -aieh, s.f. Temporary shower, flying 
b.ast of foul weather. 

sgart, see sgairt. 

sgarta, past pt. of sgart. Separated, disjoined, 
disunited, 2 Pulled or torn asunder. 3 Af- 
flicted, tormented. 4 Galled, harassed. 

Sparta falaich, (AC) s. Rift, rent, cleft, cave, 
recess in a rock in which to hide or shelter. 

sgarthanaich, -e, s. f. Dawn,twilight, day-spring. 
Bha ean seo sans, he was here at dawn. 

sgat, -ait, -an, s.f. Skate (fish.)  [s.m.**] 

Tha a’ mheòir an déidh na sgait, Ais fingers 
are after the skate—said of a bad piper. ‘The 
saying originated with a young piper, who 
was being instructed at the piper’s college a8 
Boreraig in Skye. Having had skate to din- 
ner one day, which he did not approve of, 





Original from 


RL Fe eo nf NBI Bee H 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS Al 


Pi 


URBANA-CHAM 


T 


Al fh 
IAM GN 
FE S23 1 


Trod nam ban mu'n s, 'san s. àir. 


f 





ta + 


OE wn t 


d, 


emt; 


anl paying afterwards indiTeorently, he was 
aske | what was wrong with him, ‘‘ The skate 
sticks to my fingers," was his reply. Ma 
cheannaic' eas tu ia-g ceannaich iasg sgait, 
if vou buy Dish, buy skate The H zhland pre- 
judices against certain meat and fish are 
sometimes very absurl. The skate is most 
unjustiy undervalued by the natives of the 
western coists of Scotland —N.G.P. 

Sica. sea sgat. 

--——Ch, a. Abounding in skates. 

szat ghlas, s.f. Large soft zrey skate— Lewis. 

Sib a -An, 8.1. Shadow. shade. 2 Pretence. 
3 Disgust. 4 Fright, fear, dread, apprehen- 
sion. 5 Sake, account 6 Nearness, propiu- 
quitv. 7 Bashtulness, timidity. 8 (A€) see 
sxoth. 9*Shelter, protection, 10**Veil,cover- 
ing. Tha mi fo s., I am afraid ; tha thu 
"eur 3, orm, you make me feel squeamish ; s. 
Dhé, the fear of Qod; s. an taigh, the shelter 
6’ the house ; fo s, do sgéith, under the covert 
of thy wing ; airs. sgo.une, for decency’s sake; 
na ch’ fhuiing e air mo sgàth-sa, what he suf- 
for d on mu account ; guns., without dread ; 
air s., for the sake of ; on pretence of ; a’ gabh- 
ail s., taking fright. 

& à h, A. -an, s.*. Hurdle. 2 Door secured by a 
hurdle. Prov, 3 Threshed or scntched flax. 
4 Wattled (our large bundle of rods tied close- 
ly together and used as a door. 

Sab, pr.pt. a’ sgath & a’ sgathadh, v.g. Lop 
of, prune, cut off. 2 Destroy. 3 Dite, sting. 
4 Injure, hurt, do harm. 5**Curdle. S.an 
c2ann dheth, chop off his head ; s. na meang- 
lain, chop of the twigs. 

Sza' h, -a, s.m. Consuming, destruction, waste, 
havoc. 2 Damage by cattle. 3 Tow, thirds, 
the short part of lint called brairds. 

scàih, see sgàthadn. 

Bgathach, -aiche, a. Pruning, cutting, lopping 

- off. 2 Biting, that bites or stings. 95 That in- 
jures or huris. 4 Destructive, destroying. 5 
Wasteful. 6 Pernicious. 7 Doubtful. 8** 
Nkirmishing. 

gga hach, -aiche, a. Shady, shadowy. 2 Cover- 
veg, sheltering. 3 Timid, fearful, afraid 4 
Bashful. 6* Skittish. 7 Aghast. 7(M3)Back- 
ward. &** Causing fear. Tha 'n t-each a 

" bhuailear 'sa cheann S., the horse struck vn the 
head will be timid. 

egathach,** -aich, -aichean, s.m. Fence made 
of luppings. 2ttBranches lopped o" 3 (CR) 
Loppings of any wood except birch—W. of 
Ross-shire. A" Hur'lle or great bundle of twigs 
to serve as a portable porch at a Highlander’s 
door... [s.f.**] 

, äich, s.m. Drink of water and milk in 

equal proportions and the sour thick milk un- 

der the cream that was-kept for butter,cbura- 

ed into a froth—Gael.Soc.Inv xiv 145 

—an, s. m. Tail. Feumaidh fear na h- 
aona bhà car d? à h-earball, no a s. m a 
dhorn, the man who has only one cow must 
twist her tai round his fist—i.e. look well at- 
ter her, 

——as, -ais, s.m, see sgàth. 

sgathachd, s.f ind. Timidity. 

Sgathadair, -ean, s.m. Cutter, lopper off. 2łł 
Blacksmith’s chisel for cutting iron. 

sgathadh, (CR) s. m. Drawing straw for thatch- 
ing. 2(DMy) Cutting the roots off the barley 
sheaves for thatching purposes— Lewis 

, -aidh, Sam, Lopping off, severing, act 
of lopping of or pruning. 2 Biting, act of 
biting. 3 Hurting, act of hurting or injuring. 

4 Segment, shred. 5 Incision, puncture. 6** 

Destruction, 7**Loss. 8**Skirmisiing. 9** 











817 

















sreachag-Muirs 


Bickering. 10 (AIT) '* Shipping " or taking 
in (of oars) Air s. gun iochd, cvt down miti- 
out pity ; nach robh s, de thalamh ‘san thradn- 
rac, that there was no trace of land in sight 3 
s. ràimh, 8s2inping of oars ; cha d' fhuair a 
nach d fhuiling nàir, they never met with loss 
who did not suffer biame. A’ s—, pr. pt. of 
sgath. 

sgathag,(CR) s.f. Fright—Skye. 

sgathag, -aig, -an, $.f Trefoii in flower. 

ach,** a, Full of trefoil in flower. 

sgathag fhiadhain,$s./ Cotton-seioe see canach. 





sgathaich, oo, Discourage. 2(MS3) Awe 3(MS3) 
Bescreen. 
sgathair, -ean, s.m. Spruce fellow, beau. 2 see 


sgathadair. 
—eachd, s.f.ind. Cutting down, lopping 
off, as of branches. 
sgàthaireachd,ff $./ Timidity, fear, 
sgathalachd, s.f. Umbrosity. 
sgathan, -ain, -an, s.m. Mirror, looking-glass. 2 
**Gazing-stock. Is math an s. suil carari æ 
friend's eye is a good mirror ; a réidh-ghorm 
lith mar s., her smooth blu» pools like mirrors. 
S. balgach, @ convex mirror. 
s.-comhnard, a plain mirror. 
8. tolgach, og concav? mirror, 
— —ach,a Abounding in mirrors 
Sgatharra, a. Hewiag, lopping, pruning, cutting 
down. 
sgath-bhard, -Aird, s.m. Satirist, lampooner. 
—_———_——aehd, s.f. Satire, ribaldry, lam- 
ooning. An s.a bu chruaidhe gu léir, the 
eenest satire of all. 
sgàth-fhras, (CR) s. f. Passing shower— W. of 
Ross-shire & Argyllshire. 
szàth-laun, -lainn, an, s. f. Booth, cover, teat, 
shed, shop, penthouse. 
seath-thaigh, -ean, s.m. Porch. 
sgathmhor, -oire, @ see sgàthach. 
sgathmbor, see sgathach. 
sgathta, past pt. of sgath. Pruned, lopped off. 
2 Bitten, stung, 3 Injured, hurt. 
své, poetic for sgiath. 2” seve sgeith., 
sgeach, -eich, An, $8.1. see sjeachag. 2 see 
sgitheach. 3**Bush. 4** Buss. 
s.chaor, whitethorn. 
s.-chübhraidh, sweet-briar.. 
s.-mhadraidh, doq-ros’. 
g.-spionnain, (gen. -ai3,) gooseberry-bush. 
sgeachag, -aig, -an, s.f. ti» wthoru-berry. 
sgeachagach, -aiche, a Aboun'ling in hawthorn 
berries. 2 Like a haw. 3 Pertaining to haws. 
Mios s., the month of hawthorn berries, 
sgeachagan. n. pl. of sgeachag. Haws, 
sgeachag Muire,$ s.f. Bur-marigold—--bidens cer- 


nua. 
S E 





NA UA. 
Wor 
dor 
Ae | 


Te 





rm 


N 1 J i ec = E [gx P 
L d M a DN = [ | je Ss d LJ — 


ee AO A PAT ar qr SE 


d 
La 
! ^1 


szeachanach 


sgeachanaoh,** a Bushy, bramb'v. 

ezeachracn, -aicae, a. Full of bushes or thorns, 
2 Prickly. 3 Of briars or brambles. 

sgeachradh, -arth, aidhean, s m Prickle. 
**Briar bramble. 

sgeach spionnau,** ain, s m. Gooseherry-bush. 

sgead.** s.m, Speck, white spot 2 Ornament. 

ach" a Fond of dress. 2Speckled. 3 
Skv-coloured, 4 Cirrocumulated. Neuls., d 
crrrocumulus cloud 

sgeadach.* aich, sm see sgeadas. [s.f.*) 

-—adh, -arlh, s.m. Clothing, act of cloth- 
ing 2 Dress, clothes. 3 Adorning, beleck: 
ing, ornamenting. 4 Ornament 5 Dressing 
6 Dress. clothes. A's—, pr pt of sgeadaich, 
S. gu leòir, enough of ornament. 

8:eadachail,** a Ornamental 2 Beautifying. 
3 Fond of ornament, fond of dress 4 Gallant. 

szeadachair,"* s.m. One who adorns or beauti- 
ties, rarnisher, decker. 

sceadachd, s f. Drapery 2(MS) Honour. 

sgeadaich, pr. pt. a’ sgeadachadh, v. a. Dress, 
clothe. 2 Dress, garnish, adorn with dress. 
3 Conjugate 4**Accomplish. 5(M»)Blazon, 
6(MS) Prank, S. an teine, make up the fire ; 
8 an lampa, trim the lamp 

—— ——ear, fut pass. of sgeadaich. S, na lòin, 
the meadows shall be adorned. 

—te, past pt of sgeadaich. Clothed, 
dressed. 2 Adorned, ornamented with dress. 
3 Conjugatel. 4 Accomplished, 

sgeadas, ais, -an, $5 m. Ornament, gayness of 
dress. 2 Decoracion. 3 Spottedness,speckled- 
ness. 


2 








Ceea 





ach, aiche, o Having a gay dress. 2 
Fond of gay dress. 3**Ornamental. 4**Spot 
ted, speckied. 
achd, s.f.ind. Dress, gaudiness of dress. 
2 Foudness or vay dress. 

sreafay,** s.f. Filip. 2(DMy) Slight bite of a 
dog, or little cut by a knife on a person, 

sveafard, see sgeaíag. 

sgeal, see sgeul, 

achd, see sgeulachd. 

srealag,** -aig, see sgeallag, 

ach,** a. see szeillagach, 

ecealan, see sgeillag. 

sgealanach, see sgeallagach. 

skealb, -eilb, -au, s.f. Splinter, broken fragment 
of wood, stone or any hard substance. 2**Clitf, 
3**Sherd. Air sgeilb creige, on the fraqinent 
of a rock ; chaidh am bala ’na sgealbaibh, the 
boat went to splinters. 

sgerlb, pr.pt. a’ sgealbadh, v.a. dn Split, 2 
Dash into pieces or fragments, splinter, 3 
Become pieces or fragments. 4 Fritter. 5 
Tear. 6**Snatch, 

ach, -aiche, a. In pieces, fragments or 

splinters. 2 'T'hat breaks into pieces. 3 Hav- 

ing a tendency to break or disunite into frag- 

ments or splinters,splintering.smashing,cleav- 

ing, rending, snatching. 4**5masned, 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Act of splitting or dash- 
ing into fragments or pieces, 2 State of fall- 
ing into fragments. 3 Splintering, smas‘ing, 
cleaving. 4 Plucking, snatching. 5 Fragment, 
rent, splinter. A’ s—, pr pt. of sgealb. 

sgealbag. -aig, -an, sf. dim. of sgealb. Small 
piece or fragment. 2**Livtle rock, 3°* Pinch 

— ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in small frag- 
ments 2 Breaking into splinters. 

szealbaeaidu,(DMIEC) s. f. The forefinger — Loch- 
broom, 

sgealbair, -ean, s.m. Splitter, one that splits or 
breaks anything into pieces. 2 Stout young 
fellow. j 

————eachd, s.fimd. Act of splitting or dash- 




















Di Jitiz eu py 


RB” A nm iJ 
INTERNET ARCHIV 


ege EE 


818 


sveéanachas 


ing inio pieces | 
sgealb-chreag — chreige,, an, sf. Splintered cy 
shelvy rock orciiff Airde nan S., the pinn 
cles of the splintered cliffs. [s.1n. —McL & D.s 
—&ach. -aichs. @ Abounding in rng 
ged or shelvy rocks or cliffs. 2 Full of spiip- 
tered rocks or cliffs. 
srealbta, past pt of sgealb. Dashed in pieces 
sgeallag.}-aig, s.f. Wild mustard,charlock —&i 
napsis arvensis. — [s.in-— MeL & D.) 
———ach, Auch, s.n. see sgeallag, 2 Quantity 
of wild mustard. | 
—ach, a. Abounding in wild mustard. 
Having a kernel. 
sgealiag meilte, s, f. Mustard-seed., 
syeallan.§ -ain, sam see szeallag. 2**Kernel, 
—ach, see sgeallagach. 
sgeallag-bhuacha;r.( DC) s f. Mushroom—JUist, 
see balg bhuachaill. 
sgealp, -a & -eilp, -an, 3./. Slap with the palm 
of the hand. 2 Sound of a blow so given. 3 
Quick, sudden sound 4(DMK)}Sharp report, 
as of a pistol—Caithness, 4 see sgealp. (5.32. 








H 











"Sam Tall, lively man 

"em Shelf 

po, Strike with tha palm of the hand. 

ach. aiche, a. see sgealbach 2**Striking 

or slapping with th» palm of the hand 

adh, adh., Striking, act of striking with 
the palm of the hand. Scots, skelp. A’ s-—, 
pr.pt. of sgealp. 

—— —arra, &. Loud and shrill. 2 Emitting a 
loud and shrill sound. 3 Forcible. 4ffilas- 
tic. 5**Smart, as a report. 6tfAgile. Pio) 

s. MbicUruimein, MacCrimmon s loud-souní-- 
nj pines, braidhe s., @ smart report, cainnt s., 
loud and articulate utterance. 

arrachd, s.f.ind. Loudness and shrillness 
of sound, 92**Elastiecity. 3**Smartness as of 
a report, 4tłShrill sound. 

sgeamaiain, (AH) sf. Harum-scarum, loquacity. 
2 Loquacious person. E 

sgeamh, -a, & m. Severeor cutting language, — 
abusive words, 2 Disgust, anuupithy.  3ff /——-— 
Scolding. 4 Speck on the eye. 5* Thin skin, 
membrane,  6* in Jrish, Polypody. 
sgiamh. 

sgeamnh,™* v a. Reproach. 

sgsamh, -a & -eimh, s f. Polypody. 

———ag,* s.f. Small slice. 

ail, -e,@ Satirical. 2 Disgusting. 8 — 
Comely. 4 Using severe or cutting words, 5 — 
see sgreamhail. ) 
sgeamhair, -ean, s.m. Satirist. 2 One who uses 
cutting words. 

















*1 


7 see 





—eachd, $.f.ind, Satire. 2 Trouble- © 

some talk, 3 Habit of using cutting words. 
sgeamhaltrach,*-aich,s.m.Persun that does anye —— 
thing furiously. A 
sgéamianach,* -aich, s.m. Macaroni. i 
sgeamh-dharaich, §-a-, s.f. Oak-feru—polypodium — — 
dryonteris. T 
sgeamh!a, see sgeamhladh. 3 
szeamhladh, -aidh, -ean, s.m, Sudden fright, d 
alarm, 2 Skirmish. 3 Keen appetite. 
sgeamnaidh,** a, Concionous, $ 
—————— ——enach |,**  s.f. ind. Concinnity. ` 
szeamh-nan-clach. $ s. f. Polypody, see clach- 4 
raineacn. . E 
sgèan, -A, $.)0. see sgeun & sgian. y 
srean, -a, S.» Cleanliness, neatness. 2 Polish. i 
tsyeana, gen.sinj & nol. of sgian. A 
s;eanaàch, see sgeunach & sgianach, A 
greanach,* -aica, sm. Chop. 4 
sgeanachail, -e, @ see Szeanail. d 
sgéanachas, -ais, s.m. see sgeunachas. à / 
ell 

Original from 4 

1 


I P AI male AT 
ILLI d LI el Fi 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


UNIVE 


p FupyUEM d Fm 
RSITY.OF 
b Wut iau f 


sgeanadh 


agdanadh, -aidh, see sgeunadh i 

sgeanag,ūTt -aig, -an, s. f. Species of edible sea- 
weed. 

svéanag, see sgeunag & sgianag. 

sgéanaich, see sgeunaich. i | 

sgeanail, -e, a. Clean, neat, tidy. 2 Brisk, live- 
ly -Dàin I. Ghobha. 

szeanalaehd, $.7.4nd. Neatness, cleanliness. 

sreanamhail, æ. see seeanail. Biodag direach, 
tana, glé s., a s/raight dirk, thin and well pol- 
ished, — Donn. Ban, 5th ed. p. 75. | 

Tsgeanan, pl. of sgian, i 

sgeann, -a,-an, s. m, Stare, gazing upon any- 
thing, glaring. 

sgeann,* s.f. Cleanliness. 

———, v.n. Stare,gaze upon anything. glare. S. 
e orm, Ae stared at m^; s. a shuilean ’na 
cheann, his eyes glared in his head. 

————ach, -aiche, æ. Staring, gazing, glaring. 2 
Bull-eyed, 

——adh, -aidh, s.m. Staring, act of staring or 
gazing, gaze, glare. <A’ pr.pt. of sgeann, 

szeannag,** -aig, s.f. Staring female. 

sgeanna!l,* a. Neatly clean. 

sgeaunair, -ean, s.m. Starer, gazer. f 

sgeap, -ip, pl. -an & -aichean, s.f. Beehive, skep. 
2 (MMcD) Straw basket: for holding grain 
when sowing, always slung round the shoul- 
der by a straw rope-— Lewis. 3 Hand-winnow- 


er. S. sheillean, a straw beehive. (gen. sgeapa 
*X* ` 


sgeap,* v.a. Gaelic form of skip. *Pass over. 

sgeapach, -aiche, a. Abounding in beehives. 2 
Like a beehive. 3 Of, or like, a basket. 4 

- Abounding in baskets. 

sgeap fhriaisg,( DMy) s.f. Small basket made of 
stalks or ‘‘cuiseagan,’’ for taking home liin- 
pets to bait the small lines. 

sgeap mhór,(DMy) s.f. Large basket made of the 
same materials as sgeap fhriasz, but with a 
stouter cord attached, for carrying fish from 
the rocks, potatoes, &c.— Ness, Lewis. 

sgeapaichean, n.pl szeap. 

sgearach,** a. Happy. 

sgearach,* -aich, s.m. Anything scattered. 2** 
Square. 

sgearadh,** -aidh, s.m. Stage-play. 

sgearaich,* v.a. Scatter. 

sgearail,** a. Happy. 

eachd,** st Happiness. 

sgeath, see sgeith, 

——ach, ** see sgeilheach. 

sgeath-chosg, see sgeith-chosg, 

seeathracb, see sgeitheach. 

sveathraich, see sgeithrich. 

sgéil’, poetical contr. of sgéithe, gen. sing. of 
sgiath. 


sgeig, -e, s.f. Mockery, derision, jeering, scorn, 


"eg 


-—-—— 


ridicule 2 Taunt. 3 Buffoonery, waggery. 
S.-fhiacaill, a hissing. 

sgeig, pr.pt. a’ sceigeadh, v.a. Mock,ridicule,de- 
ride, taunt, scorn, 

sgeigeach, -eiche, a. Mocking, deriding, ridicul- 
ing. 2 Taunting, scorning. 3 Having a pro- 
minent chin, or 4 à beard of strong strai«ht 
hair—Suth’d. 5 Prone to mock or ridicule, 
scornful, taunting. 6 Waggish. 

——.——,-ich, s.m. Mocker, derider, buffoon, 
zany, wag. 2 Irouy. 3 Taunter, scorner. 

sgeigealachd, s.f,/nd, Mockery. taunting,satire, 

Sgeigear, -ean, s.m. Mocker, wag, buffoon,lam- 
pooner, banterer. 29 Gander, see gànradh. 

sgeigearachd, s. f. ind. Mockery, derision, buf- 
foonery, wagzery, wagzishness. 2 Habit of 
mocking or deriding. 


 8geizeas. -is, et Wagzery, buffoonery. [* gives 


sgeigeis as non.) 


819 . 


sgilmireacnd J 


sgeigeasach, -aichy, a. see sgeigeil, 

sge gèil, -e, a. Reproach‘ul, scornful, mocking. 
given tomockery or derision, jeering, jibing, 
taunting, scorning, burlesque. 

sgeigeir Ben sgeigear., 

Szeigeireachd, see sgoigaaraend. 

sgeiszidh, fut.aff a. of sgeig Shall or wil! mook. 

sgeivire,* see sgeigear. 

sgeil, (CR) s.f. Loud and rapid utterance, gab- 
ble. Nach anntha'ns. air do theangaidh! 
what a gabble you are makin}. 

sgéil, gen.sing. & n. pl of sgeul. [also sgeoil.] 

széil,** -e, s.f. Misery, pity, calamity, disaster. 
Mos. ! alas ! 

sgeil, s.f. Gaelic form of skill, see sgil. 2** 
SEN grain, Fear gun s., @ man without 
skill. 

Szeilb,* see gilb. 

sgeilc,** v. n. Crack, make a crackling sound — 
Perthshire, 

--—— (CR) s.f. Crackling sound. 
plosion, 8**Loud report. 


2**Smart ex- 


sgeilcearra, æ. Supple, elastic. 2 Active, live- 


ly, sudden, quick. 3 Giving hard blows. 4** 
Smart or loud, as a report or explosion. 

———- —chd, s.f.ind. Suppleness, elasticity. 2 
Activity, quic«ness, liveliness. 3 Suddenness. 

szeilceil, (CR) s.f. Crackling, 2**Knacking. 

széilo, s.f.ind. Misery, pity, calamity. [** gives 
(széil, -e.] 

syéileach, -eiche, o Calamitous, 2 
Pitiable, pitiful, 3 Painful, 

s¢éilexrdh, -idh, see sgéile. 

sgeileas, -eis, -an, $.2. Bill, baak 2 Thin face. 
3 l'alkativeness, garrulity, prov. 

sgeileasach,-aiche,a. lhin faced. 2 Loquacious, 
garrulous, prov. 

-—, -aich, s.f. Loquacious, 
woman. 

sgeileid, -e, -ean, $.f. Skillet, small boiler,''gob- 
let," saucepan. 

sgeileil, see sgileil. 

sgeileit, see sgeileid. 

sgeilm, e s.f, Boasting, vain-glory. 2 Prattling, 
vain Or idle talk. 3 Neatniess of dress,s»ruca- 
ness. 4 Razor- or thin-iipped mouth. 5 Taste. 
6 Decency, propriety. 7 Countenance indica- 
ting a scolding, prating, impertinent disposi- 
tion, s**Chatberer. 9 Brigntness. 10 tł 
Mouth made for scolding 11* Prater's mouta. 
12**Talo.telling.  13**lell-ale. 14**Imper- 
tinent prater. 15 Loquacious, forward girl. 
16 Forward or impertinent talk. 

sgeilm, s, f. Joiner's chisel —5v/A'd. 

sycilmeach, -eiche, a See sgeilmeil. ` 

sgeilmeach,* eich, af, Prating, vaia, silly wo- 
man. 

sreilmeag, tf eg, 


ruinous. 





garrulous 


an, $f. Chattering woman. 

sgeilmear, -eir, -elrean, $.70. Foolish boaster. 2 
Prattlinz fellow. 3 Neatly-dressed person. 

sgeilmearra, a. see sgeilmeil. — 

hd, s.f. see 8zeil.neileachd. 

sgeilmeil.-e, a. Borsting, Vain-glorious. 2 Pra- 
ting, given to idle language. 3 Neat, tidy, 
trim in dress. 4 Piquant 5 Tattliag, imou- 
dently garrulous. 6 Quicx, nimble, 7 Be'znt* 
8 (MS) Cavalier. 9 Beanish. 10* Haviaza 
pert, prating, officions mouth or expression of 
countenines. 11 2aublinz. 12 Addicted to 
forward or impartinent talk. 

srxeilmeileachd, s.f.im!. Habit of boasting. 2 
Habit of prating. 3 Neatness or tidinesS of 
dress. 4 (MS Piausibleness. 5 Garrul¥4s 
ness, talkativeness. 

sgeilmich, v.v. Bodizen. | 

5 oer Piae ad s.f. Impertinent prattle or gar- 
Tua "E 





— 


egeilmrich 


egvilmrich,** s. Chatter. 

age ims2, s. f. inl. Surpris3, sudden attac. 
Thàinig ial oiran 'nan sgeilmse, they a'tackd 
us "na ares. 

ach, -eiche, a. Attacking or coming upon 
one unawares, 

ezeilmsich,(MS) va@ Bicker. 

sgeilp, s. dn se^ szealp. 

sgeilp, -e, pl, -ean & -eachan, $.f. Shelf or cliff 
of a rock, 2Shelf ina keeping place. 

egeilperch, -eiche. qa. Shelvy, furnished with 
shelves, 2 Abounding in cliffs or rocks. 

—an. vl. of sgeilp. 

egéil-theachda'r, -ean, 8.7n.see sgeul-theachdair. 

sgeim,** s.f. Foam. | 

azéimh, -e, s.f. Comeliness, beauty. 2 Personal 
elegance, 3 Ornament, hand om ness, 
Scheme. 5 Draught, schedule 6(M*3)Honour. 
Sheas iad 'nan s., they stood in ther beauty ; 
s, an naomhachd, the beauty of their holiness; 
s. ard, high bloom, qood plight or habit of body. 

agéimh,** v.a. Adorn, beautify. 2 Makea 
draught or scheme. 3 Skim, scum. 

each, -eiche, a. Handsome, graceful, ele- 
gant, blooming, ornamental, beautiful, fair, 
lovely, 2 Like a scheme or draught. Maise s. 
an caoin-shruth, the exquisite beauty of their 
fair forms; s. mar a’ ghealaich, fair as the 
NVON. 

———eachadh, -aidh, s. m. Adorning, act of a- 
dorning, ornamenting or beautifying. 

———eachd, s.f.ind. Beauty, comeliness, grace- 
fulness. ornament, elegance. 2 State of being 
adorned, 

—— —ealach, -aiche, a. Handsome, fair, grace- 
ful. 2 Well-dressed, ornamented, adorned. 

———ealachadh, s. m. Garnishment. 

—ealachd, s.f.ind. Handsomeness, neat- 
ness. 2 Accomplishment. 

sgéeimheiche, com». of sgèimheach. 

Bzeinheil, -e, a see sgèimheach. 

sgèimhich, pr.pt. a’ sgéimheachadh, v.a.Adorn, 
ornament, 2 Beautify, make fair, bedeck. 3 
Blazon. 

- ————.21, -eid, s.m. Beauty, handsomeness, 
decree of beauty. 

$réimhichte, past pf. of sgèimhich. Adorned, 
ornamented. 2 Made fair, beautified. 

sgeimhle, s.m. see sgeimhleadh. 2 (CR) Swag- 
ger — Perthshire, 

sgeimhlea'h, -eidh, s.m. Skirmish, fight. 2 Act 
of skirmishing. 3 Surprise. 4 Bitterness of 
speech, biting worls, bickering. 5 Act of 
using bitter language. 6 Alarm. A’ s—, pr. 
pt. of szeimhlieh. 

Sgeimhlear, -eir, -an, s.m. Fighter, disputer. 2 
One who uses bitter words. 

————— —achd, s.f.ind. Habit of bickering or 
quarrelling. 

ggeimhlich, pr.pt. a’ sgeimhleadh,v.a. & n. Snr- 
prise, alarm. 2 Skirmish. 3 Bicker, use bit- 
ter words. 

sxeimhnidh,** a. Clean. 2 Fierce, 

sceimineach, AC) a. Dignified. 

sgèin, see sgeun. 

sgéin, ‘at sing. of sgian. 

sgoin,** s.m. Hidinz-place. 

sgéine, gen.sing. of sgian. 

syéineach, see sgeunach. 

sgeineil, see sgeunch. 

sgeineil.** a see sgeanail. 

seeing,** s.f. Bounce, start. 

—each,** a. Bouncing, starting. 

sgeinm,*s.f. seo sge'lm. 2**fidy person. 

-—vach, see sgeilmeil. 
egeinmeichd,** er, Garrulousness. 2 Tidiness, 
smartness. 2 Nimbleness, 




















820 


Sz eireach,-eiche, a. 


sgeithte 


sgeinmeil, see sgeilmeil, 

sg:inn, see sgeiunilh. 2ft see sgeilm. 

sgeinne.** s. f. Wuniele. 

svéiuns, s.f. Pack-thread. 

syeinnea th,** s.m. Eruption. 2 Gushinz forth. 
3 Bouncing, 4 Sliding, sally. 

sgéineadh,** -idh, s.m. Pack-tliread, 

szeiunich, v.a. Tie, cor. 

sgeinnidn, s. m. Flax, hemp. 2 Thread, small 
twine. 3 Skein. Art Fishinz-line.  Sgiürs- 
air de s. chaol, a scourge of small cords. 

sgeir, -e, Gun, s. f. Rock in the sea nearly or 
quite coverel by neap-tides and quite cover- 
ed by spring-tides, 2*Peat-bauk,. 3**Oliff. 4 
Sharp, fliaty rock. 5(CR) Covering, top-layer, 
as on cold porridge, or of fat, soup, &c.— 
Arran. 

Rocky, full of rocks, 2 


Cliffy. 3 Flinty. 4 Unnayigvble. 
sgeireaz, -eig, -an, s.f. dim, of sgeir. Little 
rock ia thessa 2**Chip of stone, Ze  3** 


Sharp rock. 4**Sharp splinter of a rock. 

sgeireagach, -eiche, a. Full of little sea-rocks, 
2** Full of splinters of stones. 3**Apt to brea« 
into splinters, 

sgeirean,(CR) s.pl. Drops of food, as on clothes, 
&c.—Arran. 

sgeir-liamhraidh,(DC) s.f. Yarn-winder. [Call- 
e:l eachan in Argyll.} 

sgeirmeis,** Gaelic spelling of skirmish. 

- evch,** a. Skirmishing. 2 Like or of 
skirmishes, 

————vachd,** s, f. Continued or frequent 
skirmishing. 

sgeirmeil,(CR) a Clean, tidy— Arran, 

sgeirmse,* s.f. Panic. 2 Skirmish. 

sgeir-Lhonn, -ean-thonna, 3.f. Breaker. 

sgeith, s.m. Vomit, food thrown up from the 
stomach. 2 Vomiting, act of vomiting. 3** 
Spawn. 4 Fraying of cloth. A’ S—, pr. 
pt. of sgeith. 

sgeith,pr. pt. a’ sgeith &a’ sgeitheadh, v.n. Vo- 
init. [confined to cats and dogs in Perthshire.) 
2**Spawn. 3**Avoid. 4* Overiow, as a ri- 
ver. 5 Spread, as water. Am an treabhaidh, 
'nuair thòisicheas an talamh ri s. ua h-ùr- 
ach, the time for ploujhing, when the ground 
begins to cast up earth—after hard frost. 

sgèith, pr. pt. a’ sgeitheadh, v. a. Cut uut, re- 
duce to a shape, as cloth, 2 Cut oi. 3 Fi, 
suit. 

sgèith, (CR) s. Shape— Perthshire. 

S :eith-an-roiu,ft s.m. Kind of small jelly-fish, 

sgeith-chosg,** s.m. Anti-emetic. 1 

sgeitheach. -eiche, a. Nauseous, causing to vo- 
mit, emetic, auacathartic. 2 Ready to vomii, 
3**Spiwning, 

sgeitheadh, -idh, s.m. see sgeith. 


gzéitheadh, -idh, s. m. Cutting out. 2 Act of d 


cu'ting out or reducing to a shape or form, 
fitting, A’ s—, pr.pt. of sgeich. 
syeitheadh-faithe, s.m. Rupture of a blood-ves- 
sel. 2t+Varicose veia. p sgeith-feith.] 
sgeith-na-muice-mara,(AF) s.m. Kind of large 
jelly-fish. E 
sgeith-nau-reultaz,Tf s. m. Glutinous substance 
vulgularly supposed to fall from the stars. 
sreithreach, s. see sgeitheadu. 
-o sithreach, a. se sgeitheacu. d 
sysithrich, -e, sf. Vowaitiug. 2** Vomit. 
s;eithrich, v.n. Vomit. ; 
sgeith-rionnaig,(DC) s.j. Meteor. 2 szeith-nan- 


reultag. 
sgeith-ròin,tt s.m. See-blubber, jelly fish. ` ` 
sgèithte, past pt. of sgèith. Cut out, reduced ia 
shape or form, Ohair s., a task. 
sgeithte, past pt. of sgeith. Vomited, cast up. 


eF ata 


he 


sgeo,(AC) gen. sgiach, s.m. Haze, fog, vapour. 
Dimness— Dain 7. Ghobha. 
4sgeó, s.m. Understanding. ` 
agedb.* s.m. Aperture. 2 Wide mouth. 
sgeoblach,(CR) s.m. Untidy person or dress— 
Arran. | 
sgeóoc, -edic, -an, s m. Long neck. 2 Neck ofa 
bottle or phial. 3t Tallness. 
sgeócach, -aiche, a. Long-necked, as a bottle or 
nhial. 
&geóocag, -aig, -an, $.f. Long-necked female. 
szeocan, -ain, -an, s. m. Long-necked youth or 
hoy. 2 inderison, Long neck. 3**Neck of a 
bottle. 
sgeòil, -eoid, an, see sgòd. 
sreodach, see sgodach. 
sgeòdag, see sgódag. 
greóg, see szeop. 
syeogair, -ean, $.m. 
fellow. 
sveogaireach 4, s.f.in?. Foolish talk, 
sgedil, gen.sima. & n.pl. of sgeul, 
sgeólach, s.m. The nam? of one of Fionn's cups. 
seeoldair,( CR ) s.m. Jellv-fish— Farr. 
sceop, -oip, s.m. Torrent of foolish words,  ? 
++Lond tattling. 3 Aperture. 4 Wry mouth. 
sgeópair, -ean, s.m. Tattler. 
sgeopaireachd, s.f./nd. Tattling, prattle. 
sgedpraich. see sgeopaireachd. 
8v eot, ** -eoit, s.m, Shield, target. 
sgeuban, S/rath, Suth'd for geuban. 
sgeudach, see sgeadach. 
sgeudachadh, -aidh, see sceadachadh. 
sgzeudaich, v.d. see szeadaich. 
sgeudaichte, see sgeadaichte. 
sgeugach, a. Having a physical peculiarity, ap- 
plied only to the meaning of having a project- 
ing chin, or one that has a beard of a pecu- 
liarlv strong straight hair—Suth'd. 
sgeugh, s. & v. Shape. 
sgeul, -éil. éile & -eoil, pl. -eòil & -an, s. m. [ 7. 
in Badenoch.) Narrative, relation, narration. 
2 Tale, fable, story. 3 False or malicious re- 
E falsehood, 4 News, information, tidings. 
nnis s.,fell a tale,relate a story; sgeul thairis ! 
channe the subject !—Arran; air aon s., of one 
opinion ; de do s. ? what is your news ? s, mu'n 
Fhéinn, a tale about the Féinne ; droch s., bad 
intelligence ; bi aar s., be in pursuit of inform- 
ation ; am bheil e air s. ? i$ he (ort) to be 
found ? a dh’ ìnnseadh sgeòil, to tell the result; 
eadar dà s., by the way ; a’ deanamh széile, 
making a tale, telling a tale or falsehood; nar- 
rating, uttering a speech ; choigrich na sgéile 
truaighe ! stranger of the mournful tale ! air s., 
found. 
sgeula, see sgeul. 
sgeulach, -aiche, a. Having many tales. 2 Fond 
. of reciting tales or stories. 3 Like a tale. 4 
Tale-telling, 5 News-mongering. 6*Running 
from house to house with reports, 
sgeulachd, an, s.f Tale, fable, fiction, romance. 
2 Tradition. 3 Telling or reciting of tales, 
fables or traditions 4 Legend, history. 5 
Archsology. 5* Vague reports, Sgeulachdan 
shean bhan, old wives’ tales , gun aire thoirt 
do sgeulachdaibh, without heeding fables. 
sgeulaich.1f v.a. Narrate. 
sgeulaiche, -an,s.m. Relater of tales, fictions 
... orfables. 2 Newsmonger. 3 Promulgator of 
— false reports. 4**Historian. 5**Archzologist. 
Cha robh s. nach robh breugach, there never 
“px @ tale-bearer that did not tell some false. 
oods. 
sgeultach,* -aich, s.f. Female gossip. 
sgeultach,* a, see sgeulach. | 
sgeultachd,” s.f.ınd. Tradition, legendary lore 


Foolish talker.  2* Silly 


A 


821 
2 S.mu'n Fhéinn, tradition about the Féinn, s. 


sgiamhaichte 


nan seanar, the tradition of the elders. 

sgeultair,* s.m. see sgeulaiche. 

sgeu'-rùin, s. m. Secret. Cha s. e "a fios aig 
triùir air, 1t'S no secret if three know it. 

sgeul-theachdair, -ean, s.m. Tale-bearer. 

sgeumh, -a, see sgéimh. 

sgeun, -éin, s.m. Shyness, wildness, readiness 
to be frightened. 2 Sudden fright or dread, 
causing to start or fly away suddenly. 8 Look 
expressive of fear, dread or terror. 4*Squint. 
5**Mad look,terror, astonishment. 6] Dread. 
Dh’ fhalbh an t-each air s., the horse bolted. 

sceun,* v.n. Squint. 

sgeun, see sgian. i 

sgeunach, -aiche, a. Shy, skittish, easily fright- 
ened, wild, m-ttled, apt to run off in fright, 
as a horse. 2 Suddenly frightened, flying off in 
fear. 3 Having a look of fear or terror. 4 
Timid, 

sgeunachadh, -aidh, s.m. Scaring,act of scaring, 
a‘frighting or chasing away for fear. A’ s—, 
pr.vt. of sgeunaich. 

sgeunachas, -ais, $ m. see sgeun. 

sgeuna'lh, -aidh, s.m. see sgeun. 

sgeunaich, pr.pt. a’ sgeunachadh, v.a. Terrify, 
scare, chase away for fear. 

—— e, past pt. of sgeanaich. Terrified, 
scared, chased away by fear. 

szeunail, -e, a, Neat, in good order, 2 Pruned. 
3 see sgeunach. 

sgia. soe sgiath. 

sgiab, -a, -an, s.f. Quick or sudden movement, 
start. 2 Snatch or pull at anything. 

sgiab, v.&. & n. Start or move sud len!y. 2 Pull 
or snatch at anything, 3**Skim. 4(AH Open 
widely, as the legs of a compass straddle one’s 
legs. 5( AH) Gaps, yawn— Argyll. S. do chas- 
an, straddle your lens, 

sgiabach, -aiche, æ. Moving quickly or sudden- 
ly. 2 Snatching or pulling at anything. 3 
(AH) Yawning. 4(Fionn) Biustering. Là s., 
a blus'ering day. 

egiabadh, -aidh, s.m. Moving. 2 Act of moving 
suddenly or quickly. 3 Actof snatching or 
pulling at anything. 4 see sgiab. 5 Strad- 
dling. A’s—, pr. pt. of sgiab. Thoir tuilleadh 
sgiabaidh do’n fharach, give more slant to the 
ladder. 

sgiabag, -aig, -an, s. m. Slap given in play. 2 
Hasty touch or snatch. 

Sgiabair, -ean, s.m. Snatcher, one who snatches 
or pulls at anything. 

sgia‘lh, see sgiath. 

seial, see sgeul. 

sgialachd, see sgeulachd. 

sgiamh, -éimh, s.f, see sgèimh. 

sgiamh, -a, s.m. Shriek, yell. 2 Caterwauling 
ofa cat. 3 see sgèimh. 4 Yelp. 5 Squeal. 
6* Wild expression of countenance. f[s.f.*] 

sgiamh, v.n. Shriek, yell. 2 Mew, caterwaul. 3 
Squeal, as a pix. 4 see sgeamh. 

ach, -aiche, a. see sgèimheach. 

———ach, -aiche, a. Yelling, shrieking. 2 Mew- 
ing, caterwauling. 

sgiamhachadh, -aidh, s.m. & pr. pt. of sgiamh- 
aich, see sgeimheachadh. 

sgiamhachair,** s.m. Decorator. 

sgiamhachd, see sgéimheachd. 

sgiamhadh, -aidh, s. m. Shrieking, 
shrieking or yelling. 3 Mewing, 
mewing or caterwauling. 
s—, pr. pt. of sgiamh. 

sgiamhaich, v.d. see sgèimhich. 

———— .—e, see seéimhiche. 

ead,** -eid, see sgéimhichead. 

sgiamheichte, past pt. see sgéimhichte, 








2 Act of 
4 Act of 
5* Squealing. A’ 





—— —— —ach, -aiche, a. Skittish, apt to shy. 


sgiamhail 


822 


iim 





sgiamhail, ** pr.pt. a sgiamhail, v.n. Shriek, |sgiathadlair,** s.m. Shield-bearer. | 


yel!, mew, caterwaul. 2 Squeal, as a pig. 
sgiamhail, -e, s.f. & pr.pt. of sgiamh. [MeL & 
{yzives s.m.] see sgiamhadh. 
sgiam^ail,** a. Squally. 2 Squeaking 8 Mew- 
ing. asa eat, 4* Seemly, decent. 
sgiamh-àrd,** -àird, sm High bloom. 
sziamh-oradh,** .aidh. s.m. Gilding. 
seiamhas. -ais, s.m. Trimming (of dress.) 
sgiamhlaich, v. see sgiamhail. 
sgiamhnilich, (MS) v.n. Grunt, as à pig. 
sgian, ine & -éine, dat, sgithinn, pl. sgianan, 
Sgianan, sginichean, sgéanan & sgéinichean, 
s.f. Knife. Air son na sgéine, for the knife. 
sgian, see sgeun. 
sgianach, -eiche, 
having knives, 
ach. 
sgian-achlais,** of Large pocket-knife, once 
much used by the Gael and put to various 
uses,— it was particularly serviceable in close 
fight. 
sgianadair,*® s.m. Cutler. 
sgiin-adhairceach,** s. m. Sheep with sharp 
horns. 


a. Furnished with knives, 
2 Like a knife. 3 see sgeun- 








, eiche, a. Sharp-horned, as 
sheep. 

sgianag, -aig,-an,s.f.,dim. of sgian. Little knife. 

srianazach, -aiche, a. Having little knives. 

Splanaich, see sgeuna ich, 

sg an-bharrain, s.f. Hedge-knife, pruning-hook. 

&2ian-bhéarraidh.ff s.f. Razor. 

sgian-bhuird, s.f. 'l'able-knife. 

sgiin-cheann, -chinn, s.m. Witless head. 

sgian-cheannach, -aiche, a. Addle-headed, fool- 
ish. witless, 

sgian-chollag,tf s.f. Chopping-knife. 

egian-corrain,( MMcD) s.f. Knife made from the 
blade of an old sickle — Lewis. 

sgian-fola, s. , Lancet. 

sgian-lüthaidh,* s.f. Clasp-knife. 

sgian-pheann, s.f. Pen-knife. 

Sgiau-phinn, see sei&n-pheann. 

sgian-phóca, s.f. Pocket-knife. 

sgian-phronaaidh, s.f. Chopping-knife. 

8gians»ar,-air, sm. Side starting, as of a horse. 
2 Sudden fear. ; 


Easily frightened. 

&8rian-seathaidh, s.f. Bill. 

8ziap,** s,m. see siab. 

sgiap, Gaelic form of scoop. 2**Skip. 

sviapach, see siabach. 2**Skipping. 

sgiarnag,( AF) s.f. Hare. 

gziatan,** .ain, s.m. Dart. 

sgiath, -éith & -éithe, pl. -an, s.f. Wing, pinion. 
2 Wing of a house or army. 3 Portion of laud 
jutting into the sea. 4 Shelter, protection. 5 
Shield, buckler, target. 6 Bilge-piece in boat, 
see bàta, F8, p. 73. 7 Furrow-board of a 
plough. 8 Top-sides or floats of a cart. 9 pl. 
(na sgiathan) Caithness for liaghra, which see. 
10 Side-wing of a boat, see p. 77. 
S.-mhuilinn-gaoithe, fan of a windmill—sma!l 
circular apparatus at back to keep the sails to 
the wind ; s. faochaig, the disc which forms 
the door of a whelk ; fo d’ sgéith, under thy 
wing ; le ‘sgiath ’s le ’chlogaid, with his 
shield and his he/met ; feadh bholg a sgéith, 
around the boss of his shield. 

sgiathach. -aiche, a. Winged. 2 Shie!ded, hav: 
ing a shield or shizids. 3 Affordiug shelter or 
protection. 4 Winged. as a house. 65 (AF) 
White-streaked. 6* White-sided. 

— ———- (AF) -aich, s.m. White-streaked cow. 

igiathadaich, e s. f. Fluttering about upon 
wing. 


Sziathag, -aig, -an, 8. f., dim. ot sgiath. Little 
Wing. 2 Little shield or buckler. 

————Ach, -aiche, a. Having little wings. 

sgiathaibh, dat ol of sgiath. Airs. na gaoithe, 
on the wings of the wind. 

sgiathair, -ean, s.m. Flutterer. 2 Idler. 

sgiathaireachd, s.f.ind. Fluttering idly about 

sgiathalachadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of fluttering or 
plying of the wings, <A’ s—, pr.pt. of sgiath- 
alaich. 

sgiathalachd, s.f. Fluttering. 

sgiathalaich, pr.pt. a’ sgiathalachadh, v.n. Flute 
ter, ply the wings. 

——— .* s.f. Fluttering. 

sgiathan, -ain, -an, s.m., dim. of sgiath. Little 
wing. 2 Twig partition. 3 Portion, 4**Fan. 
see also sgiathag. 

sciathan, n.pl. of sgiath. 

sgiathanach, -aiche, a. Winged. 2Jutting out 
into promontories, 

sgiath-chatha,** s.f. Battle shield. 

sgiath-chomhraig s.f. Aegis. 

sgiath-dheargan, T s.m. Redwing—jardus ilia- 
emus, > 

sgiath mhealltach, s.f. Bastard wing of a bird, 
see No, 3. p. 398. 

sciath-mheurach, s.m. Plerodactyle. 

sgiath-shüileach, -eiche, a. Wall-eyed, 

soivth-theaghlaich, s.f. Escutcheon, 

fsgib, s.f. Hand, fist. 

tsgib, -e, -ean, s.f. Ship, skiff. 

sgibeach, -eiche, a. Neat, tidy, spruce, trim. 
Gu sgrideil, s., lively and spruce. 

as. -ais, $m. Neatness, tidiness. 

sgibear, -eir, -an, s.m. see sgiobair. 

- - ——na9,** -eig, s,f. Hare. 

tsgibheal, -eil, s.m. Eaves of a roof. 

sgibid,** s. m. Slap given by children to one 
another at play. 2'l'he game "tg" 





|sgibidh, see sgibeach. 


sgid, s.m. Little excrement. 

sgidean,* emm, $.m. Contemptible little man. 

sgidealach,ff a. Pertaining to a plash of water 

sgideil, s. m. Plash of water. Muc sgideil, a 
«mall whale. 

szig, see sgeig. 

sgil, or pt. a’ sgileadh, v.a. Unhusk, shell grain. 
2 *Loosen, as the pile of a beast. 

sgil, s. m. Skill, knowledge. 2**Address. 3 
Skilfulness. 4 Learning. 5tfLoquacity, gab- 
bling. 6**Process of shelling grain. 7*Expert- 
ness, dexterity. 

sgilbheag, s.f. Chip of slate— A rgyll. XAH) 
Chip of stone, cloth or leather. 

sgildaimhne,** see sgioldaimhne. 

sgileadh, -idh, s.m. Shelling. 2 Act of shelling 
or preparing corn by grinding off the husks, 
3 Corn after the husks are ground off. A" Bar, 
ing. 

sgileam,** s.m. Busy-body. 

sgilear, -eire, a. Skilful. 

sgilig, s. Shelled grain. 

svilig, v.a. & n. Pop. 

sgileil, -e, a. Skilful, knowing, intelligent, dex- 
terous. 

tsgille, s.f. Fright, terror. 

syilleag, -eig, s./. Small peblbe. 

sgillean, s.p/. Scales of a fish. KS 

sgillinn, -e, -ean. s.f. English penny. 2 12 Scots 
pence. 3Shilling-land. S. meant a shilling 
in Scots money when this system of denom- 
inat:ng land was instituted, but when Eng- 
lish money came into use in Scotland, it was 
found thatthe English penny was of the sams 
value asthe Scots shilling, and so sgillinn 
came in modern Gaelic to mean a penny ster- 


sgillinn 


ling. 
land denomination. 


in the sing. with numerals requiring plural 
nouns.) 
sgilm, see sgeilm. 


szilm,tt s. m. Mouth made for scolding. 2 


Gabbling. 3* Razor-lipp*l mouth. 4 Express- 
ion of countenance in licating a scolding,p-rt, 
prating, impertinent disposition. 

sgilmeil, se» sgeilmeil. 

eachd, see sgeilineileachd. 

sgi'p, see sgeilp. 

svilte, rast pt. of sgil. 
grain.) 

se. m^ach,^ MS) a. Mucilazinous, 

s :mhoal,** eil, s.m. Pent-house. 

Sp imilear, -eir, An, s.a. Vagrant parasite. 2 
Gossip, intruder, moucher. 3tt Instrument 
for skimming. 4*Mean person that steals out 
of pots. 

ach, -aiche, a. Obtrusive, impudent. 

achd, 5. f. Obtrusiveness, impudence, 
intrusion, 2*Mean habit of popping in upon 
people at meals, living and doing nothing 
about gentlemen's kitchens, 

sgine, gen.sing. of sgian. 

Sgineach, -ichean,(DMy) s.m. Cutlet. S. feòla, 
ameat-cutlet ; s. éisg, a fish-crtlet, 

sgineadh,** -idh, s.m. Leap, skip. 

sgineag,** eg sf. Flight. 

sgineal,** -eil, sm. Leap, skip, start. 

——-—ach,** a. Leaping, skipping, starting. 

sging, Badenoch, Argyll & W. of Ross for sginn, 

s. S. e troimh, he squeezed through. 
sgineideach,** a. Skittish, 

sginichd,** s.f. Squeezing, pressing, hugging 
with force. j 

sginichd,** oa, Squeeze, press, hug with force. 

srinmeil, see sgeilmeil. 

syinn, s.f. Spring, force. 2 see szeinnidh. Cha 
chuir s. a mach e, force will not put it (the 
pump) out of order, 

Sginn, pr.pt. a’ sginneadh, v.a. & n. Protrude, 
2 Spring or gush out, as water. 3 Squeeze 
or force out of its skin or socket, 

seinn, & Sqneeze. 2 Hardship. 

REN -aidh, $. m. d pr. pt. see sginn- 
eadh. 

sginneadh, -idh, s, m. Protruding. 2 State of 
being protruded. 3 Gushing out. 4 State or 
act of gushing out, 6 Act of squeezing or 
forcing out. A’s—, pr.pt. of sginn. 

sginneag,** s.f. Crack (noise.) 

sginnear,(MS) s.m. Furrier. 
8kinner, 











Gaelie form of 


, Sginnich, v, see sginn E sgeinnich. 


,* &.f. see sgeinnidh. 

sginnichd,* v. see sginn. 

Sginnichte, past pt. of sginnich. 
forced out, 

sgiob,* s. f. Dutch-built boat. 
sg'ab, 

Sgiob,* v.g. Man, as a boat. ? see sgiab. Aira 
sgiabadh le gillean sgairteil, manned with 
smart fellows. 

8gioba,-n, s.m. d f. Ship's or boat’s crew. 2 
Any party or company associated for anv pur- 
me Fo lan &, having a full complement of 

2w 

sgiobach, see sgiabach. 

sgiobach,** a. Like a ship or boat. 
ships or boats. 3 Of ships or boats. 
Spruce, trim, 

Sgiobadh, see sgioba. 





Squeezed, 


2 Scoop. 3 see 


2 Having 
4 Tidy, 


EO Ph gm 1 rr 
[uk [ H ATE 
Li i 

ae Kä Li 


Digit 


NTERNET 


823 


The old meaning is still retained in 
S. Shasunnach, an En7. 
lish shilling ; s. Albannach, a Scots shilling ; 
dà s, is bonn-a-sé, twopence-halfpenny ; gnn 
uiread is s., without so much as a penny. [Used 


Unhusked, hulled (of 


sgioleantachd 


sgiobag, -aig, -an, s.f. see sgiabag & sgiobait, 
sgioba'dh.** a. Tidy, neat, spruce. 2 Trim [jit 
person. 
sgiobailt," s.f. Touch. 2 The game "touch and 
be gone,” (Scots, ** tig.’’) 
sgiobvir, -ean, s.m. Skipper, master or captain 
of a boat. 2 Pilot. 3 Helmsman. 
each, stand, Office or business of a 
shipm ıster, skipper, pilot. or helmsman. 2 
Navigation, art of navigating a snip. 3*Com- 
mand of a ship. r 
sgiobal, -ail, -an, s.m. Barn, granary. 
ach,* -aiche, a. Having barns or gran- 
aries, 
sziohall, -aill, -an,.s.m. The loose folds or skirts 
of a garment. 2 Mantle. 3 Garment. Cuir 
'nad s. e, put it in the fold of your coat ; air 
s. na gaoithe, on the skirts of the wind. [s.f.*] 
Ach, -aiche, a. Mantled, robed, having 
flowing garments. 2 Skirted, as a garment. 
an,** -ain, s.m. Brush for sweeping cat- 
tle with. 
sgiobalta, -ailte, a. Quick, active, clever,agile, 
2 Tidy, neat. 3 Portable. Gu s., tidily. 
acht, s.f.ind. Activity, quickness, alar- 
rity, agility. 2 Neatness, tidiness, trimuess, 
spruceness, tightness.  3* Portability.  4* 
Snugness, 
sgiobarnag,/ AF? -aig, s.f. see sgibearnaz. 
sgioblachadh, -aidh, s.in. Act of adjusting on9’s 
dress, or adjusting one's self for work. A’ s—, 
pr pt. of svioblaich. 
sgioblaich,” pr. pt. a’ sgioblachadh, v. «a. & n. 
Tuck up or adjust one's dress, truss. 2 Make 
tidy, neat or trim. 3 (CR) Clear away, take a- 
way —Skye. 
sgioblaichte, past pf. of sgioblaich. Adjusted. 
2 Having one’s clothes tucked up or made 
neat. 3 Having the dress adjusted for any 
work. 
sgioblan (CR) s.m. Lapful— Arran. 
sgiobul, see sgiobal. 
sgiol, v. see sgud. 
sgiodair,(A F) s.m. Medusse (fish.) 


sgiodar, air, s. m. Plashing through bogs or 


mire, ?ffD1arrhcea. 

--———laich, see sgiodar, 

*giogair, -ean, s.m. Jackanapes, impertinent fel- 
OW. 

—eachd, s.f. ind. Impertinence, behaviour 
of a jackanapes. 

sgiol, pr.pt. a’ smoladh, see sgil. 

sgioladh, -aidh, s.in. & pr.pt. see sgileadh. 

sziolaid, see sgeileid. 

sgiolam, -aim, s.m. & f. see sgeilm. 

—— ——Aach, -aiche, see sgeilmeil. 

se10lamail, see sgeilmeil. 

sgiolan, ain, s.m. Oats or barley with the husks 
taken off, groats. 

sgiole, v.a. d n. Slip in or out with a sudden 
or unexpected motion. 2 Push in or out sud- 
denly. 3ttSkulk. Sgiolcailh am buntàta 
Sgiathanach as an rùsg gu barr a’ chroinn, 
the Skye potato will jerk out of its jacket to the 
top of the mast—a sailor's saying. The Skye 
potatoes are wet until the end of the season. 
The idea is, that by taking a potato and 
squeezing one part, the jacket rips and the 
tuber is so wet that it bounds away. 

adh, -ardh, s.m. Act of slipoing in or out 

with a sudden motion. 2 Act of pushing in or 

out suddenly. A’s—, pr.pl. of sziole. 

anta, -ainte, a. That gii&es in or out 

with & sudden motion. 2 That pushes in or 

out with a sudden motion. 3 Elastic. 4 Agile, 











ck. 
antachd,s.f.ind.Suddeu motion or act of 





sgiolcantachd 


824 


sgithealachd 


€ € ——Á II ———————M———eniuntüo 
sliding in or out. 2 Elasticity. 3 Agility, | sgtortachadh, -aidh, s. m. Skirting, bordering, 


quickness. ^ 
sgiolcarra, see sgiolcanta. 
sziolearrachd, see sgio!cantachd. 
sgioldaimhne,** s. Miunow. 
svioll,** v a. see sgil. 
sviolladh,** -aidh, s.m. Decidence. 

-sgiollag (AF) s. f. Minnow, 2 Small fish. 3 
sand-eel. í 
sgiolmhor,** -oire, @. Talkative. ` "M 
sgiolta, a. Tidy, trim, neat. 2 Active, nimble, 

quick. 3 Small, slender, 4 seesgilte. ótt 
Moquent, 6**Bald. Am buicean s., the light 
young buck. ne ) 
scioltach, s.f.ind. Tidiness, vrimness, neat- 
ness, 2 Activity,quickness,lightness. 3 Small- 
ness, slenderne:s. 4tfKloq uence. 
sgiom,* s.m. Fat sticking to dishes. 2 Scum on 
the surface of water, 
sciomalair,* -ean, s.m. Skimmer, instrument to 
take sueb, &c. off a pot. 2 see sgimilear. 
—eachd, see sgimilearachd, 
sgionibhagan, s pl. Smithereens— A rgqyll. 
svionnadh,t -aida, sm. Starting. 2 Eyes start- 
ing with fear. 1 
sgionn-shüil, -shala, -ean, s.f. Squint-eye. 
—each, -eiche, a. Squiut-eyed. 
sziop, Gaelic form of scoop. 
sgiopaidh, -e, œ. see sgibeach. 
sziorbha,** s.n. Gall. 
sgiord, pr.pt. a’ sgiordath, v.a. d n. Squirt. 2 
2 Purge, cleanse. 3**Spit. 
goiord, s.m. Squirt, spurt. 2 Purge 3 Lift. 
seiord ich, -aiche, œ. Squirting. 2 Purging. 
sziordadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of squirting. 2 
Purging, act of purging. A’ S—, pr.pt. of 
sviori. : 
sgiordan, -ain, -an, s.m. Syringe, water-gun. 2 
Purgative. 
sgiordle, past pt. of sgiord. 
sgiorlaich, (CR) v æ. Crush, squash, as an or- 
ange— Perthshire. 
sgiorr, pr.pt. a’ sgiorradh, v.n. Slip, slide, stum- 
ble. 2 Run a risk, 3* Happen. 
sgiorr, AF) s. Black spaul, disease of cattle. 
sgorrach, -aiche, a. Apt to slip, slide or stum- 
ble. 2 Running a risk, foolhardy. 
sgiorradh, -aidh, s.m. Act of slipping, sliding or 
stumbling. 2 Act of runninga risk, risking. 
3 Accideut, adventure, mischance., 4 Sudden 











danger, 5 Mischief, harm. A’ s—, pr. pt. of 
sviorr, Gun az gun tubaist, without slip or 
mishap. 


-facail, see sgiorr-fhacal. 

sgiorrag,** -aig, s.m. Flatus. 

sgiorradail, -e, a. Accidental. 2 Hurtful in con- 
sequence of an accident. 3 Risking. 4 Cal. 
amitous, mischievous, disastrous. 

sgiorrail. see sgiorradail. 

eciorralachd,** s.f. Accidentalness. 

Briorran, -ain, -an, à. mMm. Stumbler, one who 
slips or stumbles, 2 One who runsa risk 3 
dim. of sgiorradh. 4 Slight accident, mis- 
chance. 5**Slip. 

sgiorr-fhacal,-ail, an, s.m, Random expres- 





sion. hasty word. 2 Mistake in speaking. 3| 


3**Ill-timed expression. 
eziorr-fhaclach, -aiche, œ. Using random ex- 
pressions. 2 Committing errors of speech. 
sgiorrta,** a. Slipped, fallen. 
————Qe 
bardiness. 3 Liability to accidents. 
sgort, -a, -an, s.m. Edge or folds of a garment. 
? Skirt, edge. border. 3 Riding-skirt. 
egiort, v. see sgiord. 
— ach, -aiche, a. Skirted, having skirts. 
Like a skirt. 3 Bordered. 


Digi 


NTERNET ARCHIVE 


hd,** s.f.ind. Frequent risking, fool- j 
ise; heachail, a. see sgìtheil. 


og 
| 


furn shing with a skirt or. border. 
pt. e 

sgiortadh, -aidh, s.m. & pr.pt. see sgiortachad 
2**sKkirt, border, oe S e 

sgiortaich, pr.pt. a sgiortachadh, v. a. Skirt, 
furnish with skirts. 2**Border. 

———te, past pt. of sgiortaich, Furnished 
with a skirt or border. 

sviort-cuim,** xmn. Clyster. 

Sue, s.f.ind. Weariness, fatigue. 2 Toi','abour, 
Leig do S., rest uourself; ag obair gun s.,work- 
ing indefaligably ; clamor an s. e ? what a. 
weariness tit i$! ach!ann na s. ! ye sons of toil : 
le s., on account of tol; is e s. a’ chosnaich 
a bhi'na thàmh, :£ fatigues the good worker to 
be idle, [s.m.**) MID | 

sgi bag sey -aidh, s.m. & pr.pt. see sgitheach- 
adh. 

sgiosaich, pr.pt. a’ sgiosachadh, see sgìthich, 

——-——te, see sgithichte. 

sgiot, pr.pt. a’ sgiotadh, v.a. Disperse,scatter, 
2 Fling or throw about. 

tsgiot, -a, -an, s.m. Dart, arrow 

sgi0tach, -aiche, o Scattering, that scatters or 
disperses. 2 Flinging, that flings or throws 
about. 3 Scattered, straying. 

sgiotadh, -aidh, s.m. Scattering. 2 Act of scat- 
tering or dispersing. 3 Act of flinging or 
throwing about. A’ s—, pr.pt. of sgiot. 

sgoth,** a, Partition of wattled work. 

Tszriolh, see sgith. d 

Tspgio'has, see sgios. 

smiothlaieh,** s.f. Haunch. 

sgipidh, a Neat, active. 

svipi!tcach,*Uist form of sgiobag, sgiobagaich or 
s.riobatan. 

sgirbi,** Rocky ford. 2 Stony bottom. 

svire,-an, see sgireachd. 

srirea^h:l, an, s f. Parish. Cruinneachadh g., 
the gathering of a parish, 

atl, -e, a, Parochial, of or belonging to 
a parish. 

sgireachdair,** -ean, s.m. Parishioner, 

seireil,( MS) a. Parochial. 

sgirt, see sgiord., 

sgirtean, s.m. Disease in cattle, calle in Scot- 
land '' the black spaul ” or *' quarter-ill.'' 

gate ul An, $. m. Droll, prater, talkative 
ellow. 

achd,** s.f. Prating, drollery. 

sgite, see sgith. 

sgite,** s.f. Mai len-ray (fish.) 3 

seiteal, -eil, -an, see sgi leil iS 

sgìth, -e, a. Weary, fatigued, tired. 2 Fa- -— 
tigung, wearying, that wearies or fatigues, — 
labori»us, oppressive, Seac s., quite tired, ` 
utterly fatigued, | 
sgith, AF) s. Maaden-ray (fish.) 
sgitheach,ff a. see sgith. $ 
sgitheach, eich, s m. Whitethorn. hawthorn— - 
crategus oxacantha. 2 Thicket of hawthorn. 
Preas szitheich. a hawthorn bush ; 8. an fhàs- — 
ach, he thorn of the wilderness. (ill. 631.) . 
sgitheach dubh,$ s.m. Blackthorn. 

sgith ach geal.$ see sgitheach. Badge of Clan 
Ogilvie. [Also called ban-sgitheach. . 

sgitheicnadh, -a:db, s.m. Growing weary or |— 
ured. 2 Wearyimg. 2 Act of wearying Or - 
fatiguing. Air s.. fatuwed, A’ 8—, pr. pt. of — 
sgìthich ; 


A’ s—, pr. 


' 
i e 
A aden tet | L 2-2 


Cee eee sn ec d A 
























.eig, -an, St Stalk or prickle of haw- ` 


sgitheaz, 0 1 
2 see sgeach. 3 Diminutive hawthorn ES 


thoru. 
tree. Ar 
sgithealachil, s fiind. Irksom?2ness. 2 Prolixity. 
3 ‘Tiredness, 
Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS Ai 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


sgitheas 





634. Sgitheach, 
sritheas, See sgìos. 
sgitheil, a, Wearisome, tiresome, tedious. 
Importune. 
sgìthich, pr. pf. a’ sgitheachadh,v.a. & n.Weary, 


Nl 


fatigue, tire. 2 Grow tired or fatigued. Na 

s. d'a smachdachadh, do not weary of his 

correction or reproof. 

-te, past pt. of sgithich. Wearied, tired, 
fatigued. 
tsgithiol, s.m., Sheiling-hut. 
sgiùcar, -ain, s.m. The cackling plaintive notes 

of a moor-hen or female grouse, 

sginch,* s.f. Activity, cleverness. 

sgiucha,(AC) s. Bursting, see sgoch. Eòlas s. 
feithe, a charm fora bursting vein, 

sgiuchail,* e a. Active, 2 Clever. 

sgiüchan, see sgiücan. 

sgiügan, -ain, sm. Whimpor, whimpering. 
Habit of whimpering. 3**Snubbiug. 

ach, -aiche,@. Whimpering. 2 Apt to 
whimper. 

———aich, -e, $.f. Same meanings as sgiügan. 
Thòisich e air s., he began to whwnper. 

egiüird,* ert, The flux. 2 see sgiort, 

ire,* see sgiordan. 

sgiüirleach,(CR) s.m. Lapful—S. end of Arran. 

sgiuirt see sgiort. 

egiült,* a. Smug. 

a, see suiolta, 

——achi,* see sgioltachd. ` 

&,iünach, -aich, -aichean, s f. Bold, forward, im- 
pudent or shameless woman. 2* Charm for 
getting all the fish about a boat or headland 
into one's own boatamudst the atnazement of 
the neighbours, 3* Amulet to excel in any- 
thing. 

egiur,** v.a. Scour, purge, cleanse, see sgùr. 

sgiürdan, see sgiordan. 

t-giurlong,** ing, s.m. Fugitive, deserter, 

syiurrte, see sg1ürte. 

sgiùrs, pr.pt. a’ sgiùrsadh, v.a. Scourge, whip. 2 
Afflict, persecute. 3 Chase, drive away, pur- 
sue. 4**Scare or scatter suddenly. Sg:urzsaidh 
iad sibh, they shall scourge you. 

sgiùrs, 8, -an, s.m. Scourge, whip. 
3 Scattering. 4 Woe, affliction, 
tion. 

Sgiurs2, see sgiùrsadh, 

Sgilrsach -a:che, o Scourging, whinping. 2 
* Afflicting. 3 Like a scourze or lash 4 
Chasiug, driving away, scattering. 5 Inclined 
to whip or persecute, perseeutiug 





2 











2 Scaring. 
5 Persecu- 


cution. 
——.———,* see siùrsach. 
——-—as, see siùrsachd. 
sgiursadair, see sgilirsair. 
sgiùrsadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Scourge, whip. 


825 


| 6** Like | 
a persecution. 7 Of a scourge, lush or perse- | 


sglamh adh 


way, chasing, act of driving away. 4 Whip- 
ping. 5 Afflicting, lashing, persecu'ing.  6* 
ain, 7*Persecntion. A’ s—, pr.vt. of sgiùrs. 

Ruith sgiürsadh, running the gauntlet ; s. na 
teangaidh, the scourge of the tongue, 

sgiursailh, past pass. of sgiùrs. Was scourged, 2 
srd. siny. & pl. imp. of sgiùrs. S. e, let hia 
scourge. 

sgiursag, -aig, -an, $.f. Scourge, whip. 

ach, æ. Having scourges or whips. 

sgiursair, -ean, s.m. Scourge, whip. 2 Scourger, 
one who scourges. 3 One who chases or driv- 
es away. 4ffLumbering lout. 5*Whoremon- 
ger. 6 (AH) Undutiful, wilful incorrigib!e 
maid. 

sgiürsaireach/(, s.f.ind. Scourging, act of scourg- 
ing. 2 Chasing or driving away. 8łtti minber- 
ing. 4 (AH) Acting like an ill-conducted, 
misguided inaid. 

sgiurste, past p'. of sgiürs. 

syiurt, see sgiort. 

sgiut,* v.n. Dart or dash forward. 2 Slip by. 3 
(CR) Perthshire for sgiot. 

sgiut,** v.a. Scatter, 

sgiüthadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. 
with a goal or whip, “cut.” 2 Flourisa. 
Prov. SttWlourish with a whip. 

sgiuthanta,-ainte, a. Smarting, as a lash. Prov. 

sgiuts, see seirürs, 

sglabh, -àibh, s.m. Slave. 

———achi,**s./. Slavery, bondage. 

——arth,** -aith, s.m. Slave, bondsman, 

sglàbhaiche,** -an, s.m, Slave. 

syiabhailbeachd,** sf. Siavery, bondage, ser- 
vitude, 

sglabhair, -e, -ean, s. m. f. Foul-mouthed 
man or woma., 2 Scold, 

sglabhaireachd, s.f. Scolding. 
uage, 

sglabhart, -airt, -an, s.m. Blow on the side of 
the head. 

sglabhairtach, -aiche, a. Giving blows. 

splaib,* s. Plaster. 

sglaib-deoch, s.f. Drink for nothing, drink got 
through ostentation. 

sglàibeadair,* -ean, s.m. Plasterer. 

sgla:gean,** ëm, Beam of a cart, draught-tree, 

sylaim,* s. f. Questionably acquired wealth, 
booty. 

sgiaim,* v.v. Usurp wealth or property, mono- 








Lash, strike 


2 Abusive lang- 


polize. 2** Seize violently or greedily. 3** 
Grasp. 4**snatch. 5**Clutch. 
sgliimheach, -ich, s. m. Glutton, 2 Hungry 


mastiff. 

sglaimir,* -ean, s.m. Usurper. 

sglaims»ar,* see sglaimir. CS 

sglamath, -aidh,s.?a. Snapping, seizing quickly. 

sgiamh,* v.n. Eat voraciously, glut. 2 Scold. 3 
**Seize greedily, snatch. 4 Grasp. 5 Wran- 

le. 6 U urp. 7* Eat as a hungry dog. 8 

Seold suddenly or furiously. 

sglamhach, see sglaimheach, 

sglamh^ch,-21ehe, a. That snatches away greed- 
ily. 2 Greedy, snatching, grasping, clutching. 

sg!amhach,** a. Abusive, scolding, wrangling. 
2 loul-monthed. 

sgiamhacha !h,** s,m. Engrossment, — 

sglàmnaciid,** s.f. Abusiveness, habit of scold- 
iug or wrangling, abusive language. 

sgiamnachil, s.7. see sglainhada. A 

sg'àmhadh, -ailh, s. m. Scolding, abusing, 
wranging. 2 Scold, abuse, wrangle. 3 Sud- 
den scolding, 4 Greedy seizing. 5 Eating 
voraciously. 

syiamhadh, -aidh, s. m. Seizing greedily upon 

| anythinz. 2 Snatching of anvthing by force, 


2 Scourging, act of scourgiug. 3 Driving a-i ciucching. 3 Usurpation, 4 gs d grasp 


Dig (zeg P 


NTERNET ARCHIVE 


Lidi Ilt 


sglamhadh 


or snatch, clutch. 

sglamhaich,** v.a. Engross to one’s self, mono- 
polize. 

szlamhaiche,** 8 m. Curmudgeon, engrosser, 

sglamhaid,** s.m. Glutton. 

sglimhair, -ean, s.m. Scolder. 2 Abusive,foul- 
mouthed fellow. 8łtHarsh scolder. 

sglamhair, -ean, s.m. One tha: snatcheth away 
or seizeth greedily. 2 Usu per. 3 *Glutton. 
greedy fellow. 4ff Snapper. 5* Voracious 
fellow. 

sg)smbhaireachd, s.f. Seizing violently. 2 Greed- 
iness. 3 Usurpation. 4[[15nappiug. 2*Vora- 
city, glut, monopoly. 

Sglàmnhaireachd, s. /. Abusiveness, scolding, 
wrangling. 2 Bad laneua;e. 

Sglamhraeh, -aiche, œ. Contumelious,scolding, 
abusive, wrangling. 

sglamhradh, -aidn, s.m. see szlámhruinn. 

sglamhradh, -aidh, s.m. Clawiag, scratching of 
the skin, itch. 

sclànhruiz,(MS) s f. Squabble. 

sglamhruinn, -e, -ean, 3. f. Scolding, abusive 
words. 71fAsperity. 3 Wranegle, reprimand, 
4 Kibaldry. 5 Scold, one given Lo scolding. 
6 Rai'lery. 

sglamhruinn,** v, Abuse, 

sglamhruinueach, -eiche. a, Scolding. 2 Scur- 
rilous. 3 Apttoscold. 4 Abusive. 

eglamhruinneacid, s.f.ind. Habit of scolding. 2 
Aptuess to scold, 

szlamhruinnte, past pt. Abused. 

gejanrachid, see sglamhruinneachd, 

sg Anradh, see sylamhruina. 

sgianraiin, se? sglamhruina, 

sg'àrninn, see sglàmhruinn. 

svicad, see sglèat. Taigh s., a slated house. 

seleadach, sae segléatacit. 

sy.eadair, see sglèatair. 

-—each41, see sg'éataireachá. 

sgleafart,** s, Knock, slap or blow with the 
oven hand. 

evieafartaich,** v.a. Strike with the open band. 

Segieamacair,* -ean, s.m. Dauber. 2 Mean, low, 
worthless fellow. 3(DU), Bore. 

sgleamacaireachd (DU) s.f. Boring talk, act of 
boring. 





sgleamaic,* pr. pt. a’ sgleamacadh, v.a. Plas-. 


ter or flatten outwardly. 2 Daub filthily. 

sgleamaid,* s.f. Horrid snotter. 

sgleamhas, -ais, s. m. Meanness, sordidness, 
vileness. 2** Seroyle, term of extreme per- 
sonal contempt. 

sgleamhasach, -aiche, o, Mean, sordid, vile, ig- 
noble. 2 Seroylish. 

sgleamhraidh, -ean, s.m. Stupid, senseless per- 
son. 2 Awkward, untidy fellow. 3 Mean or 
ignorant fellow. 4 Bumpkin 

sgleamhraidheachd, s.f. Stupidity,senselessness. 
2 Awkwardness, untidiness. 3 Meanness. 4 
Ignorance. 

sgleamhsa,** s.m. Mean fellow. 

sgléap,(CR) s.m. Scolding, rating. Thug e s. 
dha, he gave him a scolding—Suth’d, 

sgléap. (CR) s.f. Torrent of speech—W. of Ross- 
shire. 

sglèap, -èip, s.f. Ostentation. 2 Meanness un- 
der à plausible appearance. 3 Awkwardness. 
4* Low meanness under the guise of liberality, 
Deoch sgléip, a drink at others’ expense. 

&gléap,* v.t. & n. Flatten, spoil the shape of. 2 
Draw down your under lip. 3 Wag your 
head. 4 Flatter, 5 Stare open-mouthned at 
one. 

——ach, -aiche, a. Ostentatious, vain-glorious, 
vaunting. 2 Mean-spirited, 3**Awkward Gu 
g., ostentatiously. 


D jr [ 

LIZ'S L 
{LITARI T Amr J 
A I- HF. Dk Li ! M L V 


sgleoid 

sgleapaid,* s.f. Female who stares open mouth- 
ed at one. 

sglé?pair, -ean, s. m. Vain, vaunting fellow. 2 
Mean-spirited fellow. 3* Foolish, boorish 
starer, applied to children who are backward 
through being brought up in remote corners, 
where they have seldom seen sirangers, 4 
Osten'atiuus fellow. 5 Awkward, sprawling 
fellow. 

sgléapaireach l, s.f. Habit of silly boasting. 2 
Meanuess of spirit. 3* Unmannerly staring, 
4 Ostentatiousness. 5 Awkwardness. 

sglèat, -a, -an, sn. Slate. Creag sgléata, a slate 
quarry. 

sgiéat, v.a Slate, cover with slates, 

sgleatach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to, slates, 
2 Like a slate, 

—— ——-,' s,f Slate-quarry. 2 Granite (?) 

sgleatadh, -aidh, s.m. Slating. 2 Act of cover 
ing with slates <A’ s—, pr. pt of sgleat. 

sgleatair, -eam, $8 m. Slater. 2** Milliped. 3 
“ Sgletter,’’ (not cheslip, as given in the dic- 
tionaries—M M.) 

syleataireachd, s.f. Business of a slater, or 2 
of a slate-quarryer. 
slating. 4 Slate-quarry. 5 Slate-work. 

sgleatar,** a. Slaty. 2 Laminar. 

sgleimce (CR) [pron. sgleimichde—m long] & 
Cajolery, wheedling— W. of Ross-shire. 

sgleinnseard, -an, s.m. Kind of scone. 

sgleó,** s.m. Vapour, mist. 2 Shade, darkness, 
3 Idle talk, redomontade, romance, verbiage, 
falsehood. 4 High-puffing, fustian. 5 Spectre. 
6 Struggle. 7 Misery. 8 Compassion. 9ttDime 
ness of the eyes. 10* Disease of the eyes, 
glare about the eyes. 11* Amazement. 12* 
Misapprehension, 13*Romancing of one who 
sees imperfectly and consequently misrepre- 
sents facts, Iomar sgleò, a contest maintained 
with varying success. 

sgleobach, -aiche, «. Sluttish, slovenly. 

spleobag, -aig,-an, s.f. Slovenly woman. 

sgleoba:d, see sgleobag. 

sgleobaideach, -eiche, see sgledideach. 

sgleocach, -aiche, a. Having bad-sighted large 
eyes. 

szledcair, -ean, $m. Foolish starer. 

sgleocaireachd, s,f. Foolish staring or gaping. 

sgleóchaid, -ean, s.f. Foolish, staring woman, 

sgleochdair, -e, -ean, s.m. see szledcair, 

—_————.-—eachd, see sgleocaireachd. 

sgleodhach, -aiche,g. Shadowy, filmy, ill-colour- 
ed. 2 Affected. 

sgleadhair,(MS) s.m. Quack. 

sgleo-dhan, s.m. Boasting, pu'fing, bombast, 2 
Shade, film. 3 Vapour, mist. 4 Dimness of 
the eyes, produced by looking at anything lu- 
minous. 5 Ghost,spectre. 6 Fable,romance. 
7 Misery. 8 Pity. 9 Carcase. 

sgled-éiligheachd,(MS) s.f Libel. 

sgleog, -oig, -an, &. f. Saliva, snot, phlegm. 2 
Knock, sudden collision. 3ffSound. 4(CR) 
Slap—Suth’d & Farr. 5 Drivel. 

szleogach, -aiche,a Falling like snot or saliva, 
drivellinz 2 Striking suddenly against each 
other. 3 (DU) Easy-going, imperturbable. 

sgleogair, -ean, s. m. Troublesome prattler. £ 
Lying, flattering fellow. 3 Driveller. 

-—eachd, s.f. Silly prattling taik. 

sgled-ghloir, -e, s.f. Loud cry, huzza. Á 

sgleoiceach,/, DMy) a. Ceare s, @ hen with @ 
ium» on each side of its h-ad. 

sgleoid, ze, -ean, s.m. & f. Silly man or woman, 

one easily imposed upoa. 2Slovenly man or 

woman. drav, slut. 3 One who indulges, in 

ille talk. 4* Heavy, clumsy, lifeless female. 

5^* Filo, 





3 Employment of house 





sgleoideach 


sgleoideach. -eiche, a. Silly, senseless, 2 Slo- | 





venly, filthy, drabbish. 3 Gawky. Gu s. 
drabbishly. | 
gieoideil, -e, og see sgledideach. 


szleoit. see seleoid. 

suleop,(UR) v. Slap. 

srleothach,* -aiche. «e^ seled.thach. 

syledthail,* -e, a. Romincing. 

~vivdthair,*® -ean, s.m. Romancer. 2 Swaggerer. 

grliamach, -a/che, og Slippery-faced. 

svliamair, -ean, s.m. One havin: a siippery face, 

szliaimhach. -aiche see seliamach. 

syliamhair, sve sgliainair. 

suliap, see szleap. 

aireachd, see sg'óapaireach.l, 

Srliat, seo sglèat. 

‘giittach, see sglèatach. 

sglivtath, see sgleatadh. 

syliatair, see sg'éata'r. 

eachd, see sg¢leataireach l. 

siliatar, see sgleatar, 

&lgcan,"* -ein, sat. Speckled or spotted crea- 
ture. 

aviizeanach,** a. Speckled, snotted. 

sylimeach, -eiche, a. ''roubleso ue, asan unwel- 

come guest. — 

selimeaenas, -als, Em. Troublesomeness. 

szl near, -ir, -an, s.m. Troublesome guest. 

&elimsear, -ir, -an, s.m. Flattering fellow. 
Parasite, 

sgiimsearachd, et Sordid, parasitical flattery. 

sgliobhag, s.f. Light blow, 

szliofag,( CR) s.f. Light blow—W. of Ross, 

sgliog.( MS) s. Box. 

ggliogaist,( CR)s. f. Large soit, distinguished from 
sylongaid by absence of colouring urvter— 
Perthshire. 

sgliomair,* see sgimilear. (loch. 

sgliongaid, (MS) er Mucus. [splaingeil—Gu«r- 

gagliughaisz,* s.f. Dowdy. 

sgiiùireach, see sgliùrach. 

sgliuisgeach, -eiche, a. Dowdy. 

sgliurach, -aich, -aichean, s.f. Slut, slattern. 2 
Gossip, female tattler. 3 Whore. 4 Clurnsy 
person. 51fYoung sea-gull. 6*Newly-fledged 
crow or sea-gull. 

sgliurachd, s.f. Sluttishness. 2 Gossipping, tat- 
tling. 3 Whorishness. 

sgiog-vhardachd, sr Bathos. 

sgloid, e, s... Filth, dirt. 2 see sgleoid. 

sgloideach, -eiche, a. Filthy, dirty, prov. 

egloidhseach,(CR) s. f. Anything broad and 
flaccid, S. mhór araiu, œ broad thin piece of 
bread —W, of Ross-shire. 

egoige,** s.f. Throat. 

sgloigeach,** a. Guttural. 

sgloing,** st Snot. 

sgloingean, see sglongaid. 

Sseloiugeanach, -aiche, a. see sglongaideach. 

sgloingeanachd, see sglongaideach.l. 

Szlong, see sglongaid. 2* s.f. Horrid snotter. 

ezlongach, -aiche, see sglongaideach. 2*Dirtily 
viscous. 

sylongachd, see sglongaideachd. 

aglongaid, -e,-ean, s.f. Snot, saliva, spit, mu- 
cus. 2**Term of personal contempt. 

eglongaideach, -eiche, a. Snotty, mucuous, 
snivelling. 

sglongaileachd, s. f. Snottiness, mucousness. 
z Habit of snivelling. 

ezlongair,tt s.m. Snotty fellow, 

——eachd,tt s.f. Snottiness. 

wlorach, s.m. Big slattern—IJsluy. 

tgluait (CR) st Slattern —A rran. 

uguoz, s. d v. see sgrog. 

wrnoganach, Mull, £c. for sgroganach, 

Wo, s. Stray cloud — Eiyg & Skye. 


EN 





es 





9 


- 


cJ 
—— —— ÁREA, tr EE M 





Di gitized By 
NT F R d CT ARC H V E 


8?7 


sgoideas 


T 


sgob, v.a. Snatch, pluck, pull. 2 Sting, bite, 8 


Scoop out. 
asa bird. 

szobach, -aicho, a. That snatches plucks or 
pulls. 2 Stinging, that stings or bites. 3 
Scooping. 4 Apt to pluck. 

sgobadh, -aidh, s.m. Snatch, act of snatching, 
plucking or pulling. 2 Act of stinging or bit- 
ing. 3 lwitch, wound. 4* Short while. 5** 
Pluck, tug, pull. 6* Nibbling. 7(DU) Act 
of pecking. N. bho 'n bhaile, a little while 
from hom’ ; 4. doeth, a little while of it. (pt. 
-aiehean—ff.] A’ s—, pr.pt. of sgob. 

sgobag, -aig,-an, s.f. Little twitca or wound, 
2 Small dram, small quantity of any liquor to 
drink.  3(0U) Spoonful of porridge, gruel, 
pudding, &c. 

ach, -aiche, a. 
lightly. 

sgoba'r,** s.m. Biter. 

sgoballach, -aich. s.n. Piece or morsel to eat. 

scobauta, -ainte, a. Exger,voracious, 2tf Snatch- 
ing. 


4* Nibble lightly. 5(DU) Peck, 





Twitching or wounding 


— ———chd, s.f. ind. Eagerness, voraciousness. 
2tf Snatchiny. 

sgobhachan, s.pl. Pieces— Dudenoch. 

sgobhrag,** s.f. Fairy. 

sgoch, pi. p/. a’ sgochadh, D. a. Gash, scarify, 
hack, notch. ?(0My) Sprain. S. mi mo chas, 
I sorained my foot. 

sgoch,* s.m. Gash, incision, notch. cut, slit. 2 
(AC) Bursting. 3 First shot from a still— 
Perthshire. 

sgocha, see sgoch. 

sgochach,** æ. Full of cuts, slits or incisions. 2 
Causing evts or slits. 

sgocha‘lair,** s.m. Scarificator. 

sgocna-feithe, (DU) s.f. Sprain. Eòlas s., tha 
charm by which sprains were healed. 

sgochraich,* s. Liver. 

sgòil, -òid, -an, s.m.Coruer of a cloth or garment, 


lappet. 2 Sheet ofa sail(rope.) 3 Corner of 
a sail. Error, defect, blemish. 4 Conceit, af- 


fectation, pride, airiness, coquetry, foppery, 
vanity. 5 Command, lordliness, rule. 6** 
Disposal. S. an t-siùil mheadhoin, the main- 
sheet ; s. an t-siùil thoisich, the foresail-sheet ; 
s. an t-siùil chiun, the jib-sheet ; ainnir gun s., 
a ma'd without conceit ; fuidh d' s., under thy 
rule ; crain-sgoid, ship-boom ; caint gun sS., 
languag» without ajfectation. 

sgòdach, -aiche, a. Having corners or lappets. 
2 Furnished with sheets (ropes.) 3 Defective, 


blemished. 4 Trailiug, dragging. 5(CR) 
Ragged—Skye. [xgeddach in Gairloch.] 6 
Awkward. 7 Conceited, affected, pedantic, 


beauish. proud, haughty, airy, flashy, foppish. 
8 Lordiy, having command, 

sgodag, -aig, -an, S.f. Slovenly, awkward wo- 
man. 2 Conceited, vain girl, coquette, airy 
or affected female, 

sgodaich,(MS) v.a. Eke. 

gs odail,** a. Big. 2 see sgodach. 

sgòdan, -ain, am, s.m. dim. of sgòd. Little cor 
ner or lappet. 2 Small defect or blemish. 9 
Sheet of a sail. 4(MS) Patch. 

sgog, -oig, -an, s.m. Fool, idler, 

sgog.* v.n. Hesitate, waver, 

srogach, -aiche, æ. Foolish, senseless. 9 Idle. 

szozarsaich,* s.f. Hesitation. 

sgòid. prov, sve sgòd., 25./. **Neok. 8 gen.sing. 
of sgòd. 4**shirt. 

sgòideach, -eiene, sce sgodach, 

So Aula, -ele, -an, see syddag, 

ach,** œ. Vain, airy, as a girl, coquete 
tish, showy. 

sgoidvas, -eis, 8,f, Pageantry, vain EON OS8LG2«. 

giv 2 





-—-- 


| | E 


bw 
I J 
kä = 


BANA-( 


Pl Í I1 


$ sgoideas 


[* gives sgoideis for nom.] 
ach, -aiche, a. Showy, foppish, proud, 
airy, coquettish, flirting, formal, fond of pag- 
eantry, vain, conceited. 
sgdideil,** -e, a. Vain, airy, conceited, foppish, 
flirting, showy, formai, fond of show or pag- 
eantry. 
egoideiserch, see sgoideasach. 
sgoige,** s.f. The throat, 
ach,** a. Guttural. 
sg ignein, -ein, s.m. Fan. 
8701i,* v.a. School, teach. 
sgoil, -e,-ean, s.f. School. 2 Education, learn- 
ing, knowledge, 3 Science, literature. Am 
bheil s. aige ? i$ he educated? a’ dol don s., 
going to school ` cha'n 'eil s. agam air, Z know 
nothing of it ; taìgh na sgoile, the schoot-house. 
s.-na-cruinne, doctrine of the sphere. 
s.-àitean, topography. 
S -bhalbhan, deaf-mute schooling, 
s.-bhisbaireachd, fencing. 
s.-buüird, boarding-school. 
$.-chlaidheamh, s vord-exrercise, 
S.-chozaidh, military academy. 
s.-chreig^, g'oíogy. 
$.-chéairl, mechanics. 
s.-chruinue, geography. 
Ss.-dunusailn, duncini-schook, 
8.-diadhaireacd, theology. 
s.-diomhair, private school. 
s.-dorn, boxing. 
s.-dreag, »a^t-orology. 
s.-dreagaireachd, see sgoil-dreag. 
s-dubh, the black art. 
s.-eachidraidh, historiography. 
s.-eun, ornithology. 
8.-fhacal, etymo/oyy. 
s.-fhairge, navigation. 
s.-fhearainn, ayriculture ; 2* land-surveying. 
g.-fhreumhachil, see s.-fhacal. 
s.-fhuuigneil, $ewing-class. 
s.-leughaidh, rvading-school. 
8.-lusan, botany. 
8.-mhara, neviyation, 
s.-mharcachd, rcling-school, 
g.-inharsantachd, book-keeping. 
s.-mhiotail:, mineralogy. 
s.-oide, schoolmaster, usher. 
s.-oiilhche, a school taught at night-time, 
s.-naluir, physiology. 
s.-nan-reult, astronomy. 
s.-nan-sian, meteorology. 
s.-na-fairge, navigation. 
g.-reul, astronomy. 
s.-sgriobhaidh, writing-school. 
s.-sheinn, sinjiny-schoul or class. 
8.-Speur, as/ronomy. 
s.-uisge, hydrostatics. 
s.-uisgearachd, see sgoil-uisge. 

The following given by * are undesirable or 
incorrect, and should not be used. S.-fhollais- 
each, æ public school ; s.-iuntinn, philosophy ; 
s.-mhulcach, phrenoloyy ; 3.-riomball, spherics 
—riomball is a circle, not a sphere ; s.-nà-cum- 
asg, chemistry ; s.-na h-inntinn, intellectual 
knowledge —knowledgo is eòlas, nob sjoil. 

eguililha,** a. Scholastic, 

sgvileach, ft a. Pertaining to a school, 

sgoile :g, -eig, -an, 8. f., dim. of sgoil. Little 
school. 

ach Ht a, Pertaining to a little school. 

Bgoileam, -eim, 8,m, Loquacity, garrulity, prat- 
tle, Z**lupertiueunt garrulity, 

ach, -aicho, a. Loquacious, prattling, 
garrulous, 2 3eoldiug. 2* Veuomous in scold- 
ing. 4**Impertiventiy garrulou,, 

— —üch,* -aich, 4,/. Shrew, sould, sooldiug 





— 











D 


E -- Fa A gen AR = 
d HN | ARY e UE 
L i = i 1 "uu T ELI 


[TI 
II) 


828 
tation, pride,airine ss,coquetry, flirting, vanity: 





sgoinneil 


female, 

sgoileamachd, s. f. ind. Habit of loquacity o 
prattle. 

sgoilear, -eir, -an, s.m. Scholar, school-boy, stn- 
dent. 2 Scholar, man of learning. 
s., @ good scholar. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Scholastic, learned, li ke 

a scholar, acadenical. 








dition, education, intelligence, 

an, n.nl. of szoilear. 

—ra, a. Schooled, scholastic, 

szoileil,** a. Acid. mical. 2 Scholastic. 
szoileisleach.** a. Academical. 

,*? doa. Acalemician. 
sgoileisteach, see sgoileis leac. 
sgvilm,} & see sgoileam, 2 Razor-bill. 3*Mouth 














or face expressive of a seolding disposition. 4 


*High key in scolding. 
each,** a. see ssoileamach. 
sgoilmeis,* «.f. Biting severe cold. 2 Garrulity. 
—eachd,** s.f. Garrulity. 
sgoilmrich,** y. Chat!er, prate. 
,** s.f. Chatter, pratinz. 
sgoilt, pr.pt. a’ sg ltadh, v.a. d' n. Split, cleave, 








Sgoiltidh sùil a’ chlach, en (evil) eye will split 
a stone ; an ti a sgoltas fiodh, he who cleau-s 
wood. 

sgoilte, past pt. of sgoilt. Cleft, splintered, riy- 
en, burst, cracked. 2 **Abrupt. 3 (DU) Bi- 
furcate. 

———ach, -eiche, e. Splitting, cleaving, crack- 
ing. 2 That splits or cleaves. 3 Causing to 
split, cl ave or burst. 4 Apt to split or cleave. 
5** Bursting. 

sgoilteadh, 3rd.sing. & pl. of sgoilt. 

sg jiltean, -ein, -àu, s.m. Splinter, slice. 2 Cleft. 
3 Colon in grain. 4 Half of a s(uare Decker, 
chief. 5 Billet of wood. 6 Slit stick, used by 
children for throwing pebbles. 7 Se-d.slip of 
a potato. 8* Half. 9$(DMy) Parting of the hair 
of the head. 

——-——ach, -aiche, a, Abounding in splinters, 

sgoiltear, -eir, -am, s. m. see *coliair. 2 see 
sgoltair. 

, fut. pass. of sgoilt. 

sgoim, -e, s.f, Wandering or ranging about. 2 
see sgaoim 

sgoineadh, -idh, -idhein, sm, Keen attack. 2. 
Eager longing. S. acrais, a vehem-ni aitack of 
hung’. 

sgoiun, -e, s.f. Care, attention, carefulness, mo- 
ment. 2 Heed. 3 Eifiicacy, power, effect, 
good effect or purpose. 4 Neatuess. trimness. 
5 Decency, taste, propriety. 6 Affection. 7 
(CR) Small pool in the rocky bed of a stream, 
in which salmon get imprisoned and caught 
when the tide is low.— W. of Ross-shire. 8 (D 
U) Potential or active energy, force, activity. 
Tha s. air, he is actsve ; ddan le s. e, do it taste 
fully ; rinne air sgàth sgoinne, 4 did it for 
decency's sake ; is beag s, a bhitheas air do 
ghnotuach, your busin-ss will be done with lit- 
tle propriety; cha'n ‘eiis. air an làimn, they are 
waste/ul or extravagant, 

sgoinn, (DMy) s.f. Hurry, QO ait’ am bhell thu 
dol leis an s. seo P where are you guiny in such 
haste ? 

sgoinn,* v.a. Oheok, reprove, sould bitterly, 

sgoinueach,* -viche, a, Bitter in seulding. 

,* -viche, 4. /, Bittor soviding female, 

sgoinuear,** a, Heeuful, see sguinneil, 

syvinneil, o à, Caretul, heeitul, 3 Attentive, 
3 Hitfieacious, producing a good eitoot, 4 Neat, 
trim, tidy, o *Deeccut, tasteful. 6 (DMy) En- 
ergetiv, aclive, bustiiug, Duino &, dn achoue 
ULSS Hutt, 


d 











Deagh 


--avhd, s.f.ind. Scholarship, learning, eru- 


burst asunder, break, erack. 2 Gut fish. 





| 
| 
| 


sgoirm 


Sgoirm, -e, can, &,/. The throat. 2 The lower 
parts of à hill or heap. 3*Br w of a hill. An 
droighean gorm air s. nan carn, the green 
thorn on the brow of the cairns. 

tsyit,** et, Shield, target. 

ef iceach, -eiche, a. Quack. 

——-——d, $.f.ind. Quackery. 

¢sgoith, v. see sgath. thing. 

&:vithean,"* g.m. The best or prime of any- 

sgoitich, -ean, s.m. Quack, mountebauk, 

sgoititheachd, s.7, $:e sgoiteachd. 

Sol, pr.pt, &' sgoladh, v.a. Rinse, wash, make 
ciean. 2 Drench. 3ttsScull. 

tsgol, -oil,;g.7n. Skxll. 2 Loud laughter. 

€gp (AH) sm. Viscous matter nsually exuding 
from and covering an ill-dressed wound. 

sgoladh, -aidh, s.m. Rinsing, cleaning, washing. 
2 Act of washing. 3 Draugnt. 4tfWaddling. 
5t¢Sculling. A’ s—,pr.pt. of sgol. 

sgulag, -aig, s.f. Olive-tree. 2 see sgalag. 

syolagag,(DC) s. f. Forefinger—coigag or sgola- 
hay in Argyll. 

sg.lais'l, see colais 1. 

sgoluisdeach, see sgoileisdeach, 

sgolap, Gaelic forn of scollop. 

8golb, -uilb, -an, s.m. Spiinter, 2 Prickle,thorn. 
3 Wooden pin or wattle, used for fixing thatch 
on A roof. 4 Single floorings (nails.) 5**Skir- 
mixh or fight with knives or dirks, 6**Doubt. 
7 Split. 

8golbich, -aiche, a. Prickly, thorny. 2 Splint- 
tered, splintering. 

,"* s.m. Spray or wattle, used in thatch- 
ing houses. 

—— ——d,( M58) s.f. Prickliness. 

eggolbaich (MS) v.a, Split. 

sgolbynach, -aich, s.m. Stripling, youth. 

egolbanta, -ainte, a. ‘Thin, slerder. 2 Apt to 
break into splinters. 3 *Sharp, prickly. 








Tallness. 3 Aptness to break into splinters, 

sgolgair,** -ean, em, Scold. 

1sgo ‘guiire,** s.f. Loud !auzhter, horse laugh. 

sgoli,* v.g. Scull, as a boat. 2 see sgol. 3** 
Deplume. 4 Scold in a high key. 

Sgoll,* s.m. Scum, as on proud Han, 

szollachan,* ai, s m. Uufledged bird. 

a:collag, -aig, s.f. Dingsy. see p. 78. 

8g0it,** .oilt, -an, s.m. Split, slit, cleft, rent. 

szoltach, -à/che, a. Spiitting, cleaving, slitting, 
riving. 2 Bursting, breaking 3 Ap: to split 
or cleaye, 4 Apt to burst or break. 

egoltadh, -aidh. -ailheo:n, s. m. Split, chink, 
cleft, cracx, s'it. 2 Splitting. act of splitting, 
slitting, cleaving, rending oz riviay, 3 Burst- 
ing, act of bursting or br»eaki»g asinder. 4 
Ear-mark on sheep, see under comharradh- 
cluaiss. 5 Laceration. 6**Burst. A’ s—, pr. 
pt. of sgolt. As. cheann., to clave h ads, 

szoltair,** s.m. Cleaver. splitter of wood. 

sgoltan, T -ain, s.m. Nui-hatch -sitta europea, 

 sgonihal-sgarach,** a. Astride, astraddle, 

8zonasach,** a. Mag r, greedy. 

sgonn, sguinn & sgoin:, pl. an s. m. Short 
block of wooi, 2 Snapsless: m ss. 3 Dolt, 
blockhead, dunce. rude, uncultivated person. 
4 Bull-calf. 5 ‘Trifler, prater. 6 Shapeless 
hill. 7 Base of a couple iinbed led in tne wall 
of a house, balk.  $* Large mouthful, gulp, 
glut. 9* Huge, unsh^p.ly person. 10 (DU) 
Large slice, as of bread, mat, &e. S. labuair, 
prae, blab foolishly ; s. cabair. a block of wood; 
8. cloiche, a block of stone; s. gille,a h avy- 
headed fellow ; s. arain a block of br-ad. 

sgonn,” v.n. Gulp, glut, eat in larg? mouthfuls. 

sgouna-bhard (JM) s.m. Poetaster. 

8$50naach, -aicue, @ Lump sh, coarse, shape- 


829 


— —À— 





—— chd, s.f.ind. Thinness. sleuderness, 2 


sror-bheannach 


lees. ? S. up d, senseless. 3 Rude, unpolished. 

sgonnadh, -ailh. s.m. Guipinz. A’ s—, pr. pt. 
of sgonn. ‘(ia S. air, guiping it vp. 

Sgonnaz. s.f dim. of s:onn, Crack (no:se.) Clach 
mhór bhun sgonnaag, the uprivhs flagstone at 
the bas» of the couple as a partition, to prevent 
cows injuring one ano'h«r—Scots, buisting- 
stanes,—buist is the space between, holding 
two cows. 

sgonnaz, Ap, $.f. Hasty word. 

sgonnair, ean, 8.m. Lump sh fellow. 
3 Boor, rustic, trifler, wuiffler, rascallion. 
Gulp-r. 

sgonvairvachd, s f.ind. Stupidity, senselessness. 

2 Boorisnn.ss, rusticity. 3** Behaviour of a 


2 Flatus. 
2 Dunce. 
4? 


dunce. 4 Whiffliny, prating, trifling. 
sgonnan, -ain, -an, s.m., dim. of sgonn, Short, 
thick piece of wood, little block. 2 The peg 


of a cas-chrom on which the right foot is 
placed. 3 Ine wind-pipe,as distinguished from 
an slunan, the gullet. 4 Handle of a quern 
by which it is turned. 

sgonnas ich.** a. Trifling, whiffling, prating. 

sgonnasachd,** s.f.ind. Habit of trifling, whif- 
fling or prating. 

sgonn-bhalach, -aich, s. m. Lumpish boor. 2 
Dunce. 3S3 Trifler, rascallion. 

sgonn-chu, -choin, s.m. Surly or vicious dog, 

sgonn-labhairt, v.a. Prate, blab foolishly. 

sgonn-labhairt,** s.f. Pratiug, blabbing. 

sgonusa,** s.m, Fort, sconce. 

sgop, ën. Foam, froth. 

sgopraich, a. Senseless. 

sgor, -oir, -an, s.m. (AF) Stud of horses, 2 
(CR)slice of bread — of Ross-shire. 8.DU) 
Slice of fish, fillet. 4 (CR) Swathe or sweep 
of the scythe—Suth’d, 5tt Cut, notch,*gash. 

sgòr, -dir, -an, sn, Sharp, steep hill rising by 
itself, or a little, steep, precipitous height on 
another hill or mountain. 7 Peak, pinnacle, 
3 Tail of a bank in the sea, concealed rock 
jutting into the sea. 4 Axperity. 

sgor, -oir, -an, s.m. Mark, notch or cut, made 
by any sharp ius.rument. S. creige, a cleft in 
a rock. 

sgor,* s.f. Fork. Sgian agus s., a knife and fork. 

Sgor, pr.pt. a’ sgoradh, v.a. Cut, hack, gasn,scar- 
ify, lance, cut in pieces. 2 Erase. 3 Fork 
peats or hay. 4 Lay out peats to dry. 

sgoraban (CR) s.m, Little pointed rock —W. of 
Ross-shir». 

szorach, -aiche, a. Rocky, full of pointed rocks, 
2 Peaked. 3 Pronzed. 4 *Cliffy, 5*Coni- 
cal. 6 Rugged. [s oracn—DU] 

sgorach, -aiche, a. Cutting, hacking, scarifving. 
2 Abounding in cuts or notches. 3**Krasiag, 
4 Having a buck-tooth. 

sgora-cuil,(AC) s. Leaning-rod. Gun s., with- 
out a leaning rod. 

sgoradh, -aidh, s.m. Cutting act of cutting, 
hacking, gashing or scarifying. 2 Scoring, 
scratching, erasing, erasure, scratch, score. 
3*Working. 4 Laying out of peats. 5ttPierc- 
ing A’S—, pr. pt. of sgor. Dheanadh tu 
tora ’dheanadh an toll is sgoradh ‘na bhoun 
gu sha'l, thou woulds' make an augur that 
would hore the holes and cut into his sole to hig 
heel — Duanaire, p. 37. 

sgurag, AIS, -an, s.f. Piece of turf. 2 Roasted 
limpet. 3 Scollop, waving edge. 4ttSmall bit 
of stone. 

—ach.If-aiche, a. Full of small pieces of 
stone or turf. 2ttScalloped. 

sgorazaich, v a. Scollop, cut the edge of cloth, 
&c. in a wavy line. 

sgoranach, -aich, s.m. Youth, stripling. 

sgor-bheaunach,** @ Rocky, hilly. 





« dc 


" d V g de 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


* ` Jo 


f 


szor-bheirn 





830 


sgraingean 


sgor-bheinn, -e, pl. bheannta & -eauntan, s. f., sgrabail, T S’. Kilda for s2riab. 


Rocky, comeal mountain. 2 Monntain 
3 Projecting cliff. 
rock. 

Tsgor-chailbhe, see sgorn-chailbhe. 

sgor-éild.** s m, Hill frequent<d by roe-deer. 2 
Upland rock. 

sgor-fhiacail, -cla, pl. -clan, s.m. Buck-tooth. 

sgor-thiaclach, -aicuc, à. buci-tootued, 

sgorn, -dirn, -an, s.m. Throat, wiudpipe, gullet. 

sgornach, -aicb, see sgòrnan. 

sgòrnan, ain, -an, s.m. The throat, neck,throt- 
tle, gullet. 2* Windpipe. Tha na fosgail- 
te mar uaigh, their throat isan open sepul- 
ch re, 

sgornan, n.pl. of sgórn. 

ach, -aiche, @. Wide-throated. 2 Bron- 
chial. 3( M5) Guttural. 

——achas, -a's, 8.1m. Gutturainess. 

—— ——-àicn, v.a. Gorge. 

sgorn-chailbne, -an, s.7. The epiglottis. 

sgòrr, -a, -an, see sgòr. 

sgorr,(DMy) v. Secure a boat with two or more 
sticks to hold it on an even keel. 

sgorrach, see syorach. 

sgorrach, (AL) s.m. Perch (fish.) 

sgorralh, (OU) -aldh. s.m. Act of propping up a 
poat on even Keel, 2 ‘ihe props takeu col- 
leetivelv. (Sgorraidhean, the props taken in- 
dividnalty.) 

Sgorrag,, DMIX) s... Small bannock of oatmeal 
with a hole in the centre, wade for children 
— Caithness. 

Ssgorr-bueian, see szor-bheinn. 

Bavr-souil, -shula, -s:uilean, s.f. Blink-eye. 

sgor-snuiieach, -eiche, @ Blinis-eye-l, 

eg or-snrato,** -ach, gut, Roexy stream. 

S.orchauach, see syoranach. 

sgun, in, -AD, San, Sm thi farm. 
ci. oT anotaer. 3 Small Duck, 
jage. 

Bu. Sse sgòd. 

szut, -oit, s.in. Shot, reckoning. 2 Part or 
pordon of a reckoning, — Una s. agam ort, 4 
h:v:capp'd your wittwism —Leis. 

sgoian, -àio, s.m» Smali farn. 2 small flock. 3 
Small group of persons. 4 Small blemish. 

Szot-briaile,* s.m. Village. 

sgoth,** va. Pull. 

sgoth, -a, -a', $.f. Boat, skif, large winter fish- 
ing boat, yacnt. T2 Flower. 3 (AC) Shade, 
shelter,hut for concealing sportsmen. 4**Son. 
5**Unvice part of anythiag. 6**Disease. 7 
(DU)Boat with stem and stern vertical—szdth 
in Garioch. Imich 'uad s., depart in thy skif. 

sgoth, -achan, s.f. (AC) Steep rock, abrupt hill. 
2 (AC) Bank of cloud, overuaugiuz baze. 3 
(CH) The shade caused by a clout obscuring 
the sun.—W, of Ross-shire, 4 (UCR) Dimaess 
on glass caused by breatn—Stratisp-y. 

ggoihadh, -aidh, s.n. Puil. 2 Gash, slash, cut. 
sgothas, -aig, -an, s.f.dum. of sgoth. Little skiff, 
small yacnt, cutter. 

Sgocualen, (41S) v.a. Overcloul. 

sg than, see sgt. 

sgoth-long, -luinge, -an, sf. Yacht, ship's fy- 
DOA, See p. 7a. 

Sg x h-Inath, st Cutter (boa!) see p. 73. 

S,rab,** v.g. Eras.. 2 Scraten. 3 Write. 

S&grab,"] s. Gre st shearwater, see sgriab. 
Zor-bill— Barra, see coltraiche, 

sgrabach, -aiche, a. Rough, rugged, shaggy. 2 
Rare, scarce. 

sgrabachan, -ain, s.m. Roughness. 

Sgrabachas, -ais, s.m. Roughness, shagginess, 
ruggedness. 

Sgrabadh, see sgrobadh. 





2 Piece of land 
4* Small vil- 


2 Ra- 


Digitized by 


E IgUEEPTEPXARIFT- OIN M F 
1 iA i 
a = Mi ii = i LY vi | H H V 


elit. | 
4 Blasted cuit. 6 Ciitfy | sgraban, am s.m. Cu-rycomb, 


sprabair, -ean, sun. Greenland dove, see sgriab. 


sgrauvinach, -aiche, see sgiabach. 

sgrabanaeh:t, see sgrabachas. 

lit ia 5.75. Guld-foii, tiu-foil, gold-leaf, span- 
gle. 


sgragaliach, -aiche. a. Spangled. 2 Like tin-foil 


guid-leaf or gold-foil. 

sgraibh,eadh, -idh, -idhean, s. m. Hand-saw. 
{*sgraivhse, er) | 

sgraicheag,{ -aig, an, s.f. Jay—garrulus olan- 
darius. 2(AV) Redwing, see sgivth-i{hearcan, 
& sgreuchag. 

— — -ghlas, T s.f. Missel-thrush. 2 Red- 

wing, see sgiath-dheargan. | 

— -oidbche,T sr, Night-jar, goat-suck- 








er. 





dd 635. Suraicheag-oidhche. 

szraid, s.f. Oid haz. z Oid mare or cow. 

each, -eiche, œ. Shrivelled and ugly. 

sgraideach,** a. Diminutive. 2 Of a shabby ex- 
terior, 

sgràileag, -eig, -an, s.f. Small morsel. 2 Small 
or ugly female. 3*Small potato. 4*Any small 
thing. | | 

—ach,** o, Diminutive, puny. 2 Shaboby. 
3 Ugty. 

sgràidean, -ein, -an, s.m. Diminutive, dwarfish 
us 2 Shabby-looking fellow. 3 Uxly littie 
ellow. 

sgraideanach,ft -ciche. a. Diminutive and ugly, 
2 Shabby. 3 Having au ugly diminutive person. 
4**Puny. : 

sgraitht, eum, s.f. Shrivelie! an l ugly old wo- 
man. 











each, see sgraid ‘ach. 

sgraid-sha oh, s.f. Hanl-saw. 

sgraig, v. &. Strike, hit on-a blow. 

syr.igeatn, -idh, s m Striking, act of striking 
a blow. A's-—.p« pt. of S:raix. 

Ssgraigte, pats’ pt. of xgraig. "rue", 

sgrail, T s.f Manx-shearwater'-pufinus anjlor- 
rea, 

serà li, n.a: Rail ar, revile sitiriz», abuse with 
words. scoli harshly. [tfsgraill.] 

sgraiileadh, ad, s.m. Railing act of railing at 
one, sitirizi g, abusing wi h worts, rev:ling. 
2** Offensive languag `‘, greatest abas. A’s-, 
pr.p . of sgràill. 

sgràilleag, Gu, -an, SP, Sand-piper, 

sgralliig AF) s. f£. Dunlin. 

Sir, -e, -can, sf. Angry look, frown, scowl, 
giooiny, cuncracted countenancs. 2 P rb. 
ding a- pact. 3 Niggarilins.s. 4**Gloom. 

sgrajiugeuen, -2iche, @ soe sgraing»^al. 

sgraiigeag, -cig, -an, SE Surly, sull n-looking 
woman, 2 Niz»ardiy woman. 

sgrain,eal'acnd, s find. Suil2nn3ss, g'oomin^ss 
or aspect. 2 Forbidding loos. -3 Nigz.udiü- 


ness, 4* Surly morosicy, i 
sgruingeil, -e, a. Gloomy, sullen, frowning, 
scowling, 2 Of a forbidding aspect. 3 Niz- 


gardiy. 4**Having a frowning or forbiddiug 
Visage. 

sgrainzean, -ein, -an, s.m. Surly-looking fellow. 
one with a frowning or g!oomy visage. 2 Nig. 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS SÉ 


ww | 
‘ot uli 


URBANA-CRAMPAIGN 


used" V. 5. 


ts e M 4 


ah Kä z 


a 








SKS 


sgraingean 





gardly fellow. 


$31 





SETPREMD 


*Crust. 7 (DU) Thin layer or film of dirt, &e 


egraingear," -eir, -an, s.m.Scowler, curmudg?on. | erreabach, -aiche, a Scabbed, blotched,mangy, 


syraist, -ean, s.m. Sluggard, slothfal persou. 2 
Sluggishness. 

each,** a. Sluggish, indolent, slothful. 

2 Slovenly. 

each, s.m, Sluggard, sloven, 

eachd, $8.f.tnd. Laziness, sluggishness. 2 
Sloveniiness. | 

agraisteag, -eig, -an, $.f. Lazy, indolent woman, 
2 Sloven. 3**Slothful young feinale. 

sgràistealachd. see sgraisteach I. Í | 

sgraisteil, e, &. Slothful, lazy, sluggish. 2 Slo- 
venly. Gu s., slugmshly. 

Sgrait, -e, pl. -ean & -eachan, s.f. Shred, rag. 

sgraiteach, -eiche, a. Shredded, ragged shabby. 
Gu s., raggedly, 

sgraiteachd,** s.f. Raggedness, shabbin»ss. ` 

sgraiteag, -eig, -an,s.f. Ragged f. male, shabbily 
dressed female. 

8graitean, -ein, -an, s.m. Ragged fellow, shabbi- 
ly dressed fellow. 

Sgraith, see serath. 

sgraithte, past pt. of sgrath. 

sgral, s.m. Host, large nu:noer, applied to min- 
ute insects, (In other cas-s sgród is used. j— 
Dàin I. Ghobha. S. ai bhaile, the children of 
the township gath^red, together. 

agram,** s.j. Scratch. 2 Snap. 

sgram,** v.a. Wipe off. 

8Sgramain,** s.m. lixtortioner. 

&8gràmail, Gaelic form of scramble. 

syramalaich, v.g. Scramble. 

sgràmalair,** s.m. Sprawler, 

egramalanach,** o, Sprawling. 

sgramalanaich,** s.f. Sprawling. 

sgrath, A, -an, 8. f. Outer skin or rin! of any- 
thing, husk, peel. 2 Bark of a tree, 3 Coat of 
an onion. 4 Turf, green sod, divot, as used 
for covering root of houses. Stt Horror, 
dread. 6 Rust, 7 Scale. 5** Rough hand- 
ling. 9**Longrhyme. 10 Pull tug.  11* 
What covers the kiln of grain. 12** Green- 
sward. 

sgrath, v.a. Peel, take off the rind or skin. 2** 
Excoriate, pare, asa surface, 3 Thatch with 
turfs. 4**Tug, pull or han/lle roughly. 

8grathach, -aiche, a. Having a rind or skin of 
any kind, 2 Peeling, that peels or takes off 
the rind or skin. 3 Abounding in sods, diyots 
or green turfs, 4**Skinny,having a thick or 
strong rind. 5** Having many rinds, as an 
onion. 6 Filmy. 7 Scaly, crusty, of a brok- 
en skin. 

Sgrathachadh, -aidh, s.m. d£ pr. pt. of sgrath- 
aich, see sgrathadh, 

Bgrathadh, -aidh, s.m. Peeling, act of peeling, 
taking otf the peel, rind or skin 2 Tha:ching, 
act of thatchinz with turf. 3**Pull, tug. 4 
Scouring. A’ s—, pr. p'. of sgrath. 

sgrathag, -aig, -an, s.f.dim. of sgrath. Thin cov- 
ering, peel or rind of any kind. 2 Small tucf, 

6zrathagach, -aiche, a. Having a thin rind or 
skin of any kind, 2+tf Full of small peelings. 
3 Abounding in little sods. 

Sgrathaich, v. see sgrath. 

egrathaichte, past pt. of sgrathaich. Peeled, 
skinned. 2 Pared, as a surface, 3 Thatched 
with turf. 

sgrathail,-e, a. Destructive, tearing, destroy- 
ing. 2 Pernicious, 3 Terrible. 4**Peeiing, 
paring. 

sgrathair,* -ean, s.m. Skeleton. 

sgrathal, s.co/l. Small ones of anything. 2 Rə- 
fuse, rubbish. (*sgrathall.] 

sgreab, -a, -an,s.f. Scab, blotch, 2 Mange. 3 
*“The itch. 4 Scurt. 65(MS) Anthrax. 6f 











Digitized by 


| ld TLCOARICT A Pass TE 
hl d I LETT dE a M L. H M 


2 Itchy. 
sgrevnach1,( MS) st Scabbiness 
sgreabair.* -ean, s.m. Mean fellow. 
S;reub-chinn, s.f. Dandruff 
sgreabhayz, -aig,-an, s. m. Omelet. 

Harl, 4 MS) Husk, 5**Scab, 
sgreabhal.** -ail, s. m. Favour given hy a new- 

ly-married couple. 2 Annual tribute of 3d. 

paid at the command of the monarch by the 
petty princes of ireland to St. Patrick. 
sgreach, -a, -an, &.f. see sgreuch, 
Ath, see sgreuchach. 
adh, see sgreuchadh. 
ag, see sgreuchag 
azach. see sgreuchagach, 
— ————àn, -ain, see srreuchin. 
sgread, a, An, s.m. Screech, shriek, cry. 2 

Squall, bawling. 3 Any shrill jarring noisa. 

creaking noise, crushing noise, grating sound. 

*Gnash. 5** Clashing or cras» ing noise. 
sgread, or. p'. a’ sgreadail & a’ szrealadh, pe 

Shriek, ery, s reech, scream. 2 Make a harsh 

sound, creak. 3 Clash. 4 *Sqnall, 
sgreadadh,** -aidh, s.m. Shrizking, screeching, 

creaking, squalling, squall, shriek, screech. 2 

Creak, grating, 3 Clashin. 
sgreadach, -aiche, a. That shrieks, shrieking, 

syualling. 2 Creaking, making a grating 

noise. 3* Argute. 4 Crashing. 5 Clashivg. 
sgrea lachin,** -ain, s.m. Little syualler,shriek- 
ing child. 
sgreadag, -vig, -an, $. f. dim. of sgread. Little 

shriek. 2 Sharp, sour drink. 3* Acid. 4** 

Shrieking female, shriil-voiced female. 5* 

Anything sour. 


3** Affected with mange or iten. 
2 Scurfiuess., 


2 Crust. $ 


sgrevlaich, v.a. Howl, 


sgreadail. -e, sf. Screeching, act of screeching, 
screaming or crying. 2 Continued shrieking. 
3 Grat n», shrill or clashing noise, 4* Gnasn- 
ing. 5**Loud creaking. A's —, pr.nt. of szreal, 

sgreadair, ean, sm, Bawler, shrieker, screech- 
er, brayer, crier. 2 One witha shrill voice. 

sgre.dvlach,** a. Shrieking scce«min zr, bawling. 
Gin: 2 Creaking, gratiay, clashing, 

sgreadan, -ain, s. m. Disagreeabie sound. 2 
Noiss of anything tearing asunder, 3 Creak- 
ing or grating noise. 4 Scream, shriex. 65 
Bawler,shrill-yoiced fellow. Cruaidh a’ sgreal- 

~ an air cruaidh, st^»l grating on steel. 

ich, -aiche, @ Making a disagreeable or 

grating sound. 2 Creakinzg,ciashing. 3 Scream- 
lug. 

egreadhadh,* -ailh, s.m. Scissure, parchedness, 

syreadhail.* -e, -dhlaichean, s.f. Trowel. 2(D 
U) Wooden trowel used for digzing up spout- 
fish. 3 nl. used in the sense of Broken boards. 
Chai Ih i na sgreadhlaichean, she was smashed 
into fraginents. i 

gyreag, pr.pt. a’ sgreagadh, v.a. & n. Dry, parch, 
shrivel, cause tu shrivel. 2 Become dry, parch- 
ed or shrivelled. 3* Dry the outside hurriedly 
without entering into the inner part. 

ggreavach, -aiche, a. Dry, hard, sirivelled. 2 
Rocky, parched (of soil.) 3 Stingy, penurious, 
mean, 

svreagath, -aidh, s.m. Drying, parching. A’ s—, 
pr.»t. of sgreag. 

sgreagag, -aig, -an, S.E Shrivelled old woman. 
2 Penurious, stingy woman. 

agreivair, -eau, s. m. Shrivelled old man. 2 
Close-fisted, stingy man. 

sgreagat, -ain, -an, sm. Anything dry, shrunk 
or shrivelled. 2** ‘ard, rocky ground.3 (DMy) 
Cori p'aced about a span between the half 
hitches on the tops of fishing-rods. Lalawih a, 








Se" ig 


sgreagan 832 seriobachan ci 

hard, rocky ground. screeching. 3 Whooping. [* gives s. m. for 3 
ach, -eiche, a. see sgreagach. No.2.] A’ s—, pr. pt. of sgreuch. | rj 

ta. -ainte, @ see sgreayacu. Sgreuchair,* -ean, s.m. Sereecher, squaller. TA 
sgreagar,** a. Rocty. Sgreuchan, ain, -àn, sn One who seréecaes or ES 
sgreaioh, -eimne, & -a, s.m. Loathing, abhor-| screams  2**Person with a shrili voice. 3** e 
renee, dis;ust, nausea. 2** Disgusting S'sht. Vulture. e b: 
8*Thiu scum, rint or ugly skin. 4**Dis:usting | sgreuchna-co'lle,* s m. Jay. D 
 obzect, S. no sgaoim, di&just or fear. —L. na | szreuchan-cra sien, s.m. Vulture, gee fang. x 
- Féinne, 208/3 5. —fiamh no sgàth); ghabh e s., | BSzreuciuan-iongich,(A F) 8m Vulture. kl 


he was disjusted. 

ach, -Aiche, see sgreamhail. 

achadb, -aidh, s.m. Nauseating, act of 
nauseating. A' s—, pr.pt. of sgreamhaich. 
aich, v.a. d n.Loathe, turu the stomach, 
disgust, abhor. 

aichte, past ot. of sgreamhaich, Disgust- 
ed, shocked. 

ail, -e, a. Loathsome,abominable,nasty, 
abhorrent, fearful, dreadful horrifying, dis- 
gusting, horrible. 2 Apt to take disgust. 
aileacud, see sgreamhalachu. 

aach, tf æ. Disgusviny. 

—alachd, s.f.ind. Diszustfuluess, abomin- 
ableness, loathing. 2 Wearfuiness, dreadiul- 
ness, 3 Readiness to be shocked or disgusted. 


























the skin. 

sereanach,tf -aiche, a, Inc!ement,rougn,stormy. 

sgreang,-a, -an, S. f. fjWrinkle. 2 Wrinkled 
woman, 

sgieanzail,-e, œ. Wrinkled, corrugated. 

Szr.ann, s.m. Scowl—Dain I. Ghobha. 

Tszreoapal,** ail, ssm. Seruple weight.) 

—ach,** a. In scruples (of weight.) 

t-gr-agtadh,** -aidh, sem. Destruction. 

Szroat, s.m. Disgust, abhorrence, abomination, 

ssreatachd, s.f. Saime meanings as s;roanmhal- 
annd. 

sgreara'ch,* pr. pt. a' spreadachedh, Va. dn. 
Horri/y, bighiy disgust. 2 Loathe, abhor. 

sgreatai ih, -e, d. Sam: moanines as sgreainhail 

— —— ——eacid, s.f. Same meanings as sgreamh- 
a achd. 

Grreatas, -Ais, $m. Queasiness. 

sgrcath,* see sgrenbh, sgreay & sgreumh. 

— ail, see sgrumnliail. 

sgreig,** s.f. Rocky ground. 

Sereig,** va. Fry. 

eadh,** s.m. Frying. 

sgreiteacud, see sgreamhalachd. 

sgreitheil,** u. sce sgreamaail. 

sgreitidh, see »greamhail. 

sgicitiiiheachd,** see sgreamhalachd. 

sgreòd (CR) s.m. Grouo, erowd—W. of Ross-sh. 

syrcoth,* wa. see sgreubh. 

Szreothainn,** s.f. Straw used in the place of 
hair-eloth ona kiln. 2 Drawn straw. 

sgreubh, v.n. Dry up, crack by drought, parch. 

—ach,tt a. Drying, as by heat. 

—— ——Aádüh, -aidh, s. m. State of drying up or 
cracking from drought. A’ s—, pr. pt. of 
sgreubh. 

sgreuch, pr. pt. a’ sgreuchail, v.n. Scream, 
screech in a croaking and drawliag manner. 
2 Whoop. 3 Cry witb a shrili and loud voice. 

sgreuch, -a, -an, s.m. Screaim,sereech, shrill cry, 

sureuchach, -aiche. a. Screeching, screaming. 
sereuchadh, -aidh, see sgreuchail. 

sgreuchag, -aig,-an, s. f. Jay. 2 Night-jar, 
screech-owl, 3 Shrill-veiced female. 

———ach, -wiche,@. Abounding in jays. 2 
Like ajay. 3 Shrill-voiced. 

sereuchag-choille,** s.f. Jay. 2 Screech-owl. 

ser -uchag-vidhche,** s.f. Screech-owl, 

sg: euchag-reilge,** Sr, O wl. 

















sgreuchail, -e, s.f. Shrieking, screeching, aet of 
screeching or screaming. 2* Continuous 


Digitized by 


= — 8. V eR Ln opm gm " 

1 1 V A 1 i 

k HILL rh Kä H P 
LE = Fil Y LÀ 


Srribeag, -eig, s.f. Small griddle. 


sgribninn, -e, -ean, s.f. Rugged, rocky side of à 
la'th,* s.f. Thick wettish rash through 


Sgribhi«g,"** s f. Notes, comments. 


Sgrid,(Ati) s.f. Any small, stunted livingsthiug. 
| sgrid, -e, -ean, s.f. Breath. 2 The least breath of 





Szrenhach, æ. Wet,gusty,stormvy,windy — 4 rgril. 

sgreunach,} -aich, s.m. Shivering—A rra i 

sgreuth, (CR) v a. Shrivel, shrink with drvaght, 
as atub—Skye [sgrèidh in Garrloch— >U J 

sgriah, T s. Greater shear water—pufins major. 

sgriach, -a, -an, prov. for sgreuch. 2 s.m. -core, 
seracch, streak. 

sgriachag, -eig, -an, prov. for sgreuchag. 

sgriachail, see sgreuchail. 

syriachan-criosach, see sgreuchan-crassach. 

84r10, -e, -ean, see sgriob 


sgrìbh, v. see sgrxohin. 
hil. 2**Rugged, sloping shore. 

eacn, -e'che, o, Rocky, having rugzed 

sides(of hills.) 2 Liaving rugged,sluping shores. | 

—--eachd,** s /. Rockitess, ruggedness. 











~giibbte, see sgriobdhta, e : 
sgrid,(AC) v. Scrape. 2*'Breathe your last in 
consequence of laughing or weepinz. 








S. phaisde, s. laoigh, &c. 
life or air. 3** Voice. 4* Gasp. Chan 'eil 
S, aun, therei8 mot a breath in him, he is 
quite dead. 

—ealachd, s.f. Life, vigour, liveliness. 2 (MS) 
Mettle, 

——eil, -e, a. Lively, vigorous, active, sprightly. 

sgrilleag, (AF) s.f..San:lerling, sandpiper. 

Sprin,"*.e, SL Shrine. ~ 

-——vach,** a. Havin; a shrine. 2 Like a shrine, 

sgriob, pr.pt. a’ sgriobadh, v.a. & n. Scrape,rub 
off the surface. 2 Scratch, tear, marx with 
slizht incisions, 3** Carve, engrave. 4 Draw 
lines or strokes onany surface, draw scratch- n 
es. 5 Make a furrow. 6 Scrib»ie,scrape,wribe. Gi 
7 Sweep off, make bare by rubbing. 8 Carry 
off, take away. 9 Comb or curry asa lors. 
10 Snatch. 11 Lay waste, mike (desolate by a 
calamity. 12* Drag or dredge for fish or oysters. 
S. leat e, snatch or sweep it away with you; 
a’ sgriobadh 'sa phort, dredging in the harbour; 
a’ sgrìobadh buntàta, scrapiny potatoes. 

sgriob, A, -an, &f. Scratch, track, mark, line. 
scrape. 2 Furrow, as of a plough. 3 Cart-rut. 
4 Trip, journey, excursion. 5 Calamity, be- 
reavement. 6 Itching of the lip, superstitious- 
ly supposed to portend,a kiss (s.-pdige), or S.- 
dibhe (ox s.-drama), a dram, 7 Curry-comb. 8 
Stroke of a whip-saw. 9tt Hurt. S. do 'n 
Ghalltachd, œ trip to the Lowlands ; thoir s. 
mu 'n cuairt, (ake a turn round, make a cir- 
cuit ; s. an t-saibh mhóir, a stroke of the whip- 
saw; S.croinn, the furrow of a plough; a, 
bhuntàta, a dril/ of potatoes, 

sgriobach,l -aich, s.f. The itch, mange, scurvy. 
2* Scotch or Highland fiddle. 

sgrìobach, -aiche, œ. Scratching, scraping, 2 
Prone to scrateh orserape. attltechin,. ¢ 
Furrowing. 5 Curry-combing, 

sgniobachan,** -ain, sn. Seraper. 2 Wooten 
instrument for raking asies, wooden rase 
without teeth. N. na iuaithre, the wooden jire- 
shovel. 

surivbadair, -ean, s.m. Scraper. 2 Nutmcg-grate 


ge, 


Gre nh, cold dada 


PT 


Pe 


A Ye v 
TU 


‘Original from 8 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS EM 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGNZS 


svriobachan 


Ze e. 

Sgriobadaireachd,tt s.f. Scrap'ns. 1 

Sgriobadan, -ain, -an, 8.1. Se sgrìobadair. - 

sgriobah, vida, s.m. Ser«ping, act of scraping 
or scratching. 2 Ac of scribbling, drawing 
lines or furrows. 3 Act of carrying off or ta- 
king away. 4 Laying waste, act of laying 
waste. A’ s—, pr.pt. of sgrìob. 

Sgriobachan, -ain, -an. £. mM. see sgrìobadair. 

6ziiobag, -aig, -an, s. f. din. of sgriob. Slight 
scratch. 

sgriobaz,(AF) s.f. Cockle, see creachag. 

. Sgriobazach.ff a. Abouding in scratches. 

sgriobaidh, fut.a/7.a. ot s:riob. 

&irio^air, -ean, zm. Graving tool. 
scratcher. 3 Grater. 4* Dredge. 
comb. 6 see sgrioban. 

sgriobaireachd,** s f.ind. Continued scraping or 
scratching. 2 Working with a graving tool. 

sgrìoban, -ain, -an, s.m. Any kind of hoe, rake 
or scraper. 2 Wool-card. 3 Curry-comb. 4 
Hand fishing line. 5 Scraping. Dorghach 
leis an sgrìoban, fish:ma with the hand-line ; 
earba bheag an sgriobain, the scraping young 
roe—- Donn. Pan. p. 54.—they have a habit of 
scraping with their fore-feet ; gheibh cear- 
an sgrìobain rud-eigi », the scratching hen will 
find something. 

8zriobanach, -iiche, a. Abounding in rakes, &c. 

YIand.line, 


2 Scraper, 
5*Uurry- 


2 Like a scraper, or curry-como. 
sgrioban-dorubua c», (DIM) s. m. 
used in botí«» fi hing for co. 
 Sgriobar,** fu’. pasi. of Szriob. 
sgrìobh, v.a. Write, perfoim the act of writing. 
2 Compose a hook or writing. 3 Record. 4 
**iünorave, S.P a ionasui ln, write to him ; 
a’ sgrìobhadh leabhair, zer tiny à book. 
Sgriobh, $234. sce Sg. Pub, | 
Szriobha, s. & v. see sgrobna. 
sgrìobach, icht, -a/cuean, s.m. Writer, scribe, 
clerk. 2 **Notarv. 
sgriobhach, -aich^, a. Writing. that writes,com- 
poses or records. 2 Fond of writing, compos- 
ing or recording, 
agriubhalair, caa, s. m. Writer, scribe, clerk. 
penman. 2 Notary. 3 Attorney, 
Szriobhadaireachd, s.f.ind. Writing, busin‘ ss of 
à writer, clerk or notary. 2 Attorneyship. 2 
Penmanship. 
sgriobhadh, -aidh, -ean, s.m. Writing, penman- 
ship. 2 Act of writing. 3 Composing, act of 
composing, 4 Recording, act of recording or 
committing to writing. 5* Handwriting. 6 
Engraving. A’ s—, pr. pl. of sgrìobh, Fath- 
sgriobnaidh, an appendix. 
sgriobhadh, pas! pass. of sgrìobh, 
sgriobhaiche, see sgrìobhadair, 
sgriobhaichean,** s.pl. Writin«s. 2 Writers. 
sgriobhainnear,** -eir, s.m. Writer, clerk,scrive. 
2 Notary. 3 Scrivener. 
agiobhainn,** sf. Dill, writ, evidence. 
sgriobhair, -ean, s.m. Writer, seribe,clerk,agent, 
penman. 2 Notary. 3 Attorney. 
Bgriobhairsiehd, see sz 10043 la reachi, 
sgriobham, Ist. sng. iip. of sgrìobh. Let me 
write. 9 1s/. fut.a[f.a. I will write. 
sgriobhar, fut. pass, of sgriobh.Shall be written. 
suriobh-lochd, An, s.m. Fault or error in writ- 
ing, erratum. 
szriobh-thiizh,* s.m. Writer's office. 
agriobhtach,** aq. Writing. 2 Fond of writing. 
3 Writing frequently. 
sgriobhta, past pt. of sgriobh. Written, record- 
ed, registered, composi. | 
sgriobtuir, -ean, s.m. Scr:pture. 
—— each, -eiche, a. Scriptural, 
———— —eil,* a. Scriptural, 





853 


sgròb 





sgriobhuinn,** -ean, sf, Bill or evii-nes. 42 
Writings, 

sgriocn,** sm Serabch, score, line, furrow, 

sgrioch,** v.a. Dasi. 2 Scratch, score, notch, 
draw a liue or furrow. 

sgriodath, -ilh, s.m. Shingle. 

sgrìodan, -ain, -an, s. m. Stony ravine on A 
moun:ain site. 2 Track of à mountain torrent. 
3 Continuous heap of small stones on a moun- 
tain side. 

sgriodanach, -aiche, 
Abouudinz in continuous heaps of 
stones, 3 Like a mountain torreat. 
of channels. 5* Like a mountain, 
rents. | 

sgriodanaich.(M3) v.g. Streak. 

szrioga'ach, s.f. Bare mountain top beyond the 
line of veg»tation, Auns an sZzriogalaich seo, 
an this barren wilderness, 

sgrios, pr.pt. a’ sgrios & a’ sgriosadh, v.a. & n. 
Destroy, ruin, anniailate, consumo, 2** A bol- 
ish. 3 Stumble, slip. 4* Scrape or sweep 
of the surface. 5*Ruin.  Sgiiosaidh mi an 
duine, I wil! d’s'roy min; a sgriosadh an 
leathrach, scrapiny the rind off the leather ; s. 
mo chas, my foot siivoed. 

grios, -a, -an, s.m. Destruction, ruin, annihila- 
tion, 2* Sweeping off a surface, scraping 
rind, 3*Stumbling, slip. Mos., my ruin! 
bheir thus. oiran,you will annihilate us. Dat 

sgriosach, -aiche, see sgriosail, 

griosadair, Gët, sm. Destroyer, pillager, one 
who lays wastes, 

sgrivsadaiceachd, s f.ind. Destroying, sweeping 
away, anuihilation, continued pillagiag or 
wasting. 

sg riosa.Ih,-aidh, -aidhean,s.?n. Destroying, act of 
destroying, or ruining. 72 Abolition, pillaging, 
destructiun, waste, pillage. 3 Act of sLum- 
blire or slipping the foot. 4 Cutting or peel- 
ing oif the skin by accident. 5 Act of open- 
ing an ulcer by paring off its surface with any 


a. Cleft by ravines. 2 

small 
4** ull 
6**Of tor- 


sharp instrument. 6**Slip, tumble, A’ s—, 
pr.pt. of sgrios. 
«sgrio-a7,-aig, -an, $.f. Wreath of yarn on a clew. 


2 (DU) Smaull;ball of yarn. 

svriosayach, -aiche, a. Made up in clews. 

setiosiil, -e, a. Destructive, ruinous, pernicios. 
së Wasteful. 3** Slippery. 4"*Api to stum- 

e. 

seriosalach,(AC) s.m. Cloud. 'Nan sgriosalaich 
mora, in great c/ouds. 

seriosalachd,** s. f. Dalefulness, banefulness. 

sgriosan, s.m. Trousseau—Arran, 2(AH) Tor- 
reut of vituperation. Chuir e’na s. dheth, Ae 
lectured in very offensive lLanmage. 

sgriosar, ful.pass. of sgrios. Shall or will be des- 
troyed. 

sgrios-na-heithire, (AC) s. m. Destruction by 
lightning. 

sgriosta. nast pt. of serios, Destroyed, ruined. 

seriot,(DMu) v.a. Suth’d. for sgrüd (examine.) 

seriot,( DU) s.f. Vale of distress. 

sgriotachan, Ain, s. m. Squalling creature, in- 
fant. 2* Child that is lixely to die. 

sgriotal, s.m. Suth’d for sgriothail. 

syrioth,t s.in. Gravel. 

sgriothail,f s. pl. Lot of small items, as small 
potatoes—Jad^noch, Chuir e sgriotal (sgrioth- 
ail) dheth. he spoke a great many words with 
little subs ance in them. zttUcowd of youug 
creatures. 

sgriotnal,tt-a/l, s.m. Crowd of young creatures 
or small th:nzs. 

sgriobh, see sgrubha. 

sgrisleach, -eich, sm. Tartar, 

sgròb, v.G. Scratch, scrape with the nails, 2** 


sgrob 





Scra wl, 

sgròb, -a, -an, s.f. Scratch, scrape, line, scrawl. 

sgrobach, -aich:, @. That scratches or scrapes, 
scrawling, scratching, inclined to scrap». 

sxròbadair, -ean, s.m. Scratcher, scraper. 
sgronadaireachd, s. /. Serateuaing. 

szroba‘th, -aidh, s.m. Scratching, act of scrap- 
ing or scratching with talons or nails, scrawl- 
ing, scratch, scrawl. A’ s—, pr.pt. of sgròb. 

sgrobag, -aig, -an, s.f. Slight scratch. 

sgrovagach.tt a. Scratching. 

sgrohaich, see sgrob. 

sgrobair, -ean, see sgrohadair. 

Szrbbaireachd, s f. Unskilful writing, serawling. 

sgròban, -ain, -an, s.m. Scraping or scratching 
with the nails or talons. 2Cropofa bird. 3 
Dewlap. 4**Gizzard. 

Sgrobanach, -aiche, a. Scratching. 2 That 
scratcbes with nails or talons. 3 Of, or belong- 
ing to, a bird's crop or gizzard. 4 Having a 
crop or gizzard. 5 Having a large crop or giz- 
zard. 6 Hanging down, as a dewlap. 

82robha, -a, -achan, s.m. Screw. 2**Vice. 3 see 
sgrath. 4**Corkscrew. 

sgrobha, v.a. Screw. 

sgrobhach, -aiche, o Twisted, like a screw ,spi- 
al. 2 Having serews. 

sgrób-bhéarna:h, @ Do dheud a, your scratched 
an distorted teeth —Donn. bàn, p. 183. 

sgroch, see sgròb. 

——ail,* v.a. Scrawl, scribble. 

———ladh, -aidh, s. m, Scrawling, scribblinz. 
2 Scrawl, scribble. A’s—, wr.pt. of sgrochail. 

sgrod, s.m. Host, large number. S. chloinne, a 
host of children ; s. buntàta beaga, a quantity 
of small potatoes-—Dàin I, Ghobha.—not good 
grammar, 

sgrodia, see sgrobha. 

szrodhach, see serobhach, 

Syrog, -oig. -an, s.m, The head, side of the head, 
in rilicule, 2 'The neck, in ridicule. 3 Hat, 
bonnet. 4 Bite, mouthful. 5** Skull-cap. 6 
ty Siting word. 7 see szrogag. A sgrog, his 
nob—an expression used iu playing cribbage. 

—-—,(AH) s.f. Old cow or ewe. 2ttShrivelled 
person. 

sgrog, v.a. Put on the bonnet firmly, pull on, as 
a helmet. 2 Dof. 3 Cork. 4 Compress,shriv- 
el. 5 Become shrivelled. 6 Do away with. 7 
*Bite, as a horse. 8ttNag. S. e mi, he bit 
ine ; s. do bhoineid ort, tighten your bonnet on 
your head ; s. e am balach, he killed the fellow. 

sgrogach, -aiche, a. Shrivelled. 2 Impotent. 3 
Mean, contemptible. 4 Having a hat or bon- 
net. 

sgrogadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of putting on a hat or 
bounet. 2 Shrivelling, act of shrivelling. 3 
State of becoming shrivelled. 4 Act of doing 
away with, finishing. A’ s—, pr.pt. of sgrog. 

sgrogag, -aig, -an, $.f. Anything shrivelled and 
coutemp:ible. 2 Little oll woman. 3 Usaiess 
old timber. 4 Stunted growing timber. 5** 
Oath. 6(AF) Old cow or ewe. 71tLittle horn. 
8(CR) Crumpied horn —W. of Ross-shire. 9(C 
R) Mythical aquatic animal—Skye. 10 (DU) 
Drinking-horn. Lan na sgroga'g, a horufwul 
(of liquor); béist na sgrogaig, the unicorn in 
arimoria! b-a riis. 

sgrogaid,* s.f. Old hat or cap. 

sgrogair,-ean, sm. Shrivelie4 old fellow. 2 Biter. 
carper. 

sgrogan,** -ain, $. m. Skull-cap. 2 (DU) Little 
man, dwarfish person. 

Bgrorauach,s.;n. Short-necked m n. S. de bhod- 
ach còir, æ thick-set, sturdy, eldily kind little 
man,—Sgeul.-nan-caol, p. 29h. 

Sgroid,(AC) v.a, Search. 


Digitized 


EN 


834 


sgruibleachan 


| sgroidhseach,(CR) er Hag, cormorant—W. oj 
Ross-shire. 

Sgrulz,tf -e, -ean, $.f. see sgroigean. 

kit al gen. sing. of sgrog. [nom. in Gairloch — 


sgroigean, -ein, -an, s.m. see sgruigean. 

noue -ean, sf. Peeling, paring, anything torn 
off. 

sgroill, v.z. Peel, pare, excoriate. 

syroille,** s.f, Peeling, paring. 2 Any part that 
is torn off a skinned or coated surface. 

szroilleach, -eiche, a. Peeling, excoriating, that 
pee's or pares. 2In peels or parings. 3**Apt 
to peel or pare. 

sgroilleachadh,** s.m. Scarification, 

sgróilleag, eg, -an, s.f. dim. of sgroill. Little 
peeling or paring. 2**Scale. 3 Any part tura 
from a coated surface. 

sgioilleagach, -aiche, a. see sgrdilleach. 

sgroillich, see sgroill. 

sgroingean,** s.m. Barebone, curmudzeon, 

Szroingeanach,** a. Close-hande l, illiberal. 

"groingeanachd,** s.f. Illiberality, 

szroinneach, a. Raggel—Arran. 

sgroitheach, -eiche, a. see sgrathach. i n 

sgroithean, n.pl. of sgroth. ch 

sgrol,(CR) s.m., Multitude, crowd, great num- 

ef, S. chloinne, a crowd of children—W. of 

Ross-shire. 

fsgroll,* s.m. Large wide piece. 

sgroth, -oith, -oithean, s.m. see sgrath. 

sgrothach, -aiche, see sgrathach. 

sgrothach,§ -aich, s.m. Sea furbelows, bulbous- 
rooted tangle—iaminaria bulbosa. 

sgrothachd, (MS) s.m. Scaliness. 

syrothath, see sgrathadh. 

sgrothaiche,(MS) s.m. Epidermis, morphew. 

sgrub, s.m. Hesitation, scruple. 

sgrub, v.a. & n. Hesitate, delay. 2 Be niggard- l 
ly, act in a niggardly manner. d 

sgrubadh, -aidh, s.m. Delaying, act of hesgitat- | 
ing or delaying. 2 Act of playing the niggard. 
3 Scrubbishness, 4 Draught (liquid.) A's—, 
pr.pt. of sgrub. j 

sgrubail, -e, a. Hesitating, dallying. 2 Scrupu- M 
lous. 3 Niggardly, parsimonious. 1 

sgrubair, -ean, s.m. Churl,nizgard,miser,scrub, 1 

sgrubaireachd, s.f.ind. Churlishness, scrubbisa- 1 
ness. 

sgrubal, ail, -an, s.m. Scruple. 2 Doubt. 

sgrubalach,tt a. In scruples. 2** Hesitating, 
scrupulous, 

sgrubauta,* see sgrubail. 

sgrùd, v.a. Search, scrutinize, pry, examine. 
2** Question. j | 

sgrüdach,** o Examining, catechising, ques- 
tioning, prying, searching, inquisitive,investi- 
gating. 

sgrüdachadh, -aidh, s.m. & pr.pt. of sgrüdaich, 
se» szrüdadh. 

sgrùdadh, -aidh, s.m. Searching, act of search- 
iug, scrutinizing,prying, examining, question- 
ing, investigation. 2 Search. 3 Inquisitive- 
ness, curiosity, 4 Audit (of accounts.) Ut- 
most scraping of anything in a dish. A's—, 
pr. pl. of sgrul, A’ s. gach ionaid, searching 
every place. 

sgrudaich, v.a. see sgrùd. 

sgrùdaichte, past p. of sgrüdaich. Tried, ex- 
amined, searched, JE 

sgrù lair, -ean, s.m. Searcher, investigator,scru- 
tinizer. A 

syrudaireachd, s.f. Searching. ‘, 

sgrugaill,(CR) s.f. Neck of a bottle. 2 Neck of . 
a hen—Suth’d. l 

sgruibleach, Ach, st Refuse, rubbish. 

sgruibleachan,** -ain, -an, s.m. Scribbler. 





"indu rec e a e 


tet EPEE, 


ri 


n a 
UN oe 


ioc TETES A Ao Asie P A. apt 


Original fram 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


saeruidte 

&:rü'dte, past pt of sgrùd, see sgrùdaichte. 

e ruigein ft-ein,-an,s.m.Neck ofa bottle, or any- 
thing shaneri for the haud. 2 The neck, in ri- 
dicute, 3**Short neck, in ridicule. 4**Snort- 
necked person, in ridicule. 5 Hat, bonnet. 
Rug i air an s. air, she grasped him by the 
ech. 

Sg!uivesnach,** a. Short-necked. 

8;ruig dheiridh, s.f. Parts of stern-post about 
the gnuwaile. 

sgruig thoisich, 8.f. Parts of stem-post about 

, the aunwale. 

&rru'imbean, ein, -an, 8 m. Scrub. 

syraimbeanach, a. Scrubbed. 

Szrumge,** $.f. Ensign. ; 

spruit, ean, s. m, Old, shrivelled person. 2 
Thin, meagre person. 3**Old man. 4**Nig- 
gard. 5(AF)Lean, hard cow. 6**Harangue. 
vz Ol decayed person, 8**Old hard-featured 

erson. 

ae B -eiche, a. Old, withered, wrinkled. 
2 Meagre, thin. 3**Niggardly. 

szrum, 8. Mm. Shell of the same shape and colonr 
as a mussel, but smaller. They are used when 
ground small to entice coal-fish into the bag 
which catches them. 

sgrung,(DMIX) s. Ill-conditioned animal, one 
having à hard, skinny, bony appearauce— 
Rob Doim. 

Sr ui, see sgrnib. 

syriutach,** -aich, s m. Itch. 

syrntach, see sgiuiteach. 

S:ruthan, aiu, s. m. Sbock of corn—Assynt. 
(s2tu'an.] ` 

sg "in, -aib, Sam, Besom, broom, brush. 2 Sheaf 
uf corn, 3 The plant bealailh (from which 
brushes are made.) 4**Sweepings, refuse. S. 
choirce, a shea’ of oats ; mar leus air an s., 
like a flam» on the sheaf; 8.-aoda’ch, clothes’ - 
brush ; s.-làir, s-ürlair, foor-brush ; s,-deaun- 
nich, whisk. | 

gguab, pr.pt. a’ sguabadh, v.a. Sweep, sweep 

away, brush. 2**Bind into sheaves. 3**Move 
quickly or witha sweep. 4tf Clean with a 
broom or besom. 

Sruab, s.m, Extinguisher, hollow, conical shap- 
elapparatus for putting out a candle without 
smell or spilling of grease. 

sguabach, -aiche, a Abounding in sheaves, 2 
Sweeping, that sweeps, brushing. 3 Cleanly, 
cleansing. 4 Moving with a sweep. 

sznabach, -aich, -aichean,s.# Besom Hoor-brush 

sguabachan, -ain, -an, 6m. dim. of sguabach’ 
ses sguabay. | d 
syuabachail, a. Sweepy. 

s.uabadair, -ean, see sguabair. 

sguabadh, -aidn, s.m. Sweeping, act of sweep- 
ing, brushing or cleaning. 2 Sweeping mo 
tion, 3** Sweepin,;s, refuse, A’ s— pr 
pt. of sguab. Meòir aa na cruit, fingers 
sweeping nimbly along theharp-strinjs. 

gruabag, -aig, An, s.f. dim. of sguab. Little be: 
som, whisk. 2Sm!ll sheaf of corn. 3 Smart 
breeze of wind. 4**Female that moves with 
a sweeping gait. bit Gusty wind. Tri là 
Sguabag, three days, the 7th., 8th., and 9th. 
o] April. 

aguabaichean,**n pl. of sguabach., 

S.Uabair, ean, 8.m. Sweeper. 

sguabaireachd, s.f. Sweeping. 

sguabair-luidheir, s.m Chimney-sweep, 

sguaban aodaich, s.m. Clothes'-brush 

sguaban-stòthaidh, s.m. Resource. Is mairg do 
'n 8. bò mhaol odhar MhicGhill' Eoinidh, pity 
him whose resource is MacGillony’s hornless 
duncow. Macintosh says that MacGillony 
Was à famous hunter in the Grampians, and 


835 


s:»uidilear 

several vestiges of his temporary huts were 

still to be s:en t 1785, in the mounsiins o 

Atholl. [lis ‘‘ dun cow " was tie wil |l mouan- 

tain doe. Macintosh gives sfagia:! (an un- 

known word) for $'ó'ha:d^, which m ikes the 
proverb meaningiess S. meaus th? cuiting of 
corn short, as wou'd b» dens for a inssty sup- 
ply. The MacGillonies b?!on zed to the Clan 

Cameron, but were originally ailied to the 

Macleans.—N GP, 

sguabanta, @ Portable, trim. 

S;uab-ghàbhaidh** (an), sf. The banner of Os- 
car, son of Ossian. 

sguabhair,** -burean, s.f. Square. 

sguab-lion, s.f. Trawl or sween-net, drag-net, 

sguabta, past pt. of sguab. Swept, brushed. 

sguaib, -e, -ean, $.f. see sguab. 

sguaibte, see sguabta. 

sguaigeis, -e, s.f. Coquetry, flirtation. 

sguain, -e, $.f. Train of dress, tail. 2 Crowd, 
swarm. Gille-seuain, æ train-bearer. 

sguainseach s. f. Hussey, hoyden—Argyll, 

sguair,** Gaelic form of sjuare or squire. 

Sun (AO) son. Sur, stavdler, 23319. 

sguasaichean,( D MIC)s.»7. Long narrow and thin 
strips of wood laid across the tnatch of a 
house to keep i5 in positioun — Loch^room. 

sguch, v æ. Sprain or strain a joinr, 

sguch, (CE) v.n. Move, stir. Na sguchaibh,don't 
move. sit slill—Suth'd E Farr. 

Ssruchadh, -nidh, aidi an, s.m. Sprain, strain. 
2 Sprainins, act of spra ning a iimb A’ s-, 
pr nt, of sguch. 

szuchta, past pt. of sguch. Sprained. 

sgùd, -hid, än, 8m. Scout, soy. 2 Cluster. Hä 
Ship. 4 Ketch (boat)—M-brides, 

sgud, pr.pt. a’ sguladh, v.a. Lop, prune, eut of 
at one stroke,tiew down. 2 Curtail. 3 Suateh., 
4 Abscond. 5**Walk quickly, 

sgùd, -a, an, s.m. D:rty water, foul drops. 

sgudaciu,** aiche a. Walking quickly, or with a 
sweening gait. 2 Lopping otf, hewing down 
ata biow. 3 Absconding, 

sgulach,** a. Spying, apt to spy. 2 Abounding 
in dirty water or foul drops. 

sgü.laehd,**s.f. Espionage, habit of spying. 2 
Frequent spying or scouting. 

sgudach 1,** s.f. Continuel cutting. 2 Sweep- 
ing giit. 3 Nimble motion. 

sgudadh, -aidh, s.m. Lopping of cleverly, hew- 
ing down at a blow. 2**Sweeping gait. A’ s—, 
pr.pt. of sguil. 

sgudag.** -aig,s.f. Female with a sweeping gait. 
2 Active, tidy girl. 

sgudal, -ail. -an, s.m. Fish guts, offal, filth. 
*Trash, refuse of anyth'ng. 

NC STE -aiche, @& Abounding ia offal or 

ith, 

sgudalair, see sguidilear. 

sguga, -n & caan, s.m. & f. Coarse clumsy 
person. 2tfPerson in a crouching pos5ure, 

sgugach, -aiche, a. Coarse, clumsy. 2(DU)Shy 
and awkward. - 

sgugach,* -aich, s.m. Soft, boorish fellow. 

sengiirneach (AF) s. m. Useless or worthless 
bird, 2 see sgug. — S. de dh’ ian deireadn 
Foehr, ’s mairg a dh’ fheith ri d’ bhreith 's 
a’ Mhart, useless bird at harvest-end, pity those 
who waited for your birth in March—applied 
to clumsy workers, more in the way than use: 
iul. —N GP 

sgnibhir,** s.m. Squire, esquire. 

sguiblich,** v.a. Tuck up. 

sguich,(AH) s.f Booty, spoil, plunder---A rgyll 

sguideireachd, see sguidilearachd. 

eguidilear,-eir,-an, sm. & f. Dirty drudge, 
scullion, 


o 


~ 


sguidilearachd 826 


siab 





aguid.learachi, ¢ fini. Foul drudgeay, siuctisu 
11 e43. 

sguids, v.a. Thrash, switch, lash. 3 
Dress flax. (Scofs, skutch.) 

sguidseach, -ich,-icnean, s.m. & f. Stripling,prov. 
2*Very tall, slender young manu. 3 Prosti- 
tute, prov. 4ftLaà1k young girl. 

sguids-adh, -ida, s.m. Switching, act of switch- 
ing, thrashing or lashing. 2 Act of dressing 
flax. A’ *—,pr pt. of s:uids. Deirca lh mo sgéi 
mo s., the end of ny tale will be whipping. — 
(Ge confess an | be hanged. 

Szuidsevr,** -eir, s.m. Beetle, thresher, dresser 
of fl ix. 

ag tidseineach, -ich, s m. sae sgui lseach. 

sguitsic,** see szuids. 

sr ulbaeach, see yuilbne2ach, 

sva'),* s. Tray. 

srüile, see szulan, 

agru leaca,** -ich s.m. Rubbish, refuse. 

sia l13 i, GD. -an, 32e Sgulan, 

si tilear (Cit) son. Mean c moemotible fetlow — 
south end of Arran. | 

Bruiils,** s, on. Kotcuan-boy. 

Ssgrailleir,** s.m Scullery. 

sguir, »r pl. Ai szur & a’ srurachd, v.a. & n.Stop 
ceis3, leave oif, terminace, desist, settle. 
TtCause to stop. S. dheth, desisti, be don» with 
it; mu'n do s. sinn, before we stopped ; nach s. 
thu P will you not stop ? 

svuicb,** s.f. Coisvtion. 

syuirbsa 1n,** -ida, s.m. Condemning, con lemn- 
abiou. 

Bguirid, -e, -ean, s.f. The lap. 2 Lapful. 3 Shift, 
smock, 4 Apron. 5 Skirt. 

sziurd, v. see sgiord. 

—— —eaca,tf -eiche. a In lapfuls, 

s ùirl-shoirbhei:, (M53) s.f. Mackerel-gale. 

s uiridh, fut.af.a. of sguir, 

sgùirt, -e, -an, see saiord. 

3, ses sgiordite, 

szuit, -e, pl. -eau & -ichean, sf. Board on the 
bottom of an open boat, fore and aft, on 
whicu passengers piace their feet, foot-boar:l. 
2 Stern-seatiu a boat. 3 $.pl. *Skates. 4(DM 
K) Basket used for holding wool, something 
of the shape of a beehive aud made of straw 
or twigs —Lochbroom. | 

sguit, -ean, s.m. Wanderer. 

Szuit, locative of sgov, Piece of land cut off an- 


other. 

szui -dheiridh, : 

erui OH see bata, p. 77. 

sguiteal, Gaelic -pelling of scuttle. 

syuithe (AF) s Pig. 

gjuitlear,** er, s.m. Low, menial drudge. 

uchd,** s.f. Meuial drudgery, scullery. 

syuUlis, see sguids. 

Bruitseich see sguidseach 

Syuitseailh, see sguidseada 

sguitsear, see syul.lseac. 

sgula, s.m. see sgulag. 

ggulaz. s.f. Little person. 

sgulag, -aig, -an, s.f. Basket for holding the lin. 
en—Suth d. 2see sgalag. 2 Basket for fish- 
ing-lines. 

sgulair, -ean, s. m. Large old hat. 

Bgüirteach,** s. Skirted. 2 Having a shirt or 
sinock. 

egülan, -ain, -an, s.m. Wicker basket for fish- 
ing-lines, 2 Potato-basket. [u short in Arran 
—QR.] 3 Large coarse basket made of willow 
twigs, hamper. 4 Creel. 

&zulan, ain, -an, s. m. Little old man. 2 Old 
man. 

ach,(AC) a. Flippant. : 

————ach,(AC) -aich, & m, Flippancy, 2 Evil. 


2 Drive. 


2 Scullery. 


L4 
-d 











| 


NTER 


| | f 
" L 
& Im Nom gr m 
IET ARCHIVE 
= LE S X vL 


| speaking. Shallow person, 

seu an-là mhe, s.m. Maund. : 

sùm, $n. Foam, scum. .;[fRefuse S. ant 
Svozhail, the refuse of in nxind. 

'Sgu'in, And so that. Tog brìgh do chluiche 
'sgu'mfai:zhinn a bhi g imeachd, take tha 
stak» of your gain», so that I way get away— 
W.H 1.12, ) 

sgumach,** a. Scummy, frothy. 

sgurn'idair, -ean, sm. Scummer. 

—eachd,** s.f. Business of scumming. 2 
Contin ued seumm:ng. 

sg üman, -ain, -an, s.m. Bag forme bv tempor- 
arily githeriug up tne four corners of a square 
of cloch, and often usel as a strainer, 2 Skiri, 
train tucked up. 3 Tawdry head-dresx 4 
track of corn. 5 Lock of hairon th» fore- 
head, especially of sheep. 6 Baling-disn fora 
boat. 7**3kimining-dish. 8 Stack of corn —- 
McL & D 

sgùm vr, (A H)s. m.see sguman. 2 Uncidy person. 

srumhan,(AC) -ain, s.m. Lobe. 

s; umnuara,^* a. Fat. [dowdy, prov. 

sruimnraxz, -aig, an, s.f. Fire-shovel. 2 Slattern, 

svilimragach, -aicne, a. Siovenly, 2**Slatteruly. ` 

sgùr, pr.pt. a’ sgùradh, v.a. Scour, wash, clean, 
rub up, purge. 2 Purify. 3 Burnish. A’ sgùr- 
adh nau iarunn, polishing the fire-trons. 

sgur, s.m. Desisting, ceasing, leaving off,giving 
over, cessation, Stopping. 2** Termination, 
conclusion. A’ s—, pr pt. of sguir. Buidh- 
eachas gun S., thanks without ceasing ; gun se, 
Uncasin ply. 

syuracu,**a@. Aperient. 2 Scouring, burnishiog, 
cieansing, purging, purifying. 

sgurachd, s.f. & pr.pt. of sguir, see sgur. 

sgurachdainn,* see sgur. 

sgüradair,** s.m. Burnisher, cleanser, 

sgürada, -aidh, s.m.Clexusing, act of cleanging, 
scouring, burnishing, purging, purifying. A 
s—, pr.pt. of sgùr. i 

sgurainn, $.f. Washing-water, scourings, ley, 
topiash. 2** Water in which much soap hag 
been dissolved in the course of clothes-wash- 
ing, called in Broad Scots, sappte. 3tfseeds. 
4* Any trash of liquor, va contempt. 

sgur-éill,** see sgór-éild d 

sgùrr, -a,-an, s.m. High, sharp-pointed hill, 3 
Large conical hiil (sgor.) 

sgùrrach, d, Rugged. 

sgurt,* see sgiut. 

«gut, see sgud, e 

szüt, -uit, see sgud. 

sgutach, see sgudach. 

sguiach,** see «gudach, 

sgutachd, see syudachd, 

szutachd, see sgudachd, 

3;uth, s. Spraiu. ; 

h For all words beginning with sh, see un-e 

S ) der $. 

shios, adv. Down, in position 

si, pers.pron She, see i, S. is never used to de- 
note the object after the verb like t. Phòs e 1, 
he married her. . 

's i. contr. for is, v. +i, pers.pron. It is she. 
'S i rogha nam ban òg, she is the chowe of dam- 
sls. 

's i, contr. for 1s, conj +i, pers.pron. And she. 2 
Asshe. 3 Whilst she. 

sia, @ see se. 

siab, pr.pt. a’ siabadh &a' siabail, v.a. & n.Rub, 
wipe, cleanse by rubbing. 2 Drift, as snow. 3 
Sweep along, pass by with quick motion. H 
Skim. 5 Snatch, snatch away, D Breathe 
away dust. 7 Fish, angle. &(CR) Casta line 
in angling, ‘‘ whip” a steam, 9(DC) Blow A- 
way, as thatch off a house in à store — Uist. 








Aë siab 
A’ cur 's a’ siabadh, snowing and drifting. 
Siab,** s.m. Wipe, rub. 2 Cleansing. 3 Fliuch- 
ing. Thug es. dha, he gave it a rub. 
-—uch, -aiche, a. Wiping, rubbing, cleansing 
by rubbing. 2 Passing along with a quick 
continuous motion. 3 Snatching, that snatch- 
eth. 4 Flinching. 5Sarcastic, cutting. 
——adh, -aidh, s.m. Wiping, act of wiping or 
rubbing. 2 Cleansing by rubbing. 3 Act of 
passing along with quick continuous motion. 
4 Snatching, act of snatching away. 5 Breath- 
ing away. 6tftSweeping. 7ffPlying a fishing 
rod. 8 Drifting—Arran. A’ s—, pr.pt. of siab. 
sirbail,** a. Abstergent. 
ESO (a), pr.pt. of siab. Angling—W. of Ross- 
shir’. 
siabair, -exn.$.m. Wiper, one who wipes or rubs. 
2sSnatcher, one who snatches. 3 Awkward 
fellow. 4 Cleanser, 5 **Sarcastic fellow, 
giabaiceachd, s.f. Wiping, rubbing. 2 Awkward- 
M345. 
siaban, -ain, s.m. Sand-drift, prov. 2 Sea-spray. 
3 tiSlight shower. The dry sand in whicn the 
muran (sea-maram) always grows is called s. 
when it drifts in a storm. The breaking of sea 
waves in a storm drifts in the same manner, 
and is called ** s, nan tonu móra.” 
Siabh, A -an, s.m. Dish of stewed periwinkles. 
— Hebrides. 2ttBroth of grouse. 
siabh,f v. see siab. 
ach, see siabach. 
sitbhidh, see siabadh. 
siabhair,* v.a. Tease, weary out. 
eachd,tt s.f. Skimming about like a 
swallow. 
siabhrach,f-aich, -aichean, s. m. Fairy. 2tt 
Ghost. [also siabhraich, e € 
siabhas, -ais, -an, s.m. Idle ceremony. 
siabhasach, -riche, a. Idly ceremonious. 
siabuinn, gen.sing. of siabunn. 
siabunn, nian, s.m., Soap.’ 
8i .bunnach, -aiche, a. Soapy. 
si:bunn-nim-ban-sith, s. m. Milkwort—Colonsay. 
siacair, see siachair. 
siach, v. @ Sprain orstrain a joint. 2 (CR) 
Avoil—Strathtay. 3** Filter. 
gixchadh, -aidh, s.m. Sprain, spraining. act of 
gpraining. 2 Scra.ch on tne skin, 3**filter- 
ing. A’ s—, pr.pt. of siach. 
gi yehair, -ean, 5,m. Pithless wretch. 
gia-haireach, -eiche, d. Pithless, contemptible, 
siachaireachl, s.f.ind. Pithlessness, want of 
ypirit. 
JS oer -e, a. Selfish. 
sia-chasvch, @ see se-cn iach. 
gia-chearnach, a. sé-chearnach. 
Sia-cheariaz, see sé-chearuag. 
. Siach-inntinn, see seacha-inntinn. 
'8 iad, contr. for is, v. c iad, pers.pron. It is they. 
2 Thy were the persons. [they. 
’s iad, contr. for is, conj. +iad, pers. pron. Anil 
siad, pers.pron. This pronoun is another form 
of iad, but it is not, like :al, emoloyed to de- 
note an object after an active verb. S. is used 
in such expressions as, Mharbh s. iad, they 
kili-4 them. (the Gael never say, mharba iad 
si vd.] 
sial, s»e seòd. 
siad,* v. n. Sheer, go obliquely. 
skulk. 
siad,-a,-an, s.m. Stink. 2 Laziness, sloth. 3 
t{Filthiness. 4 Fusty smell. 
sia iach, tf -aiche, a. Having a fusty smell. 
siadair, -ean, à, m. Stinkard. 2 Filthy person, 3 
Lazy fellow, shufHer. 4 Sneaking fellow. 5 
Buzzard. 6* Sly, skulkinz fellow. 7** Booby. 
numnmskull. SA 








2"*Sneak, 


Pn 


837 
siadair,* v.n. Stink. 


siantachd 


siadaireacnl, 8. f. Filthiness. 2 Laziness, 3 
SJinkiug, shuffling, sly conduct, sneaking. 4 
Meanness. 5 Stuvidity. 

sia-deug, see sé-deng, 

siadha,(AC) Uesticle. S. coin-ghéarr, the testicle 
of the wolf. 

siadhail,** s.f. Sloth, sluggishness. 

siadh in, -ain, s.m. State of con'usion, 

sia lhan,** a. Confused, topsy-turvy. 

sia'ach, a. Harum-scarum—A rran. 

siaman, see siom vu. 

siamarlan,** Ain, s.m. Gaelic spelling of cham- 
berlain. 2 Factor. 2 Land-azent. 

sian, -ine, Lan, s. m. Shriek, scream, roar. 2 
*3queil, 3**Voice. 4 (AC) Soft, sorrowful 
music, generally applied to the music heard 
in a fairy Knoll. 5* Drawling scream. 6(DC) 
App2arance. S. fala mu d shùilean, an ap- 
pearance of blool about your eyes. 

sian, -a, -tan, see seun. 

, v.@ See seun. 





sian, pr.pt. a’ sianail, v. n. Scream, erg shriek. ` 


2*Squeal. 3 Yell, bellow. 4 sS-ream tedious- 
ly, raising one’s voice gradu lly. 

sian, -ine, -an, $. m. Pile of grass. 
barley. 

sian, 58.m.ind. see sion. 

sian, -ine, pl. siantan, siantaidh & siantaidhean, 
s.f. Any storm, as wiad, snow or rain. 2 Sea- 
son. 3 in pl. The elements. An dóéidh tàirn- 
eanaich a' gheamhraidh thig aon chuid side ro 
mhath no side nan s»ach.l] siantan, after win- 
ter thunder, comes either vory good weather or 
the weather of the seven «lem^n'8 —that is. the 
roughest weather that could possibly Gomz 
a mixture of wind and rain, snow and frost, 
thunder and lightning, and hailstone,  4** 
Blast, 5 (DO) Age, period. Gu sian-saozhail, 
to the world’s end. 

sianach,** o Scrzaming, shrieking, yelling, 
roarins. 2 Stormy, showery. 3 sees2unach. 

sianach (AF) eum, Monster. 

sianachd,** s.f.imi. Screaming, shrieking, vell- 
ing. 2 Storminess, coutiuued showers or 
blasts. 

siaradh, -aidh, s.m. £ pr.pt. Prov. for seunadh. 

sianaiche,** s. m. One who shrieks, screams, 
roars or yells. 2 (DO) Changeling, fairy-chilil. 

sianail, -e, s.f. Screaming, cryisg shrieking. 
syuealing, yelling. 2 Act of squealing or yell- 
ing. 3* Drawling, squealing, A s—, pr. pt. 
of sian. 

** a. Screaming, shrieking, yelling, 2 

Stormy. 3 Showery. | 

Sianan, see seunan. 

sia’nar, see seathnar. 

sianar,** a. Stormy. 2 Showery. 

sianas,** -ais, s.m. Hate, hating. 

ach,** a. Harmonious,me:o lious,p'easant. 

2 Dolefal. 

sian-steul,** s.m. Driving blast. A’ casgadh 
sian-steuda nan speur, calming the driving 
blasts of the sky. 

sian-bhnailte, past pt. Weather-beaten. 

. ——Ach,** æ. Exposed to the weather. 

sian-bhualadh,** -aidh, s.m. Beating of wind or 
weatner, 

siann, &. see sionn. 

S'annt, æ. see sionn. 

sianntan, S»e sincan. 

siansidh.** -Aidh, s.m. 
Pleasantn 33s. 

siansan,** ». Hum. 

siant, (portical) n.p’, of sian. 

siantach,** a. Stormy, rainy, showery, snowy, 

—— 1, ** s.f. Sturminess. 2 Showiness, 


2 Beard of 











Harmony, melody. 2 


siantaidh 


siautaidh, n.pl. of sian. 

- ——_——, -ean, 8.m. Hardy man, hero. 

siantan, pl. of sian. 

siap,* v.n. see scan & siab, 

S Aach, see siabach. 

siapadh, see s.abadh. 

siapunn, se- siabunn. 

siar, a. The west, westward. 2 Back, back- 
ward, behiad. 3 Sideways. asvl». 4** On- 
wards. Gu tràigh s., toa w»^st»rn shore ; ruith 
e S. le tartar, he rushed onwards with a@ noise; 
sar ort, to the westward of yore. 

——, tf à. Oblique. 

Siar, pr.pt. a’ siaradh, v.a. & n. Cast awry, move 
or throw obiiquely or awkwardly. 2* Lurch. 
Slt Waste. 4 Decay. 5 (CR) Sprain—Skye. 
Sh. mi mo chas, I sprained my ankle, 

8 arach Lat Melancholy. 

S ;ra lh, -aidh, -ailhean, s.m. Casting. 2 Act 
of casting obiiyuely. 8ffObliqne line.  4ff 
Decaying. 5(MS) Caracole, 6 (DC)Obliyuity 
of vision—Gair:och. A’ s—, pr.pt. of siar. lha 
loann dubh air mo sh., melancho’y is wasting 
an?.—R, 71. 

S'araich, v. see siar. 

siaraidhean,(CR) s.p/. Eheumatis'n, (Jit. contor- 
bions)—SutA'd. 

Siarainnich, pr.pt. a’ siarainneacha‘th, v.n. Lan- 
gani, pine away. 2fttTurn, becoine sour, as 
milk. 

sia-ràmhach, see sé-ràmhach. 

Si iran chadh, -aidh, san. Languishing. 2 State 
of languishing or piuinz away. A’ s—, pr.pt. 
of slaranaich. 

siaranaich,pr.pt. a’ siaranachadh, v.n. Languish, 
piue away. 

siaħ-shùil, -shùla. -shüilean, s.f. S uint-eye. 2 
**Obli jue or side look. 

‘ach,  -eiche, a. 
Squiaüv-eved. 

sias, (for sìos.) Cha bhi slat a sias (sìos) o chrùn 
deth, miaun gach sul e annus an fnaidhir, 
not a yarl of it will be less than a crown, 
'tinitl be sought by everyone at the market — 
Donn, Bàn. p. 155. 

fsiasar, -air, s.m. Session, sitting of a court as- 
sizes. 

& i-shlisneach, see sé-shlisneach, 

siv-sal'sneag, see se-shlisneag. 

siainadh, s.m. Wasting, decaying, fading away, 
— Ito? Donn. 

siut,** son. Tumour, swelling, puffing up. 

"Én, Swell, puf uo. 

s ataidh ! int, Pass! (call to a cat.) 

siatag, s.f. Sciatica, rheumatism. 

sicham, se» seatham 1. 

Sit, see sioban. "'Nuaàir a chuir iad sinn air 
Lir am measg sibein (siabain) is murain, wren 
tay landed us mid sa d-drift and sea-bent— 
Dianair’,7l ; thog bàrr-zaucaz fairge gu sib- 
ean (siaban), the foain of the sew rose to spin- 
drift —Sgoulaich?-nan--ao!, p. 101. 

sibh, vers. pron. 2nd. pers. pl. Ye, you. [Used 
instead of thu, when a tlr2ssinz a person old- 
er or of higher social rank than the spaker, 
als» when speaking to more than on? verson 
collectively of any age or rank. la Arran, 
the use of thu and sivh is determined solely by 
num er, and never by age or rank, except 
that oll paop!e say sibh to a minister-—CR.] 
Emphatic forms, sibh-se, sibh-iéin, yourself, 
yours2ves. 'Déanisibh ? what wil! ye do ? 

8: bhexg,(DC) sf. Wiex of a lamp—Uist. 

sibhealta, -eilte, a. see sinvbhalta, 

chd, see siobhaltachd. 

sibheilt, see siobhalt.. 

— —- —eachd, see sìobhaltachd, 


Looking awry. 2 











Digitized l 
AITE ee A my oJ 
dIERNET ARCHIV 


833 


sigeantach1 


sibhin,$ s. Bulrush, see luachair-ghobhlach. 

si Mrs E -eich, -an, s.m. Fairy, specure, appar 
ition. . ! 

sibireachail,* -e, a. Fairy-like. 

sithreag,(CR) s.f. Fairy. . 

sibi-sz, emphatic form of sibh. 

sibht,* Gaelic spelling of shift. 
vance, sudterfu ze. | 

sibhteach,** æ. Fullof shifts, schemes or plans, 
contrivant. 

sibitealachd,s.f. Providentness. 2**Contrivance. 
3 Cunning, craftiness. 

sibhteil, -e, a. Shifty, inventive, 2 Provident, 
thrifty. 

sic, -e,-ean, s.f. The prominence of the belly. 
2. Peritoneum, 3 The inner skin which is next 
ths viscera in anima s. 4 (AC) see sicean, 
Bnur's an t-sic, the inn’r skin broke ; màm-sic, 
rupture, Ben o. 5 ses seic. 

sic, (CR) -e, -ean, s.f. Snatch. 2 Attempt. 3 
S1dden efort to take hold of one. 4** Sud- 
dea personal ons2t, swoop.  5** Firmness, 
strength. 6**Ins le of the skuil. . Rug e lo 
S, he grasped suddenly ; thug aa cù s. air, the 
dog snapped at him ; thug e s. as A dhéidh, he 
mad? a snap after him. | AU from Rerthshire. 

sic, v.n. Dash to, lay hold or. 

tsic, a. Dry, purched, droughty. 

S c2. $ s. f. s23 craoóbh-shice. 

sicean (AC) s m, Particle, grain, infinitessimal 
quantity. S. sil, a small grain of seed; 

sj^h:l, -3, -ean, S.f. see sic, 

sichd,* v.n. s»e sic. 

siciamin,$ s. Mulberry, (sycamine in Bible), see 
maot-dh 2arc. 

sicir, -e, a. Surewd, sagacious, wise, 2**Acut». 
2 Prudent, stealy, firm, sure. 
**Advisadle. 6**Advised. 7**Not easily im- 
posed upon. 

——Peachd, s.f.ind. Accuracy, acuteness. 2 Man- 
agement. 3 Consilerateness. 4 Advisableness, 
5 Prudence, sagaciousness. 

gid,T see siod. 

sid, e, s. f. Weather, good or bad. 2 Abate- 
meut of a storm. 3 Abatement of rave. paci- 
fication, cessation, 4** see sioda. 5* Mool 
humour. [McL & D gives sm]  'Nuair a ni 
e sil, when the storm arates ; dé an sid a tt? 
ort Pin what humour are you ? am bheil s. air 
a nis P is his rage abated? sid mhath, good weg- 
ther ; droch shid, bad weather. 

sid,** s.m. Lair, as of a bear. 

sideach,** a, see siodach. 

—l,** s.f. see siodachd. 

fsideadh, -ilh, -idhean, s.m. Blast, as of wind. 

sideil,* -e & sileiliche, a. More molerate, as 
wind. 2 In good humour, in good temper, as 
a, person. 

sidhe,** s.f. se» sidheadh. 

--——ach,(AF) s.m. Wolf. 

sidheidh,** -idh, s.m. Blast. 

tsi lheang, s.m. Infamy. 

tsidhich, v.a. Prove. (suidhich.). 

sid-na'ch, (an), em»hat. form of sid—Badenoch 
& Glon Urquhart, (siodanaich.) 

sfueaz,(CR) W. of Ross tor siobhag, (wick.) 

3ifian,(DU) s.f. see sithfean. i 


Plan, contri- 


sifir, 
sifire, (AO) s.m. Male fairy. 
sifreach. (sibhrea^h ) 


sizeica,* -eiche, a. Slim. 2Slimy. 3(DC) Sly. 
sigsan, -ain, -29, $. m. Diminusive creature, 2 
Silly p-rson or thing. 3 (*sigeann) Pleasant 
countenanca. 

sa, -einte, &, Diminutive. 2 Silly. 3 Də- 

lighi‘ul, pleasant. 4* Cheerful, 
vachd, sjf.ind. Diminutiyeness. 2 Silli- 
Original.fram 


La Imm rg; 
| | i EH ke [d 
LA^ h L J 








ELE 


| r3 Si d A d gm | A RA rr d gm d 
ri Fa III Li mw T eh 
Se E Wf 1! |! ^13 Yu | !4 Z FA L 


4 Acenrate. 5 


" Nr "T 
i d L J J A 


A 
ee f 


< 


D 
-. 
o c. Wi EE e e D 


SÉ e? + Zä) e 


" £g 
s 
Ze 


sigeantachd 


ness. 3 Delivhtfulness. 
Affability, complacency. 

sigh,* v.n. Glide, skip, dash forth,dart. A’ sigh- 
eadh armullaci nam bean, skipping on the 
ton of the hilis ; sh. i seachad, she glided by. 

sigh, see sith. 

signeach, see silheach. Mi 

gigheadh,* -eilh, s.m. Gliling, vanishing, skip- 

ing. see s thead.  A'S , pr. pt. of sigh. 
huy ean s. ul, he made sucha bolt. 

sigheanv. see sithionn. 

. signear,** er, s.m. Mountaineer. 

 gizhich, s.m. dr see sìthich 

sighideach,* -eich, 8. m. Spectre. 
Person taken away by the fa'ries. 

fsizhin, Gaelic spelling of sign. 

ich, v.a. Sign, mark. 

fsigir, s.f. Silk. 

sizirean, AF) s.f. Silk-worm. 

ts zie, s.f. Seal, 

tsignea l, eil, Gaelic sgelling of signet. 

sil, pr. pt. a sileadh, n.a. & n. Drop, distil. 2 
Drop, drip, shed, let fall in drops 3 Cause to 
drop. 4 Rain 5 Shower. Shile, it rained ; 
&' silea.ih o 'n taigh, dripping from the house ; 
mu'ns. e, ere it rain; a’ sileadh nan deur, 
shediling ‘ears ; tha e a’ sileadh, tt ts vaimingi 
silidh au là, 1t will »a/n 

gil, -e, -ean, s.m. Drop, see sile, 
tear—a droppin: of the eves,. 

ail,** -e, s.f. Shower, heavy rain. 

gil, gn. sing. of sioi. 

silc, (AC) se» sic an. 

Silc^an,( AC) see s cean, 

sile,(AC) s.f. Nectar  2/AT) Milk. Blas nas. 
'nam bhile, the ta te of nectar on my lips. 

gile, -an, s.m. Spittle, saliva 2(AC) Salve. 3 
** Issue. 

sileach, -eiche, a. Spitting, that spits. 2 see gil- 
teach. 

sileach,** ag. Rainy, showery. Aimsir sh., skow- 
ery weather. 

sileachadh, -ailh, s.m. Spitting, act of spitting 

or slavering. A’s—, pr.p!. of silich. 

` gileadach, -aich, en, s.n. Handkerchief. 

sileadan, -ain, -an, s.m. Sp ttoon. ( 

sileadh,( AC) -lidh,s.m. Stem-platform in a boat. 

gileadh, -idh, -ean, s.m. Dropping, act or s: ate 
of dropping, distilling. 2 Raining, dripping 
of rain through a roof during a shower. 3 
*Dispensation, economy. 4 Shedding. 5 Is- 
sue, issuing. 6 Drop, drip. <A’ s—, pr.pt. of 


2 Fairy. 3 
Uert 





S. nan sul, a 


Mar shior-shileadh uisge tha aimhreitean 


mnà, d&s the continual dropping of waters are the | 


contentions of a woman; fo sh. au t-s.isgeil, un- 

der the gosvel dispensation ; fo sh, an t-Seann 

Tiomnaidh, under the Mosaic dispensation ; 

gach s., every drap ; s. na h-oidhche, dew ; s. 

nan speur, rain s. nan Sul, tears ; à sùil & s., 

her tears faliing —ü!. ner eyes shedding. 

- gileadh, 2rd.pers.sing. & pl.imp. of sil. 

-suith (DMK) s. m. Rain percolating 
through the svoty thatch of a house and fall- 
ing in iarge black drops indelibly staiuinz 
everything it comes iu contact with—Cuwith- 
ness. 

Sileag, -eig, -an, s.f.,dim. of sil. Little drop. 

— —- Ach, -aiche, a. Falling in small drops,drip- 
ping. 








— gilean,(AC) see sicean. 


^. lean, -ein, -an, s.m.,dim. of sìol. Small single 
grain. 2 The worst part of grain. 3 Stunted 
grain. 

ach, a. Abounding in small grain. 
&ile-reuin, see sile-ronn. 

. sile-ronn,* s.m, Salivation. 

.Bilich, pr.pt. a’ sileachadh, v.n. Spit, slaver. 





839 
4* Cheerfulness. 5 


sin 





siliche. an, s.m. Spare, meazre, lean, pithless 


creacure, 

silid'1,** s. Breed, pedigree, genealogy, lineage, 
race, 

silidi, fut.aff.a of sil. Shall or will drop. 

«llim-a«, H uf Ross for seamrag. 

si:in,$ se» eraobh-shuris. 

siliue2g (CR) s.f. W. of Ross for seamrag. 

sil-shüil, s.f. Watery eye. 

eich, -eiche, a. Fearful. 2 Watery-eyed, 
blear-eyed. 

silt, -e, -ean, $.f. Drop. 3 Issue. (** 
gives silce for nom. ] 

siite, past pt. of sil. Dropped, distilled. 

——ach, -eiche, a. Droppiug, that drops, drip- 
ping, oozing, moist. 2 Issuing, as matter from 
a Sore, runvinz, as a" ulcer. 3 Serofulous, 4 
Tearful. 5**|'hin, fading. 6* Often raining. 
7* Discharge. Suil sh., a tearful eye ; uair 
sh., showery weather ; cneadh s., æ scrofulous 
issie. 

—-ach, -ich, -ichean, s.f. Issue, discharge. 2 
pl. Scrofula. 3**Flowers, 4**Person arflict- 
ed with scrofulous sores, Ma dhüiuear a suas 
'fheoil o 'shilteach, tf his flesh be stopped from 
his issue ; làithean a siltich, the days of her 
menstruation ; air son a shiltich, on account 
ef his i8 tt. 

silteachail, -e, a. Ichorons. 

silteavhan,** -ain, s.m. Stili. 2 Distiller. 

silteachd, $.f.ind. Coistaut droppiag. 2 Ulcer- 
ous habit. 3*Kaininess. | 

siltichean, s. pl, Scrofula. 

simeaviia-guild,(AH) s.f. Falseness, fraud, de- 
ceit, guile. 

simear, (DMK) s.m. Long rafter of à kiln— 
Caithness. 

simii, -e, -ean, s.m. Mallet, beetle, batlet. 2 
**Rammer. 3 Rolling-pin. 4 (AH) Beetle 
(insect.) P 5 (DMy) Potato-masher. 6(PMy) 
Tail-valf of fishes. Ceann-simid, a tadpole ; s. 
an truisg, the tai/-ha/f of the cod ; s, na bior- 
aich, the tail-half of the dog-fish. [** gives 
nom, simide & s.f.] 

sim.deach, -eicie, œ. Formed like à mallet or 
beetle, or rolling-pin. 2 Of a hammer or ram- 
mor, 

simidean,* ssm. see simid. 2tfTadpole. 

simileach, tf -ica -ichean, s.m. Coward. 

———Altt s.f. Cowardice. 

similear, -eir, -an, s.n. Chimney, vent. Gaelic 
form of chimney. — Ceann simileir, à chimney- 
sia k ; troimh an t-simileir, through the vent. 

Similearach, -aiche, a. Of, or belongiag to, chim» 
neys. 

similearaich, v.a. Put a chimney on. 

te, past pt. Cmmneye'i. 

Siiuilidh, -e, a. Cowardly, dascardly. 
silly. 

sinisd,(CR) sf. Beam, of which there were 
three, laid across a corn-kiln to support the 
' sticleau beaga,” see sticil.— Wofoss-shire. 

simleag, -eig, -an, $.f. Silly woman, 

sim nach,** ot, Simoniacal. 

—(q,** s.f. Simony. 

-imonaiche,** s.m. Man guilty of simony. 

simplich,** v.g. Simplify. 

simplidh, o Simple, single-hearted, artless, 2 

Silly, 3**Plain, meek, mean. 4**Unalert. 

eachd, s f.ind. Simpleness or singleness 
of heart, plainness, honesty. 2 Silliness. 3 
Unaffectedness, ineekness, 4 Unalertness. 5 
**WVeanness, Na biodh s. oirbh, let there be 
no unaleriness in You. 

sin, demons.pron. That, those. Na daoine sin, 
those men ; an duine sin, that man ; an t-àm 
sin, that time ; mar sin, in that manner ; ’se 
siu ri ràdh, that is to say ; an sin, then, on 





——— 


2 Spittle, 








2 Feeble, 


LHNIVERSITY DE 
VIN dek: LIF 


i 1 
v LL = 
tee a 
| | 1 ) Fi 
^ bh Va 
= LA i 


E. Te? = d 
, i | 
d Os A 


NA-CHAMPAIGN 


Sin 


that occasion ; there,in that place ; an sin fhéin, | 
at that very time ; in that very place ; sin mar 
a thàinig e, it was in that ma ner he came ; 
mar sin sìos, and 80 on ; o Sin, since. 

sin ! int. There! Well done! Sin ! sin ! enough! 
enough ! ; ain thu, a laocnaia ! well done, my 
good fellow! asan &n thu! Ge of with you; 
sin agad sin! there it is for you! sin thu- 
fhéin ! well dome yourself ! 

sin, pr.pt. a’ sineadh, v.a. Stretch. 2 Increase 
in lergun, stretch out. 3 Hand, reach any- 
thing to another. 4**Prolong.  5* Pursue, 
chase. 6**Grow in stature. 7* Lean or lounge 
on a bod. 8 Lie at fuil length. 9ffxcend. 
10 (DU ) Begin, commence. 

S. dhomn sin, kand me that; s. do làmh, 
Stretch out your hand ; s. do làmh dha, extend 
your hand to hün ; drub him : tha e a’ sineadh, 
he is growty ; ma shineas Dia mo laithean, if 
God prolong my days ; Sh. sinn orra, we pur- 
sued them with all our might; an dé«h sìn- 
idh, having commenced ; sh. i ris, she was se- 
duced by hum; s air, chase him ; tha e "n shin 
eadh, he is leaning or lounging on the vel;sh eas, 
he hurried of—W.S. 2. 216 ; shininn mo làmh, 
1 would stretch my hand ; sìnidh e a làithean, 
he will prolong his. days. 

gin, pr.pt. a’ sineadh, v. see toisich, 

sìn, -e, siantan, sf. see sian, 

s.udeagaich, v.a. Pace. | 

sine,** s.f Age, oldness. A’ shine chas-aod- 
ainneach, wrinkled a7’. 


sine,* -an & -achan, s. f. Teat, dug, nipple. 2 
(AF) Udiler. 

Sine, comp. of sean, Older, elder. 2 Oldest, 
eldest. Có dhiuoh a's sine P who of them is the 
elder, or elds! ? 

sine, gen. of sian & sion, 2 gen. of sithionu, 

sine, s.f. Blast, stormy weather, see sian, 

8 ne:ch, -eiche, à. Having large dugs. 

sineachan, pl. of siae. 

sineacad,(MsS) s.f. Seniority. 

sineachdiinn, («n sineachiainn) adv. emphat, 
form of sin-—Bad ‘noch «€ Gacrioch. 

8inead, -eid, s.an. Seniority, degree of seniority. 
Air a sh.. let hàn be ever so oid ; an s.’S an 
donaid,war a bha cuilean a’ mhadaidh ruaidh, 
the older the worse, like the fox’s whelp. 

gineadair, gan, Scretcher, see bata, No. 38, p.76. 

sin‘ath, -idh, s.m. Stretching, act of stretching 
vr extending. 2Increasing in length, act of 
stretching out. 3 Act of reaching anything 
to another. 4 Lying at full length. 5 Pro- 
longing, act of prownging. prolongation, — 6 
Length, stretch, pursuit. 7 Pursuing. 8 
Bolding at full ;eungch, as of wool when it is 
being spun. 9 Reclining. lu Peiaymg 11 
(DU) Bezinning, commencing. A’s—, pr. pt. 
of sin. M. laicnean, fent of days; 'na shìn- 
eadh dlùth dhith, stretched besid2 her. 

gineag, sf. (AC) ijanadful of coru cut at one 
stroke of the reap ng-h»ok, z Wick made 
from a rush by pzei ng off the green covering, 
3 (DC) Wick of a lamp--Uist. CR) Rus — 
Dornoch, Creich. SOU) eat oí a child's 
feediny-buttle. 

Bineal.§ -eil, s.m. Stinking maywerd—anthemis 
colula. [Not found in the Highlands, but cum- 
mon 1n [reland.| iliust. 630. 

Sinein, ge» spealt. 

gine-bhog (AF) s. f. Soft crab. 

singil,** s. Bastinuade. 

singil,** v.a. Dress flax, prepare flax for the 
hatchel (geicil.) 2 Belabour, give a thrashing. 

singil,** v, Swinge. 

sineil, a. see simplidh. - 

singilear,** -eir, -an, s.m, One who prepares flax 
for the hatchel. 


D 


JITEBRNET ABCLIV 
` CN EN i CN | Li 
"E san LNS, i 


840 


a l0 
singilearachd,** s.f. Preparation of flax for thé 
hatehel, | 
singi!te,** o Single, alone, not double. 

iug one pieat. 3 Not mixed. | 
,"* past pt. of snzil. Dressed or prepared 
for the hatchzl, as flax. 


2 Have 





_hatchel (seieleadh.) 2 Belabouring,thrashiag, 
singlidh, fut.af.a. of singil. 
sinith, fut. of o of sin. 
siun, pers.pron We. us. Emphatic forms, sinne, 
sinn-féin. Rinn sinn e, we did it, we made it; 
their sinn, we shall say; siun-fhiu is sinn- 
fhìn, Cloiun Cholla (locally, Cl, Toila) Ghias- 
druim, dh’ fhalbh am pràbar ud,onrse/v-s ant 
ourselves, the MacColls of Glasdrum. that ra ;- 
ble has gone—a saying current in the Appin 
district, and ofteu used to point out sveciaily 


noticeable clannishness ; it is a'so usd asa. 


rallying-shout when playing games ; bnuail e 
sinu, he sivuck us. l 
sinne, emphat. form of sinn, 
sinue, ses sine, 
--——ach, see sineach. 
sinneach,** Ach, s./. Wen. 
sinneach, a. Mammal. 
sinnean,** ein, s.m. Little dug. teat or udder, 
sinn-seanair, -eail, Sm. Great-zrandfather. 
sinn-seanmhathair, -thar, -thraichean, s./. Great 
grandmother, i 
siniiseanach, (seann sionnach AF) am. Fox. 
sinn-seachad-sinn-seanair,* 8. m. Great-greate 
great-grandfather, ; 
sinn-seachad-sinn-seanamhathair,* s. f. Greate 
great-great-grandmother. 
i siunsear, -ir, -irean, s. m.coll. see sinnsir. 
, ir, -an, s m. Elder, the eldest. 
achd, svs sinnsireachd. 
sinn-sinn-seanair, sm. Great-great-grandfather, 
sinn-sinn-seanamhathair, *s.f.Great-great-grand- 
mother. 
sinnsir, -sre & e, -ean & -srean, s. [sing. in num- 
ber, coll. in meaning.] Ancestors, fathers. 
sinnsireach, -eiche, a. Patrimonial. 
2 An- 


Right of succession. 
cestry. 3 Genealogy, account of families. 4 
Customs of ancestors. 5 see sinnsir. 6**sSeni- 
ority, eldership.  7**Desceut.  8**Progeny. 
Mo sh., my ancestry, my fathers; gun S., wiih- 
out descent. 
sinnsireil, -e, a. Ancestral. ` 
sinnsre, see sinnsir. 
adh, see sinn ir. 


gleadh, -idh, s.m. Praparing of flax for the. - 


ect 8 


[across the slugan. 





sìnte, past pt. of sin. Stretched. 2 Increased 
in length. 3 Prolonged, exten:led. 
ed. 5 Grown in stature. 
aidry. T*Fətchel. S. r' a thaobh, siveiched 





Original from 


PET A- a 
| I^ VIE EM C | 
"EE VM LIS 


M'EN 8 c 
[1 = & ] 
d | > LA) 

— „A =} [3 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


4* Reach- ` 
6 Couchant, in Aer- | 


pem M. Bd 
PET. - . — 5 di 


sinridean,(AF) s.pl, Pieces of wood in Kiln, jaid 
| 


M 

Mi 
t 
"^i 
( 


ah 4 


Le 
ay 
— 
"Me 
Y 


E 





sinte 


oy his vide, 

sìnte, -an, ¢.m. Traces by which a horse draws 
a plough. 

sinteach, -ich, -ichean, s.f. see sìnte. 

=— ——, -elche, qt. Stra: «ht, long, extending 
far, extended, tall, 2* Prostrate. 3 Stretch- 
ing. 4With long steps. 6**Growing fast in 
stature, 

sìnteag, -eig, -an, s.f. Sxip, bound hop. 2 Pace, 
stride. s**Straight line, 4 Scanping-stuue, 5 
¢tStroke in swimming. Chr ghabh mi na 
sinteagau,l wil. not go the way of the stepping- 
stones. 

-———— ach, -aiche, œ. Skipping. bounding. 2 
Striding, making long sirides or paces, 3 
Bouncing. 

sinteagaici,** v, Pace. 

sinteag- -téidh, s.f. (stas's leap.) Old Highland 
linear measure equal to 30 English feet. 

Bintean "Tor siantan) m wl. of sian, 

sintealachd,( MS) s.7. Tractability, 

giob,* v. see siab. 

siobadh, -aidh, s.m. see siabadh. 

siobag, -aig, -an, $.f. Blast of the mouth, whiff, 


sidbaid, ** st Scaliion, onion, see uinnean. 2 
The plant cibol. 

each,** o Abounding in scallions, onions 
or cibols. 

siohail,* v. see siab. 

sioban, see siabunn. 

sioban,( AH) -ain, s.m. Spindrift, see siaban. 

siobann,$ s. Onion, see uinnean. 2**Cibol. 

gicbhach,§ s. Darnel rye-grass. see breòillean. 
siobhag, -a'g, -an, s,/. Straw. 2* Pilie of rye- 
grass. 3 Wick of a lamp cr cand'e. 

ach,** aq. Abounding in, or ilike straws. 

siobhaide, a. Blightiug. Le saighdean s, siùbh- 
lach 'gam leòn, wounding me with blighting 
swift arrows— Dàin 1. Ghebha. 

siobhailt, see sìobhalta. 

siobhailteaend, see sìobhaltachd. 

giobhalta, -ailte, a. Civil, courteous, 2 Peace- 
ful, mild, placid. 3 Obliging, kiad, urbane. 
(also siobhalt. ) 

——-—chd, s.f.ind. Civility, courtesy, peace- 
fulness. 

8, -ais, s.m. see siobhaltachd. 

siobhas, -ais, sm. Rage, madness, fury. 

ach, -aiche, do PEEN frantic, mad. 
siobhrag,** er, Elf. 

tsiobhraich, -e, -ean, s.f. Fairy work, magic, en- 
chantment. 

gioblach,* -aich, s.m. Streamer. 2 Long person. 
Sttsee siobladh. 4 (DU) ‘* Cast " of a fish:ng- 
line or tackle. 

Biobladh, -aidh, s.m. Fishing with the boat un- 
der weigh. 2 Time of tide suitable for fishing. 
3tt Result of one’s rod-fishiug. A’ s—, pr. pt. 
of siobail. 4 (DU) Fishing by trailiug the flies 
on the surface of the water. 

sioc ! int. Call to a goat—W. of Ross. 

tsioc, s.m. Frost. 2 The umbilical region. 

Tsioc, v.a. Freeze, 2 Dry up, grow hard. 

¢—aichte a, past pt. Frozen. 2 Dried up, grown 
hard. 3 Ovdurate. 

siocair,** s.m. Motive, reason. 2 Natural 3 
Ee 

v. See siach. 

eim Za Jf. Peace, quiet, repose, comfort. 

siochadh,* -aidh, see siachadh, 

siochaich, ** yt, Assuage compose, settie,calm. 

2 Grow compos +d or ‘calm, 

eiochaithy(CB) s.m. Peace— Perthshire. 

siochail,* -e, a. Peaceful, quiet. 2 Causing 














.. peace or quietness. 3 Pros perous, Gu s., 
peacefully 
Digitized t 
ITERNET ARCHIVE 


841 


siogada-sinn-seanaireach 


siochaiche,** s,m. Peace-maker. 

siochaileachd, see siochalachd. 

siochaint, -e, s. f. Peace, peacefulness, quiet, 
repose. 2 Assuagement. 

—each, -eiche, @ Peaceful, tranquil. 2 

Silent. 3**silencing. 4*Undisturbed, uamo- 

lested, 
—eachil,* s.f. ind. Peacefulness quietude, 
2 Appeasablenes s. 3 Happy repose and peace. 
Siochair, -e, -ean, s. m. Dwarf. 2 Fairy-like 
person, 3 Contemptible fellow, trifling per- 
son, brat. 

siochaiuteil,( MS) æ. Appeasable. 

sSiochaintiche, s.m, Peace-maker. 

slochaireach, -eiche, a. Dwarfish. 2 Mean, con- 
tem^tibie, 

siochaireachd, s.f.ind. Dwarfishness. 2 Con- 
temptible habits. 3 Personal insignificance, 
4 Pusillanimousness, 5* Trifling conduct, 
quantity or consideration. 

siochaire-baic,(AH) s.m, Boy who, when peats 
are being cut, lifts on. to the bank any that 
may accidentally fall off the p-at-spade. 

siochalachd,* s. f. Peacefulness, quietude. 2 
Peaceableness. 3 Peace- making. 

siocharra,(AC) s.pl. Fairy darts 

siochchath,** s.f. Peace, tranquility, abstain- 
ment from war. 2 Silence. 

siod, demons. pron. Yon, that, there. An siod, 
yonder, there ; s. an duine, yonder is the man; 
an siod 's an seo, there and here ; s. e, yonder 
he is ; siod agad siod, there i$ your match; s. 
fhé'n, for every reason, because I thought it 
prover ; mar s. 's mar seo, that way and this 
way ;S. an t-àite, yonder is the,place ;'dé bha'n 
s. P what was that ? ; c' ar son s. P why yon 
way ? an téid thu an s. ? will you go yonder ? 
chaidh eau s., he went yonder ; s. mar a dh’ 
iomehair e 'chluiche, yon is the way he played 
his cards ; an deach thu an s. ? did you go yon- 
dr, to yon place * ; s. an làmh a thogas an t- 
sleagh, there is the hand that can play venge- 
ance with the spear ; s. mar à chìteadh an 
Greugach, thus was the Grecian seen ; s. mar 
a thachair dhuinn, so it happened to us. 

sioda, chan, s.m. Silk. ‘Trusgau de shioda, à 
garment of silk. 

,* a. Silken, of silk. 

PLAN -aiche, og Silky, silken. 

- — chail,** a. Niiken. 

-——chan, emphat. of siod. 

-——chd,** s,7. ind. Silkiness. 

-——il,-e, a. Silky, like silk. 

siodail,ttpr. pt. a’ siodal, v.a.Milk the last drop, 
2 (DO) Nag, importune—A rqyll. 

sioda-lus.$s.;n. Kaggel robin—lych nis flos-cuculi. 

Siuda-monaidh, s.m. Cotton-grass, mountain silk 
—eriophorum, 

siod-chruimh, -e, Gan, s.f. Silk- 
wonn,see cruimh-shiod.. 

siodha,(AC) s. Fay, fairy. 

siodhach,(AC) s.m. Fay, fairy. 

siog," s. f. Cadaverous appear- 
ance, 

siog4,* s.m. Weakling. 

sioga, s.m. Streak. 2 Rick. 

siovach, -aiche, a. Pale, ill-look- 
ing, ill-coloured. 

siogacu, -aichs, a. Inactive, 
lazy. 2 Greasy, siimy. 3** 
Streaked. 4 ** Ill-shaped. 
Eòrna s., barley nut weli-ful- 
ed in the grain, or reaped be- 
for» it was ripe. 637, Stodu-monaidh. 

sioga 'h (AF) s.m. Wolf. 

sio : 'ada- sinn-segnaireach (AC)a.Sly, old-fashiort- 
ed Cno siogada-sini- -seanaracn ri Sionüusaca 

3G 














siogada-sinn-seanaireach 


na Maoile (Maol Chinntìre), as great-great- 
great-grandfatherish as the fox of the Mull (of 
Kintyre.) 

siogaid, -ean, 8m. Lean, dwarfsh, weakly fel- 
low. 2Starveling. 

each, -eicb, s.m. see siogaid. 

each, -eiche, a. Lean, cadaverous, famish- 

-ed looking. 2 Dwarfish, bony, ill-made —sar- 
Obair. 

Siogaidh,** -ean, s.m..Fairy. 2 Pigmy. 

Slog.idh, o Twining—applied to the motions 
of aserpent, and hence to music, which twines 
and coils round the heart. It is transiated 
calming in W. A. Tales. 

Tsiogaii,** a. Streaky, striped. 

sioguisteach,** a. Shapeless and long in person. 

2 Having long limbs. 3 Tough. 

——d,** s.f. Shapelessness of person. 
Toughness, 

siogan,** -ain,s.m. Gizzard. 

Sioglachadh, -aidh, s.m. Milking or sucking to 
the last drop—Sleat. 

Siogladh, -aidn, s.m. Sucking an udder to the 
last drop. 

siogar, Gaelic form of cigar. 

Slogaran, s.m. Cigarette. 

Siol, sil, s.m. Seed of any kind. 2 Progeny, des- 
cendants. 3** Ancestry. 4 Tribe, clan, 5 
Spawn or roe of fish. 6**Corn. 7**Oats. A 
shil nam fonn ! O children of song !—i.e.bards. 
[Generally aspirates a proper name following 
it, except one commenciug with 7.] Siol 
Phiarmaid—a/so Siol Diarmaid (ua Duibh- 
uich,) the Campbells ; Sìol Torcuil, the Mac- 
Leods of Lewis ; s. gruinnd, seed for sowing. 

siol ! * int. Mode of calling geese. 

siol, s.m. Sprat (fish)—c/«pea sprattus. 

sivl,** v.d. d n. Sow. 2 Drop, spill, drivel. 

810la, Chan, ëm. [ f. in Badenoch]. Gill, gill mea- 
sure. 2 pl. Wooden hames for plough-horses. 
8**Prow of a boat. A Syllable, see sioladh. 5 
(DMy) Milt of male fishes, in herring termed 
mealg. [** gives nom. siol for Nos. 1, 3 & 4.] 

&olach,* -aich, s.m. Breed, brood, offspring,par- 
ticularly applied to cattle, birds, &e. 2 Des- 
cendant. S. àluinn nan speur, the beautiful 
offspring of the skies. 

, a Having progeny, prolific. 
seed, spermatic. 

sìolach, see siolaidh. 

Siolachadh, -aidh, s. m. Propagating, propaga- 
tion, breeding, generating. 2 Increasing in 
number, multiplying. 3 State of being multi- 
plied, 4 Filtering, clarifying. 5 Clarification, 
colation. A’ s—, pr.pt.of siolaich. 

sìolachan, -ain, -an, s.m. Filter, strainer, colan- 
der. 














2 Having 


-—— —— ——., pl. of siola. 
sioladair,** -ean, s.m. Sower. 2 Seedsman. 
eachd,** sr, Employment of sowing 

seed. 2 Business of a seedsman. 

sioladh, -aidh, s.m. Subsiding. 2 State of sub- 
siding. 3Straining. 4 Aet of straining or fil- 
tering. 5 Sinking. 6 State of sinking. 7 Pro- 
pagation. 8 Dropping. 9**breeding, genera- 
ting, sowing, 10**Race, offspring. A’ s—, 
pr. pt. of siolaidh. A’ aa bhainne, sfrain- 
ing the milk ; tha a’ gnaoth a’ s., the wind is 
subsiding ; tha ’n t-uisge a’ s., the water is 
fütering, the sediments in the water ave sub- 
siding ; a’ s. as, passing quietly away. 

sioladii, see sìolaidh. 

Sioladh,* -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Syllable. 2 Gill. 
3 Prow of a ship. | 

ach, -aiche, a. Syllabic. 

giolag, -aig, -àn, s. f. dim. of siol. Seedling. 2 
Small or stunted grain of corn or potato. 3 





Digitized E 


rg: En P 8. 1 Ern reg noms "m 
i i p 1 i 
INTERNET ARCHIVE 


842 sioll 


Breeding-sow— Perthshire de Suther/and. 4 
Young pig— E. Loss. 

siolag,** -aig, -an, s. f. Strainer. 2 Gill (mea- 
sure.) i | 

siolag,( DC) -aig, -an, s.f. Viper-fish. Supposed 
to be tne male of the sind-eel or launce—am- 
modytes lenceolatus, "This little reptile comes 
to the shallow fors of Uist in myriads, and ig 
largely used as food. | 

Siolagach, -aiche, a.’ Abounding in seedlings. 


siolagicen,*" a. Abounding in gilis, 2 Fond of 


dratus, tippling. 

siolagag, see siolag. 

siolagiig, see siolag. 

sìolaich, v.a. & n. Propagate, "breed, mu'tiply, 
engender, beget, be fruitful. 2 Spring from, 
as seed. 3 Abound, 
or multiplied ` sio.aichinh is fasaibh lìonmhor, 
increase and multiply ; o Dhiarmad sh. clann 
nach ganan, from Derinid syruny a numerous 
progeny. 

sìolaich, -ein, s.m. Propagator. 2tfStallion. 

siolaichidh, fou oo of sìolaich. - 

siolaidh, pr. pt. a’ sìoladh, v.a. dn. Subside, 
compose. settle down, strain, filter, cause to 
subsite, cleanse, as a fluid. 2 Sink, lower. 3 
Grow less. 4 Become composed. 5(MS) Re- 
side. Sh. an soirbheas, the wind subsided ; sh. 
confhadh lot gu sith, the rage for wounds sub- 
sided into peace ; siolailh m’ anam o stri, let my 
soul subside from struggle; s. am bainne, strain 
the milk ; leig le:s. sioladh, let it subside, 

sìolaidh, fut.aff.a. of sìoladh. 

sìolaidh, gen.sing. of sìoladh. 

siolaidh,(MN) v.a. & n. Avail. 

siolaidh,** s.f. Race, offspring. 3 Stallion. 

siolaigh,(CR) s.m. Stallion— Arran. 

siolan,** .ain, -an, $. m. Strainer, filter. 2 see 
siolag. 

siolar,** a. Abounding in seed. 2 Prolific, pro- 
ductive, generative, fruitful. 

siolarnach,** a, Snoring, snorting. 

slolistar,§ s.m. Yellow flag, see bog-uisge. 
lisvear. } 

siolc, v.a. Snatch, seize upon. 
Wink. 4ffSlip, bound. 5* Seek, 

——ach, -aiche, o Snaiching, seizing upon. 2 
Pilfering. 3 Winking. 

—aith, -aidh, s.m. Sna'ching. 2 Act of snatch- 
ing or seizing upon. 3 Pilfering. 4 Twink- 
ling. 5 Act of twinkling. 6+t Quick motion, 
bound, skip. A’ s—, pr.pt. of siolc. 

siolcair. -ean, s.m. Rogue, light-fingered fellow. 
2tTOne that skips off. 

— —— ——eachd, s.f. Petty theft. 

siol-chonnlach, -aich, s.f. Unthreshed straw, gi- 
ven as fodder. 

siol-chuir, pr.pt. a’ siol-chur, v.a. Sow seed. 

--— — ——.e, past pt. Sown. 


(sei- 
2 PRufer..8 


sìol-chur, -a, s.m. Sowing seed. 2 Actofsow- 


ing seed. 
s-chuir. ] 

siol-coise, s. m. Footboard on the treadle of a 
spinniug-wheel, No. 17, p. 290. 

siol-cuir, s.n. Sowing-seed, seed to sow. 

siol-cura, see siol-cuir. 

siolgach, -aiche, a. Lazy, spiritless, sorry, piti- 
ful, dwarfish. 

siolgair, -ean, s.m. Spiritless, mean sluggard. 

— ———eachd, s.f./nd. Inactivity, tardiness lazi- 
ness. ? Meanness. I 

siol-ghobach, -aich, s.f. Sand-eel. 2(DJ M)Pipe- 
fi-h. 

siol-ghinidh,** sil-, s.m. Seed of copulation. 

gioll,* s.m. ‘turn, rotation. S. mu seach, tima 
about, in ration, alternately ; 's e seo mo sh.- 
sa, this i$ my turn; amd’ thàinig do sh.-sa a 


A’ s—, pr.pt. of sìol-chuir. [**gen. 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


Sh. iad, they inereased 


" 


D 4 
PM KÉ 5 y d 4 vi 
ës aom oam u^ EC be idest 


=o E 


AX X Pom 


- u^ ` N11 uit o^ ep 
ee Cie Ef e 


ei dade ase 


= 


ege 
ER 


D 


sioll 





siolla, see siola. 
siolladh, -aidh, -aidhean, 
sioladh. | 

-8 o:laimeach,(MS) s.m Prevaricator. 

sivilan,** -ain, s.m. Skinny, meagre creature, 

siol-lann,** s.m. Granary. 

sì lman, -ain,-an, s.n. Seedling. 2 Refuse of 
corn. Chanel ann na’s miosa na s., there is 
no refuse worse than that of the corn-pickle— 
sail of mean gentry. 

siuimheinn, see siolmhuinn, 

sio. mhoire, comp. of siolmhor. 

—achd, see siolmhorachd. 

Si»'-mhór,(CR) s.f. Kel resembling the sand-eel, 

but growing to a length of two feet, usually 

round in the company of the guruet— West of 

Ross-shire. 
mor, -oire, @. Prolific, fertile, generative, 

f-uitful. 2 Abounding in sel. 3 Productive, 

substantial, as corn, 

achd, sr Fertility, fecundity, produc- 

tiveness. 2 Iinpreznation. 

&ionlmhuinn, &. f. Progeuy, stock, race. 2 Fe- 
eundating substance—Dain I. Ghobha. 

Siol-0ladh, s.m. Spermaceti. 

Siol p,(CR)v. n. Slip iu or out unperceived, skulk. 
— Skye, 2(DU)Pilfer. 'Détha thu a’ siolp- 
adh ? what are you sneaking off ? 

sl, CR) s.m. Pilferiug. 

—air,(CR) s.m. Pilferer. ` 

—an,(DMK) s.m. Constabie’s baton—W. coast 
of Ross. 

siolradh, -aidh, s.m, Breed, race, offspring. 

siolraich, v.a. Breed, generate, propagate, 

siol-reicear, -ir, -an, s.in. Corn-chaadler. 
siol-roiun,** s, Dizeresis, - 
siolruin, see siol-roinn. 

Siolta, pl. sioltaidheau, 
duck, see crann-lach. 

-bheag,§ see lach-fiacailleach. 

si ltach, see seainlach. 

S.oltachan, -ain, -an, see sìolachan. 

Sivitachd, s.f. iud. Propagation, the multiplying 
of a stock. 

siolta dhearg. T s.f. Red-breasted merganser— 
mercus serrator, 

Siolta.ch, -ean, s.m. Red-breasted merganser, 
see siolta dhearg. 2 see siolaich. 3 see lach- 
fiacailleach. 4* Stallion. 6*Propagator. [* 
gives sioltaiche for Nos. 4 & 5. | 

breac,] s.m. Smew—mergus al^ellus. 

siol an,§ -ain, s. m. Red-breasted merganser, 

. see sìolta dhearg & lach fiacailleach. 

bàn, T s.m. Sinew, see sioltaich breac. 

breac, T s.m. see sioltaich breac. 

siol-treubh** -treibh, s.m. Family. (*siol-triabh.] 
tsiolt-shuileas,** eis, s.m. Kunning of the eyes. 
siomi AH) sm. Whale. 

siomagu ul, s.m. Shuffle, evasion, subterfuge. 

—ach,** a, Evasive, shuffling, equivoca- 


s. m. Syllable, see 


- 





^ 
8i 





$.f. Teal, small wild 

















-— — 


ting. 


fling. 

siomal, see simid. 

each,** see simideach, 

siomaidean,* see simid. 
Bio,nain, see sioman. 
siomal, -ail, s.m. Ceiling. 

8:0:naltach,(MS) a. Merry. 

-&10man, -ain, -an, s.m. Rope of twisted straw or 
nay. 2 Rope of twisted heather—Skye.  3** 
Rope,cord. 4 in derision, Tall, shapeless fel- 
low. Corr-shiomain, bent stick, used for mak- 
ing siraw-ropes ; cho mear ri c-ann-siomain, 
as m»rry as a rope's end. (Scots, thraw-crook.) 

acb,** @, Like a rope of straw, hay or 


—achd,** s.f. Habit of evading or shuf- 











Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIV 


843 


staigh fhathast? has your turn come round yet? | 


1 


sionsa 





heather. 2 Having ropes of straw, hay or hea» 

taer, as a rie«. 

aiche.** s.m. One who makes rop:s of 

hay, straw or heather, 

-barraich, (DU) 8. m. 
withes. 

Ssiomin-orda2ig.(DMK) s.m. Rope made of straw 
or hay twisted with the thumb— Cuithn»ss, 
Argi/l. de, 

Siomiach -aich, -aichean, s. see seamlach. 

— —— —d,* s.f. Chicken-heartedness, sheepish- 
ness, cowerdice. 

siomlag,* -aig, -an, s.m. Great coward. 

siom)aidh, -e, a.  Chicken-hearted, sheepish, 
spiritless, heartless. 

siomlainn, see sm .lear. 

siomlair,* see similear, 

siomrag, see S’amray. 

Sion, -tan, s.m. Something, anything, 2 with a 
negative, Nothing. 3(MS) Atom. 4*Climate. 
5 Klement. 6 Air, blast. 7 Drift. Cha'n 'eil 
s. agam I have nothing ; gach s. a th’ agam, 
every particle I possess ; cha'n 'eil s. math air, 
it is worth nothing ; a’ dol an aghaidh an t- 
s., going against the blast ; an s. 'na chùlaibh, 
the drift of the rain at his back ; tha na sion- 
tan air atharrachadh, the climate has changed; 
fo m’ shiontau dùthchasach, under my native 
cli mato, in my na'ive aimosphere ; mar chrith- 
each ‘san t-s., like the aspen in the blast; 
tamhasg air éideadh le siontaibh, a spectre 
shrouded with the elements. [** s.f. & gen. 
sine. 

tsion, sine, -e, $.f. Chain, bond. 2 see sionn & 
sian. 

sion,** s, m. Whisper. 2 Phenomenon. 3 Bright- 
ness. 4 Warning. 

sion,(A F) s.m. Craw-fish, cray-fish. 

tsiona, s.m. Delay. 

sionadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s. m. Lord, noble, 
chief, prince. [** nom, sionaidh.] 

sionail,** see sianail. 

sion-bhuailte, see sian-bhuailte. 

sion-bhuxilteach, see sian-bhuailteach. 

sion-Lhualadh, see sian-biualadh. 

tsiongailte, seo singilte. 

siou-giomach,(AF) s.m. Craw-fish, cray-fish. 

Thonn, ad». In this place, here. 

sionn, sn. Foxglove, see lus-nam-ban-sith. 2 
(AC) Light, brightuess, lurid light. 3 (AC) 
Region of lurid light. 

sionn, (AC) a. Mysterious. 
Lustrous. 

sionn, s.m. Phosphorous— Dàin I. Ghobha. 

sionnach, -aich, s.m. Fox. 2 Bagpipe-reed. 
Wind-valve of a bagpipe. 4 Wind-valve of 
smith’s bellows, +5 Tub, keeve. 

-————a ir, ** -ean, s.m. Fox-hunter. 

-—————-An, -ain, s.n. Will-o'-the-wisp. 2(DU) 
Phosphorus. Teine sionnachain, phosphorus ; 
tha s. ’sa mhuir, tie sea is phospho: escent. 

-— — ——A8S,** -ais, s.n. Craítiness, low cunning. 

sionnachla,(AF) s. Weather gaw, seagull. 

sionnadh,** -aidh, s.m. Repiootf, revuxe, scoff. 

sionnaicn, (AC) a. Bright.  Domhuacü s., o@ 
bright Sunday. 

"lonisa, see sionnsar. 

sionnsair, see sionnsar. 

sionnsar, -air, -an, sem. Chanter. 2 Gaelic spell- 
ing of censer. |** nom. sionnsair.) Prov. tor 


seanusar. 
ach, -aiche, a. Having a chanter. 2 
Like a chanter. 3 Furnished with censers. 4 
[seaunsaireach is best form.] 





bad 





Rope of twigs, 


2 Phosphorescent. 3 


Like a censer. 
achd, see seannsaireachd. 
sionradhach,** a. Single. 
țsionsa, s.m. Censer. 


sion-stend 


Nut Tur Nr 
gion-steud, see sian-steud. 
siontach, see siantach. 

d, see siantachd. 

siontaibh, dat. pl. of sion. 

siontan, n.pl. of sion. 
siop. Cuir an siop, despise, turn tail on—Dain 

I. Ghobha, 

&iopunn, see siabunn. 

ach, -aiche, œ. see siahunnach. 

sìor, a. Continual, long, perpetual. 2 Persever- 
ing. [Always placed before the noun or verb 
qualified.] A’ s.-amhare orin, eternally staring 
"ur me .; 2'8S.mhagadh air, perpetua/ly gibing 

im. 

——,* sm. Time, circuit of time, Gu S., for 
ever ; thuit mo ghrian gu s., my Sun has set for 
ever. 

siorachd, e. Melodious, plaintive. 

sior-atharrach, -viche, o Variab'e, inconstant. 

alh, -aidh, s.m. Variableness,cou- 
tinual variation or shifting. 

— — — ail, -e, see sior-atharrach. 

siorbhai,** s.m. Theft. 

sior-bhed,** a. Everlasting, eternal 2** Ever- 
green. 

sìor-bhraighlich.** s. f. Continued loud noise, 
constant rattling or clattering, 

sìor-bhualadh, -ailn, s.m. Continual striking, 
beating or thumping. 

sior-bhuain,**v a. Cut, shear or mow frequently. 

gior-bhuan,** a. Everiasting, eternal, 

-—ag, -ais, s.m. Perseverance. 

-—tachd,** s.f£; Eternity of being, etern- 

ity of existence. 

-—tas,** -ais, s.m. Durableness. 

giorcall,** -aill, -an, s.m. Gaelic form of circle. 

ach,** a. Circular, circled. 

aich, v.a. Circle, encircle. 

aichte, past pt. Circled, encircled, sur- 
rounded. j 

sìor-chainnt,** s.f. Garrulity, constant prating. 

each, -eiche, œ. Prating, garrulous, 

continually talking. 

each, -eich, s.m. Babbler, constant 












































talker. 

sior-chas,** v.n. Turn to and again. 

—ach, a. Ruuning to and fro. 2 Walking 
frequently. 

gior-cheangaltachd, s.7.ind. Indissolubility, 

sior-chleachil,** v.a. Exercise often, train to. 

-- adh,-aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Constant 
habit, regular practice. 

siorda,** -ai, s.m. Great favour or present. 

siordan,** -ain, s.m. Rattling noise, rustling 
noise. 











ach,** v. Making a rattling noise. 2 
Rustling. 

gior-éighe,** s.f. Continued crying, shouting or 
shrieking. 

—ach,** a. Continually crying, shouting 
or shrieking. 

sior-euchd, s.f. Softness —R. 8. 

. yor-ghàir,** s.f. Continued laughter, noise or 
clamour. 

gor-ghlae,** v.a. Grip. 2 Haudle roughly. 3 
Grasp frequently. 

—,** .aic, s.m. Grip. 2 Rough handling. 
3 Frequent grasping. 

&or-ghnàth, s.m. Continual use, constant habit. 

—ach, a. Habitual, having a continual 














habit. 

—achd, s.f.ind. Perpetuity. 

aich, v.@ Practice much or often. 2 
Use frequently. 

gior-zhnothachair, emm. Amateur. 

sior-zhuidhe, v. Desire. 

&or-iarr, 9.9. Imporviune. 








Digitized by 


844 


810S 


sìor-iarraidh, s. f. Importunity, constant or ur- 
gent petitioning. 

—————each,** a. Importunate, troubles 
some by means of frequent requests or petiti- 
ons. d 

————tach, -aiche, a. Importunate, 

sior-imrich,** s.f. Transmigration. 

sior-Jà nhach,** a. Long-i»ndel. 

sior-loisg,** v.a. Burn perpetually or eterna" v. 

A derum U a. Burning perpetually or eter- 
nally. 

sior-losgadh,** -aidh, s.m. Continual burning. 2 
Eternal fire. 

siormag, N. Argyll for seamrag. 

sior-miiaireanuacn,** a. Everlasting, eternal, 2 
Immortal 3 Du able. 

d, s.f.ind.Perpetuity,durahle- 
ness. 2 Immortality, state of being everlast- 
ing or eternal. 

sior-ol,** son.H ard drinking, frequent drinking. 

sior-osd,** v.n. Gape or yawn frequently. 

sior-phlucas, -ais,s m. Lientery. 

siorr,* v.n. Scud, slip in or out. 

giorra, see siorram. 

siorrachd, see siorramachd. 

siorradh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Deviation, excur- 

 eursion. 2 Onset, attack. 3 Darting. 4 Dart. 
5 see siorram. 

siorraimh, -ean, see siorram. 

siorralach,$s. m. Broom-rape —orobanchaca major 
& o minor. 








A 





638. Siorralach. 
siorram, -Aim, -an, s.m Sheriff. 


—achd,s./.Sheriffdom, county. 2 Office of 
sheriff. 

siorruich,** v.g. Eternize, immortalize, perpet- 
uate. 

sìorruidh, a. Eternal, everlasting. Gu s., for 
ever. Gu suthain siorruidh, for ever and ever. 

siorruidheachd, s.f.imd. Eternity. 2 Immortal- 
ity. 3 Perpetuity. 

siorsan,** -ain, s.m. Pleasant or good news. 

ach,** a. Slow, tedious. 

— — ——Aach,** -aich, s.m. Slow, tedious person. 

sior-sheasmhachd, s.f. Immovableness. 

sior-shileach,** a. Dropping or dripping contin- 
ually. 

sior-shi eadh,** -eidh, s.m. Continual dropping. 

sior-shiolaidheach, -aiche, a. Insensible. 

fsiort, v.a. Strike. 

*siorbair, ean, s.m. Executioner. 

gior-thoireas,** eg, s.m. Request. 

sior-uaine, @ Evergreen. 

—, s.m. Evergreen. 

sjor-uisge,** s.m. Running stream. 2 Perennial 
fountain. 3 Constant rain. 

--—ach,**a.A bounding in running streams 

or paroni fountains.. 2 Raining contiuu- 

ously.. 

gos, adv. Down, downwards (from: one)—down 











Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


la 


i Ca 
ET A tX 


eg tL oh 


Te 
ke 


Se ee 


x 


E 


sos 





towards ona is nuas. 2 (shìos) Resting below. 


In W. of Ross shìos and sìos naturally mean 
west and westward respectively, that is, down 


the course of the streams anid vaiieys, aud | 


shuas and suas, east and eastward. Yet, 
shìos rathad Chataibh, down the way of Su'h- 
erand, is the usual way of speaking of the 


815 
^ sjothsinma ^. (MS) s. Ataraxv. 


Siothamh, -aimh, s, f. Peace, rest. 





siteag 





sivthalachd, s find. Peacefulness. 

Seallaidh 
siothaimh, sivhkts of peace. 

Siothann, see sithionn. 

siothchaich,** v. see sithich. 

siothehail, see sitheil. 2 Prosperous, 


part of Sutherland on the Moray firth. ‘hese’ siothchaileachd, see siochalachd. 
meaniugs of sìos and suas are now p'rp-tuated siothchaimh, see siothaimh, 
jn à curious way in the east of Ross-shire] siothceh innt, see sìochaint. 


when sp-akinz Eng ish ; e.g. “ go east to the 
kitchen,” * go west to the byre,” Ge, ex- 
pr s-iovs that strike anyone as very conical 
till he understands how they originated and 
that they have uo connection with var and far. 
This does not apply exclusively to Ross-shire. 

in Gairloch, shios and shuas mean practi- 








sioth-chainnt, see sithchaint, 
siotn-chainateach, also siochainnteach. 


| siothchainnteach, see sithchainnteach, 


sioth-chainutiche, also siochainntiche. 
siothchath, see siochath. 

sioth-choimheailaiche, se^ sith-choimheadaiche, 
siothlachan,(DC) s»e sìolachan. 


ealiy north and south. South Esrradale, for siotuladh,** xm Clarification. 


exam:le, in the south of the par sh, is called 
Karradal shuas and Eàrradal à deas, and 
North Earradale is Eàrradal siios an | Kàrra- 
da! a tuath. Am baile shuas aud Am baile 
shios at Red Point, furnish another instance 
—CR. in Garl. Soc. of Liv -rness, Ei, 369. 

In Perthshire, Kast, eastward. 2**future. | 

S. ud [or s. an siod], down yonder ; a’ dol S., 
going down, setting, as the sun; o shiübhal s. 
agus suas, from goinj dowm amd up ; s. agus 
suas, eustwan/s and westwards; © but and ben’ 
oja house; falbh suas do 'n t-seòmar, go 
' ben the hoose "7 (in some places, go west to 
“the room); cluinnidh aimsir sìos ar cliù, futur? 
tims shal) hear our prais” ; cuir s., send east- 
ward or downward —Perthsitre. 

In Sutheriand, it is invaria ly '* tha a’ 
ghaoth à shuas.” for wesverly win l, and “ a’ 
ghaoth à shìos ” for easterly wind. 

1n all parts, the usə of sìos aud suis is regu- 
lated by the direction in which the water 
flows, thus, it is customary to say, ‘‘a’ dol 
suas gu ce unn an Joch, "or ‘‘ suas do 'n eag- 
lais,” if in a contrary direction to the general 
flow of the surrounding streams even although 
the journey, may be dowhill ali the way from 
where the speaker stands. 

#siosa, s.m. Court, parliament. 

siosacot, s.m. Doub!et. 

siosar, -air, -an, s.m. Pair of scissors or shears. 

ach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to scissors 
or shears. 2 Abounding in scissors or shears. 
3 Like scissors or shears, 

Biosarnaich,** s.f. Hissing. 

siosdan,** -ain, s.m. Hunter's ery. 

Si ama, s. Gaelic form of schism, 2 Private con- 
ference, whisper. 

ch,** o Schismatic. 2 Conferring private- 
ly, whispering. 

siosmair,** -ean, 
Whisperer, 

each 1,** sting, Schismatising, sece- 
ding. 2 Whispering. 

S'osbacota,* sm. see siosacot. 

sivstair,** s.m  Barrator. 

siota,t s. Blackguard. 2 Pet. 3 Ill-bred or spoilt 
child. 4(AF, see seota. 

sintacun,** a. Ill-bred, as a pettel child. 
pered. 

> ,** s.m.Ul-bred person, pampered person. 

siotaidh,** s.f. Trifle, jot. 

s oth, see sith. 

8 othach, see sitheach, 

siothach, see sith. 

siothachaith.(MS) Appeasement, 

siothachair, s.m, Pacificator, 

silthadair, s.m. Pacificator. 

siothadh, -aidh, s.m. see sith, 

Siothaich, see sithich. 








s. m. Seceder, schismatic. 2 





2 Pam- 





Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


siothlag,** s.f. Filter. 
siothlaich, v.a. Drain, 
siothlaidh, see siolaich. 
siothlaidh, v. see siothlaich. 
siothlan,** s.m. 3traiuer. 2 Sack. 
sioth-shaimh 
-——each, see sith-thamh, &c. 
eachd, 
siotli-thaimh, see sitii-thamh. 
—— euch, see sith-thamhach. 
——eachd, see sith-thamhachd. 
sir, pr. pt. a’ sireadh & a’ sireachd, v.a. Seek, 
search. 2 Seek, ask, request. 3 Want. S. 
e, seek it ; dé tha thu a’ sireadh ? what do you 
want ? what are you seckiny ? esan a shireas, 
he that sveks ; s. air, ask of him; sh. i oirbh- 
se, a fnlatha, she asked of you, ye nobles, 
sir,** œ. see sìor. 
sir-bhuain, see sior-bhuain. 
sir-bhuladh, see sìor-bhualadh. 
sir-chsint, see sior-chainnt. 
— each, see sior-chainnteach, 
sir-chileachl, see sior-chleaehd. 
sireach,** æ. Seeking, searching, prying, scruti- 
nous. 2 Lean, poor. 
sireachl, s f. & pr.pt Same meanings as sireadh. 
siread,** -eid, s.m. Ferret. 
——-ach,** æ. Like, or abounding in, ferrets. 
sireadair, -ean, san. Questant, inquirer. 
sirea ian,** -ain, s.m. Sound, probe, in surgery. 
Sirea/lh, -idh, gan, Searching, act of searching. 
2 Seeking, act of seeking. 3 Asking, request- 
ing, demanding, begging. A’ s—, pr. pl. of 
sir. 
sireamh, -eimh, s.m. Disease. 
siris, -ean, s.j. Cherry, see craobh-shiris. 
———eacii,-eiche, a. Of, or belonging to, cherries. 
sirist, see siris. 
-——each, a prov. for siriseach. 
——-each,* s.m. Shelty, pony. 
sirne wai,(AF) s.pl. see sinridean, 
sir-snilea‘ih, see sior-shileadh. 
isist, S. lime, while. 
sisteai,** s.m. Cistern. 2 Flaxcomb. 
sistealach,** -aich, s.m. Flax-dresser. 
comber. | 
sistealach,** o Having cisterns or flaxcombs. 2 
Like a cstern or flaxcomb. 
—d,** sg.f.ind. Fiax-dressing. 2 Wool- 
combine or card ng. | 
nistealair,** s.m. Flax-dresser. 2 Wool-comber. 
site, -achan, s.7. Gaelic form of sheet. S. phaip- 
eir, a shert of paper. 
——ach, a. Sheeted, in sheets. 2 Like a sheet. 
siteay, -eig, -an, sf. Dunghill. Originally ap- 
plied to the dung that was allowed to accu- 
iiulatein a byre for twelve months,and clean- 
ed out in the spring time. ‘The custom still 
obiaius in Lewis.—DMK, 2 Nice young fee 











2 Wool- 


Original from 
T 


INOIS A 


IGN 


N VIE DECEIT ac | 
A A V E Wi wi |j LJ P | 


i L- 


URBANA-CHAMP 


Il 


siteag 


male, 3(DU) In Gairloch, applied to outside 


846 


sithichte 
keeps the peace. 





generally. Cuir chun na siteiz e, turn Aim Sith-dheanadach, -aiche, a. Pacific. 


out. 





asa voung female. 3**Kffeminate, 

Bitealachd,** s.f. see sibhtealachd. 

tsilearn, -eirn, s.m. Harp. [*s.f.] 

siteil,;g. Cunning, crafty, designing. 

sith, -ean, Hill, mount. 2 Prefix in the names 
of many hills, 

sich, -ean, s.m. € f. Fairy. 

sith, -e, -ean, s.f. Peace, quietness, tranquility. 
2 Rest from war. 3 Reconciliation. 4 Truce. 
Cogadh no s., war or peace; an S., in quietness. 

sith, s. f. Mark in which to fix auything— 
Rob Donn. 

Sith a Spiritual. Daoine s., fa'ries ; bean-sh., 
& familiar spirit. [Leannan-s. is given in the 
Bible for the power of bringing the spirit ofa 
dead person into one’s presence, or witchcraft ; 
its colloquial meaning is, a fuiry sweetheart. | 

Sith, -ean, s.m. Stride, long quick pace. 2 On- 
set, dart to. 3 Shock. 4 Gnash. 5 Sudden 
attempt to grasp or bite. 6 Span, squint— 
Sar Obair. 7 Determined position in stand- 
ing. S. giomaich, s. rionnaich. s, roin—tri 
sithean na muire móire, rush of lobster, rush 
of mackerel, rush of seal—the three rushes of 
the ocean ; s. nan cop corn-dhubh, the shock of 
vound black bosses. [**s.f.] 

Sith-aigean,** -aigne, 8. f. 
peace, tranquil mind. 

-—tach,** a. Disposed to peace, peace- 

able, tranquil in mind. 

-—achd, s.f. Placability. 

sith-aigneach, -eiche, a. Peaceable, conciliatory. 

sithain,** see sithean. 

sithamh,** see sith-thàmh. 

sith-bheath,** s.f. Immortality. 

sith-bhed,** a. Eternal, immortal. 2 Perennial, 
Pluran s.. @ perennial lower. 

sith-bhollsair,** -ean, s.m. Herald, one who pro- 
claims peace. 

—— —— -——— each'l,** s.f.Proclaiming of peace, 
office of a herald of peace. 

sith-bhreitheamh, -einih, -an,s.m. Justice of the 
peace. 

sith-bhriseach, -ich, -ichean, sam. Rebel. 

sith-bhriseach,** a, Pease-breakiag, riotous, re- 
bellious. 

sith-bhr:seadh,** -idh, ssm. Disturbance, rebel- 
lion. 

gith-hhrog, see sith-bhrugh. 

sith-bhrugh, -a, -uighean & -ughan, s.m. Fairy 
nili or mansion. 

—— — — ach, a. Abounding in fairy-hills. 

sith-bhruth, see sith-ohbrugh, 

sith-bbruthach, see sith-bliruzh. 

sith-biiuan,** a. Eternal, immortal, 
al, perennial. 

—tachd, s.f. Eternity, immortality. 
sithchail, see sitheil. 

"gith-chainnt,**s.f. Salutation. 2 Words of peace, 

peaceful language. 

——each, a. Saluting. 2 Speaking peace- 


Mind disposed to 





-—— — 





2 Perpetu- 





fully. 

Sithche, -an, s.m. soe sìthich. 

—— an, pl. of sithich. : 

sith-cheangail,** v.a. Join ina confederacy. 2 
Bind over to keep the peace. 

sith-chean:lach,** o. Confedeialive. 2 Binding 
over to keep the peace, 

sith-cheangladh.** -aidh, s.m. Confederation. 2 
Binding over to keep the peace. 

gith-cheanglaiche,** -an, s m. One of a confeder- 
acy. 2 One who binds over to keep the peace. 

gith-choimheadaicne,** s.m. Constable, one who 


Digitized by 


NTERNET ARCHIVE 


sith-dhuine, pl. -1haoine, s.m. Fairy. 


ach, a. Abounding in dung^ills, 2** Nice, | Sich-diiàn,** sm, Fairy knoll. 


sitheach,* -eich, s.m. Male fairy— A rgyll. 

sitheach, -eiche, a. Making long and quick 
strides or paces) 2 Rushing impetuously. 3 
Making a sudden assault, 

sitheaen, a. see sicheil. l 

sith ‘achadh, -aidh, s.m. Pacifying, act of paci- 
fying. A’ s—, pr.pt. of sithich. 

sitheadair, -ean, s.m. Pacifier, 

sitheadh, -idh,-idhean, s.n. force, impetuosity- 
2 Violent attack or onset. 3 Rush or shoot 
of fish. 4**Bending, sloping, declining.  5ff 
Stride. 

sitheag, 8f. Female fairy. 

sitheag, (DMK) st Core of rushes used as a 
wick in a erüisgean-—W. Highlands. 

sitheal.** -an, s. m. Trowel. 2 Drinking-cup. 
8 Body. 

sithealachd, s.f.ind. Peacefulness, amity. 

sithean, -ein, -an, s.m. Little hill or knoll. 2 
Fairy hill. 3 vary, Big rounded hill. S. 
mul!ach a’ chinn, the crown or very top of the 
head where the hair parts. 

———ach, -aiche,a. Abounding in little hills 
or knolls, 2 Fairy. 3 sce sithionnach. 

sithean-as-nach-cian, s.m. First years growth 
of the foxglove— Colonsay. 

sitheann, see sithionn. 

-————-ach, see sithionnach. 

sìtheil, -e, a. Peaceful, tranquil, silent. 2(AH) 
Charmed, fairy-like. Tha falbh s. aig tioth- 
lacadh daonuan,@ funeral always has a weird 
or fairy-like mode of progression. $S. in this 
comueetion does not nian peaceful iu the or- 
diniry sense but rather enchantet4 —A H. 

sithf-an,(DMK) sn. Infinitessimal quautity. 2 
(DU) Thing of little value. Cha ennir wis 
a dhiu: hras eatorra, I cannot see a particle of 
difference between them—West coast of oss, 

sith-fhad,** œ. Lony-limbed. 2 Striling. 8 
Bounding. 4 Prancing. 

.—————,** s.m. Long stride. 2 Bound. 3 
Prance. 4 Name of one of Cuchull.n’s chariot 
horses. [sith-fhada.] 

sith-f£h :ar,** -fnir, sam, Strong man. 

sith-ghaoth, -ghaoithe, sf. Wh riwind. 

sith-ghlic,** o Politic, cunning. | 

sii h-zniiocas,** -ais, s.m. Policy, cunning, art- 
fal ess. - 

sithich, pr.»t. a’ sitheachadh, 
calm, quiet, allay, agree, reconciie. 
ealin, grow pacified, grow reconciled. 

sithich,** -ean, s.m. Fairy, eif. 

The sith ch is the most active sprite of High- 
land mythology. It isa dexcerous child steal- 
er aud is particularly intrusive on women ia 
travail. At births many covert and cunning 
ceremonies are still used to bafile the tairies' 

wer; otherwise, the new-boru infaut would 
fe taken off to fairy-land, and a withered 
brat laid in its stead. They are wantonly mis- 
chievous, aud have weapons peculiar to them- 
selves, which operate no good to those at 
whom they are shot. A clergyman of the kirk, 
who wrote concerning fairyland about the 
end of the 17th. century, says of these wea- 
pons that *‘ they are solid earthy bodies, no- 
ing of iron, but much of stone, like to a 
yellow soft flint spur, shaped like a barbed 
arrow-head, but flung like a dart with great 
force—**. 

sithiche,tt an. s.m. Fairy. 
—— ———ach,tt a. Fairy-like. ^ d 
sithichte, past pt. of sìthich, Pacified,reconciled.. 


Original from 


v. a. Pacify be- 
2 Grow 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS A 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 





d e 
we 


E 
CR. 
Leg 


Kg ww M ES 1 


4 


E a 


CA 
EST 


kot 


sithichte 


quieted. 2 Pleased—Caithnes:. 

sithionn, -inn & ìthne, s.f. Venison. 2 Flesh of 
rabbits, hares or poultry. 

——ach, -aiche, a Abounding in venison. 2 
Like venison. 

sith-mhaor, -mhaoir, an. s.m. Herald. 2 Con- 
stable, policeman. 2**Watch. 

—— — — —sainneachd,** s.f.ind. Jurisdiction of 
a constable. 

fithne, gen.sing. of sithionn & sitheann, 

sithneachan, «.pl. of sithne. 

sithune, see sine. 

ach, see sineach. 

——————aàn, n.9l. of sithnne, 

sith-shaimh, -e, £.f. Peace, peacefulness, quiet, 
tranquility. 

———-—— each, -eiche, a. Tranquil, peaceful. 

sith-sheire,** s.f. Constant affection. 

—_—_——-— ejl,** a. Constantly affectionate. 

githte, a. Glad, pleased, contented. Thami ro 
sh. dheth sin, Jam very glad of that —Suth'd. 

gith-thamh.tt -e, af, Tranquility, peaceful rest. 
2 Supineness. 

——ach.tta. Tranquil. 

—achd,** s.f. Enjoyment of peaceful 
rest or sound repose. | 

sitig, -e, -ean, s.f. Rafter laid across the part of 
a kiln on which corn is kiln-dried. 2**Dung- 
hill. Saighdear-sitig, æ dunghill soldier, a 
fireside warrior—a term applied coutempt- 
uously to holiday soldiers. 

sitin, see siteag. 

——-each, see sitergach. 

Silinn, -e, -ean, see sitig. 

sitir, -e, s.f. Bray, neighing of a horse. 

sitir,* v.n. Neigh, as a horse. 

sitireach, see sitreach. 

silireun, see s'girean., 

sitirich, see sitrich. 

sitreach, -eiche, a. Neighing. 

sitrich, v.n. Bray, neigh, as à horse. 2 Sneeze. 


M —— 














, s.f.tad. Neighing of a horse, continuous 
neighing. 2 Act of neighing. 3 Sneezing. 4 


Tittering. 

eit-sit ! ini. Hush ! 

e, -an, s.m. Brayer. 

sitta,$ s. Shittah tree—acacia seyal. 

siu, see seo, 

siubhad,(DU) v. Equivalent to imp. of siubhal. 
The only part in use— Gairloch. 

giubhail, pr.pt. a’ siubbal, v. a. & n. Go, move, 
walk, stroll. 2 Depart, set off. 3 Fly, vanish. 
4 Die. 65 Pass over, traveise.  6*Search. 
7 March. Siübhlaidh sinn le 'n anam do 'n 
araich, we shall accompany their souls to the 
battlefield ; sh. mi am baile, Z traversed the 
whole town ; siùbhlaidh sinu gu léir, we shall 
all die; siàbhiaidh an t-saighead, the arrow 
shall fly. 

siubhal, -ail, pl. siübh!aichean, s. m. Moving, 
act of moving or walking. 2 Departing, act 
of departing. 3 Dying, act or state of dying. 
4 ‘Traversing, act of traversing or travelling. 
5 Motion, progress 6 March, journey. 7 
Turn, course, 8 Certain part of a tune, see ceòl 
mor, in appen lix. 9 Ruin, extinction, de- 
surietion, 10 Dysentry, diarrhoea. 11*Search- 
ing. 12 Driving, as a cart. 13 Flight. 14** 
Sw.fbness. 15 Travail. A’ s—, pr.pt. of siubh- 





all. 

A’ siubhal a’ bhaile, traversing the town ; 
tha ea’ siubhal, he is dying ; seo mo sh.-sa, 
this is my turn; mirsantan-siubhail,travellers; 
tha iair sh., she i$ sa/acious ; air an t-s. seo, 
at this time ; s. eile, at another tim ; bithidh 
fios do sheud 's do shiubhail agam-sa, I will 
know the object of your journey ; 8$. a chaidh 


Digitized by 


I EL, 
IKITTEDNMIE"T AD TLE 
INTERNET ARCHIVE 


£47 


siud: nach 
mi do 'n Ghalltechd, a journey m took to tha 
Lowlands ; an dubh-shiübhlach, the street 
walker ; air gach a, at every trip; bean-siübhe- 
la, a woman in child-bed ; luidhe-shiübhladh, 
confinement at or before child-Led ; tha s. sith 
aig bata-torraidh, a funeral-barge aye gets @ 
quict sea—as in many other matters, so here, 
the exception may be said to prove the rule, 
for there have been plenty of instances where 
funeral-barges have been overturned by the 
elements, and the corpses of mourned and 
mourners have been recovered together, S,- 
fola, o bloody-flua ; biadh-siubhail, provision 
for a journey ; tha e a’ siuohal gu dian, he 
driveth furiously. 

siubhalach, see siùbhlach. 

siubhalaiche.** san. Traveller, wayfaring man. 
2 Pedestrian. 3 Stroller. 

sinbhaltair, s.m. Perambulator. 

fsinbhas, adv. Before. 

siubhla, see luighe-siübhla. 

siubhlach, -aich, -aichean,s.m. & f. Vagrant man 
or woman. | 

tsiubhios, adv. Before. 

siübhlach, -aiche, a. Swift, speedy. 2 Nimble. 
3 Fleeting, speeding, passing away. 4 Wan- 
dering, fond of wandering, ambulatory. 5 
Restless, transient. 6 Fluent. 7 Traversing. 
8 Travelling, moving. 9 Migrating, flitting, 10 
Departing. Aighean s., re-tless deer, 

siùbhlachadh,(MS) s.m. Acceleration. 

siùbhlachail, -e, a. Locomotive. 

siùbhlachan, -ain, -an, s.m. Traveller, one fond 
of travelling or wandering. 2 Stream, rivulet. 

siubhlachas, -ais, s. m. Swiftness, speediness, 
speed. 2 Nimbleness. 3 Habit of travelling 
or wandering. 4 Pedestrianism. 5 Fluency. 

siüuhlachd, s.f.ind. see siùbhlachas. 2 Contin- 
ued travelling, moving or flitting. 3 Restless- 
ness, 4 ‘l'ransientness. 

siùbhladh, -aidh, s.m. Ambulation, travelling, 
departure, motion. 2 Death. 3 Looseness of 
the bowels. 

siùbhlaiche, see siubhalaiche. 

siubhlaichean, pl. of siubhal. 

siübhlaideach, -eiche, a. see siùbhlach, 

———— —— — s.f. see siübhlachas. 

siue ! int. Word by which horses are called. 3 
Away, begone, disperse—Sar-Obair. 

siue, -a, a. Dry, parched. 2 Scorched. (for sioc.) 

siucain,(M McD) see surcain. 

siùcar, -air, s.m. Sugar. S. pronn, moist sugar; 
s. can. laidh, candied sugar ; s. dubh,liquorice; 
S. geal, white sugar. 

ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in sugar. 2 Like 
sugar, sugary, saccharine, sweet. 

siuch,* s.m. Drain, sewer. 

siuchag,(Al1) s.f. Small patch of smooth green 
sward amid rough heathery ground. 

siüd, pr.pt. a’ siùdadh, po Swing, rock to sleep, 
dandle. 2 Fondle. 3*Fall to. 

siùdadh, -aidh, s.m. Swingin, act of swinging, 

. vibrating or rocking. A’ pr.pt. of siud, 

siudadh,* s.m. Commencement, 

siüdavain, v.a. see siüd. 

siùdagan, s.m. & pr.pt. see siùdan, 

.— ——— ach, -aiche, a. see siàüdanach. 

gn n, pr.pt. a' siùdan, v.a. Same meanings as 
siùd. 





—, g^n.sing. of siùdan. 

siùdan, -ain, -an, s.m. Swinging, rocking, vibra- 
ting. 2Swing. 3 Oscillatiou. 4**Any instrue 
meut for swinging or rocking on. A’ s—, pr. 
pt. of siùdain. A's. à nunn’s a nall, oscilla. 
ting this way and that way ; ris. vibrating, 
swinjing ; slat shiudain, æ pendulum. 

siüdanach, -aiche, @ Swinging, rocking, oscile 


Original fron 


sindanach 848 


lating, vibrating, dand'ing. 2 Fond of swing- 
ing, to sing or daniliing. 

Bindanachado,** -aidh, s. m. Swinging, tossing, 

. dandling, rocking. 

siddanachd,** s.f. Jactitation, nustling,rockinz, 
swinging, dandling, amusement of swinging. 

siùdanadh, (DU) s.m. Act of swinging or rocxing 
to sleep—Gairioch. 

Siwianaich, see siùdain. 

Suz ! int. Mode of calling hens, 2¢ Call todrive 
away hens. 8 (AH) In N. Argyll, inode of 
driving away hens, diug being the int. used to 
cail them towards oue. 

siü.l, gen sing. & n.pl. of seòl (sail.) 

lsiuir, s f. Sister.. 

siuliihor, see suilbhear. 

siulpan, s.. Short stout stick. 2 Policeman’s 
baivon—Suth’d. (siolpan.) 3 (DU)Short thick 
stick used for threshing corn. 4 (DU) The 
part of a fiail that strikes the corn. 

siura», 82e seamrag. 


siunan,** -ain, sn. Vessel made of straw toi 


bold meal. 

siunas, -ais, see sunais. 

siunn, s:e S onn. 

siunnachazg, see sionnachan. 

siunnailt, $. f. Likeness, comparison, resem- 
blance—5ar-Obair. 

Tsiunnsa, s.an. Sense. 

siunnsaireacnd,** s f. see seannsrireachd, 

siunnsar, -air, -ean, sn, see seannsair. 

—ach, -aiche, a. see seannsaireach. 

siup, -a, -an, sm, Tail. appendage. 

siupach, -aiche, @ Having a foolish tail or ap- 
peudage. 

siurdan ** v.n. Rattle, rustle, make a noise. 

siurdin,** -ain, s.m. Tattle. 2 Rattling noise. 
3 Rus ling noise. 

siurdsnach,** g. Rattling. 2 Noisy. 3 Rust- 
ling. 

- ——4d,** s.f. Continued rattling or rust- 
ling. 

giurdasadh,** -aidh, s. m. Rattling, rustling, 
rattling or rustling noise. 

Siurra feamainn, $. Wrack along the water- 
mark, mistrauslated ‘* seaweeu seekers ” ia 
W. A. Tales. 

Siurran,** -ain, $. m. Giddiness, 2 Drunken- 
ness. 3 Watery mist. 

siürsach, -aich, -aichean, s. f. Whore, strumpet. 

giürsachail, -e, 4. Uucliaste, whorish. 

siursachalachd, s.f.ind. Unchasteness. 
siùrsachd, s.f.ind. Whoredom, prostitution, 
siürsaich, gen.sing. of siursach. 

siürsaiche,(MS) s.m. Belswagger, debauchee, 

siùrsaichean, n.pl. of siùrsach. 

siursaidheachd, see siùrsachd. 

siursair,* -ean, s.m. Whoremonzer. 

siurtach, -aich, -aichean, s.f. see siürsach. 

Siurtachail,** a. Whor sh. 

siürtachd,** see siùrsachd. 

siürtaich, gen.sing. of siurtach. 

siürtaichean, n.pl. of siurtach. 

siurtag,** -a;g, see sùrdag. 

Biurtigach, see surdayach, 

siüsan,** -ain, s.n, Humming noise. 2 Buzz, 
buzzing. 3 Whisper. 

siusanach,** a. ilu.uming. 2 Whis>ering. 

sSiùsanadh,** -aidh, s.m. Humming, hum. z Whis- 
pering, wh:-p»r. 

siùsarnadh, -aidh, see siisinadh, 

siüsarnaich,s,f. Whispering, 

siutach, DMy) a. Thievish. 

siutair,(DMy) s.in. Thief. 

siuthad, v. def. Say away, begin, go on, help 
yourself. Pl. siuthadaibh, only used iu 2nd. 
pers. pl. imp. 








JAILI D y 
A Ve Es Fa RIT Rog 8 re 
JTERNET ARCHIVE 
= i hes ti d. Wa. r L- 


stacan 





siut hadadh,* -aidh. s.m. Commeucement. 


siuthacaibh, v. def. Say ye. 
»labag.** -aiz, -an, s.f. Slut, slattern. 


siabair,** -ean, sm. Sloven, draggler. 2 One 
who works amoug mire. ; 
slabaireachd.** s, /, Slovenliness., 2 Working 


amongst mud or mir». 3 Miriness. 

SiàDan,** -ain, s.m. Sloven, draggier. 

——-—aen,** a, Slovenly, dirty. 2 Miry. 

slabhacan, see slab'azan. 

slabhag, -aig, -an, St Horn-pith, 2 Socket of 
born, 3 Tenderling, deer's first horn, 

slabhagan, -ain, s.m. Kind of reddish seaweed, 
an article of food formerly eooked till it dis- 
solved, when it was eaten with bread and 
butter. see slòcan. [MeL & D gives slabu- 
an. 

slabhaig, see slaoic. 

slabhaigeadh, (CR) s.m. Beaten eggs spread on 
oatcake before it is turned in firing. This 
is done when the cake is to be used as pr»ri- 
Vision on a journey, and prevents iù fron 
erumblinz —W. of Ross-shire The vake thus 
treated is “aran slabhaigidh," ( Ga/rzocà ) b i£ 
is applied to cakes that have not been spread 
over with egg —DU. : 

slabhar,** @ Narrow. 

slabhartaich, v.a. Slap. 

slabhear,f -air, ssm. Slouching fellow. 2 Tauni- 
er. 3 Spiritless fell ow—suth’d. 

slabhraich, po, Shackle. 

Slabhradair,* -ean, s.m. Chair-maker. 


slabhraidh, -e [ & slaibhre]. -aidh^an, sf Chain. 
3(AF) Cattle, herds ‘Tinne sa 


2 Pot-hanzer. 
slathraidn, a link of the chain; s. air a god 
chain ; as na slabhraidh, the pot-hooít. d«ath. 

slabirailheacn, -eiche, 4. Furnisied with 
chiins, 2 Of chains. | 

slabhruidh, see slabhraidh. 

slac, v. &. Thrash, beat with a mallet. 2 Dash 
against. 3 Cane, drub. 4 Bang. 5 Bruise. 6 
Strike with a bxtlet, 7 Maul. 

slac, s.m. Mallet. 

siachdach,**e. Prone or inclined to beat, thrash, 
maul or bruise. 

slacadaich. (DU) s.f. 
with a heavy body. 

slacadh, -aidh, s.m. Thrashing. act of thrash- 
ing or beating, as witha mallet. 2 Dasiing, 
aet of dashing against. 3 Bruising, 4 Slauch- 
tering, act of slaughtering. A’s—, pr. pt. of 
slac. 

slacaich, oo, see slac. 

slacainn,** v.n. Beat, maul, bruise, thrash. 

slacaiun, v.@. See slac. | 

—, s. see slacadh. 

slacainn, s. f. Beating, thrashing, mauling, 
bruising. Fhuair e S., he received a thrashing; 


Sound mid3 by beating 





thuir a dheaga sh. dha, give him & good ihrasn- 


ing. 

slaexir,** ro, see slacainn, 

slac ir, -evn, Ss. m. Thrasher, one that beats 
with a mallet or beetle, 2 Slauguterer. 3 

. Bruiser. | 1 

slacaireachd, s.f. imd. Thrashing, beating, 
noise of hard labour. 2 Constant dashing of 
one thing against another. 3 Slaughtering. 
4** Business of slaughtering. 5 Bruisiag. 6 
Baffeting. 7 Striking with a batlet. JU 

slacairt,** s. f. Beating, thrashing, bruising, 
m uling. 

slacan, ain, -an, s.m. Beetle, mallet for wash- 
ing clothes or fulling cloth. 2 Impediment, 
drawback. 3 Brake of a cycle. 
wood, or any weight tied to an animal to 
prevent its escape. 5 Bat, as for cricket, 
rounders, ée, "It Club,  S.-druidbeaehd, a 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


4 Block of. 





| 


slacan 


magic wand. 4 

S'acau, 8.5. Circular depression, like a kiln. 

Si:canaich, v.g. see slac. 2 s. see slacaireach'. 

s.acin-bata, s.p. Davits of a boat. (No 16, p.70.) 

sacan-craigeir, 8. m. Cricket-bat. 

8l .carsaich, s.f. Battery. 2 beating, thrash ng. 
mauling, buffeting, 3 Continued beatiug or 
thrassing. 4 Beating wilh a bailet. 

sluchd, see slac. 

siachdach, see slacach. 

slacndatch, v. see slac. 

siacidair, see slacair. 

8'achilairt, see slacairt. 

slachdan, see slacan. 

&.icadanaich, see slacanaich, 

stachdriaich, see slacra'ch. 

siachiuinn, see slacainn. 

siucran, -aiu, s.m. Battering-ram. 

slacriich, -e, s.f. Maul. ^ft s2a:ing, thrashing, 
2t Noise of beating, or ponderous haumering. 
4 purtecing. Bhiodh lavicn churrau'a slac- 
raich bhàis 'nuair 'bu trod 'bu bheus doibh. 
stout heroes would give deuth-deaiing vlows 
when scolding was their traine of mind —D uan- 
aire, 193. 

8 acia, past pt, of sac, Beaten with a mallet or 
beetle, 2 Dashed against. 3 Slaughtered. 

s-acuion, see slacainn, 

gad, -aid, s.m. Theft, robbery. 2 Plunder, 
booty. 3* Havoc, carnage. ’S iad a rinn an 
8. ! what havoc they have made ! 's ana an sin 
a bha an S. ; that was the awful piace for car- 
tie ! caal-shlad, sacrilege. 

slad, v.d. Steal, rob, plunder. 2 Fag, cxruse to 
faz, deprive of strength. 3ff Pommel. Sh. 
sin seachad iad, that made thom fuy, it pait- 
ed on their stomach ; sh. e mo chlì bhuam, 
it deprived me of my strength. 

sladach, -aiche, a. Robbing, plunderin;, thiev- 


ish. 

gladachd, s.f.ind. Theft, robbery, plunder,thiev- 
ishness. Gun dad s., without any theft. 

Slaaadh, -aidh,s.m. Stealing, act of stealing rob- 
bery, pillaging, theft. A’ s—, pr. pt. o. stat. 

Slailaiche, -an, s.m. Robber, plunderer, thief. 

Si :daidheachd, see stadachit. 

sialaig, (air) (CR) v.n. Working hard at, going 
at it—Perthshire. 

Sladair, -ean, s.m. see sladaiche, 

sladaireachd, s.f. Thievisimess, robbery, plun- 
dering. Ceall-sh., sacereligiousness. 

Sladiiag, -aig, -an, s.f. Sheaf of straw prepared 
for thatcning, sheaf of drawn straw. 2ftsneaf 
of corn ready to be threshed, 3 (DC) Keratin, 
outer sheath of the horn of an ox, sheep, dr, 

8lad-mharbh, see siat-mhort. 

siad-mharbhadh, -aidh, 8.72. See slad-inhortadh, 

sl» dmhoireachd,** s.f. Thievishness, robbery. 

islai-mhort, v. a. Rob and murder on the high- 
way. 2 Murder in order to conceal a roboery. 

glad-mbhortadh,** -aidh, s. m. Robbery aud 
murder. 

Sla.i-mhortair, -ean, ssm. Robber and murderer, 
one who commits murder to effect or conceal 
a robbery. 

slad-imhurt, see slad-mhort. 

slad-':hurtadh, see stact-mhortadh. 

s ad-maurtair, sce Sia 1-mhortair. 

siad a, past pt. of slad.  Roobed, stolen, plun- 
der.d. see slaidte. 

slafaist, s. Loosely-built person. 

siig,** -aig, s.f.Spoonful of any inspissated sub- 
SD, as porridge. 2 Flummer,. 

slazai, Ci) -ain, s.m. see slaman., 2 Cup-shaped 
interior of a kilu. 

slagan cul A chinn DMy) sm. Hollow at the 


back of one’s head—Lewis, Guirioch, &e, for | 


Digitized by 


NEG, er ee 
IN Ln d ET ARCHIVE 


849 


slaisichte 


lagan cul a’ chinn. 

slaib, -e, s.f. Mire. sediment of water, filth, dirt. 
2 Mire by the side of a stream. 

slaibeach, -eiche, a. Miry. filthy, dirty, 2 Pud- 
dling in mire, drazeling. 

slàibear,** -eir, sm. Dirty fellow, draggler. 2 
One who works in mire or mud, 

slàibearachd,** s. f. Draggling. 

s'àibei!, -e, æ. Se» S'àibeach. 

sia bhre, see siablirai!h, 25s f. Purchase, 

slaibireas,** -eis, 8. m. Chains. 2 Servitude, 
bondage. 3 State of being in chains. 

S'uic, v. see siac. 

slaic'nn,* v. see slac. 

slaid, -e, -ean. s.f. Munificent gift or present, 2 
Booty. 3 Tbeit, robbery. 

slaid, see slat. 

siaideach, see s!adach. 

slii leadh, sm. Depredation. 

slaidear, -ir, -an, s.m. Rovber, thief, plunderer, 
defran‘ler. 

slailcarachl, see s!alachd. 

slai.l-e,** Gaelic speiling of slash. 

ach,** a. Slashing, lashing, whipping. 

anta,** a. Stout, robust. 

aracnd,** sf. Lashing, whipping. 

slailte, past pt. of slaid. Stolen, robbed, plun- 
dered. 

slaighdean,** -ein, s.m. Cold, cough. 

slaighre,** -rich: an, s.f. Sword, scimitar. 

Slaiznt, -e, sf. Rozuery, villainy, knavery. 

sl.i;hs,* v.n. Sneak or steal by. Sh. e seachad, 
he sneaked by. 

slaightear, -ir, -an, s.m. Rogue, rascal, knave, 
blaekguard. 

—ach, -aiche. o Kuavish, roguish. 

———— achd, s. f. ind. Roguery, dishonesty, 
thievery, fuilhlessness, villainy, sneaking. 

slaighteil,* -e, a. Hogu'sh. knavish, sneakish. 

slaim, -e, pl. -ean & -eannan, s.f. Great booty, 
piunder, much boo: y. 2 Heap. 3f Riches. 

slaimeach, o Havıng prey or booty. 2 Of 
prey or booty, 3 lu heaps. 

s'aimean,** -ein, s.m. Dirty person. 

s;àiue, comp. of sian. More or most healthy. 

, S.f. Wholeness, entireness. 2 Cunyales- 

cence, 

ad,** -eid, s. m. see slàine, 8.f. 

slainute, see slàinte. 

slàinte, s.f.ind. Health. 2 Salvation. 3 Toast, 
health. 4**Healing virtue. Agus ’nan s. do 
na cnàmhan, aud health to the bones ; chionn 
gwu do dhi-chnimhnich thu Dia, do shlàinte, 
Le uge thou hast forgotten God thy salvation ; 
thoir dhuinn s., give us a toast ; dh’ òl sinn do 
dheoch-s., we drank your health ; air do sh., 
to your good healt ; s. agad-sa, thank you, the 
same to you ; s. leat, (usually slàn leat) fare- 
well ; thig mi thaobh mo sh., Z will come if I 
be w^, if my neaith permit. [ttpl. -eachan.] 

ach, -eiche, se» slàinteil. 

achail, a. Healthso!:ae. 

alachd, s.f. Liealthiress. 


























2 Benignity. 





il,-e, o Healthy, ia good health. 2 
Healthy, bringing health. 3 Benign. 4 see 
tath. 


slais, v.a, Gaelic form of lash, ?2ffSplice, as a 
rope. 

slais,* -e, -ean & -eachan, s.f. Great quantity or 
number. N. é'sz, @ great quantity of fish ; 
fnvair iad s.. they got a great quantity ; S. air- 
gid, a quantity of mney. 

slaiseadh, -jidh, s.m. Lasuing, act of lashing, 
whipping, 2 Spiiciag, act of splicing. A’ s—, 
pr.pt. of slais. 

Slai-ich, See siaisvich. 

te, see s;alste, 


Dal Tor 


U d WERS "nE 


La 
M LINZ ` LL 


NOIS 


| | Li Li d ^] A C -] Fi A A ik] n rs N 
et Lam P ^ [7 E e - [7 E ! 


J 


d 
Li 
! 4 


slaisneach 


slaisneich,(MS) san, Lath. 

Siaisnich,(MS) v.a. Lash, lath. 

sla/ste, past pt. of siais. 

Siait,** a. S.rong, robust. 

Slam,** v.a. Teaze, pluck or card wool. 

` slam, -aim, -an, s. m. Lock of hair or wool, (in 
AN. Argyll, tlàn—AH.) 2 Slime. 3 Curis. 

Slamach, -aiche, a. see slamanach. 2**l'eazing, 
pluching, as wool. 3 Carding. 4 In locks, as 
hair. 5 In flocks, as wool. 

—— aiih,** -aidh, s.m. Coalescence. 2 Teaz- 
ing wool (in N. Aryyil, tlànadh —AH.) 

slamadh, DU) s.m. Lull ina gale— Gairloch. 

Slamag, -aig, -an, s. f. Little lock of hair. 2 
Small flock of wool. *8 see slaman. 

-ach, -aiche, a. Curled. 2 In small locks. 
as hair. 3 In little flocks, as wool. 4 see 
slainanach. 

Sl^magan, 8. pl, Tresses—MacMhaighstir Alasd- 
air. 

slumaich,** v. Clot, curdle. 

-~-~-——-~Le, past pt, Clotted. 

slamair,** s.m. One who eats voraciously. 

slaman, -ain, 8.m. Curdied milk. 2 Any flabby 
substance, 

--ach, -aiche, d. Flabby. 2Abounding in 
or like curdlei milk. 3 Lentous, mucous, 
ciotty. 4 Pro'lucing curds. 

slamanachi,** s.f. State of being curdled. 2 
Coagulation, 3 Tendency to coagulate. 

-aich, v.a. Curdle. 

—-—— -ceathaich,** s.m. Light dry mist. 2 
Stratus cloud, fall cloud. 

milis, s.m. Jelly. 
-Lath, s.m. Glue. 

slamb,* see slaman-milis. 

slatuban,* -ain, s.?n. see slaman. 

—achi, see slamanach. 

———— —achd,** see slamanachd. 

slamhach,** ach, s./, Frothstick, instrument 
for frothing cream. 

slamhagan, see slabhagan. 

slamhagan,** s.pl. Locks of hair or wool. 

siamian,$ sm. Elm, see leamhann. 

—, -ain, s.m. Mucilage. 
ach, -aiche, o Mucilagimous. 2 see 

slamanach. 3 Abounding in elms. 4 Made of 

elm. 

—achd, s.f. Mucilaginousness. 

slan, s.m. Defence, protection. 2 Garrison. Sur- 
Obair. 

slàn, -àine, a. Healthy, in good health. 2 Heal- 
ed. 3 Sound. 4 Uninjured, unhurt. 5 Un- 
broken, whole. 

Am bheil thu s. P are you in good health ? 

[ thoir dhomh s. e, give it me whole; s. leat ! 
fareweil ! gu ma s. gu'n till thu, may you be 
well till you return; an s. dhuit? art thou 
well? ; tha igu s. fallain, she is perfectly 
well; dighean bhoidheach, s. leibh ! ye pretty 
maids, farewell! ; nighean nan ór-chleachd, 
an s. dhuit P maiden of the golden locks, art 
thou well? ; gu ma s. a chi mi thu, may 1 see 
you well ; gu s. fallain, safe and sound, in per- 
fect heaith. 

1slan,** -ain, s.m, Defiance, challenge. 

+——ach, a. Defying, challenging. 2 Ready to 
Qety or challenge. 3 Of a defiance or chal- 

enge. 

Slànach,* -aiche, a. Convalescent. 2**Healing, 
curing, having a healing virtue, salubrious, 
salutary. 

slànachadh,** -aidh, s.m. A’ 8—, pr. pt. of slàn- 
aich. see slanuchadh. 

slàuachail, -e, a. Curative. 

sianadh, -aidh, s.m. Healing, saving, salvation, 
security. 

slànaich, see slanuich. 




















Digitized E y 


qoe 
VTERNET. ARCHIV 


850 


8g'aodair ` 


slanaichear, see slJànuicaear. 
slànaichidh, see slànnichidh. 
s ànaichte, see slanuichte. 

slanaiehear, gle s anuighear, 
sian-lc, see ic. 2 





689. S'àn-lu«. 


slàn-lus, -luis, -an, s.m. Rib-wort—p'antago lan- 
ceolata, 2**Any medicinal herb. 33 Self-beal, 
see dubhan ceann-chdsach. 4$ Garden-sage, 
see ath vir-liath. 

ach, a. Abounding in rib-wort, or 2 in 
Medicinal herbs, or 3 in Self-heal,or 4 in 
Garden-sage. 

slànphairteach, «. Aliquot. 

slàa-reie, s. Wholesale. 

slantachd,(MS) s.f. Solidity. 

slanuchadh, -aidh. s.m. Healing, act of healing, 
curing or reme:lying. 2 Saving, act of saving 
(in a spiritual sense.) 3 Repairing, mending. 
4 Growing whole. A’ s—. pr. pt. of slanuich. 

slanuich, pr. pt. a’ slànuchadn, v. a. Heal. 2 
Save (In a spiritual sense.) 3 Cure, remedy, 
make whole. 4 Grow whole. 5 Mend, repair. 

-ear, fut. pass. of slàhuich. Shall be 
healed. 

ST EUN fut.aff.a. of slanuich. Shall or wiil 

ea L 

———te, past pt. of slànuich. Healed, cured. 
2 Saved (in a spiritual sense.) 3 Mended. 

slànuighear, -ir, sm, Healer. 2 Saviour (in a 








spiritual sense.) An Slànuighear, tiie Saviour. 


slaobach,** a. Dowdy. 

slaod, pr.pt. a’ slaodadh, v.a. Drag, haul, trail 
along the ground,draw. 2**Walk with a trail- 
ing gait. 

slaod, -aoid, an, s.m. Raft, float. 2 Sledge. 3 
Trail, trailing burden. 4 Act of draggiig 
along. 6 Clumsy, lazy person. 6**Solution. 
7**Murder, slaughter. 8 Pulley, crane, 9tt 
Lounge. 10tftLarge Cuir H 

slaodach,(MMcD) s.f. Seaweed—Lewis, sve tea- 
mainn dubh. 

, “aiche, a. Trailing, dragging, drawing, 
ulling. 2** Like à drag, 3 Like a raft or 
oat. 4 Clumsy. 6 Lazy. 6 Ill-dressed, slo- 

venly, untidv, 7 Awkward, 8 Having a slug» 
gish gait. 9* Lounging, 

— —— d,** s.f, Awkwardnesa,  ?f10rowsinons, 

slaoda:!h, -aidh. s,m, Dragging, act of dia giug, 
trailing or hauling along, 9 Trailin burden, 
3 Sledge, drag, 4 Slageisu gait, 4 Rait fluan 
A’ s—, pr, pt. of slaod, 

&luodag, -aig, «un, 8f. Sluc, slovenly woman, * 
(DU; Slouge, 

slaodaiche, sind. Drawing, trailing, dragging. 
v Nloyonlinosa, 

slaodail, -8, a, sov Blaodach, 

———,,** of, Uontiuucd dragging, traillug ui 
pulling, 2 Like a raft, ð Like a drag, 

slaudair, -ean, si Lazy, awkward, slovenl 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


y 








 gisot,2r -aoit, s.m. Dirt, dross. 


slaodair 
follow, untidy fellow, sluggard, lounger. 


~- — eachd, s find. AwKwardness, sioven!i- | sl pr iich, -e, sf. Din, noise, 


hess, untilin.S3. 2 Laziness, sluggishness. 3 
(M3) Backwardness. 4(MS) Restiveness. 
slaudalachd, see siaodair-acad. 

Slaoian, -aiu, -an, $.2^. Trask or rut of a cart- 
wheel or sledge. 2 **Uold, cough. 
raft, little float. 4**Little trailing burden, 

—— ——., n.pl. of slaod., 

slaodan ven, *-aich, s.n. Ileavy fellow. 2 Slouch- 
nz fellow. 

sla.xid-inheurach., -aiche, a. Clumsy-fingered. 

Siaod-mheuraiche, s find. Clumsiness ia fiager- 
ing, as ofa musical instrument. 

slaowrach, -wich, -aichean,s.f. Hinge. 2** round- 
ation. 

&laodr»ich, -e, -ean, $./. Continual trailing. 2 
Mass of lumber or luggage. 3* Great haul of 
Dar, 

Si«od-theine,** s.m. Wasting or consuming fire. 
2 Great fire in which many persons were cun- 
sumed. 

slaud-uisge,(AH) s.m. Raft. 

siaoic,(CR) s.f. Large slice, as of bread— Perth- 
shire, 2 Large piece. 3 (DC) Buttocks. Air 
a sh., prone on the ground. 

,** a. Inverted. 2 Lying. 3 (AH) Uneven, 
crooked, unmatched, sloucuing to one side, 
Mart s., a cow having one horn egtending ina 
differ nt direction to the other; tha s. air an 
fhear nd, that man has à slouching gait. 

8.3 »ich 1, see slaoic. 

slavcil, see slaod. 2 gen.sing. of slaod. 

Slao'ghte. see slaight. 

-—il, see slaighteil. 

slaoightir,* see slaightear, 

—— each, see slaightearachd. 

8l^oit, -e, $.f. TDross, refuse of metal. 
filth. 

slaonasadh,** -aidh, s.m. Tragedy. 

slaonasair,** s.m. Travedian. 











2** Dirt, 


plaop, pr.p'. a’ slaopadh, v. a. Parboil, simmer, 


boil slowly, as shell-fish for bait, 

slaop, -aoip, s.m. Slovenliness, sluggishness. 

Slaopacit, -aiche, a, Parboilel, 2 Trailing, 
drawii g. 3 lazy. 4 Awkward. 5 Slovenly, 
Siuggish, tawdry, untidy. 6 Uncleau. 7ff 
Dragging lazily. 

--————d, $.f, Awkwardness. 2 Slovenliness, 
untidiness, tawdriness. 3 Unacleanness. 


slaopadh, -aidh, pr. pt. Act of parboiling or sim- 


mering. A s—, pr.pt. of slaop. 
slaopaidh, a. see slaopach. 
slaopair, -ean, s.m. Drawler. 2 Trailer. 
ven, sluggard., awkward, untidy fellow. 
eachd, s.f.ind, Trailing, 2 Drawling. 3 
Slovenliness. 4 Awkwardness. 5 Sluggish- 
ness. 


3 Slo- 





2 see slaod, 

slaotan, -ain, see slaodan. 

slap,* s.m. Flap, flapping. 

slap, pr.pt. a’ slapail & a’ slanadh, va. Flap, 
fling. A’ slapail mu m’ chluasin, flapping a- 
bout my ears, 

slapach, a. Lukewarm. 2 Sloveuly, sluttish. 

slapach, see slapach. 

8lapaz, -aig, -an, s.f. Slut, drab, slattern. 

——ach,** a Siuttish, drabbish. 

slaprich,* v.n. Get flappish, get suft and pliant, 
as greens heated. 

slapail,* -e, s.f. Flapping. A’s—, pr.pt. of slap. 

Slapair, -ean, sm. Mlovenly fellow. 2 Dangler. 
3 Sluggard. 4**One who works in mud, 

Leachd, s find. Slovenliness. 
tslapar,** s.m. Skirt, train of a long roba. 
t1——-—ach, a. Having a long sairi or train, as a 


obe. 
$—— — aich, St Din. 


Digitized by 


FKITTIEDAIET A DLN IE 
i e kä TE | Lh kal LJ ke 
NK bel Yi = maly Sa M L. 


851 


o**jittle 


sleag 


siap-c à * s.m. Spi.iach, see b!oinigean-gàraidh. 
2 sound of tramp* 
ling, as of men or horses, | 
slas lac':,** a. Envyiug, invidious. 
grudge, 
—1L** s f. Envy, grudge. 
slat, -ait, -An, s.f. Any rod or twig. 2 Switch, 
wani. 3 Yarlin iength. 4 Yard to measure 
with. 5 Had!e-bar of a cycle. 6 Stry of a 
plough. 7** Penis. Thog e aa t-slat, he lifted 
the rod ; S. air fad, a yard long; s. gulas da'n 
chritheaeh, a green rod of gien ; ea lar aa t- 
sùgh 's ant-siat, between the bark and the (ree, 
Slatach, -aiche, o Abonnding in rods or twigs. 
2 Like a rod. 3 Straight, erect. 4 Stateiy, 


2 Having a 





tall, 5 Branchy, brancaiuz, sprouting. 6 
Pliant, as a switea. 7 In rods or wands. 8 
In switches. Na fiùrain sh., the pliant ten- 
drils, 


slatag, -aig, -an, $.f., dim. of slat. Smal rod, 
twig, Wandor switca, 2 Chat (of brusawood.) 
ach, -aiche,a. Abonuniting in sm'll rois, 





twigs, tendrils, wands or switches. 2 Like a 
sma!l rod. 
s!latailj** a. Amorous. 2** Goatish. 3 Tall, 


4 Imosr. 


siately, s raight, upright. 
2 Uprizht- 


ach l, *® s. f, Amorousness. 
ness, tal!ness, statelin ‘ss. 

slatair,* -ean, s.2n. Debaucuee. 2**Amorist, 

slatan,** -ain. s ^n. Little rod, little wand. 

, n.p. of slat. 

————ta,** a. Flexible. 

slatarra,** a. Straight, tall, upright. 

slat-bhedil,* sf. Guuwale, see bata, E 7, p. 73. 

slat-bhvodaidh, s.p. Gca4. 

3lat-bhrog udh, ** sf. Goad. 

slat-bhnilg, s.f. Brige-piecs, see bata, F 8, p. 73. 

slat-draoiineach Lë s.f. M ice, rol of oftica. 2 
Th» magie wanl of the folk-tales. 

Slat-g orat? s.f. Woody -nightshade, bitter-sweet, 
See searbh2ze-mhilis, 

slat-ghreasaid, ff s.f. Whip, goad. 

slat-gunna,1f s.f. Ram-rod of a gun. 

slathag,(AC) s.f. Handful of corn cut at one 
stroke of the reaping-hook, 

S'at-iasgaich,**s.f. Fishiag-rod. 

slat-iomain,* s.f. Goad. 

slat-ladhrach, s.f. Gat, see bata, H, p. 73. 

slat-looid, s.f. Temple, stretcher, in weaving. 

slat-mhara, -ait- & -aite-, pl. slatan-mara, s.f. 
Sea-oak, oar-weed, tangles, see stama. 2ft 
Large grey tangle. 

slat-maareachd,* s./. Rider's whip or switch. 

slat-oi:r, (an t-s—,) SE Golden-rod —Colon:aj. 

Slat-réil, s.f. Astrolabe. 

slat-rioghail,* s.f. Sceptre. 

slat-syiurs.idh,* -an-, s.f. Lash, scourge, cat-o'- 
nine-cails, (These names in Mugiisu are ap- 
plied ouly to instruments of hemp or leather, 
buc s'at is essentially one of wootl, ] 

slat-sgòid, (AU) s.f. Boom of a ship. 

slat-shiuil, s.f. Sail-yard,gaff, see bata, H, p.73, 

slat-sanaicheantais. s.f. Sceptre, mace. 2 Flag- 
siatt, banuer-staff, 

slat-thomhais, s.f. Wand, yard-measure,ell-mea- 
sure, 2 ** Any rod used for making liueal 
measurements, 3 Pole. 4 The three brilliant 
stars popularly known as ''Orion's belt,” | pre- 
ceded by the article an t-.] 5: DU;Centipede, 
"run. 

Most? -air, -an, s.m. see slabhcar. 

sleac, Badenoch for leac. 

sleach 1, see sleuchd. 

tsieachd,** v.a Cut, dissect, lance, scarify. 

T— adh,** -aidu, su, Cutting, disseciirg, 
lanemnz, s arifyi g. 2M8) Obeisaiice, 











| Sslea s (A Fdo 8.7. State of listing very much to ono 


side as a S.il.sg-boat in a scii: breeze, Tha 
ing romi 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


Fh 
La 
ta 


sleag 


8. bréagh orra, she has a fine list. 

sleag, v.a. Sneak, drawl. 

-——ach,** a. Sneaking, drawling. 

adh,** -aidh, s.m. Sneaking, drawling. 

sleaghag,(AC) -aig, an, s.f. Kind of mattock 
for digging up carrots aud roots of plants used 
in tanning and dyeing. | 

slea2air,** -ean,s.m. Sneaking fellow. 2 Drawl- 
er. 

—— ——-enachd,** s.f. Habit of sneaking, 2 Beha- 
viour of a sneaking fellow. 3 Drawling. 

sleagan,** -ain, s.m. A shell. 

Sleagh, -a [& sle'gh**] pl. -an Lë sléigh,] s. f. 
Spear, lance, javelia. Bitheadh’ur sieaghan 
mar theachdairean a’ bhàis, det your spra. s be 
as the m*ssenjers of death ; thog sinu sieagh- 
an, we lifted spears, 

-———ach, -aiche, a. Of,or resembling a spear or 
lance. 2 Armed with a spear, lance or dart. 

sleaghadair, see sleaghair. 

———— each i, s.f.ind. Tournament, 

sleaghair,* -ean, s.m. Spearman, lancer. 2(DC) 
Lazy busybody, one given to frequenting 
liouses, 

——eachd,** St Shooting witha spear, 
Spearing. 2 Fighting with spears. 

sleaguag,( MMceL) s.f. The stick used for stirring 
the grain when iu à large pot before the fire 
after having been eleaned from the husks, be- 
fore being sifted previous to grinding in the 
bra.—Lewis. 2(DMy) Pointed instrument for 
aigging, 3 Little spear. 4(DMy) Pot-stick 
to stir potatoes, also for planting potatoes in 
newly reclaimed soil. 

Sleaghaich, (MS) v.a. Iudart. 

Sc, hun, -ain, s.m. Kind of turf-soade, spad- 
dle, iustrumenut for digging. 2 Little spear. 

Sleagh un, n.pl. of sleagh. : 

sl amaclid, gaz sliomachd. 

Sivamcaire,(MS) s.m. Dangler. 

sSicamhain, -inhna, see sleamhuinn, 

sluamhan,** -ain, see leamhan, 

--—- — ach, see leamnanach. 

sleamhua, comp, of Sieamhuian, 

Sl-amhuachadh, -aidh, s.m. Siipping, act of slip- 
ping, sliding. 2 Slipperiness. 3 Gliding, A7 
Retrogradiug, getting worse. A’ s—,pr. pt. 
of sleamhnaich. Cul-s., backsliding. 

si amhuachd, s.f. Slipperiness. 2 Smoothness. 

sleamnnad, -aid, s.m. Degree of slipperiness, 2 
Degree of smoothness, 

S'euulnagan, see sleamhnan. 

Slceamhnaich, pr.pt. a’ sleamlinachadh,v.n. Slip, 
ali ie, 2 Make slippery. 3 Make smooth. 4 
ulide, move imperceptibly. 

BSleamhnan, -ain, -an, s.n. Any slippery sub- 
stance. 2Sneaking fellow, 3 Piece of ice on 
which to slide, 4 Mucus, saliva. 5 Stye, in- 
iiauima'ion of the eyes, prov. 

sleamhanaciid,, AC, s.f. Exorcism of a stye. 

sleamhouchadh, see sleamhnachadh. 

Sleainunuich, see sleamhnaicn. 

sleam;iragan, see sleamhnan, 

Sleainürau, see sleamhnan. 

sleamhuina, sleamana, à. Slippery. 2 Smooth. 

Sivcaul,** s.m. Tile. 

Sleautach,** s.m. Flake. 2 Slice. 

tsleas, sleis, s.m. Mark, sign. 2 Ridge. 
Silos, 

sleas i,** v.a, Smear, bedaub, bespawl. 

Sleasilach,** g, Sineary, dirty. 

sieasuaich,** v.a. Smear, bedaub, bespawl. 

Sleas iair, see sleastair. 

eachd, see sleastaireachd. 

s.casy,** v.a. £ n. Split, crack. 

-———ach, a. Cracking, splitting. 

Sluasgudb,** -aidh, s. m. Cracking, splitting, 











3 see 





Digitized by 


NTERNET ARCHIV 


852 


ng —MMÓ——————— 


sliachdradh 


crack, split. 

Sleastair,t v.a. Bedaub —Bad-noch. 

~ — —-eachd, s./. Simearing, bedaubing, be- 
spawling. 

sléibiie,* gen siny. of s'iabh. 

sle'bheag, see sleabhag. 

slé bhte, pl. of sliabn. 

sléibhteach, -eiche, a. Mountainous, hiy. 3 
Dwelling among mountains, 3 Of mountains, 

Sich, $m. Mountaineer. 

E -—d, s.f. Moun'!ainousness. 

sléibhtean, npl. of shabh. 

sléiohtrich,tf s.f. Wreckage, things strewn, 

tu idm, 8$. '' Naniem.'" 

sléixeil.t -eala, æ. Dilatory. 2t Drawling,slow, 
3tt5ly. 

sle mune, comp. of sleamhuinn. 

sicim ine, 8. find. see sleamanachd, 

3leimhneach,** a. Slipping, slippery. 2 Smooth, 

~————d,** s.f. Slipp riness. 2 Smoothness. 

sl? mhneae,ftt -aig, -an, s.f. Slide. 

siéis, gen.siny. of slias. 

slé sde, gen.si ng. of sliasaid. 

sléis leach, tf -aichs, a. Large-thighe. 

sléis dean, pl. of sliasaid. 

sléisne, see sléise & s'éisdean, 

sléisneach, -eich a. Large-thighed, 

siéisneadh, s.m. Back-sliding -Dàin I. Ghobha. 

slé:snean, se slé:sde & sléi«dean. 

sleithe,** s. f. Section, division, cutting. 

sleog * v.a. Pall on the,stomach. 

sleogach, -aiche, a. Qualmish, queasy, 2*Slimy. 
3* Apt to pall on tne stomach. 

Ssleogadh, -ailh, s.m. Quaim, qualmishness, 
queasiness. 

sleuchd, pr.pt. a’ sleuchdadh, v.n. Kneel, pros- 
trate, bow down revereutly,worship. 2 Yield, 
subinit, surren ler. 

3leuchdaeh, -aiche, a. Bowing down reverently, 
pros rating. 2 Yieldiug, submitting, submis- 
sive, 

sleuchdadh, -ai th, s.m. Prostrating. act of pros- 
trating or bowing down reverently, worsito- 
ping, prostratiou, 2 Yieiding, submitting. 
A’ s—, pr.pt. of sleuchd. 

sleuchdamaid, 18t. pers. pl. imp. of sleuchd. Let 
us kneel. 

sleichdair,( MS) v a. see sliachdair. 

sleug,* v.a. Sneak, elrawl. 

CEA i -aich, 8.f. Sneaking, sly, drawling fe, 
male, | 

sleugach,* -aiche, a. Sly and slow. 2 Dilatorv, 

Sleugair* -ean, s.m. Sly, drawiing, sneaking fel- 
low, sueaker, drawler. 

sliabadh, see slìobadh. 

sliabn, sléibhe, pl. sléibhte & sléibhtean, s. m. 
Mountain of the first mavenitude. 2 Hxlended 
heath, a'pine plain,mvovrish ground, 2 Exteu- 
sive tract of dry moorlaud. 3 Mountain grass, 
moor bent grass, 5 Faceofa hill. Seann 
s.,withered unt, gathered for bedding in spring 

— W. of Ross-shire ; slèibhtean creagach, coili- 
teach, rocky, wooded mountains, 

sliabh, (Al) emt Soup made from periwinkles. 
(called s£«bk in W. Highíanis gensra'ly. 2 
Juice of leeches. 

sliabhach, -aicne, a. Mountainous. 2 Abounding 
131 extensive heaths. 3 Abounding in mounu» 
ain-gr«ss. 

sliabh ur, -ean, s.m. Mountaineer. 

slia hdair, v.g. Extend or spread any soft sub- 
stauce by trampling. 2 Plaster or daub over. 

sliachdsachadh, s-e sliachdradh. 











sl achdradh, -aidh, s.m. Spreading out, act of `: 
spr-adinz out any St: substance by tramps ——— 


ling. 2 Act of plastering or daubing over. A 
—s, pr.pt. of sliachdair, 
Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS SÉ 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 





l 
l 
4 


slachdraich 
sliachdraich, see sliachd{ir. 


sliachdrai 
out by tramp:ing. 

sliadh, see sl:abh. 

sliaisd, see sliasaid. 





2 Plastered, daubed. 


slias ** sléis, An, $&./. Thigh. 2 Coarse part of, 


a threa:l. 

sliasach,** a. Having large thighs. 2 Of, or be- 
longing to, the thigh. 

sliasad, see sliasaid. 

siiesaid, sléisde & sléisno, pl. sléislean & «léis- 


side towards the stern. 3 Strand of repe or 
thread. 4**Coarse part of a thread. 5ttGigot, 
leg of meat. Lag a shléiste, the hollow of his 
thigh. 

sliasaideach,(MS) a. Crural, 

sliasb,** v. Draggle. 

sliasbair,** v. Dragele. 

«lias d, s.m. Ledge ina loom. 

sliasdan, Ain, s.m. Lelge in a loom, 

sliast, see sliasd. 

sliaspair,** v.a. Draggle, daggle. 

sliaspair,** s.m. Dragger. 

sliaspairt,** s.f. Draggling, covering or besmear- 
ing with mud. A’ s-, pr.pt. of sliaspair. 

siiast, see sliasd. 

~———an, See sliasilan. 

slib, see sliob. 

slibist, -ean, s.m. Sloven, paltry or sorry fellow. 

,* a. Clumsy, Mer $ 

glib isteach, ei, ie, a Slovenly, mean, abject. 

slige, pl. -an & -achan, s.f. Shell, 2 Seale of a 
balance. 3 *Hullof a vessel. 4ff Coin, in 
ridicule. 5 Bent timver in a boat, see bala, D, 

. 73. 6 Skin of a boat, se» bata, E 4, p. 73. 

(**Drinking.shell.  8** Splinter of earthen- 
ware. 9 Scallop-shell. 10**Bomb. , Chaidh 
e "na shligeachan, it broke in splinters. 

sligeach,* s.f. Wreck. 2 Crustaceous surface. 

sligeach, -eiche, a. Shelly, having a shell. 2 A- 
pounding in shells. 3 Like a scale, 4 Of, or 
like a bomb.  Bralan s.,a sturgeon. 

siigeachan, n.pl. of slige. 

Ss izeachd, s.f.?nd. Crustiness, 

Biiveadachid,** s.f. Conchology. 

siigeadair, -ean, s.m. ** says Conchologist, but 
it ineans rather ** a maker of shells." 

Siigeadh, -idh, s.m. **Fom :ntation. 2 Dividing 
with shells, 3 Drinking from shells. Shells 
and horns were the chief drinking-vessels of 
old. Fìon 'ga shligeailh beòir 'ga bai ac’, 
they had wine from shells and plenty of beer to 
drink— Duanaire, p. 143. 

sligeag, -eig, -an, s.f., dim. of slige. Little shell, 

sligeagach, -aiche, a. Abounding in small shells, 

sligean,** -ein, s.m., dim. of slige. Little shell. 
2 Little scale or balance. 3 Little splinter of 





earthenware. 
sligeanach,** -aiche, o. Spotted. 2 Sky-colour- 
ed. 3 Green. 4 Cirrocumniated. 5 Scaled, 


scaly, 6 see sligeach. Nathair bhreac, sh., a 
spotted green serpent. 
Sligeanach, -aich, s. m. Tortoise. 
3 (AF) Turtle. 
sligear,* Ar, -an, s.m. Conchologist. 
achd,* see sligeadachd. 
sligearnach, -aiche, a. Made of shells. 
shells. 
sligearnach, -aich, 
shells, 
sligeart, -eirt, -an, s.m. Pumice-stone. 
Sibjeas, -eis, -an, s.m. The chin, in ridicule, 
&ize-bhloighdeach, s.f. Bomb-sheil.  Fadadh 
-ba slige-bloighdich, th fusee, 
slige-chabon.(MMcD) art Large cockle scallop- 
ed shell— Lewis, 


2 Chelonian. 





= 


2 Full of 


sm. Place abounding in 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


j 
chte, past pt. «f sliachdraich. Spread | 


í 


-—— — 2 E eee — — ————————— 


8Siiobach 





640. SLuje-chreac! ainn. 


HIERZ 
nean, sf. The thigh. 2 The part of a ship's | 8l.ge-cnreach, st, Scallop-she.l. 


s'ige-chresehainn, s./, Scallop-shell, clam. 

Suges-chreadha, -an-creadha, s... Potsherd. 

sigo-neamhnuid, -e, -ean, s.f. Mother-of-pearl. 

slige-neamhnuinn,(AEF) s. f. Pearl oyster shell. 
2 Mother-of-pearl. 

slige-neamhu'nn, see slize-neamhnuid. 

sl ge-thomhais, -ean-tomiiais, $.f. Balance scale. 

slighe, -an & -achan, s.f. Way, path, road, pas- 
sage, inlet. 2 Journey. 3 Manner, conduct, 
4* Craft. 5'*Approach. 6**Track. Dh fhalbh 
e air s. na firiun, he has gon» on the way of 
truth—said of one who is dead. 

sligheach, -eiche, @. Artful, sly, crafty, wily, 
cunning, full of stratagems. deceilfal. 

Sligheacaas, -ais, s.m. Slyuess, 

sligheadair, -ean, s.m. One who lives by fraud. 
2 Artful, scheming fellow. 

sligheadaireachd, s.find. Craftiness, cunning, 
artfulness, ceceiifulness, slyness, practice of 
stratagems. 

slighearachd, see sligheaiiaireachd. 

slirhearra, -eire, a see sligheach. 

slighreach, -eiche, s.%.culd. Shreds, shards,prov. 

sligich, v @ Crust. 

sligir,* see sligear. 

-——eachd, see sligeadachd. 

sligneach, erch, s.f. Icicles. 2 Scales of a fish. 

, -eiche, a. see.sligeach & sligeauach. 

slim, -e, a. see slìom. 

slimseag, -eig, -an, s.f. Silly, tawdry woman. 2 
Whore. 

s! he! nante -aiche, a. Silly, tawdry. 2 Whor- 
ish. 











d, s.f.ind. Silliness, tawdriness. 2 
Whorishness. 
slinn, -eachan, s.m. Weaver’s sleay or reed, see 


be trt-fhigheadaireachd. 2**Flat stone.  3** 
Aiea V Elás, LTS] 
slinn-chrann,** -chrainn, s.m. Flag-staff. 
slinneag,tt -eig, -an, s. f. Shoulder-blade. A’ 


chuid nach 'eil air an t-slinneag tha e air a’ 
chliathaich, what is not on the shoulder may 
cover the ribs. 

slinnean, -ein, slinneinean, 
shoulder-blade. 


s. m. Shoulder, 

2ttrFore-quarter of mutton, 

ach, -aiche, @.  Shouldered, broad- 
shouldered. 2 Of à shoulder. Fear s, leath- 
ann, a larg’, broad-shouldered man. 

ach,** -aich, s.m.Broad-shouldered man. 
achd, s.f ind. Species of augury, per- 

formed by inspecting the shoulder-biade of an 
animal, by eating the flesh without touching 
the bone with tooth or nail, 

—  ——aàich, s.p/.Scapulars, see eun, No.2, p.398. 

slinnteach,** -ich, s.7. ilouse-tiles, quantity of 
house-tiles. 

sliob,** s.m. Polish, gloss, 

slìob, v.a. Stroke, rub gently with the hand. 2 
Polish, gloss, varnish, 3 Lick.  4* Cajole. 5 
Anoiut. 6**i.ubricate. 7 Smear, daub, spat- 
ter, cover. 8**Cherish. 9** Japan. lOftSteep. 
S. bolach is sgrobaidh e thu, stroke a churl 
an: he will scratch you. 

——ach, -aiche, a Clumsy, awkward. 

—ach,** a. Smoothing, polishing. 2 Besmear- 





1 d (E: Pa E mut. FE E | BEN pU 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINO 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


F —— 
LU | 
La 

A 


s'iobach 


ing daubing, spattering. 

——achadh,** -aidb, s.m. Smoothing, polishing, 
glossing. 2 Besmearing, danbiog, syattering. 

———achd, s.f. Sleekness, 

——adh, ** 3r lsin). & pl. im». of slion. 

——aith, -aidh, san, Strokiug, ac» of rubbing 
gently wi'h the han. 2 Act of licking. 38 
Act of polishing, smoothiag or giossing. 4** 
Resmearing. daubing, spattering.  5** Var- 
nish, gloss. polisa. 6ff3teeping. £’ s—, pr. 
pt.of shob. 

——aich, v.a. s20 slìob. 

—aichte, past pt. Smoothed, polished, glossed, 
varnished, 2 Besmeared, daubed. 

sliobair, eu, s.m. Clumsy, awkward fellow. 2 
*Cajoler. 3** Jap «nner. 

eachd, ¢.f.ind. Clumsiness, awkwardness. 

sliobaist, -eun, see slilist. 

— —— —each, -eiche, a. see slibisteach & slìob- 
asta. 

sliobasta,* a. Clumsy. 

Sliobastachd,* sf. Clumsiness. 

sliob-cheaunach, "zo Having smooth hair, glossy- 
haired. Anna chioch-chorrach, shliob-cheann- 
ach, round-breasted, glossy-haired Anna. 

8liobhaz,(AC) s.f. Small, 3-pronged mattock, 
used by the inhabitants of the {sles to assist 
in lifting carrots on Domhna‘h Curran (carrot 
Sunday.) (DC) Dibble for plauting potatoes 
in Cher lazy-beds,’’—Uist. [pleadhag in Ar- 
qui. | 

gliob-oladh, s.m. Varnish. 

siiobr uth, -aidh, s.m Glossinass. 2 Dranght. 

slhobta past pf. stroked, gently rubbed. 2 
Licked. 3 Polished, varnishe t,glossed,smooth- 
ed. 4**Anoinierl. 

sli^chd, -a, -an, s.m. coll. Seed, offspring, pro- 
geny, descendants, posterity. 2 ‘Lribe, cian. 
3 Lroop. 4* Track, print, rut. 5 Multitude. 
S. nan rothan, the track of the wheels; S. a 
mheur, the print of his iners; s. Dhiarmaid, 
the offspring of D-rmid (the Cainpbell:.) 

sijochdach, -aiche, a. see sliochümhor. 
Hui tracks. 

sliochdachadh,( MS) sm. Generation, prolifica- 
tion. 

sliochdar, see sliochdmhor. 

sliochdmhor, -oire, a. Prolific, having many des- 
cendants. 2 Populous. 

sliochidmhorachd, s.f.ind. Fertility, procreative- 
ness. 

sliocht, see sliochd. 

slio:lach,** -aiche, a. Cunning, artful. Gus., 
cunningly. 

sliog,** s m. Polish, gloss. 

slìog, v.a. see slìob. 2 v.n. Peak. 

sliog, (AF) s.f. Cray-fish. 2 Scallop. 3 see slige. 

slìogach, -aiche, a. Sly, subtle. 2 Sleek, slim. 3 
Sneaking. 4 Caressing, stroking. 5 Lubri- 
cated. 6 Glossy, smooth. 7 Silky. 8 Fawn- 
ing. 9 Testaceous. 

sliogadh, see sliobadh. A's. an ula, stroking 
their beards. A’ s—, pr.pt. of siiog. 

sliogaich, s.pl. Feelers, 

sliozair, -ean,s.m. Sneaking,sly fellow. 2*Strok- 
er, cajoler. 

gliogan, dim. of sliog, s.m. Shell, bomb. 2 Cup. 
3 Hulk. 4 Scale. 

elioganach,** a. Dappled. 

sliogard,** -aird. sun, Crust. 2 Pumice-stone. 

wliiogardach, ** o Crusty. 2 Hard. 

sliozarnach,** a, Made of shells, shelly. 

elio arra,** a. Smooth, g:ossy, slee«. 
3 Lubricated, 





9** 


2 Silky. 


8 


———————— 


Viogarrachd,** s.f. Smoothness, sleekness.glossi- 


Ness. 


gaogta, pact pt. Stroked, smoothed, caressed, 2 


Di 


petit, MK io he cea d 
i ) k A l i 
ITERNET ARCHIV 


51 glia 


Glossed. 3 Lubricated. 

.ed. 6 see sliobta. 
Sliugte, see sliogta. 
sliom,(AC) s. Buttercup, see cearban. | 
slìom, -a, a Sleek, smooth, glossy. 2 S!ippery. 

3 Inert, dull, inactive. 4 Slim, slender. 5 
6 Lubricated. Na brie 


4** Silky. 5 Fawm 


Iusineere, deceitful. 
sh., the sleek trout, 
sliom, v. see sliob. | 
sliomacaireachd,(MS) s.f, Adulation, mealy- 
monthedness. 

sliomacn,-aiche, a. Cringing, flattering. 2 Mean, 
3 Deceitful, plinsible. 4 Slim. 5 Sleek, 
smooth, glossy. 6 see slìom. 


slhomachd,** s.f. Sleekuess. 2 Lubricity. 3 
Smootuness, 4 Glossiness 5 Slipperiness. 6 
Slimness. 


sliomachd, pr.pt. a’ sliomachdadh, v. a. Fawn, 
sponge in a mean fashion, 2 Daub. 

sliomaehdair,ft -an, s.m. Mean parasite,spongy, 
lazy, inactive person, adulator. 

——— eachd, see sliomaireachd. 

sliomadair, see slìomair. 

sliomadaireachd, see sliomaireachd, 

sliomaich,(MS) v.a. Agrease. 

sliomaich,{ MS) v.a. Coax. 

sliomaich,** v.g. Make sleek, smooth or glossy. 
2 Lubricate. 3 Fawn, flatter. 

sliomair, -ean, $ m. Meanly flattering fellow, 
flatterer, dec»itful and fair-speaking person, 
fawning fellow. 2 Lazy, inactive person. 3 
Weakliig. 4 Craven. 5 Thief, filcher. 

s i maircac.d, s.f.ind. Me:n flattery. 2 Deceit- 
fal and fair talk, 3 Laziness, inactivity. 
Filehi'ix. 

sliom ir, -ean, sm. see sliomair. 

s ìiomeair ach 1l, see shomaireacnil. 

slomchaireachd, (MS) et, Assentation, 

s iomchratha.ch,: Ms) a. Pinguid. 

sliomhvireachd, s»e sliomuireachd. 

slivm shligneach, s.m, Ganoid. 

slione,** v.a. Beat. 

sliop, -a, -au, &,f. Lip, blubber-lip. 

siiopach, -aiche, a. Lippel. 2 Blubber-lipped. 

sliupag,(AC) -aig, -an, s.f. see sliobhag,  2** 
Thick-lipped young fe:nale. | 

sliopair,-ean, s.m.  Blubber-lipped-person. 2° 
Sulky, surly fellow. $ 

sliopaireachd, s.f. Blubbering. 

sliop-chraos, -aois, -an, s.m. Fat, thick, slavery 
lips. 

dias: -a,-an, 8.m. Side. 2 Side of a man or 
beast, flank. 3 Side ofa country, 4 Extend- 
ing,sloping declivity. 5 Coast, border, edge. 
6 Drag-rope, trace, see No. 19, p. 263. 7(DC) 
Slap on the side of the head. 

An stoirm éitidh ri s. carraig, the dreadful 
temvest beatiny against the side of a rock ; s. 
nan liath-bheann, the side of the grey hills ; s. 
as :éith, the edye of his shield. 

sliosach, -aiche, a. Having sloping sides. 2 Hay- 
ing many sides. 3 Having a border, 

yliosag, see slisea 7. 

sliosan, s.pl. Plates of a loom. 2 Drag-ropes or 
traces, see und:r crann-nan-gad. 

slios!a,** a. Fair. 2 Courteous. 8 Flattering, 
faw ing. 

slivsdachd,** s, f. Fairness. 
3 Fla:tery. 

sliosmhor.** a. Glossy, polished. 2 Extensive, as 
a country side. 

slivsmach,** a. Having sides, lateral, multilat- 
eral. 2 Angular. a 

sliosrach (AC) s. Slope, declivity. 

sliosc ig, Badenoch for liosraig. 





8 Courteousness. 


slis, -e, -ean, s. f. Crip, sice, shave, 2 Lath, 
thin board. 3 Spill. 
Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS Al 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


4 


[| 


d 





\ 
f 
i 


Se peat into charcoal. 


slis 


gege 


slis,** v.a. Slice, chip, shave, as wood. 


slis-cheumnach,** a. Apt to make a digression, 


giis-cheumnaich,** v.g. Make a digression. 


Biiseag, -eig, -an, 8.f.dim. of slis. Spill or shav- 
3 ES 


ing of wood. 2 Thin slice of anything, 
Temple upper part of the head. 


sliseagach, -aiche, a. Slived, in shavings, cut in- 
to thin slices. 2 Of, or belonging to, shavings. 


3 Abounding in shavings, slips or spills. 


s'i eagacha:lh, -aidh, s.m. Clipping, aet of chip- 


ping or planing of woud, 2 Cutting, slicing, 
act of cutting into slices. 
slisea gaich, 

gl'scaga ch, pr. pt. a’ sliseagachadh, v.a. Chip, 
plane, cut into slices, 


sliseavaichte, past pt. of sliseagaich. Cut into 


s.ices, planed, chipped, ) | 
sliseagan, npl. of sliseag. Wood-shavinzs,chips. 


siis :ag-uechd,s.f. Breast-beam of loom —Hvbrid's. 
siisinu, s. Kar-mark on sheep, see under comh- 


arra th-cluais. 


slisneach, -ich, s.f.coll. Chips, shavings, spills. 


2** Scales. : 
slisneach, -eiche, a. Having many sides. 
slisnzach,(AC) s. m. Plant like the heal-wort 

(31à u-1us.) $ | 
shueanach,** a. Horned. 

8l.b,** -uib, s.m. Dam, pond. 2 Splash, puddle. 
——aceh,** a. Splashy. 2 Puddly. 


sloban, -ain, s.m. Puddle, little pool. 
sloc, -uic, -an, s.m. Pit, 2 Den. 3 Hollow, cay- 
5 Dungeon. 6 


itv, dell, hold, hole. 4 Grave. 
Pool, gutter, ditch. 7 Marsh. 8 Plough. S.- 
guail, a coal-pit ; s.-sabhiidh, a saw-pit. 

Slocach, -aiche, a. Full of pits, dens, hollows, 
cavities, dungeons ditches or marshes, Z 
Like or pertaining to any of Less 

slocachadh, -aidh, s.m. Uollowing, act of hol- 

. lowing out or excayating. 2 Digging, act of dig- 
ging or making a pit or diteh,den or dungeon. 
A’ 8—, pr.pt. of slocaich. 

slocaich, pr.pt. a’ slocachadh, v.a. Hollow or 
excavate anything. 2 Dig or make a ditch or 
pit, draw a diteh. J 

siocaichte, past pt. of slocaich. Hollowed out. 
excavated. 2 Dug, made into a pit or ditch. 

slòcan, -ain, -an, sm. Sloke (seaweed)—porphy- 
ra laciniata. 

slocan, -ain, -an, s. m., dim, of sloc. Little pit, 
ditch, hollow, dell or den. 2**Little pool. 3 
(MS) Socket. 

slòcan, see Jochdan. 

slucanach, -aiche, a. Full of little pits, ditches, 
hollows, dens, caves or dells, 

gloc-buntàta, s.m. Potato-pit. The potato-pits 

^ in satherlandsiire before the clearances were 
made about 3 ft. square and nearly 3 ft. deep. 
In a shelving bank that greatly resembles an 
old beach, above the shepherd's house at Lear- 
able in Kiidonan, may be seen in a row some 
twenty or thirty such pils, now partly filled 
up by the falling iu of the sides. In olden 
times, when à biacksmith's customers had to 
bring him their own fuel, an empty potato-pit 
was used to convert the necessary quantity of 

This kiad of pit is siil 
used for potatoes in the county—CR, 

lt was, of old and till recently, the custom 

in Uist to dig a hole in the floor near the 

— he»rthstone, anu now and again take a live 

cat from the fire, dip it in water aud put it 

into this bole. ‘he charcual thus accumula- 
ted was for use in the smithy, as everyone 
who needed the smith s services had to pro- 
Vide the n. cessary charcoal.—DCO. 

sloc-chariach, s»e crotag. 

slochd, sve sive, 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


A’ s—, pr. pt. of 


855 sluagh 


tsloch-sine, s.f. Flake of snow. 

sloc-sàbnaidh ** s.m. Saw-pit. (**s.-shabhaidh,] 

slod, -oid & -uid, pl. an, see lod. 

slodach,** a. Full of little pools or puddles. 

slodan,** -ain, s.m. Little pool or puddle. (for 
lodan.] 

slodanach, æ. Full of little pools or puddles. 

slodhas, -aig, an, s.m. **Lining of a horn. 2 
see Sladhag & siabhag. 

slodhagzach. æ. Lined, as a horn. 

slogag,(DU) s.f. Dell. 

slogair, s.m. Gulf. 

slogan, see sluagh-ghairm. 

slozh, -òigh, s.co//. People. 2 gen. pl. of sluagh. 

slògna, (a sh— D voc.p!. of sluagh. 

sloidhe, s.f. Section, division. 

slòigh, n. & dat. pl. of sluagh. 

sloigh, gin. & pl. of sluagh. 

sloighre, s f. Sword, scimitar. 

sloighte, see slaight. 2 past pt. Beaten. 3**Rnn 
ET from the ore of metal. Obair sh., beaten 
work. 

sloightear, -ir, -an, see slaightear. 

sloightearachd, see siaiglitearaend. 

sl igntearachil, see slaodaireachd. 

sloighteil, a. see slaodach. 

sluighteil, see slaighteil. 

sloiun, v.g. Surname, bestow a surname. 2 
Trace one's pedigree. Co uaith a -hlo noeadh 
i? from whom was she surnwned ? sloinnidh se 
e féin, he will surname hünse/f. 

sloinne, 8.f. see sloinneadh. 

slo.nneaen, a. Clannish. 2 Fond of genealogy. 

sloi;neachail,** a. Genealogical. 

sloinneadh, Alb, -idhean, s. m. Surnams, pat- 
ronymic. 2 Surnamiug, act of surnaming. 3 
Act or mode of tracing one's pedigree, A’ 8—, 
pr.pt. of sloinn. 

sloinneadh, 3rd.pers.sing. & pl. imp. of sloiun. 

sloinnzar, fut.pass. of sloinn. 

sloinnich, v.a. Surname, give a surname. 

sloinnte, vast pt. of sloinn. Surnimed. 2 Hay: 
ing one’s genealogy traced. 

sloinnte,** s.f. Genealogy. ` Nuair a dh'airmh- 
eadh au s., when their genealogy was reckon-d, 

sloinntear, -eir, -an, s.m. Genealogist. 

—,(DMy)s m. Dishonest persoa— Lewis. 

sloinntearach,** o, Genealogical. 

sloinntearachd, er, Act or habit of tracing gen- 
ealogies. 2 Genealogy. 3 Extraction. N. 
neo-cnriochnaich, endless genealogies. 

sloinuteil, -e, a. Genealogical. 2 Arranged gen- 
ealogieally. 3 Skilled in or fond of gensilogy 

sloisir, pr. pt. a’ sloisreadh, v. a. Dash, beat a- 
gainst, as the sea against the shore. £ Wash 
by working backwards and forwards iu water 
3 Mix soft substances together, 4 Daub, dauk 
over. 

sloisreach, -eiche, og Dashing, rumbling, as the 
surge beating against the shore. 2 Washing. 
3 Mixing soft subsiances together, 4 Daub- 
ing, daubing over. 

sloisreadh, -idh, s.m. Dashing, as of the waves 
against a rock, 2 Act of washing by working 
anything in water. 3 Act of mixiug soft sub- 
stances together. 4 Daubing, act of daubing 
over. A’s—,pr.pt. of sloisir. 

sloisridh, fut. ajf.a. of sloisir. 

sloitir, see slaightear, 

slonnadh,** -ai:a, s.m. Cattle, flocks. 

slnagh, gen.siuaigh, dat.sinagh, voc. a shluaigh ! 

n. l. sioigh, gen. slogh, dat. slòigh, voc. a 

shlózha! s.m. Pe pe, folk. 2 Multitude. 3 

dfost, army. 4(AU > ihe hoscs,tbe spirit-world. 

O sniuagh !—an exclamation having much tie 

same import as O dear /—a calling for succour 

to iue fairies. 





















Oreinel frst 
LU NM | V E R e | T Ww O = L LI M | Q | S 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGR 


AUT 


DI 


sluaghach 


KR DEER -aiche, o. Populous, thickly inhabi- 

ted. 

sluaghail, -e, à. see sluaghach. 

siuaghar, sev sluaghmhor. 

siuagh-chunntas, -ais, s.m. Census. 

sluegh-;habhaltachd Tf et Popularity. 

siuagh-gha,.rm, -e, -eau, s.f. Signa: for a gather- 
ing among the Highland cans. — Every clan 
and many dis'ricts had their own distinctive 
war-cry, e 9v, Carn na cuimhne ! (Braemar) ; 

Creaz Kaiachai th ! (Grants) ; Fraoch ! (Mac- 

Donalds, ; Loeb Sloigh ! (MacFarlanes) ; Ard 

Chaillich ! (MacGregors) ; Tulach ard !( Mac- 

Keazies) ; Creaz dhubh ! (MacPhersons.} The 

war-cries &e. of most of the clans will be 

found in Am Feillire, 1:00. 
g'ua:nu-iogunadh, -aidh, s.m. Popularity. 
siuagh-iül, sm. Politics. 

S. aghartach, liberal politics. 

s. ais-eneumach, reactionary politics. 

s. athaiseach, conservativ? politics, 

8. aonachdach, unionist politics. 

s. pàirteach, socialist politics. 
sluagi-itlach, æ. Political. 
siuaviimhoire, comp. of sluagnmhor, 
sluegimboireachd,(Ms) s.f. Publicity. 2**Pop- 

ulonsaess, 
sluaghmhor, -oire, @ Same meanings as sluagh- 

ach. 
sluagh-mhortadh, -aidh, s.m. Massacre, 
sluagh-run, s.m. Policy. 

s. coimneach, foreign policy. 

s. na dùthcha, national policy.. 

s. nv h-impireachd, imperial policy, 
sluazh-thaitneachd, s.f.ind. Popularity. 
sinaigh, gen.sin,r. of sluagh. 
slua'gneach,* -eich, s.f. Expedition. 
tsiuaigueachd, -an, sf. Expedition. 2**Popula- 

non. 
sluaisd, see sluaisdir & sluasaid. 
siuaisle, -au, gen. of slua<aid. 
sluaisieach,** a. Shovellang. 2 Shoving. 
sluaisdea-ha:th, see sluaisreadh. 
siusisdeachd, s.f. & pres.pt. of sluaisd. 
siunisdean, pi. of sivasaid. 
siualsdicn,** see sluaisdir. 
siuaisdicnte, past pt. ot sluaisdich. 
sluaisdir, pr. pt. a’ sluaisreadh, v.a. Shovel, 

clean or work with a shovel. 2 Mix or work 

tog ther, as lime. 3 Shove aside as with a 

spade or shovel. 4*Draggle, 5*Poke. 
sli.aisir, see sluaisdir. 
slusisne, g^n. of s:uasaid. 
sluaisiean, pl. of sluasaid. 
siuaisreadh, -cidn, s.m. Mixing, act of mixing 

or beating together lime, &c., with a shovel. 

2 Cleaning, suoving or cleausiug with a shov- 

el. 3tiSlubbering. A'sc-, pr. pt. of sluaisir. 
sluasaid, v.n. see sluaisdir. 
sluasai:l, -e,-ean, $.f. Shovel, spade. 

aich, d fire-shovel. 
sluasaideach, a. Abounding in shovels or spades. 
¢sluch,** v.a. Quenca, extinguish, stifle, 2 Over- 
whelm. 
sludrach,** -aich, s.m. Foundation. 
¢siudhach,** -aich, s.f. Horn. 
sludhazan,** -ain, s.m., Horn. 
hora. 
sludraiche, see sludrach. 
slug, v. see sluig. 
siug,* -uige, -an, $.f. Miry puddle. 
slug, -uig, 3.71. Gulp. 
slugacn, -aiche, a. ‘That swalloweth, gulping. 2 

- Apt to swallow or gulp. 
slugadh, -aidn, s.m. Swallowing, act of swallow- 

ing or gulping. 2 Absorbing, act of absorbing. 

3 Enguiphing,act of engulphing or overwhelm- 


D 


s ode V oe APP 
ITER A ds 
^ HF MIT EN rt 


S.-ghrios- 


2 Lining of a 


SÉ Yi Jg 
La 
kk, H v 


856 


smachdail 

ing. 

pr.pt. of sluig. Craos-shlugadh, a voracious 

swallowing, guttony. 

slugag.tt -aig, -an, s.f. Small pool. 

slugaid, -e, -ean, $ f. Slough, deep miry placa, 
2 Qnicksand. 3 Throat, gullet. 

slugaileach, -eiche, a. Abounding in sloughs or 
quazmires, 2 Like a quagmire. 3 Having a 
larg? throat. 4 Voracious, 

sIngaideachd, see slagaireachd. 

slug ur, -ean, sm. Glutton, devourer. 
Loft, 3 Hard drinker, 

slu raireachd, s.f.ind. Voracious gulping or swal» 
lowing. 2 Glattony. 3 Extravagance. 

slugaite,** -an, s. m. Quicksand. 2 Slough, 
muddy place. 

slug in, -ain, -an, $. M. Orifice of the gullet— 
Wintpine is svonnan. 2 Neck of a bottle. 
Whirlpool, 4Guif. 5(AF) Opening of a kiln, 
whereon the corn to be-dried is laid. 6 Sheaf- 
swallow of a pulley, see Ulag 5, p.78. 7**Little 
deep pool, deep pool n a stream. 8**Gorge. 
9rtPit. Bha leum dlù aig s. carraig, Ae 
sprang quick!y in’o the pool of the rock; bha 
mo eüridhe "oam sh., my ‘heart was in my 
mouth (with terror, ) 

singanach, -aiche, o Voracious. gluttonous. 2 
Having a large throat. 3 Swallowing, gulp- 
ing. 4 Gulfy, abounding in gulfs, 5] f Pertain- 
ing to a pit. 6 Abounding in deep pools. 

sluganachd,** s.f. Gluttony, greediness, 2(DQ) 
bronchitis, 

slug-ghaineamh,** -eimh, s m. Quicksand. 

slug-pholl, -phuill, s.m. Whirlpool. 

slu:c, gen.sing. & n pl. of sloc. 

sluichd, see sluic, 

sluiz, pr.pt. a’ slugadh, v. a. Swallow. 2 Abe 
sorb. 3 Engulph,overwhelm. 4 Devour. Shluig 
e daoine, t£ devoured men. 

slnigeau,* -ein, sm, 1fGlutton. see slugan. 

sluizear, ful.pess. of sluig. Shall be swallowed, 

siuizidn, f»/aff.a. of sluig. Shall swallow. 

sluigte, past pt. of sluig. Swallowed. 2 Abe 
sorbed. 3 Engulphed. 4 Devoured. 
gorged. 

sluinn,** s.f. Telling, declaring. 

sluinnse,(DMK) v. Lash, thrash—Caithness. 

sluisich, -e, s.f. Wash, the food of pigs. 

sluisin, v. see sluaisir. 

sluisneadh, s.m. & pr.pt. see sluaiseadh. 

tslus, v.a. Disse:ub'e. 2 Counterfeit. 

smachd, s.m.ind, Authority, control, rule, dig: 
cipline, subjection, command, 2 Awe. 3 Re 
provf, correction. Fo d’ s.-sa, under your cone 
trol ; cum s, air. or cuir s air, correct him. dis- 
cipline him; s. airme, military discipline ; cuir 
fo s., bring into sudjeciton. 

(CR) Syllable—Suth’d. 


2 Spend- 








Correct. 3 Rule, keep under subjection, keep 
in awe, discipline, 


smachdach, -aiche, æ. Having or using control, ` 


authoritative, 2 Correcting, chastising, re- 
provieg. 3 Prone to chastise or correct, rule 
ing, lording, keeping in subjection or awe. 
.—adh, -aidh, s.m. Heproving, act o 
reproving or correcting. 
rection. 4 Pioof. 
A’ s—, pr.vt. of smachdaich. 
smach"achd, s.7.ind. Austereness, severity. 
smachdaich, pret. a’ smachdachadh, v. a. 





prove,correct,check. 2 Chastise. 3 Discipline, 


rule, command. 4 Reprove severely. 

smachdaichre, past pt. of smachdaich. Reprov- 
ed, corrected. 2 Chastised. 3 Brought under 
subjection. 


smachdail,-e, a, Authoritative, commanding, d 


LEIT OF 
Al / 


OK 


AB D r^ | Aas 
* Ga EN 3 -| H LN Fy 
ri mi Waar | pp 


A 


UN 


ki 
M 

II 
Welt 4 


Fete. 
FL DTI 
H POE VR I 


4 Devourinz, act of devouring. A's—, 


—,** v.a. Chastise. 2 Correct, reprove. 2 


2 Chastisiug. 3 Core 
5 Rule, awe, subjection, 


— A 


| UE IPESNSEIC WB 
kala d LJ 3 Fal 


= 


es 





"1.4 H A 

: 5 "E 4 

Poo .- Eit u^ 
mn P mu m, Parte an a a a a 


E. m 


* 
m f 


+ 
^ 


M 


kal 


*; 478 dw 





m 


emachdail 


disciplinary, Jordly, overbearing. 2 Austere, 
smachdair,** -ean, s.m. Disciplinarian, authori- 
tative person, ; 
smachdaire,(DC) s.m. Ptarmigan, see tarmach- 


an. 
smachdalachd, s.f. ind, Anthority,keeping under 
awe or control. 2*Firmnesgs of character. 
smachdan,( DO) s.m. Ptarmigan, s»etàrmachan. 
sgmachd-bhaun,** -ainn, s.m, Penal law, code of 
criminal law. 
smachd-laun, -ainn, -an, s.m. House of correct- 
ion. 
smachduchadh, see smachdachadh. 
smachduich, see «machdaich, 
smàd, v.a. Threaten, use threatening words. 2 
Intimidate, scare, 3 Beat away. 4 Abuse, re- 
vile terribly. 5**Boast. 
gmad, s.m.ind. Particle, jot, the smallest parti- 
cle of anything. 2 Spot, stain. 3** Smut, 
soot. 
smadach,** a. Sooty, smutty. 
smadach,** a. Prone to boast. 
off. 8 Intimidating, scaring. 
emadadh,** -aidh, s. 9m. Threatening, act of 
threatening or using threatening words. 2 
Intimidating, act of intimidating. 3 Act of 
beating away. 4 Abusing, abuse. 5**Boast- 
ing. 6ttSeolding. A’ s—, pr.pt. of smàd. 
smacdail, -c, a. Threatening, scaring, that threat- 
ens, 2 Intimidating. 3 Beating away. 4* 
Abusive, 5IfKuocking down ata blow. 6** 
Boastful. 
smadan,-ain, 8.1m. Soot, smut, 2'Particle of 
smut or soot, 3 Jot, particle. 
smadanach,** a. Smutted, sooted. 2 Dusty. 
smàg, aig,-an, s.f. Paw. 2 in derision, Clumsy 
paw, clumsy foot. 3 Large hand. 4 see smaig. 
5 see smà'gean, Air smagan, on all fours. 
(for mag.) 
smàg, v.G. & n, see smagaich. 
smayvach, -aiche, a. Pawel, as a beast, 2 Hav- 
ing large paws. 3 Clumsy-footed. 4 Pawing, 
groping. 
smagach, -aich, -aichean, s.m. see smaigean. 
adh, -aidh, s.m, Act of creeping along. 2 
Moving on all fours. 3**Pawing. 4 Groping. 
A’ 8—, pr. pt. of smagaich. 
smagaich, v.a. Creep along. 2 Move on all fours. 
3 Grope. 4 Sprawl. 
» gmàgail, s. find. see smagaireachd. 
smagair, -ean, s.m. One that creeps along, or 
moves on all fours, 2 Lazy fellow. 3**Clum- 
sy-footed fellow, 4**Clumsy-fisted fellow. 5 
Sprawler. 6 Groper. 
‘smagaireachd, s.f.ind. Creeping along, creeping 
on all fours. 2 Groping. 3 Pawing. 
smagairneach,**s.m. Any creature with large 
. paws. 2 Large-boned person. 3* Large-paw- 
el squat fellow or beast. 
smagairneach, a. Having large paws. 
boned. 
smagarsaich,** e, €, Pawing. 2 Groping. 3 Creep- 
ing. 4 Moving on all fours. 
smayarsanaich, (a^) pr.pt. Moving on all fours, 
smaichd, see smachd. 
smàáidse, see màidse. 
sm idseart,** -eirt, s.m. Active young man. 
smàig,* s.f. Tyranny, the upper hand, ascend- 
ant, despotism. Fo d’s., under your sway or 
... despotism. 
emaiz, gen.sing. of smàg, 
. smàigealachd, s.f. Extreme despotism, great de- 
gree of tyranny, 
emaàigean, ein, pl. -an & -geinean, s.m. Toad. 2 
Frog. Cluich nan smaigean, leap-frog. 
-—ach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to, 
i toads or frogs. 2 Full oi frogs. 3 Like a frog. 


2 Prone to beat 





2 Large- 





857 


emarach 

4 Creeping. 5 Groping. 

smaigeanachd, see amàgaireachd. 

smàigeil, e, a. Despotic, arbitrary. 

smàigir,* -ean, s.m. Tyrant, despob. 

eachd,* see smaigealachd. 

smàil, gen. & voc. sing. of smal, 

smàil, pr.pt. a’ smàladh, v.a. Snuff, top, as a 
candle. 2 Extingnish, 3 Knock down, dash 
to the ground. 4(DU) “ Rest ” a peat fire bv 
covering half-burnt peats with asnes to re- 
tard combustion. Inthe morning these live 
peats are blown into flame to rekindle a fire. 
5, e as a chéile iad, he dashed them to pieces; 
S. a3 an teine, extinguish the fire. 

smaile,** s, f. Blow, buffet. 

smaiteard, see smaidseart, 

smal, gen. -àil (smedil—W. of Ross-shire,] pl. -an, 
sm. Snuff of a candle, 2 Vapour, cloud,gloom. 
3 Cinders, embers, Gleann smedil, glen of mist 
-—Sar-Obair, Fo s., extinjuished, 

smal, v.a. see smàil, 

smal, -ail, s.m., Dust, dust covering anything. 2 
Obscurity, dimness, 3 Stain, blemish, spot. 4 
Sorrow, vexation. 5**Infirm or sickly person. 
6**Blot, blemish. Thàinig s. air an òir, the 
gold became dim ; a’ choisridh nach fhanada 
gnè s. air an ìnntinn, the company on whose 
minds no gloom would stay—Beinn Doran,l.89, 

smalach,tf a. Dusty, stained, spotted. 

smàladair, -ean, 8m. Pair of snuffers. 2**Ex- 
tinguisher, ! 

smaladaireachd, s.f. Business of a candle.:snut- 
fer. 2 Act of candle-snuffing. 

smaladan, -ain, -an, see smàladair. 

smàladh, -aidh, 8.m. Snuffing, act of snuffing a 
cindle. 2 Blowing out, act of blowing ont 
extinguishing or quenching a flame.  3** 
Quenching. 4** Knocking down. 5 Smash» 
ing, dashing to pieces, 6(DU) Act of resting 
a peat-fire. A’ s—, pr.pt. of smàil. A's. au 
t-eanchainn asda, dashing out their brains ; 
cnap-smalaidh, a gathering coal, to keep the fire 
alive overnight. 

smalag, -aig, -an, $.f. Fillip, jerk of the finger. 

smalag, -aig,-an, s.m. Saith, cuddy, coal-fish 
going into its second year. 2(AF) Smelt. 3 
*simackineg kiss. 

smalan, -ain, s.m. dim. of smal. Gloom, melan- 
choly, grief, sorrow. 2**Dust, particle of dust. 

poan” -ain, 8. m., Hillock. 2 Little blow, 
fillip. 

smalanach, -aiche, a. Sorrowful, dejected, grie- 
ved, vexatious. 2**Full of hillocks., 

smalanachd, s.f. ind. Sorrowfulness, grievous- 
ness, gloominess. : 

smàl-shoitheach, Ach, -ichean, s.m. Extinguish- 





er. 
smaogal,** -ail, s.m. Husk, hull, S. chnò, the 
husk of à nut, 
smaogalach, a. Husky, having a husk or hull. 
smaoin, -e, Lean, s.f. see smuain. 
smaoineachadh, see smuaineachadh, 
smaoinich, pr. pt. a’ smaoineachadh, 9. see 
smuainich. 
smaointe, see smuain. 
smaointeach, see smuaineach. 
——adh, see smuaineachadh, 
smaointeachail, see smuaineachail. 
smaointean, see smuainean. 
smaointich, see smuainich. 
smaointinn, see smuaineachadh, 
—— ——-—each, -eiche, see smuaineach. 
smaolach,** -aich, s.m. Thrush, ouzle. 
smaosdrach, ** -aich, s.m. Cartilage, gristle, 
smaosrach, -aich, see smaosdrach. 
smarach, -aich, s.m. Lad, growing youth—Bad- 
enoch, 2° Large louse. Se 


smarag 


smàrag, -aig, -an, s.f. Emerald. 

smaragach, a. Abounding in emeralds. 
emeralds, 3 Like an emerald. 

smat,** s, Gobbet. ect 

smeac,** s.m, Smack. 2 Kiss. 3 Fillip with the 
finger. ; l 

sm-:acadh, -aidh, s.m. Palpitation, panting, 2 
Smacking with the lips, 

smeach,* v.n. Make a filiip with the fingers. 

sineach,* -a, s.m., Smart, quick blow, filiip. 2 
see smeachan, 

gmeachach,** a. Chinned. 2 Having a peaked 
chin. 3 Having a long neck, 

smeachan, -ain, -an, ¢.m. The chin. 2ttBand- 
age round the chin, 3 Band under the jaw of 
a horse, chin-bit or cheek-band of a bridle, 4 
4 Person with a peaked chin. 5(MS) Nozzle. 
6 Little chin. 7(DMy) ('san toirsgein] the 
step on the peat-spade on which the person 
cutting places his right foot every time he 
cuts. 

smeachanach, -aiche, a. Chinned. 2 Having a 
prominent or peaked chin. 

smeachran,* -ain, s.m. see smeacharanachd. 

smeacharanachil,s.f.ind. Taking too great a lib- 
erby with people or with edged tools, e.g. tak- 
ing a person by the chin, bandying civilities 
with your betters, officious interference, 2* 
‘Tampering. 

smeacharra, a, Lively, brisk. 

smeacharrachd, s.f.ind. Liveliness. 

smeachranachd, see siuexcharanachd. 

smeacairneach, -eich, et, Slumber, slight sleep. 

smeag,(MMcD) s.f. Neck-rope for a cow, tied 
to the dornan— Lewis. 

sm-alach, -aich, -aichean, 8.f. Offal. 2 Remains 
of goods, provisions or money. 3 Dainties, 
Sweets. 

8mealach,* -aiche, a. Having a beautiful eye or 
engaging countenance, 

smeal-ghobach, -aiche, æ. Fond of dainties. 

smealas, -ais, s.m. Relish for sweet things. 

smeallach, see smealach. 

smear, v. See smeur. 

smear, -a, s.m. prov, for smior. 

smearach, -aiche, œ. S: e smiorach & smeurach. 

sinearachadh, see smeurachadh. 

smearachan, -ain, san. Kitchen brat, lick-plate. 

sinearachd, see smeuracehd. 

sméaradair, see smeura(lair. 

8méara ih, -aidh, see smeuradh. 

smearag, see smeurag. 

smearaich, see smeuraich. 

smearaiche,** s.f. Second swarming of a hive. 

smearail,** æ. see smiorail. 

sméarain, s.pl. Brambles—Arran, (smeuran. ) 

smearalachd, see smioralachd. 

smearalas, -ais, s.m. see smioralas. 

sméaran, pl. of sméar (for smeur.) 

smearoid,** s.f. Coal, burning coal, hot ember. 

smearsnichadh,(AH ) s.m. Fainting from expos- 
ure to inclement weather— A rgyll. 

smeartan,§ -ain, -an, 8.7. Sweet tangle, sea-belt 
—laminaria saccharina. 

smearta, see smeurta. 

smeat,** -a, s.m. Simper, smile. 

smeatach, -aiche, a. see smiotach. 2 Snouty. 3 
3 Short-snouted. 4**Siwpering. 

smeatadh,** -aidh, 8.m. Simpering. 
3 Snout. 

smeatag,** s.f. Simpering youug female. 2 Flat- 
nosed young female, 

smeataiche, s.f see smiotaiche. 

smèid, v.a. £ n. Nod, wink. 2 Beckon. 3 Take 
aim, prov. 4 Hiss. S. iair e thighina na bu 
dlùithe dhith, she beckoned to him to come 
nearer her -W.H. 1, 61; s.air, wave to him, 





2 Simper. 





ensurachadh 


| sméid,** s.f. Nod, wink. 2 Beckoning. ` 


2 Of | sméideach, -eiche, a. That beckons or nods, 2 
Nodding, beckoning, making private signs, $- 


Hissing. 
sméideach, eich, ëm. One who nods, beckons, 
or makes private signs. 
smèideadh, -idh, s.m, Winking, act of winking 
or nodding. 2 Wink, nod. 8 Beckoning. 4 
Beckon. 5 His-ing. 6 Hiss. 7 Act of aiming 
or taking aim, prov. 8 Slight tinge or degree. 
9* Waving. A’ s—, pr.pt. of smèid. Cuir s. 
mar seo e, put it a slight degree this way; 8. 
eile, another touch ; 8. air, wave to him,beckon 
to him. 
smèideadh, 3rd. pers. & pl. imp. of smèid. 
sméideag, -eig, -an, $. f. Little nod or wink, 
slight beckoning. 
Ree gaye a. Pertaining to little winks or 
nods. 
méideazan, An, s.m. Wooden bar on & loom, 
see beart-fhigheadaireachd, 
smeig, -e, -ean, see smig. 
smeigeach, see smigeach, 
smeigead, see smigead. i 
smeil,** s.f. Pale look, ghastly look. 
smeileach, -eiche, a. Pale, ghastly, puny. 
smeileag, -eig, -an, s.f. Pale, puny female. 
smeilean, -ein, -an, s.m. Puny, pale creature, 
smeirne, $.f. Spit. 2 Brooch. 
smeirseach(AH) s. f. Stiff cuach of stingo. 
Fhuair e deagh s., he got a good strong glass of 
spirits. 
smeoirn, -ean, 3.m. The end of an arrow next 
the bow-striag. 2**Point of a dart, spear or 
arrow, 3 The notch at the end of the arrow 
which required delicate adjustment in order 
to fit the string. Bogh an iuthair nach dio- 
bair, air 'm bu ro-mhath cur sìoda, agus fleisd- 
ear an Libhinn 'cur s. air, a yew-bow that never 
disappoints, on which is a first-rate service of 
silk and the fletcher of Leven fitting the arrow- 
notch to it—an ideal equipment ; cho cinnte 
each ri éarr na smeoirn, as certain as the end 
of the arrow-head (arrow-notch —CR.) [** gives 
nom. sinedirne, & at 
smeoirneach, ** æ. Sharp. 2 Pointed, as a dart 
or spear. 3 Like a spear's point. 
smeola, see smeórach. 
smeolach, see smeorach. 
smeor, 8.f. see smeorach, 
smeòr, v.d, see smeur. 
smeòrach, -aich, -aichean, s.f. Thrush, mavis— 
turdus musicus. 2** Linnet. 3 Dog's name, 
4 Ear-mark on sheep, see comharradh-cluais. 
smeòrach, see smeurach, 
sineorachidh, see smeurachadh. 
meórach an t-sneachda, s.f. Redwing, see 
sgiath-dheargan. 
smeòrach bhui:he,fT see smeòrach. 
smeorach ghias, s.f. Missel-thrush, see smeòr- 
ach mhòr, 
smeòrach mhnór, Mat, Missel-thrusi —turdus vis- 
civorowus. 
smeoradair, see smeuradair. 
sinedrailaireachd, see smeuradaireachd. 
smeóradh, see smeuradh. 
meoraich, see smeuraich, 
smeoraichte, see smenvaichte. 
smeur, v.@. Anoint, smear, as sheep. 
smeur, -a, -an, 8./. Blackberry. b. ambleberry. 2 
Mulberry. 3 Any fruit resembiing a black- 
berry. Crao h-nan-smeur, @ mulberry-tree— 
Bibl». 
smeurach, -aiche, @ Ful! of bramble-berrics. 2 
Pawing. groping, tingering, handling clumsily. 
smeuraciadh, -aidh, s.m. Groping, act of grop- 
ing, fingering awkwardly, pawing, fumbling. 
A ' $—.pr.pt. of smeuraich. 


| IN L/ERBCITY GE 


Fg — —À 


«emeurachan 


sgmeurachan, **-ain, s.m.Kitchen-brat,lick-plate, 
bone-picker. ) 

&meurachd, s./. Continual groping. 2 Habit of 
groping or fumbling. 3 Greasing, smearing. 
4$ Common bramble, see dris. 

emeuradair, -ean, s.m. Smearer, one who smears 
or anoints sheep. 

smeuradaireachd,s.f.ind. Smearing,employment 
of smearing sheep. 

smeurah, -aidh, s.m. Smearing, act of smear- 
ing or anointing sheep. A’ s—,pr.pt. of smeur. 

mone -an, s.f. Fruit of the common bram- 

e. 

gmeuragach, a. Full of bramble-berries. 2 Of, 
or belonging to, bramble-berries. 

gmeuraich. v.n. Grope, search by feeling in the 
dark. 

gmeuraichidh, frot off o of smeuraich. 

emeuraichte, past pt. of smeuraich. 

smeuran, n.p. of smeur. 

smeur dhearg, 6.7. Wineberry—rubus phænicola- 
sius. 

smeur-dh:cbh, -a-duibhe, -an-dubha, see smeur. 

smeur Loganach, s.f. Logan-berrv. 

emeur-phreas, $ -an, s.m. Common bramble, see 
dris. 

smeur-phreasach, a. Abounding in brambles. 
2 Of^brambles, 

smeurta, past pt. of smeur. Smeared. 

siach, (CR) s. Syllable, sound. Chad’ thubh- 
airt o s., he did not utter a syllable —W.of Ross- 
shire. 

. gmiar, v. & $. see smeur. 

smid, e, -ean, s.f. Syllable, word. 2 Opening 
of the mouth. Na h-abair s., mum, hush ! do 
not open your lips ; gun 8., mute ; gun s. tha 
ceann an eòlais, sient is the head of know- 
ledys. 

smìd, v. see smèid. 

smileach, see sméideach. 

smideachail, -e, &. Syllabic. 

smileam,‘CR) s. m. Pith, mettle— Perthshire. 
( Scots, smeddum. ) 

smig, -ean & -eachan, s.m. The chin. 2**Smile. 
SEMIEN. -[**, tt, & * GEI 

smig-bhrat, s.m. Bib. 

smigeach, -eiche, a. Chinned, having a promin- 
ent chin, 2**Smiling. 3**Mirthful. 

gmigead, -eid, -an, s.m. Chin. 

smigeadach, -aiche, see smigeach. 

——, -aich, ¢.m. Chin-cloth, bib. 

2** Mirth. 





gmigeadh, -idh, -ean, s.m. Smile. 

smigeal,* s.f. Smirking, smiling. 

smipgean, -ein, -an, s.m. dim. Little chin. 
Mirth. 3**Smile. 

smigeanach,ft a. Having a little chin. 

 smigeil,* -e, a. Smirking, smiling. 
sminvieadh,(AH) s. m. Katine grain, hay or 
straw without zest and in a fastidious man- 
ner, (applied solely to cattle and sheep.) 

emileach, eich, pi, eich & -ichean,s.m.Philomel. 
2** Nightinzale, 

smileag, see smileach. 

&miodam, -aim,s.m Spirit, pluck. 2 Animal 
spirits. 3 Smariness. 4Stamina. Cha’n "eil 
S. annad, you have no pluck. 

siniodamach, o Having spirit or pluck. 2 Hav- 

= ing animal svirits. 3 Having stamina. 
smiol, -a, s.f. Nightingale. 

smiolach,** a. Aboun ling in nightingales. 2 Of 
nightingales. 3 Sweet, as the nightingale’s 
vouce, 

emiolach, -aich, s.m. Nightingale. | 

emioladh, -aidh, see smeoradh. {ingale, 

smiolag, -aig, an, sf. Nightingale, young night- 
smivlamas * see sinolamas, 

smior, -ir & a, s.m. Marrow,pith. 2 fg. Strength, 
power, vigour. 3 Courage, spirit, mettle, 4* 


9** 


859 


?**Grease, smear. 3*Grope for vermin. | 


smioralachd, s.f.ind, Habitual manliness. 


smodanach 


Hero. 5 Vivacity. 6 Best part of anything. 
S. an t-sìl, the best of the seed ; duine gun s., 
a man without energy ; smior-chailleach, the 
spinal-marrow ; briseadh a’ chnàimh agam-sa 
'8 an s. aig cach, the breaking of the bone for 
m», the marrow for the rest. 

smior, see smeur, 

smiorach, see smeurach. 

smiorach, -aiche, o. Abounding in marrow. 2 
Of marrow. 3 Pithy, 

smiorach,* -aich, s.m. Lively louse. 

.— ——— an, -ain, s.m. Kitchen-brat, Ttek-plate, 
bone-picker, 

smiora‘th, see smeuradh. 

smiorail, e, [comp. smiorala~MM] a, Strong, 
courageous, vigorous, doughty. 2 Lively, ac- 
tive, agile, brisk, alert. 3 Hardy, enduring. 4 
Manly. 5 Having marrow, pith or pluck. 6 


Like marrow. E 
2 Ac 

tivity, briskness, liveliness. 3 Spiritedness. 
4 Hardiness. 

smioralas, -ais, s.m. Strength, courage, vigour, 
pluck. 2 Liveliness, activity, briskness, agil- 
ity, alacrity, alertness. 3 Hardiness. 4 Man- 
liness. 

smiorcadh, -aidh, s.m. Mettle, courage. (DMK) 
Sense—OCaithness, Cha'n 'eil s. (de chiall aige, 
he has mo ‘‘fiqht”’ in him—Suth'd; eha'n 'eil s. 
céill’ aige, he has not a spark of sense, 

smior-chailleach, -eich, 8. m. Spinal marrow. 
2 Spine— Lewis. 

smiorsnachadh, s.m. State of being frost-bitten, 

tsmiot, -a, -an, $.m. Ear, small ear, 2 Particle, 
small portion of anything, 

smiot, v.a. Throw in the air with one hand and 
strike with the other. 

smiot, s.m. Box, smart blow. 

smiotach, -aiche, a. Short-eared. 2 Of, or bè- 
longing to the ear. 3 (CR) Pug-nosed— W, of 
Ross-shire, 

smiotag, -aig, $t Hand or glove without fin- 
gers, mitten. (miotag.) 

smiotan, -ain, s.m. Fillip. 

smist,** v.a. Smite. 

smiste,** s.f. Pestle. 2 Mallet. 

smisteadh, -idh, s.m. Smiiing, pounding. 

smistean,** -ein, s.m. Short thick stick,cudge). 
2 Pestle. 

smiùr, v.d. see smeur. 

smiürach, see smeurach. 

smiüradair, see smeura'lair. 

—eachd, see smeuradaireachd. 

smiüradh, see smeuradh. 

smiüirte, see smeurta. 

smócan,$ -ain, s. m. Name given to callitham- 
nion plocamium, and various small red sea 
weeds seen in ladies albums. 

smod, s.m.ind. prov. for smad. 2 Dirt, filth. 3 
Grain of dust. 4 Drizzling rain, moist hazi- 
ness, creeping mist. 5tfParticle. 6 Smut. 

smodach, -aiche, a. Dirty, filthy. 2 Dusty, cov- 
ered with dust. 3 Smutty. 4 Drizzling, hazy, 
misty, 

smodadh, -aidh, see smod. 

smodal, -ail, -an, s.m. Sweepings, crumbs, frag- 
meuts of food. 2*Smattering, 3 (DC) Glean- 
ines of corn, &e.—Uist, 4tt trash. 

smodalach, a. see smodanach. 2tfTrashy. 

smodan, -ain, s.m., dim. of smod. Little spot or 
blemish. 2 Small dust, smut. 3 see smod. 

smodau, Ain, s.m. Drizzling rain, moistness, 
haze, haziness. 

smodanach, -aiche, a. Spotted, soiled, dirty. 2 
Abounding in small dust. 3 Drizzling, moist, 
hazy, misty. 

smodanachd, s.f. ind, Drizzliness, Duis 


2 Small ear, 


smog 
smog, -dig,-an, 8. & v. see smàg. 
smoyach, see smagach. 
-—adh, see smagachadh. 
smogadh, see smazada. 
smogaich, see sinagaich. 
amogair, see smagair. 
neach, s. cf a. see smagairneach. 
smogarsaich,** s f. Pawing, awkward groping. 
—,v.n. Sprawl. 
smograich, v.a. Grope, feel. 2 Sprawl, 
smògran, (CR) s.m. Crawling—W. of Ross. 
smoidseach,(CR) s.f. Lug-worm—Argyll. 
sinoigleach,** o Smutted, soiled, dirty, 
smoigleadh, -aidh, s.m. Smut, dirt. 
smoislich, (CR) W. of Ross, Argyllshire and 

Perthshire for smuaislich. 
smoit, -e, s.f. Sulkiness, sulky fit. 
&moiteach, a. Sulky. 2 see moiteil. 
-m — d, s.f. Habitual sulkiness. 
smdl, see smal. 
suiblach, -aich, s.m. Ember. 2 Thrush. 
smoóladair, see smàladair. 
smdladan, see smalacdtan. 
smolamas, -ais, s.m. Trash. 2 Fragments of 
victuals. 

smolasg,** -aisg, s.m. Dross, refuse, sweepings. 
smoldach, see smoltach. 











smoltach,(AF) s. Nightingale. 2 Thrush. 
smot,** v.n, Snuffle. 
smot,** s.m. Mouthful. 2 Pluck. 


gmotach, a. Snufflinz. 

smotail, s.m. Snuílling. 2 Snorting of a horse. 
Ciod an s. a th’ ort P why do you snuffle so ? 

smotan, -ain, s.m. Block, log, stock. 2 Mouth- 
ful. 3 Pluck. 

emuaich, pr. pt. a’ smuachadh, v.a, Break into 
bits. 

smuain, v. see smuainich. 

smuain, -e, -tean, s. f. Thought, notion, fancy, 
reflection, imagination. 2 Prudence. 3 Pres- 
ence of mind. 

smuain-dhitheach,(MS) a. Absent-minded. 

smuaineach, -eiche, a. Thoughtful, reflecting, 
prudent, pensive, prone to reflect, cogitative. 
2 Fanciful. 

smuaineachadh, -aidh, e m. Thinking, act of 
thinking, considering, reflecting, fancying. 2 
Imagnation 3 Meditation. 
smuainich, 

smuaineachail, a. Thoughtful, studious, con- 
templitive. 2 Sedate. 3 Considerate, cautious. 

smuaineachair,** s.m. Apprehender. 

smuaiueachdainn, pr.pt. of smuainich— West of 
Ross-shire. 

smuaineachd,ff an, et Conjecture. 2(MS) 
Conceit., 3 Apprehensiveness. 4 Pensive’ 
ness. 

smuaineadh, -idh, -idhean, s.m. see smuain. 

smuainean, pl. of smuain. 

smuainich, pr. pf. a smuainteachadh E a’ 
smuaineachdainn, v. n. Think, reflect sup- 
pose, consider. 2 Imagine, ponder, meditate. 
3 Devise, purpose, intend. 

gmuain-sheachr&anach, -aiche, a. 
edness, 

smuainte, -an, see smuain. 

smuaineach, -eiche, a. Thoughtful, 

gmnainteachadh, -aidh, see smuaineachadh. 

smuainteachair, see smuaineachair. 

smuainteachd,(MS) s.f. see smuaineachd, 

smunrinteachail, see smuaineachail. 

smuainteadh, see smuain. 

smuaintean, p}. of smuain. 

ach,(MS) a. see smuaineach, 

achd,( M^) s.f. see snnaineachd. 

smuaintich, pr.pt, a smuainteachdainn, v.n. see 
smuainich, 


Absent-min(d. 














TI 


RIT ARS Ly 
LI IP ci pi LT 
d L. Pail whee E 


FTI 
II 


A’ s—, pr.pt. of 


860 .— smug io. 

smuairean, -ein, $.m. Grief, dejection, sorrow 
anxiety, vexation, melancholy. 2Slight of 
fence. Cha chuir es. orm, it will not vez mw 
in the least. 

———ach, -aiche, a. Grieved, dejected. low- 

spirited. 2 Apt to be sorrowful or dejected, 

3 Causing dejection or vexation. 4*Somewhay 

melancholy. 

— -achd, s.f.ind. Dejection, sorrow, vex- 
ation, 2 State of being sorrowful or deject- 
ed. 3**Pensiveness. 

smuais, -e, $.f. Juice of the bones, fatness, mar. 
TOW, grease intermixed in the bone, 2 Pith, 
strength, vigour. 3**Sweat. 4**Sap. 5**Gris- 
tle of the nose. 6** Shivers, splinters. 7 
Smashing. Chaidh e’nas., it went into shiv» 
ers. 

smuais, v.a. Break into pieces, splinter, smash. 

smuaiseach, -eiche, æ. Juicy, greasy, fat, full 
of marrow, 2 Sweating. 3 Stirring up, ex- 
citing, moving. 4 Having marrow or pith. 5 
Sg in pieces, smashing,shivering,splin- 
ering, 

smuaiseachadh, -aidh, see smuaiseadh. 

sinuaiseadh, Alb, s. m. Act of breaking into 
pieces, smashing. A’ s—, pr.pt. of smuais. 

smuaisich, v. see smuais. 

—te, past pt.of smuaisich, see smuaiste. 

smuaislich,(CR) v.s. Stir (out of sleep)— Lewis. 

smuaisrich, -e, s.f. & coll. Breaking into pieces, 
smashing. 2 Fragments, splinters. 

smuaiste, past pt. of smuais. Broken, smashed. 

snuanoirt, s.m. Proposition. 

smuc, -üic, s.m. Nasal sound, snore. 2 Snivel. 

smucach, -aiche, a, Suivelling. 2 Making a na- 
sal sound, snoring. 

smucaiche, 3.f. see smüc. 

smücail, -e, @ Act of speaking through the 
nose. 2 Snivelling. 3 Snoring,snore. 4*Pur- 
ring through the nose. 

smücair, -ean, s.m. One that snivels. 

* —eachd, s.f.ind. Snuffling, speaking nas- 
ally. 

smucan,f -ain, s.m. Smoke, drizzle. 

sinucanach, a. Smoky, smoking. 

sinucanaich, s.f. Snivelling. 2 Snoring. 3 Nasal 
utterance. 

smùch, s.f. Nasal,sound. 

smùch, pr.pt. a’ smùchail & a’ smùchadh, v. @ 
Sneeze. 2ffsnivel. 3 Purr. 4 see mùch. 5 
see smùch. 

smuchadh, -aidh, s.m. Sneezing. 2 Snivelling. 
3% see mùchadh. A’ s—, pr.pt. of smùck. 

smuchail,* see smucail. 

smuchair,tt -ean, s.m. Sniveller. 

——-——eachd, s.f. Snivelling. 

smuchan, -ain, 8.21. Half-smothered fire. 

smüchan,** -ain, s. m. Smoke. 

— ———aàch, a. Smoky. | 

smud, see smùid & smùdan, 

smudal, -ail, s.m. see smodal. 

smùdan, -ain, -an, s.m. Musical note of any sing, 
ing-bird. 29 The rock-dove—columba livida. 
3 Wood-pigeon, see calman fiadhaich. 4 Tur- 
tle. 

smùdan, -ain, -an, sm. Small block of wood. 2 
Kiln. 3Smoke. 4 Smoke raised as a signal. 
5 Particle of dust. 6tt Smoky fire. 7 Mote. 
Soot, smut. Tha as. féin á ceann gach fòid, 
every peat has its own smoke. 

smùdanach, og, Abounding in ring-doves or wood- 
pigeons. 2 Of wood-pigeons. 3 Smoking,smoky. 

smug, -uig, -an, s.m. Snot, spittle, phlegm. 2 
Naval cartilage. 3 (CR) Muggy weather, misg 
and rain—W. of Ross-shire; & na cubhaig, 
see under smugaid. 

smug, t.a. £ n. Spit, snok 














UNIV 


smugach 


smugach, -aiche, a. Phlegmatic, mucous, full 
of spittle. 2 Having a habit of spitting. 3 
Snotty. 4(DU) Muggy, applied to weather, 
Thaes., n e muggy and drizzting. 

smugachd,tt s.f. Mucousness. 

Bee ** em, Pocket-handkerchief. 2 Be- 
spawler. 

smuga !anaich, sf. Spitting. 

smugadh, -aidh, s.m. Spitting. —— ) 

smugaid. -e, -ean, $.f. Spittle. Tilg s., epit; s. 
pa cubhaig, the froth or scum on certain grow- 
inj herbs in summer, woodsare (iphis fly.) 

smugaideach, -eiche, a. Discharging spittle. 2 
Like spittle. 3 Phlegmatic, salival, | 

——— —-——d,** s.f. Salivation. 2 Habit of 
spitting. 

smugaidean, n.pl. of smugaid. 

smugaidich,(MS) v.a. Bespawl. 

smuvail,** s./, Mucus, snot. 

smugarsaich, v. Bespawl. 

smugair.(DU) v.a. Suck. 

smugradh,(CR) s.m. Sucking, as à child suck- 
ing his fingers—W. of Ross. 

smug-shileadh, -idh, s.m. Running at the nose. 
2 Phlegm, snot, catarrh. 

smug-shuileach, -eiche, a. Rheum-eyed. 

smùid, -ean, s.m. Smoke, vapour. 2 Blaze, sig- 
nal.fire, 3**Fume. 4**Mist. 6* Column of 
smoke. A’ cur smüid, smoking as a peat-fire 
before it blazes. (**s.f.) 

smùid, v.n. Smoke. 2 Blow ofa whale, 3 
Dash to pieces, smash. 4* Curse. 5 Explode. 
6**Fume. 7 Exhale. S. e as a chéil e, he 
dashed it in pieces. 

smùideach, -eiche, a. Smoking, vapoury, 2 Ef. 
fluvious, 3 Fuming. 4 Exnaling. 

smùideadh, -idh, s.m. Smoking, act or state of 
smoking, emitting smoke. 2 Dashing, smash- 
ing. 3*Cursiug, swearing terribly. A’ s—, 
pr. pt. of smuid. 

smuidean, -ein, -an, s.m., Particle of dusb, mote. 

smüideanach, -aiche, a. Dusty, abounding in 
particles of dust, 

smuideil, -e, a. see smùideach, 

smuidich, v.n. Exhale. 

smüidir, v, see smüid. 

smuidre,** s.pl. Clouds, as of smoke or dust, 2 
Exhalation, 3 Mist, 

smüidreach,** a. Smoking, smoky. 

smuidreach,* Ach, s.f. Bolt of smoke, | 

smuidreardh, -eidh, s$. m, Smoking, 2 Cloud ot 
smoke, smoke driven by the wind. A’ s—, pr. 
pt. of smuidir. 

smùidrich, or pt. a’ smùidrich, see smùid. 

-—— — —-, -e, $.f. see smüidreadh. A’ s—, pr.pt. 
of smùidrich, Le s. ghlas, with grey smoke. 

smuig, -e, -ean, SI Snout. 2 Face, im ridicule. 
3**Snot, phlegm. 4**pirt, filth. 

smuig-aodach, -aich, -ean, s. m Handkerchief. 

smuigeach, a. Having a snout or nose, 2 Snot- 
ty, phle my, mucous. 3**Dirty, filthy. 

smuigeadach,**-aich, s.m. Pocket-handkerchief, 

smuilc, -e, -ean, $.f. Curled nose, 2tftHuff, the 
sulks, glumness, dejection. 

Arie? -eiche, a. Curl-nosed. 21t Huffy, 
sulky. 

smuilceag,(DC) s.f. Pert girl— Argyll. 


- smuilcean,( DC) s.m. Pert boy—A rgyll. 


smuiuteachadh, see smuaineachadh. 

smùintich, see smuainich. 

smùir, s.m. Dust, particle of dust, spot, blot, 
blemish. 2 Earth. 3 Ashes. Fo s., under dust. 

smuir,** s.f, Beak, snout. 

stovirich,(MS) v.a. Bedust. 

sinuireadh, see smeuradh. ` 

smuirneach, -eiche, a.Dusty,full of dust,atomy, 
drossy. 


[ A kr l 
NTERNET ARCHIVE 


861 


snàgadh 

smuüirneag, see smùirnean, 

smùirnean, -ein, -an, 8.m,dim. of smùir. Mote, 
atom, particle of dust. 2 Ace. 3 Peppercorn. 

smüirneanach, -aiche, a. Full of mo a? 


Dusty. 

———— d,** s f. Dustiness. 

smùis, -e, 8. f. see smuais. 

each, -eiche, a. Juicy. 

smuisean,** -ein, Gm, Term of much personal 
contempt, 

smuiseirnich, -e, gt The crashing noise made by 
the breaking of bones. 

smuisreadh, -idh, s.m. Breaking of bones. 

SO v.a. Suck, extract the juice from—Rob 

onn. 

smuislich, Loch Ness side for smuaislich. 

smuit,** s.f. Nose, bill, beak, snout. 

smulag,** -aig, 8.7. Fillip with the fingers, 

smulan,** -ain, s.m. Lump of wood. 

smule,** s.m. Snout. 2 Surly look, 

-———ach,** a. Snouty. 2 Surly. 3 Having a 
surly look. 

———air,** s.m. Person having a surly look. 2 
Boxer. 

——anta,** a, Snouty. 2 Having a surly look, 

smùr, uir & -dire, & mMm. see smùrach. Gun 8. 
gun smodan, without spot or blemish. 

smùr, v.@. see smeur, 

ach,"* a. Drossy, dusty, 2 Having blots, 
spots or blemishes. 

smùrach, -aich, s.m. Dross, dust, 2 Rubbish, 
fragments. 3 Ashes, 4 Blot, blemish. 5 
Groping.  6*Groping among dnst with the 
hands. A’ s—, pr.pt. of smùraich. | S, mòine, 
peat dross. 

smurach-eighe, s.m. Filings, 

smürachd, s.f.ind. Dro:siness. 

smuraich,* pr.pt. a’ smürach,v.n. Grope in dust. 

smuranach, -aiche, a. Drossy. 

smùsach, a. Suckiug,extracting the juice from— 
Rob Donn. 











! smut, -uit, -an, s.m. Bill, beak, snout, flat nose, 


pug-noss. 2 Peaked chin. 3 Stump. 4 Short 
lov. 

smut,* pr.pt. a’ smutail, v n. Sniff, 

smutach, -aiche, a. Short-snouted, billed, beak- 
ed, suouty, sad dle-nosed, pug-nosed. 2 Have 
ing a peaked chin, 3 Having a long snout. 

smutagz, € age, -av, s.f. Cole titmouse, blaek- 
cap, 'snorter," 2 Flat-nosed or saddle-nosed 
female. 

smutan, -ain,-an,s.m. Block, log. 2 dim.of smut, 

sua, for ’sna, 

snail,** -aid, s.7, see snàthad, 


snadh,** s.m. Sup. L 


snàdh, -a, see snàth. 

snadhach,** a. Sappy, juicy. 

snadhadh,** -aidh, s.m. Protection, defence. 2 
Guardian angel. 

snàdhaiun, see snàthainn. 

— ——— —each, see snathainneach, 

snadh-ghairm,** s.f. Appeliation, naming. 2 
Appeal. 

snadhm, see snaidhm. 

snàz, v.a. see snàig, 

snag, -àig, s.m. One with a creeping gait, ono 
whose motions are slow. 2* Creepiug, sneak- 
ing. 

sna, -aig,-an,s. f. Little audible knock. 12 
Hiccough. {daraich, 

snag,{l -air, -an, s.m, Wood-pecker, see snagan- 

snàgach, -aiche, see snàigeach, 

snagach, -aiche, à, Like à woodpecker. 2 Of 
a woodpecker. [eachd, 

snagadaich, -e, 6.7. seesnagardaich & snagair- 

snàgadh, -aidh, am, Creeping, crawling, sneak- 
ing. A’ s—, pr.pt, of snaig. 


Ec Y (C) 


rH 


[ 1 LJ 
The | 
LÀ V ës 1 

4 HF BPÓ-I A NP A 
Bee n Beef i. i "ls 1 


[| 


r ILL. VO) bel j 


N 


snagail 

snàgail, (DU) v.a. Whip a hook on a line. 

snàgail, -e, s.f. Creeping, slow motion. 

snàgair, -ean, 8.0. One who creeps along,creep. 
er. 2 Lazy fellow. 3Sneaking fellow,  4** 
Snarler. 6 Reptile. 

snagair, v.a. Carve or reduce a piece of wood to 
a shape with a knifə. 

snagair-daraich, see snagan-daraich. 

snàgaireachd, ot Creeping along, crawling, 
sneaking. 2 Habit of creeping, crawling or 
sneaking. | 

&nagaireachd, s.f. Cutting or carving of wood 
with a knife, whittling. A’ s—, pr.pt. of snag- 
air. 

&nagairt, Arran for snagaireachd. 

snagaladh,DU) s.m. Thread wound round a 
tishing-hook to attach it to the hair-line. [In 
Argyll, snódaladh—AH.] | 

nagan, -ain, -an, s.m. Little tinkling or clink- 
ing. 2 Comma, in writing. 3 Deep drink. 4 
Short drink or draught. 

snàgan, -ain, s.m. Creeping or slow motion. 2 
Crawler, one with a creeping gait.  8* Sly 
creeping. 

snàgan, dim. of snag. 

snaganach, -aiche, a. Tinkling, clinking. 

snàganaich,** s.f. Creeping, crawling. 

snagan-allt,q s.m. Water-rail—rallus aquaticus. 

snagán-daraich,*| s.m. Great spotted woodpeck- 
er—picus major. 

snagan-dubh,q] s,m. Water-rail, see snagan-allt. 

snagardach,** -aich, s.m. Woodpecker. 

snagardaich,** s.f. Gnashing, grating. 2 (DC) 
Chattering of the teeth with cold, S.-fhia- 
cal, gnashing of teeth. 

snàgardaich,** s f. Creeping, crawling. 

Snagarra, a. Active, alert, lively, smart. Gu 8., 
adertiy. 

-— — — chd, s.f. Activity, alertness, liveliness, 
smartness. 

snagarsaich, see snagardaich. 

snagartaich, s.f. see snagardaich. 

snag-labhair, v.n. Stammer in speaking. 

gnag-labhairt, -e, s.f. Stammering, act of stam- 
mering, hesitating in speech. A’ s—, pr.pt. of 
snag-labhair. 

snag-iabhairteach, eich, s.m. Stammerer. 

snag-lavhairtiche, see snag-labhairteach. 

snaidb, v. a. Hew, cut down, slash. 2 Reduce 
wood or stone to a certain form. 3 Whet, 
sharpen. 4 Corsume, waste, pine away. 5 
Lop. 6 Defalcate. 7 Pine away. 8 Protect, 
patronize, 9 Slice. 10(MS)Inscribe. 11 Whit- 
tle. 12 Carve. i 

snaidh,** .e, s.f. Slice, lopping, chip. 

snaidheach, -eiche, a. Hewing, hewing down, 
lopping, reducing to form. 2 Whetting. sharp- 
ening. 3 Carving,slicing. 4 Consuming,wast- 
ing. 5 Defalcatiug. 

snaidheadair, -ean, s.m. Hewer, one who cuts 
down, orreduces to form by hewing, one who 


lops. 2 Whetter, one who whets or sharpens. 
8 Defalcator. 4 (DU) One who whittles or 
carves, 





—eachd, s. f. Hewing, business of a 

hewer, carving. cutting in chips. 

snaidheadh, -idh, s.m. Hewing, act of hewing 
down, or reducing to form by hewing. 2 Whet- 
ting, act of whetting or sharpening. 3 Con- 
suming, act of consuming. 4 Blocking. 5 De- 
falcation. 6 Slicing. lopping.* 7 Pining away. 
8 Carving. 9 Whittling.  A's—, pr. pt. of 
snaidh. A’ s, as, pining away ; s. fiodha, a 
carving of wood ; 8. chlacha, a hewing of stone, 

snaidhearachd, s.f. Hewing of stone, carving, 
cutting in chips. 

, Gee anaim, 


EL ee ee et rm WË ee a aaou al uM 


862 


snaim 


snaidhte, past pt. of snaidh. Heen. eut down, 
reduced to form by hewing, carve, lopped 
off. 2 Sharpened, whetted. 3 Consumed. 4 
Defaleated. 5 Polished. 6 Dressed as a stick. 
7 (DC) Wasted with ill-health. 8(DU) Whit- 
tled, 9 (DU) Carved. Clachan s., hewn stones. 

snàig, pr. pl. a’ snàgadh, v. n. Creep, crawl, 
sneak, steal softly, grabble. 

snaig, -eachan, s.f. Latch of a door. Cuir an t-s. 
air an dorus, latch the door, 

snaig,** v.a. Latch as a door. 

snaizeach, -eiche, a. Creeping, crawling, sneak- 
ing. 2 Having a creeping gait. 

snaigeach,(AF) s.m. Reptile. 

snaigeachan, n.pl. of snaig. 

snàigeadh, -idh, s.m. see snàgadh. 

snàigean, -an, s.m. Reptile. 2 Creeping thing. 3 
One with a creeping gait. 

Soaic es rm a. Creeping, haying a creeping 
gait. 

———— —-, s.f. Creeping, creeping gait. 





4 642. Snàigear. 
snàigear,«T -eir, an, s.m. Creeper—certhia fa- 
miliaris, 
snaigh, see snaidh. 
snaigheach, see snaidheach. 
snaigheach, see snàigeach. 
snaigheadh, see snaidheadh, 
snaigheadair, -ean, s.m. see snaidheadair. 
—————- ——e&^hd, see snaidheadaireachd. 
snaighte, see snaidhte. 
snaim, -ean & -eannan, s.m. Knot, tie. 2 Diffi- 
culty, puzzle. 3 Bunch. Daoine a dh'fhuas- 
gladh gach s., men who would solve evevy dif- 
ficulty. 
1 lubag cas-laoigh, a half-hitch knot. 
2 lub ruith, a running-knot. 
3 snaim a’ bhanna, a reef-knot,a square knot. 
4 s. a’ bhreabadair, the weaver’s knot. 
5 s. a’ bhuailtein, the clove-hitch. 
6 s. an fhigheadair, the weaver’s knot. 
7 S. an t-sedladair, the reef-knot. 
8 s. calpa an dubhan, the knot put on fishing- 
hooks’ shanks. 
9 s. calpa an dul, hal/ hitch on the loop. 

10 s. casa caorach, sheep-shank knot. 

11 s. chaillich, granny’s knot. 

12 s. chruaidh, a hard knot. 

13 s. do sheanmhar, your yranny’s knot. 

14 s. gartain, knot used when garters were fas- 
tened outside the stocking. It is illustrated 
in Log in's ‘‘Scottish Gael,” 2nd. ed., vol. 
1, p. 266. Cladaich, Lochawe, was a fa- 
mous place for knitting garters. 

15 s. na banaraich, (he milkmaid's knot-—the 
way she fastens her dress at the back af- 
ter lifting it. 

16 s. ruith, a slip knot, running knot. 

17 sensig the knot put on the snoods of horace 

quw, 


-— o cmm mn E M ÁÁ 


snaim 


[Names of knots, Nos. 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 13, 15, 16 
& 17 from DMy;4,7 & 11 from AH; and 14 
from ** Kionn.’’ | i 

snaim, pr. pt. a’ snaimeadh, v a. Knot. tiea 
knot, tie with a knot. 2 Bind, fetter. 

—each, -eiche, a. Knotty, abounding in 
knots or ties. 2 Difficult. 3 Jointed. 

snaimeadh, -idh, -idhean, sm. Knotting, act of 
knotting or tying with a knot. A’ s—, pr. pt. 
of suaim. ] 

snaimean, -ein, -an, s.m. dim, of snaim. Little 


knot. Í 
ach, -aiche, a. Knotty, full of little 


r 
| 
| 





knots. 1 
——— —--achd, s.f. Knotting, tying, knottiness. 
-—— —— --àn, pl, of snaim, 
¢snaimeas, -eis, An, s.m. Rout, multitude. ` 
snaime-gaoisid, s m. Part of a hand fishing-line, 

see dorgh. 

&naimh,* see snaoth and 
snaidh, | 

@naimueach, see snaim- ` 
each. 

8gnaimte, past pt. of snaim. T' 

Knotted, bouud with a - 

knot, tied. € 
snàith, see snàth. 
snaith, v.a. Rebate. 2 

Thread a book—Suth’'d. 

3** see snaidh. 
gnaithe bathta,$ s.m. Wa- 

ter-milfoil — myriophyl- 

lum spicatum & alterni- 
forum. ' 
anaitheadair, -ean,s.m. sea 1 SAWN 
snaidheadair. | j Jj 
e — . —  eachd, s.f. see 
snaidheadaireachd. 
8$naitheadh. $. m. see 
snaidheadh. 
anaithean, see snàthainnean, 
snàithue, -an, see snàthainn. 
snàithneach, see snathainneach, 
snàithuean, ein, s.m. Small thread. 2 String. 

8 Skein. 

- -—ach, a, Abounding in small threads. 

snaithne-tomhais, s.f. Measuring-line. 

snàmh, pr.pt. a’ snàmb, v.a. Swim, perform the 
act of swimming, 2 Bathe, 3 Swim, be afioat. 

4 Float. 5 Soak, deluge, Air s., swimming, 

afloat ; tha m’ anam a’ s, an ced, my soul 

swims in mist; a’ cur an taign air 8., deluy- 
ing the house ; cuirear an tir air s., the land 
shall be deluged, 

snàmh, -Aimh.s.m. Swimming, act of swimming 
or floating. 2 Soaking, deluging. A’ s—, pr. 
pi. of snàmh. Math airan ta, good at swim- 
ming, 

XO Snawh, -aimh, s.m, Sliny track of a snail. 

——, Srd sing.& pl.imp. S. e, let him swim. 

anamhach, -aiche, a. Floating, swimming. 2 

. That floats or swims nacurally, 3 Fond of 

; 8Swimming. 4 Prone by nature to swim, as 
fish, 5 buoyant. A’ bhileag sh., a long weed 
that lies on the sur/sace of water. 

w -, -aich, $n. Swimming, floating, slow 
sailing, slow swimming. 

— — —— an, -aia, -an [& -ain,) s.m. Raft, float, 
anything that swims. 

J Snàm"a&!air, see snàmhair. 

suàmhadh, -aidh, s.m. & pr.pt. see snàmh. 

snàmhaiche, pl. -an &-ain, s.m. see snamhair. 
^haill mi s, a’ chaolais, 4 have lost the swin- 
mr of the strait. 

snàinhaidh, jut. Gf. a. of snàmh, v. 2 gen. sing, 
of suàmh, 8. 


air, -ean, s.m. Swimmer. Deagh sh., an 


643- Snaithe bathia. 








$63 


snasadair 


expert swimmer. 

snamhag,(DMK) s. f. euphemism for a Lousa, 
Tha snamhagan air, there are lice on him—W, 
coast of Ross, 

snamhan, -ain, 8.m. see snàmhach. 

suàmh luath, a. Swift in swimming, swift-swim- 


ming. 
snaodaire,(AF) s. m, “Leader” of a flock cf 
animals, 2(DC) Bell-wether. 3(DC) Bull. 


snaodh, see snaoth. 

snaogh, see snaoth. 

snaoic, (CR) s.f. Gaelic spelling of snack. 

snaoidh,* see snaoth & snaidh. 

tsnaoidh,** a. Flowing, running. 

snaoimh,* see snaoth. 4 

snaois, -e, -ean, $,f. Slice, piece of anything. 9 
*Boat's prow. 3 Spit of dried fish— Sàr-Obair. 
S. arain, a slice of bread. 

each, -eiche, a. In slices, 2 Of, or belong- 
ing to, a boat-prow. 

——eachadh, -aidh, $. m, Slicing, cutting in 
slices, A’ s—, pr.pt. of snaoisich. 

snaoisean, -ein, s.m. Snuff. 2 Pinch of snuff. 3 
**Powder, 4*Huff, 

-——ach, -aiche, a. Snuffy, of, or belonging 
to, snuff, 2 Abounding in snuff. 3 Fond of 
taking snuff. 4**Pulverized, powdered. 65 
Snufling. 

——-——achd, $.f. Habit of taking snuff,snuffing. 
2 Calcination. 

—-——adh, -aidh, s.m. Calcination. 

snaoisein, v.a. Calcine, pulverize. 

snaoisich, v.a. Slice, cut in slices. 

——-——te, past pt. Sliced. 

snaomanach, -aich, s f. Strong, robust fellow. 
2 Jolly fellow, 

snaomanach, -aiche, œ. Robust, stout. 2 Jolly.. 








snaoth, -aoith, -an, $.m.& f, Bier, prov. Air an 
t-snaoith, on the bier. 
snaoth,(AC) s.m. Leader, chief, king. Ceann 


s, nan iasg, the head chief of the fish ; coann 
snaoth na ni, the head chief of the nowt. 

snaoth,* v.n. Jerk, twitch. 

snaothadh,* -aidh, s.m. Jerking. 2 Jerk. A’ 
s--, pr.pt. of snaoth. 

snap, -aip, -an, 8.m. Trigger of a gun. 2 Morsel. 

snap, pr.pt. a’ snapadh, v.a. Pull the trigger. 2 
Miss fire. 

snapach, -aiche, a. Having a trigger. 2 That 
sed fire, 3** That fireth. 4 That strikea 
ast. 

snipadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of pulling the trigger, 
2 Act of missing fire. A’s—, pr. pt. of snap. 

snapaireachd, sr, Snapping, snapping sound, 
as that caused by pulling the trizgor of a gun, 

snas, -ais, s.m. Regularity, order, perfect: ess. 
2 Good or becoming appearance. 3 Elegance, 
gloss, ornament, polish. 4 Deeency. 5 Pro- 
portion. 6 Colour, aspect. 7 Analysis, analy- 
zing. 8 (DU) Trimness, tightness. Dean 
le s. e, do it decently ; gnothach gun s., an 
absurd thing, business without any degree of 
proprie!y ; cha'n eil s, air, it is not tight or 
well-fi' ting. 

snas, -ais, s.m. Slimy track of a snail. (ssamh- 


as.) 
snas.* v.a. see snasaich, 
snasach, -aiche, a, see snasmhor. : 


snasachadh, -aidh, Act of reducing to order or 
regularity. 2 Act of polishing, Sas ie 
or making elegant. 3 Carving. 4 Analysis i 
gram. A'S8-—, pr. pt. of snasaich. 

snasachd, s.f. Neatness, elegance, trimnegs, 

' spruceness, 2 Trimming, making neat "2, 
Criticism. 4 Lopping, cutting down. 

snasadair, s.m., Dissector, trimmer, pruner, -2 
Critic. 8 Analyzer. 


anasataireach 


enasadaireachd, s. f. Dissecting. 2 Analyzing 

snasadh, -aidh,s.m. & pr. pt. of snas, see snas- 
achadh. 2**Amputation. 

&nasaich, pp. pt. a’ snasachadh, v.a. Reduce into 
order or regularity. 2 Polish, ornament, make 
elegant. 3 Prune. 4 Analyze. 5 Cribicize. 
6 ‘Trim, cut, dissect, amputate, 

snasaichear, fut. pass. of snasaich. 

Baasaichidh, fut. of. o. of snasaich. 

enasaichte, past pt. of snasaich. Reduced to or- 
der or good appearance. 2 Po:ished,ornament- 
ed, made elegant. 3 ‘Trimmed, lopped, prun- 
ed. 4 Fixed—R.13. 5 (DU) Trim, tight,taut, 

snasail, a. Accomplished. 2 see snasmhor. 

snasaireachd, see snasmhorachd. 

gnasar, see snasmhor. 

snas-bhriathrach, -aiche, a. Oratorical, rhetor- 
ical, eloquent. 

snas-bhriathraich, eo Embellish words. 

snas-chainnt, e, $.f. Rhetoric. 2 Philology. 

snas-chlachaireachd, sf. Finely-finished mason- 
ry. 

snas-chopan, -ain, -an, s.m, Cross. 

snasda, s.m. Colour. 

snasla, @ see snasta, 

snas-labhair, v.a. Modulate in"speaking. 

snas-labhairt, s. Modulation, accent. 

snas-mhineachadh, s.m. Analysis. 

snasinhoire, comp. of snasmhor. 

snasmhor, -mhoire, à. Neat, elegant. 2 Polish- 
ed, ornamented. 3**Decent. 4 Accurate, 5 
Trimmed, lopped. 6 Brave. Cainnt sh., ac- 
curate or ele;ant language. 

snasmhorachd, s.f. Neatness, polish, ornament, 
elegance. 2 Accuracy. 3(MS)Composition. 4 
tt Perfectness. 

snasta, a. & past pt. of snas. Orderly, regular, 
neat. 2 Ornamented. 3 Joiuted. 4 Brave, 
gallant. 5 see snasaichte. Deud geal s., an 
eleyant white tooth. 

snastach, a. Trimming, lopping, pruning. 2 
Criticizing. . 

snath, -ailh &-a, pl. snàithean, s.m. Thread in 
general 2 Quantity of thread, yarn. 3 Line. 
Snath-fuaidhle, sewing-thread ; snàth-clóimhe, 
or snath-olla, woollen thread, yarn, worsted ; 
snath-galadh, [snàth-reilidh in Lewis—D My), 
the thread which binds a fishing-hook to the 
line ; snath-moineis, soft thick twine used for 
lacing fishing-nets together ; snath-cuir, weft ; 
snath-riaghailb, basting-thread ; snàth-sioda, 
a silk-thread ; snàth-dlüthaidh, abb ; snàth- 
lin, linen thread, linen yarn. [ttpl. snàthan. ] 

snàth, v.a. Thread, string. 

snath, v.a. see snadh. 

jTsnatha, s.m. Easing or riddance from pain. 2 
Grief, trouble. 

snàthach, -aiche, æ. Full of thread or yarn. 

snathaclachadh, (DMK) s. m. Act of rigging 
hooks to a fishing-line— West coast of Ross. 
C‘ Reileadh-dhubhan ” in Lewis—DMy.] 

snàthad, -aid, -an, s.f. Needle. 2 Ear-mark on 
sheep, see comharradh-cluais, 3 (CR) Hook 
to hold the blade of a scythe at the proper 
angle. (Also called snàthad-fheóir—A H.) Cro 
snatnaid, the eye of a n-edle. 

snathadach, -aiche, a. Furnished with needles. 
2 Like a needle, 

snàihadachan, -ain, -an, see snàthadan. 

snàthadag, CR) art Titlark—Suth’d.,W. of Ross 
& Perth. 

snàthadan, -ain, -an, s.»n. Needle-case. 

snathad an t-seie, s.f. Spindle or axle of fiyers of 
spinning-wheel, see No. 23, p. 290. 

snàthad-mhara,(AF) s.f. Needle-fish, 

snàchadair, ean, .m. Needle-maker. 


Snashag.Tq "aig, ED, 8. f. Meadow -pipit, heather 


804 


H 
f zg Qin fo: AE me e» mood ` egen e ep EGhr- 


^ tee MR Mere 


lintie—anthus pratensis, 

snàthainn, -e & suàithne, pl. -ean & snàithnean, 
s.m. Thread, single thread. 2 String. 3 Skein. 
4 Line. S. ascaird, æ thread of tow. 

snathainn, (DMK) s.f. Colon. or lower bowel of 
an animal. 

snathainn-bhàthaidh,} s. f. Water-milfoil—my- 
riophyliwm spicatum & alterniftrorum. 

snathainnean, -ain, -an, s.m., dim. of snàthainn., 
Little thread. 

snathainneanach, -eiche, a. Abounding in small 
threads. 2 Ropy. 3 Fibrous. 

snàth-cuir,* s.m. Waft. 

snàthdag,(DU)s.f. Small glass of whisky, “nip.” 
2(DC) Meadow-pipit. 

snàthlainn, Uist for snàthainn. 

snathteag, see snàthdag. 

sueabhartaich, s.f. Sneezing— Arran. (sreabh- 
artaich.) 

sneachd, -a, s.m. Snow. Ris an t-sneachd, snow- 
ing ; fliuch shneachd, sleet; clach shneachd, 
hail; crann shneachd, dry snow; ball sneachda, 
a snowball ; muc sneachd, or muc aitidh, @ 
GR heap of snow made by rolling in time of 

aw. 

sneachda, see sneachd. 

sueaclhidach, -aiche, a. see sneachdail 

sneachdadh, Ain, s.m. see sneachd. An uisge 
sneachdaidh, in snow-water ; là sneachdaidu, 
a its day ; muc sneachdaidh, o huge snow- 

ail. 

sneachdag,(AF) s.f. Common ptarmigan. 

sneachdail, e, o, Snowy, abounding in snow, 9 
Like snow. 3 White like snow. 

sneachdaire,(DC) eum, Ptarmigan, see tàrma- 
cnan. 

sneachdan,(DC) s.m. Ptarmigan, see tàrmachan. 

snvachdar, d. Snowy. 2 Like snow. 

sneachd-gheal, ghile, a. Snow-white. 

sueadn, -a, -an, s.f. Nit. 2 Egg of pediculus. 

sneadhach, -aiche, a. Nitty, full of nits. 
Like nits. 

sneadhanich, see sneadhach. 

sneadh na miol chaorach, s.m. Nit of the sheep- 
bot fiy —oees'rus oms. 

sneag, v.a. Notch, nick, dent, cut. 

sneag, s. Notch, see eag, 

sneagach, see eagach. 

sneagachadh, -aidh, see eagachadh. 

sneagaich, see sneag. 

snéagair, s.m. Crawler, see snàigear. 

sneagaireaehd, s.f. Hacking. z Notching, in- 
dentation. 

sneagh, see sneadh. 

sneaghach, see sneadhach. 

sneaghan, -ein, Arran, E. Perth, W. of Ross and 
Kintyre for seangan. 

sneaghanach, see seanganach, 

snesiuh, -eimh, sse snea th. 

sneamhach, s2e sneadhach. 

fsneidh, see sneigh. 

sueidhe, see snidhe. 

fsneigh, a. Straight, direct. 9 Little. 

snèip, s. ‘Turnip —Su£Ad, 

sneomn, see sneadh., 

sniagair,(MS) v.n. Hover, 

sniainh, v. see snìomh. 

gniamhair, see sniomna'r. 

snichd, s.m. see snich lean, 

snichdean, -ein, -an, s.e. Stitch of a needle, 2 
Stitch of clothing. Gach s. a th’ agam, every 
stitch I have ; cha robh s. air, Ae was naved. 
snidh, see saigh. [McL & D gives snidh, ant 
MacBain snigh. | 

snig, s.f. Nit. 

snigh, v.n. Dronas fall in drops. 2 Leak, let 
in water; 3 Ooze through in drops  4'Sued 


snigh 
tears. Bheireadh do ghnàthachadh air na 
clachaibh snigheadh, your conduct would make 
the very stones shed tears, 

&enigh, s.m. see snighe. 

snighe, s.m. ind. Rain coming through the roof 
ofa house. 2 Drop. 3Tear. 4 Sorrow, vexa- 
tion. 

ach, -eiche, a. That droppeth rain. 2 That 
admits drops of rain. 3 Oozing, as rain 
through a roof. 4 Tearful, in tears, moist 
with tears, weeping, sad. Taigh a, a house 
whose roof lets the rain through ; s. gun léir- 
sinn, tearful and blind. 

snigheadh, -idh, s.m. Dropping, act of falling in 
drops. 2 Oozing through in drops. 3 Shed- 
ding of tears. 4 Sadness.  A' s—, pr. pt. of 
snigh. 

snimhean, Bha s. nan riombalaibh buidhe, (the 
falling leaves) were twirling in circles in the 
wherlwind,—Sgeul.-nan-caol, p. 102. 

snioghag, (pron. snid-ag) Suth’d for seangan, 

snioghan, S. Inverness-shire for seangan. 

sniom, $. Distress. 

sniomh, pr.pt. a’ snìomh, v.a. £ n. Twist,twine. 
2 Spin. 3 Wind. 4 Wind yarn. 5 Curl. 6 
Wrench. 7**Wring. Sh. na mnathan, the wo- 
men spun; sh.e am’ laimh e, he wrenched it 
out of my hand; sh. e an ceann dheth, he 
wrung iis head off ; ar cridheachan air an s., 
our hearts wrung. 

sniomh, A, s.m. Sadness, heaviness. 2t+Great 

in. Tba s. air mo chridhe, my heart is sad. 

sniomh, -a, s.m. Spinning. 2 Twist, twine. 3 
Twist in yarn. 4 Curl of hair, ringlet. 6 
Sprain. 6 Wrench. 7 see sniomhadh. Deagh 
sh., good spinning; math air an t-sniomh, 
good at spinning ; a shealgair a’s àillidh s., 
O,huntsman of the comeliest locks, A’ s—, pr.pt. 
of sniomh. 

snìomhach, -aiche, a. Sad, declivous, 

———,Tt -aich, 8,5. see sniomhachas, 

—, -aiche, a. Twisting, twining, that 
twists or twines, 2 Winding, that winds. 3 
Spinning, employed in spinning. 4 In ringlets 
or curls, curling. 5 Spiral, 6 'lwisted,twined, 
helical. 7 Tending to twist or twine, & 
Spun. Falt s., hair in ringlets. 

sniomhachan, -ain, s.m. Spinner. 

sniomhachas, -ais, s.m. Employment of a spin- 
ner, spinning. 2 Anything spun. 3 Curling, 
as of the hair, 4 Tendency to form into 
curls, 5** Spun yarn. [wainer. 

sniomhadair,** -ean, s. m. Spinner. 2 Cord- 

sniomhadh, -aidh,s.m. Spinning, act of spinning. 
2 Twisting,twiniug,act of twisting or twining. 
3 Winding, act of winding. A's—, pr. pt. of 
sniomh. 

sniomhaiche, an, s.m. Spinner. 2 see sniomhair. 
Ban-sh.. spinster, spinstress, [of sniomh. 

sniomhaidh, gen.sing. of suiomhadh. 2 fut.aff.a. 

sniomhain, -e, a. see snìomhach. Càl s., curled 
hair ; air s'aidhrichibh s., om winding stairs. 

—each,** a. see suiomhach, Falt s., 
finely-twisted lock of hair. 

sniomhair, -ean, $.m. Wimble, borer, auger. 2 
**Spinner. 3**Cordwainer. 

eachd,** s.f.ind. Business of a spinner. 
2 Business of a cordwainer. 

sniomhan, see sniomhach. 

-————-—, $. see sniomh. 

sniomhanach, s. see sniomh, 

sniomhanach, -aiche, @ see snìomhach. Ciabh 
S., @ plaited rin it ; fait s., hair in ringlets. 

. -—d,(MS) s.f. Limbernes«. 

sniomhta, past pt. of snìomh. Spun. 2 Twist- 
ed, twiued. Wouhd, 

aniouga, see sneatlh: 




















snuadhaoh 

gnisean, -ein, s,m. see enaoiseaD. 

snith, see snigh. 

snithe, see snigh. 

ach, -eiche, @. see sħigheach. 

tsno, s. m. Visage. 2 Appearance. 3 Colour, 
(snuadh,) 

snod, pr. pt, of snodadh, v.a. Fix a fishing-hook 
to a line, 2 Dress a hook. 

snod, -òid [& tt-a,] pl.-an & -aichean, s.m. Twis- 
ted hairs which are fastened to a fishing-hook, 
“snood.” 2 The part of a fishing-line to whicn 
the hook 1s fastened. 3 Tippet. 

snod,* s,f. Fishing.line. 

snodach,** a, Snooded, as a fishing-line. 

snodadn, -aidh, s.m. Act of preparing a hook 
for fishing, snooding asa fishing-hook. A’ s—, 
pr.pt. of snód. [In parts of Argyll, this is 
called ‘‘ a’ tapadh dhubhan.” It ıs also call- 
ed stalcadh dhubhan—Fionn.] S 

snodail,(DC) v. Snuff the wind, as deer, dogs, 

snodan, -ain, -an, 8.m. dim. of snod. 

snodan, -ain, s.m. The rapid motion of a boat. 
prov. 

snodanach,tft a. Abounding in little tippets. 

snodha, -n, s.n. (i.e. snodha gàire) Smile on the 
countenance, (suuadh.) 

snodhach, -aich, s.m. Sap or juice of a tree, par- 
ticularly of the birch. 2*Foliage, verdure. 3 
trPertaining to hooks or fishing-lines, 4(MS) 
Bloom, efflorescence. 5(JMcF) Bud. Is geal 
gach nodha gu ruig s. an fhearna, everything 
new is white, even to the hark of the alder— 
the alder when newly-peeled is white, but 
turnsred in a short time ; a’ choill’ a’ snodh- 
achadh, the woodlands budding. 

snodhach an leamhain, 4. m. Sap of the elm, 
used of old as a hair-restorer. 

snoghach,** a. Beautiful, (snuadhach.) 

snóid,* v.a. see snod, 

snóidean, sse snóitean, 

snoidh, see snaidh. 

snoig,* &.f. Expression of countenance of a testy 
or suuffy person. 

snoigeas, -eis, -an, 3. m. Testiness, peevishness, 
2 'l'esty, peevish look. 

snoigeasich, -aiche, a. Testy, peevish. 2 Hav- 
ing a testy or peevish look. 

snoileun,§ s.m. Grey or blue titmouse, black- 
cap, see cailleachag cheann-ghorm. 

snoitean, -ein, $.m. Snuff. 2 Pinch of snuff. 8 
One who snuffs, in ridicule. 

snomhach,(MS) s.m. Blowth, see snodhach. 

snot, pr.pt. a’ snotadh &a’ snotail, v.a. Smell, 
snuff the wind. 2 Turn up the nose in smell- 
ing. 3 Suspect, havea suspicion. 4 Snuffe. 

snotach, -aiche, œ. Smelling, that smells. 2 Sus- 
pecting, suspicious. 3**snuflling, snorting. 

snotadh, -aidh, s.m. Smelling, act of smelling. 
2Snuffing up the wind, 3 Suspecting, act of 
suspecting, suspicion. 4 Snorting. ' $—, 
pr. pt. of snot. A’ s, bhileagan, smelling 
leavrs—R. 40. 

snotaich, see snot. [In Gairloch, snótaich, pr-pt. 
a’ snòtach, Smell, snuff—bDU.] 

snotail, -e, pr.pt. & s.f. see snotacdh. 

snothach, see snodhach. 

snòthd, e Part of a hand-line, see under dorgh. 

snotraich, -e, s.f. see suotadh, 

tsnuadh,** v. Flow a~ a stream. 

snuadh, -aidh, s.m. Hue, colour, appearance, 

complexion. 2 Beauty. 13**River, brook. 4 

**Blood, 5**Hair of the head. 6*Aspect. Air 

tréigsinn a shnuaidn.Aavin chang:d ils colour; 

bheir thu air à sh. caitheadh mar leomanu, 

thon shalt make his beauty to consum? as æ 

noth. 





-emc icho, a Good-ivokiug, having & 


snuadhach 


good complexion or colour. 2 Comely,elegant. 
ER UR an imposing appearance. 
. treun, good-looking and valiant; duine s., 

& comely person. 

puuadhachadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of giving a good 
appearance or colour to anything. A’ 8—, pr 
pt. of snuadhaich. 

suuadhaich, pr.pt. a’ snuadhachadh, v.a. Give a 
goo! colour or appearance to anything, adorn. 
2 Imbue. 3 Bloom. 

-—te, past pt of snuadhaich. Well-col- 
oured adorned, bedecked. 

$nuadhar, -aire, a. see snuadhach S. treun,per- 
sonable and strong: A shoóbhraibh ! is s. do 
ghnuüis, O.primrose,pleasant «s thy appearance, 

f3nuadb-chlais, -ean, s.f. Channel of a river. 

snuadhmhor., -oi:re, a. see snuaitbach.  Duine S., 
a comely person. 

&nuim,** s Bunch. 

RD uin, see snam. 

&huisean, see snaoisean. 

ach, see snaoiseanach. 

achd, see snaoiseanachd. 

0, dem.pron., alv. & int. see seo 

80-, Initial particle prefixed to adjectives and 
substantives, implying facility, aptness, fitness, 
ease, equality, and sometimes goodness, It is 
similar to the termination -ble iu English, and 
-bilis in Latin. Déanta, made, or don» ; so- 
dhéanta, easily done, [The reverse of do-.] 

tso, a. Young. 

tsoadh, s. Bed, couch. 2 Turning, return. 3 
Eclipse. 

go-aideachaidh, a. Avowable. 

go-aimsir,** s.f, Calm weather, fair weather, 
pleasant weather. 2 Season of pleasure. 

go-àireamh, -e, a, Numerable, computable, easi- 
ly numbered. 

€0-àiteachaidh, a. Arable, 2 Inhabitable. 

go-aithneach,** a, Easily known or recognised. 
2 Conspicuous, 

@o-aithneachadh, a. Easily recognised. 

80-aitreabhach, -aiche, a. Inhabitable, 

60-aithriseach, -eiche, a. Allegable. 

@o-aithriseil, -e, a. Allegable. 

fso-alt, s. Good leap. 

80-a0maidh, -e, a. Flexible, exorable, easily per- 
suaded, easily bent. 

80-aslachadh, a. Exorable. 

80-atharrach, -aiche, a. Alterable, easily moved. 

——adh, a. see so-atharrach. 

go-atharraichte, a. see so-atharrach. 

80b',$s. Common sorrel, see samh. ‘**Sobha- 
.a!mhainn, strawberries. 

sobhiidh, v.a. & n. Turn, prevent. [{sobhaidh.] 

sobhal, see sabhal. 

sobhaladh, see so-bholadh. 

gobhdan. see sodan. 

—ach,** a. Equanimous, 

#o-bheanailteach, -eiche, a. Tangible. 

——— —-—4, s.f.ind. Palpahility. 

&o-hbheantuinneachd, s.f. Tactility. 

6o-bheus, -an, s.m. Good breeding. So-bheus- 
an, good manners, 

ach, a. Well-bred. 

80-l hinntichte, ** a. Coagulable, easily curdled. 

80-bilasda, -bhlaisde, a. Savoury, tasty. 

so-hhogachaidh,** o Moveable. 2 Pliant. 3 
Easily softened. 

go-bholadh, -aidh, -aidhean, 
sweet smell. 

8so-hholtanacnd. see so-bhola th. 

&o-bholtrach, -aiche, 4 Sweet-smelling. 

sòbhrach, -aich, -aichean, s.f. see sòbhrag. 
Kind of clover. 

sòbhrach, o. see sobhragach. 

omnes ll: Rin, $,m. Young primrose. 2 Prim, 























$. m. Fragrance, 


ox 


a- 


4 Bloomy. sóbirag, -aig, An, 8. 


| 


socair 


rose— Colonsay 
f. Primrose—primula vul- 


yaris. 


Da 





644. Sobhrag. 
sóbhragach, -aiche, a. Abounding in primroses. - 
2 Like a primrose. 

sobhrag chluasach,$ $.f. Auricula, see lus-nam- 
ban-righ. 

sóbnrag-gheamhraidh,$ s. f, Winter primrose— 
gët polyanthus. 

sobhraide,** et Sobriety, 2 Mildness, gentle- 
n'8s. 

so-bhreith, o Arbitrahle. 

so-bhrisidh, a. Frangible. 

so-bhriste, a. Frangible, brittle. 

— —achd, ** s.f. Brittleness,frangibility, 2 
Weakness. 

so-bhron,** -din, s, m. Pleasant sorrow, melan- 
choly pleasure. 

so-bhruidhneach, -eiche, o Accostable. 

so-bhuailteach, -eiche, @. Easily hit or struck, 
assailable. 

so-bhualta, -ailte, a. see so-bhuailteach, 

soc, suic, s.m. Forepart or end of anything. 2 
The beak, snout. 3Chin. 4 Plough-sock, 5 
**Coulter, 6 Socket. 7**Point. 8 *Plough- 
share. S. croinn, the sock of a plough; a’ geur- 
achadh ’shuic, sharpening his sock; claidh- 
eans. ri s., swords point to point, 

soc,** v.a. Fit a plough witha sock (** says 
conlter.) 2 Provide with a socket. 3 Point. 
4 Fit a plough with a sock. 

soc,** s.m. Silence, 

ach,** s.m. Soccage, tenure of lands by ser- 
vice fixed and determined in quality. 2 Cer- 
tain extent of arable land. 3 Point of land 
jutting out between two rivers. 4 see soc. 
[Asa place-name, Succoth in English. gen. 
sing. socaich. ] 

socach,* s.f. Pert female. 

,-aiche, a. Snouted, beaked. 2 Coultered 
or socked, as a plough. 3 Having a peaked 
chin. 4 Pointed. 5 Like acoulter. 6 Like 
a beak or snout. : 

Socadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Act of fastening 
the coulter to a plough. 2 see soc. 

tsocaiche, $./. Army, host, multitude. 

socaid, -e, s.f. Socket. 

tsocail, s.f. Ease, rest, tranquility. 2 Mildness. 

socail,** a. Easy, mild, gentle. 

socain, gen.sing. of socan. i 

socair, -e & socrach, s.f. Ease, rest, tranquility. 
2 Comfort. 3 Mildness. 4 Prop. pillar, rest. 
5 A«su:goment. 6* Leisure, 7 Peace. Op- 
posite of docair. 

Gabh s., ‘ake vase ; am bheil thu air do sh. 4 
are you at leisure ? a’ cheud s. a thig, the Arst 











socair 


887 


socrach 





abatement of the storm ; gun s. oidhcho no là, 


Sochdair, see socair. 


without peace night or day ; 8. a dhuine, take | So-chinealta,** a. High-born. 


il easy, my dear sir ! 

socar, -e, OG Easy, quiet, at ease, tranquil. 2 
Pleasant. 3 Mild, gentle, comfortable, safe. 
4 Slow. Tha mi a, 1 am at peace; tha 'm 
feasgar s., the evening is mild, 

socair ! int. Avast ! avast ! 

socait,** -ean, s.f. Socket. 

each,** a. Socketted. 2 Like a socket. 

socal,** -ail, s.m. see socail. 

socalach,** -aiche, a. Easy, mild. 2 At rest. 

socamhlach, -aiche, a. see socalach. 

socan, ain, An, s.m.dim. of soc Little snout 
or beak. 2 Little coulter. 3 Big-bellied man. 
4 Little sock. 5 Little rest or prop. 6**Field- 
fare. 7 Little ploughshare. 

socanach, -aiche, a. Pertaining to little snouts, 
socks, coulters, «&c. 

Socarach, see socrach. 

Tsochaidh,** s.f. Army, host, multitude, 

sochair, e, -ean, s./. Benefit, profit, emolument. 
2Immunity, privilege. 3 Comfort, ease. 4 
(AC) Right, 5ttGift, 6 Favour. Chas, sam 
bith sin dhomh-sa, that-is noadvantage to me ; 
sochairean chlann Dhé,the privileges of God's 
children. 

so-chairdeach,** a. Nearly related. 2 Intimate- 
ly acquainted, 

so-chairdean, s.pl. Friends, intimate friends, 

go-chairdeas,** s.m, Friendship, intimate friend- 
ship. 

ge, -eiche, a. Yie!ding profit, benefici- 
al, advantageous. 2 Holding or enjoying pri- 
vileges or immunities. 3 Obliging, 4 Lucra- 
tive. 5 Easy-munded. 6 Right. 

dër s.f. Blesseduess. 2 Obliging- 
ness 3 Lucrativeness. 4 Easy-mindedness, 

sochairean, s.p/, Benefits, blessings. 

sochairich,** v. Bless. 

so-chaitheamh,** a. Consumable, 

gso-chamadh,** a. Flexible, 

so-chaochlaideach, -eiche, o Easily changed, 
chang-able, transmutable, convertible. 

so-chaoch!aideachd, s.f.1nd. Mutability, facility 
of being changed. 

so-chaochlaidh, e, a see so-chaochlaideach, 

sochar, -air, s.f. Silliness, weakness, instability 
of purpose, yielding or too compliant disposi 
tion, simplicity. 2 Indulgence. 3 Immunity 
4(MS)Interest. 5 (MS) Present. donation. 6 
see sochair. 7 (DMy) Bashfulness, shyness, 
Is ı an t-s. à thug orm a dbeanamh, pure 
simplicity made me doit ; is miosa an La na 
'mheirle, simplicity is worse than theft, 

acb, -aiche, a Silly, of a too yielding dis- 














position. 2 Boyish. 3**Obliging, ready to fa- 
vour., 4**Lucrative. 5** Easy.minded. 67° 
Right. 7] Simple, complant — 8* Easily im- 


posed upon. Duine s., a weak or $unple per. 
son, bho 'D a bha mi cho s.. nce ] was so 
Simple ; c' at son a bha thu cho 8. ? why were 
you $0 soft è? 

so-charachaidh,*® @ Agitable 

socharachd,* s.f ind. Gullibility. 

socharaich," see sochar. 

So-Charaichte.** œa Agitable. 

so-charnaiih, a. Congestible. 

80-chasta,** a. Handy, manageable, 

so-cheannsachaidh, a, Exuperable 

so-cheannsachd. s./ Manageablenessg, 

so-cheannsaichte. a. Conquerable 

so-cheanusaidheachd, s.find Manageableness 

eochd,t s.m. Silence 2 Peade, quietness, 3 see 
soc 

so-cheangladh,** a. Associable, 

 Boschdach, Auch, -an, see socach, 


—chi, $.f. High birth, nobility, 
———— s, smn. Hign birth. nooility. 
80-chiüineachadh,**a. E air appcased,placable, 

exorabie, 
so-chiüinichte, æ. Easily appeased. 
sochladh,** æ. Sensibile. 
sochladh, -aidh, s m. Fame, character, 
so-chlaistinn, a. see so-chlaistinneach. 
—— , & Aud!) bleness, 
each, -eiche, a. Audible, 
so-chlaoidhte,** a. Easily conquered. 
so-chlaonadh, -aidh, s.m. Aptness to bend. flexi- 
bility. 2 Aptness to go astray, towardness. 
so-chloiste,** a, Audible. 
so-chloistinn,** s.f, Audibleness, 
so-chluinntinn, e, a. Audible, easily heard, 
a ,"* $. Audibleness. j 
sochmadh,** a. Abstemious. 
sochmhor,** q. Abstemious. 
so-chnaimhteachd, s.f.ind. Corrodibility. 
so-chnaimhte, o. see so-chnamhta, 
so-chnàmh,** o Easy of digestion, digestible. 
so-chnamhach, see so-chnamhaih. 
so-chnamhadh,** a. Digestible, 
so-chnamhaiche,** em. Ove who has a good di- 
gestion, 
so-chnamhta,** a. Easy of digestion, digestible. 
so-chobhaiste,** a. Conformable. 
so-choimeasgta, a. Compoundable. 
so-choiinheid, @ Preservable, 
sochoire,(MS) s. Flexibiiicy, 
so-choireachaidh, a. Impeachable. 
so-chois,** s.m. Learned man. 
so-choisinnteachd, s.f..nd. Niaintainableness. 
so-choisneadh,** a. Attainable. 
so-chomhairleach, -eiche, a. Easily advised or 
entreated. 2 Versatile. 
—d, s.f.ind. Persuasiveness. 2 

















Versatility. 
so-chomhairlich, -e, @ see so-chomhairleach. 
so-chomharraichte,** a. Easily distiuguished, 

observable, conspicuous. 
so-chomhdachaidh, a, Maintainable. 
so-chomhradhach,** a.Cunversable, affable,com- 

plaisant. 
so-chómhraideach, -eiche, a. Affable, couversa- 
ble, complacent., 2 (MS—chombraiteacn) 


Familiar. 
——————— ———4, 8f Affability. 
so-chompanta,** a. Associable. 
so-cbonradh, -aidh, $ m. Cheapness, 
so-chordach, o. Agreeable 
so-chosmhuil, -e, æ. Conformable, 
sochrach,(MS) a. Available. 
sochraid,** s.f Multitude of people. 
so-chràimhte, see so-clinamhta, 
so-chràmhta, see so-chiamhta, 
so-chreidimh, e, $.f. Credulity. 
so-chreidmieach, -eiche, a. Ciredulous. 
—— -————.** -eich, s.m. Credulous person. 
so-chreidsinn, -e, 4 Credible 
go-chridheach, -eiche, a. Kind, good-hearted, 
tender-natured. 
d, s.f.ind. Good nature, cordiality, 


(MM.] 
{ lrisn— 








kindness. 

so-chrionadh,** a Adustible. 

&0-Chrübadh, a, Contractible, 

so-Cchuimte, a. Mouldable, easily shaped. 

so-chumta. see so-chuiuite. 

so-chunntach, -aiche, a Countable, 

socrach, -aiche. a Easy, quiet. comfortable, at 
rest, 2 Affording ease or comfort. 3 Not ea- 
eily moved or excited. 4 Slow, sedate, not 
easily hurried, 5** Firmly-footed, fixed,steady, 
established. &* *Smooth, plain, equal, d 


socrach 


Moderate. Feachd bu sh. 
steadiest step, 
surely, coolly, 
gu 9., 4 will le 


ceum, a host of the 


ad the way at leisure. 


eócrachadh, -aidh, oan Establishing, act of es- 
ordering, arranging.appoint- 


Lablishing,fixiug, 
ing,adjusting, 
? ‘Lranyuility. 
socraich. 
socrachd,** s f. Steadiness, undisturbedness, 
socradh,** s.m. Ease, leisure. 2 Tranquility, 
calmuess, smoothness. 


making steady or tranquilizing, 
d Comfort. A's—, pr. pt. of 


socraich, pr.pt. a socrachadh, v.a. d n Estab- 
2 Determine, 
3 Authorize. 4 Arrange,dis- 
5 Appease, quiet, compose, as- 
7 Stop or cease any mo- 
9 F'ix or place on 
10 Stand at 


lish, Gx, make firm or steady. 
appoint, decree. 
pose, settle 
Suage 6 Stand firm. 
tiou. 8* Level, make even. 
& firm footing or fouudation 


or marching in line; gu S., lei- 
softly ; gabhaidh mi an t-slighe 


868 so-fholach 


sodalaiche, s., see sodalach. s. 

sodalair,** s.m. Aula or, coaxer. 

sodalanach, -aiche, æ. Parasitic, 

sodaltach, -aiche, a. Parasitic, 

sodan, -aiu, s.m. Joy, blithesomeness. 2 Appear- 
ance or expression of joy or glarness at meet- 
ing 3 Joyous reception 4 Caressing. 5*Fawn- 
ing. ó" Complaisance Aur son sodain riut-sa, 
oul of sheer complaisance to you ; rnn au eas, 
ris, the dog fawned upon hun. 

sodanach, -aiche, a, Joyful, glad, cheerful, com- 
plaisant. 

sodanaich,(MS) v.a Cocker. 

sodar, air, s.n. Solder, 

sodar, -air, 8.m. Trotting. 

———ach,** a. Trotting. 

sodaran,( MS) s.m. Jogger. | 

sodar-bhrochan,* -ain, san. Thick gruel. 

sodarnach, -aiche, a, Able-bodied. strong, robust, 


















2 Trotting horse. 


ease. 11(M*) Ballast. 12(MS) Becalm. strong and sound for marching. 2** Clumsy. 
Sh iad uile air an lón,they all stood frmon| 3 Able to trot. 4** l'rotting. 

the plain; sh. am feasgar, the evening settled ; sodarnach, -aich, -aichean, s.m. see sodair. 

sh. e fichead punnd Sasunnach oirre ’sa sòdh, -a, see sògh. 3 

bhliadhna, Ae seitied £20 per annum on her;sh. tsodh,** sm. Turning, winding, changing. 2 

ea chridhe air sin, he set his heart on that, Eclipse. 


sh. 'fhearg, his rage subsided ; sh. e an gnoth- 
ach sin, he arranged that business ; s. an t-aite 
socraichidh mi mo 


Seo, level this place; 
smuaintean, Z will fiz my thoughts. 

Bocraichear, fut.pass. of socraich. 

&ocraichidh, fut.aff.a. of socraich. 

&ocraichte, past pt. of socraich. Established, 
tixed. 2 Determined, appointed. 3 Arranged, 
disposed, settled. 4 A 
Made level, levelled. 
aih, his heart bent on sin ; tha ’n t- 
that p'ace is levelled. 

Bocras,"* -ais, s.m. Ease, tranquility. 

&ocu!, see socal. 


aite Sin S., 


60d, -a, s.m. Noise of boiling water. 9? Steam 
of water in which meat is boiled. 3 Boiled 


meat. 
in it. 
80d, -oid, -an, s.m. Sod. 
person. 3"*Stout, corpulent person. 
Bodach, -aiche, a. Clumsy, awkward. 
3 Sodish. 4**Stout. 

. “aich, s.m. Stout, robust or clumsy man. 
Is tric a chinn an cneadach ’s a dh'fhalbh an 
S., ojten does the puny grow and the stout de- 
cay. 


1**Noise of water whea meat is boiling 


2 Untidy. 








as, -ais, s.m. Clumsiness, awkwardness. 

60dag,-aig, -an, sf. Clout, pilliou, pannel. 2 
Mat made of woven straw and placed under 
a burden. Prov. 3tflurf. 

&odagach, -aiche, a. Ragged, clouted. 2 Turfed. 

eodail, gen. gung. of sodal. 

Bodair,** v.a & n. Trot. 

„ean, s. m. Strong-built man. 

built or clumsy animal. 3**Clumsy, awkward 

fellow. 4** Trotting norse. 5 Trotter 

eachd, er Clumsiness, stoutness of form 
or make 

&odal. ail, em Flattery 2 Pride, vain:glory 3 
Fawning,adulation. 4** Arrogance. 

"7 a. Flattering, fawning 2 Proud.arro- 

gant. 

ach, -aiche,@. Flattering,fawning. 2 Proud, 
arrogant 3 Luxurious, epicurean Gu 8. 
fawningly 

e——ach, auch, om Flatterer, 
site, charlatan. cajoler 

~——-achd.[fs.f..nd Habit or practice of flattery. 
2 Pride 3**Luxury. epicurism. 

~——-aich ** væ, Flatter, fawn, cajole, 2 Soothe. 

-—— Bich, e &/ Habit of fattery. continued or 
frequent flattery, (awning or cajoling, 





2 Strong: 











adulator para- 


ppeased, assuaged. 5* 
A chridhe s. air peac- 


2 Clumsy or awkward 











tsodh,** v.a. Turn. 

so-dhaingneach,** a. Affirmable. 

Sodhan, see saoidhean. 

tsodhan,** a. Prosperous, 

so-dhealbhach, see so-dhealbhaidh. 

so-dhealbhaidh, a. QContrivable. 2 Figurable, 
well-formed, handsome. > 

so-dheanamh, see so-dheanta. 

so-dhéanta, a. Practicable, possible. 
done. 

so-dhéantachd, s.f. Possibility, practicability. 

so-dhearbhaidh, a. Probable. 

so-dhearbhta, a. Easily proved, evincible. 

so-dhianta, see so-dhèanta. 

so-dhionaidh, a. Fortifiable. 2 Justifiable. 

——eachd, s.f. J ustifiableness. | 

so-dhionta, æ. Defensible, easily defended. DN 

so-dhochanta, -ainte, a. Damageable, easily 
hurt. 

So-dhoirte,tt a. Apt to pour out. 2 Fluent in 
Speech. 

so-dhrüighidh, a. Permeable, A 

so-dhrüighteachail, e, a. Impressive. 

so-ihruidte, a. Easily shat, 

sodrach, -aiche, a. Trotting, that trots. 

— — —, aich, s.m. Trotting pace. 

sodradh, -ai;h, s.m. Quick or rapid motion. 2 
‘Trotting, galloping. 3 Quick decay of anye ` 
thing, 4 Lewdness. 

sodraich, see sod, 

sodsag"* -aig, s.f. Pillion. 

so-earalachd, s.f. see so-chomhairleachd. 

tsoeth,|l s. see saeth. 

so-fhadaidh, {t æ. [Inflammable. 

so-fhadauiheachd tf s f. Indammability. 

so-ihaghail,** a. Attainable, easily got. 

so-fliaictiin, see so-fhuae aon. 

so-thaicinn ach, see so-fhaiesinneach 

so-fhaicseanta, à. see so-fhaicsiuneach 

so-fhaiesi n, a. Easily seen, apparent, evident, 
conspicuous 

80.[haicsinneach, a. Visible, apparent, easily 
seen, conspicuous, asp-ccable 

so-fhaicsinneachd, s,f Consp culty 

so-fhaithreaehd, sr Facility. 

so-fhalamhacnhadn.** a  Voidab'!e. 

80-fnaotainn, e, a. Acquirable, easily found, at- 
taina ble. 

so-fhireanachaidh, a. Justifiable. 

s0-fhireantachd, s.f ind Justifiableness 

me EN Siche, @, Concealable, easily bid: 

en. 


2 Easily 





s0-fhuasglaidh 


80-fhuasglaidh, a. Redeemable. 

sog, $.?n.ind. see sogan. 

sogach, see sogail. 

sogail, -e, a. Merry, joyous, festive, 

sogan, -ain, s.m. Mirth, joy, delight, hilarity, 
2" Good humour. 3t Tipsiness. Nam bith- 
eadh s. air, were he in good humour. 

sogan, see sugan. 

soganach, -aiche, @ Merry, joyful. 
maudlin. 

sogh,(AF) s.m. Greyhound. 

Soch, -dizh, s.m. Pleasure, joy, luxury, delicious 
fare, luxurious ease. 2 Riot, riotous living. 
3 Dainties, delicacies. 4 Satiety. 6 Sump- 
tuousness, 6 Prosperity. 7(AF) Juice, sap. 
Sogh-nan-oigh, the joy of madens ; s. riogh- 
ail, roya! dainiies. 

80-ghabhaltach, a. Impressive. 

sóghach, -aiche, a. see sòghail. 
oghail, -e, «a. Luxurious, sumptuous, 2 Fond 
of delicacies. 3 Cheerful. 4 Prosperous 5 
Juicy, sappy. 6 Delicious. Biadh s., delci- 
ous food. 

sogh-aimsir, see so-aimsir. 

soghainn,* s. Batter 

soghainn, a, Pleasant, agreeable, cheerful. 

-————,** SE Kind of paste used by weavers 
to smooth their threads, treisgein, technically 
called ** dressing." 

soghair,** s.m. Votary of pleasure, 2 Epicure. 
2 Epicurean. 

eachd,** ert Luxuriousness, sumptuous- 
ness, 2 Epicurism. 3 Epicureanism. 

sòghalachd, s.f.ind. Luxury, daintiness, sump- 
tuousness. 2 Deliciousness. 3 Surfeit, over- 
flowing. 4 Abundance of juice and fatness or 
82p. 

sóghan,** æ. see soghainn, a. 

80-ghaolach,( MS) a. Amiable. 

sóghar, -aire, @ see sògnail, 

sogharachd, s.f. see soghair. 

gogh-chu,** -choin, s.m,.Greyhound, hound bitch. 

80-gheanalachd,( M3) s.f. Amicableness. 

80-r héillidh, a. Flexible. 

so-vhitlainteachd, sr Portableness. 

go-ghrülan, -aine, o, Portable. 2 Easily borne. 
3 Kaale suffered, j 

g0-ghlacaith, -e, a. 
prehensible. 

80-ghlacta,** o Easily caught or taken. 

so-gnleidhidh, a. Preservable. 

S0-zhluaiseach, -eiche, a. see so-ghluasad. 

80-ghlua'ste, see so-ghluasad. 

80-gilua:ad, a, Movable. 2 Wavering, easily af- 
fected or impressed. 3 Agitable, easily put 

, m motion. 

. Sóghmnar, see sòghail. 
goo hmhor, -oire, a. see sòghail. 
--—achil, see sòghalachd. 

. So-ghnaidh,** a. l'air, comely, handsome. 

'80-zhniomh, -a, -ara, s.m. Good deed 
s0-gliniomhach, -aiche, a, Doing a good deed, 

beneficent, 

. 8o-ghnüis, -e, -ean, s.f. Fair face or countenance, 

comely face. 

——each, -eiche, a, Fair, comely. 
80-ghnüiseas, eis, s.m. Comeliness, beauty. 
so-ghointe,@. Vulnerable, easily hurt or bruised. 
80-ghuidhe,** a. Exorable. 

.—B0-zhrà'lh, -ài lh, aan, Sincere love or fondness, 
Luchd mo sho-ghraidh, the p»ople I sincerely 
ov, 

so-ghralhach, -aiche, a. Acceptable, amiable, 
lovely. 2 Affectionate. 
loved. Le cridhe s., with an affectionate heart. 

80-ghràdhaich.v.a. Love exceedingly or tenderly. 

——— te, past pt. Tenderiy beloved. 


2 Festive, 





Easily caught or taken, ap- 











869 


Tsoghsur,** -uir, s.m. Fatness. | 
so-iarrta,(MS) a. Accessible, | | 


soibhriste, see so-bhriste 
soibhristeachd, see so-bhristeachd. 
soibhsgeul, see soisgeul 


3 Very dear, much 





soi- leaghta 


so-iarrtach, (MS) a. Appetible, 

so-iarrtas,( MS) s,m. Appetibility. | 
tsoib,** s.f. Hand. à 
soibh-. particle sometimes used in 
Soibheus, see so-bheus. 


place of 80, 


n 


ach, see so-bheusach, 





soicead, -eid, em Gaelic form of socket, 


soich,(AF) see soigh 
soicheal,** eil, s. m. Joy, mirth Opposite of 


doicheall, 

———ach, @ Joyful, mirthful, gay. 2 Cans- 
ing joy or mirth. 

achd, s. f. Joyfulness, muirthíulness, 

gaiety. Luchd na s., the gay. 

soichinealta, see so-chinealta, 

—---chd, sae so-chinealtachd, 

8, see so-chinealtas. 

tsoichle, st. Joy, mirth, pleasure, gaiety. 

soideal, -eil, s.»n. Rudeness, vulgarity, ignor- 
ance, 2 Timidity arising from ignorance 

soidealach, -aich, s.m. Rude, ignorant fellow 
2 Awkwardly bashful person. 3Silly, sheep- 
ish fellow. 4 Lazy, indolent person. 

soidealach, -aiche, a. see soidealta, 

——— —, s.f. see goidealtas. 

soidealta, a, Rude, ignorant. 2 Awkwardly 
bashful, timid, silly, sheepish 3 Indolent, 
lazy. 4 Simple, easily imposed upon. 

soidealtachd, s.f. Same meanings as soidealtas. 

soilealtas, Aus, s.m. nd. Rudeness, rusticity, 
ignorance. 2 Bashfulness or timidity from ig- 
norance, coyness, sheepishness, silliness. 3 
Indolence, laziness. 4 (MS) Shame. 

soidean, -ein, -an, s.0. Jolly and stout-looking 
person, 

ach, -aich, ëm. see soidean. 

ach, -aiche, a. Jolly and stout-looking. 

soideirneach,tt see sodair, s. 

so! dheach, -aich, -aichean, $.m, see soitheach. 

soidhineach,** a. Liberal. Gu s., liberally, 

soids:ag,(DC) s.f. Fetter for horses or cows. (di- 
leum in Barra, langaid in Islay.) 

*soi-fillte, a. Supple, easily folded or unfolded. 

soigh (AF) s.f. Bitch. 

soighdear, see saighdear. 

— ——— —achd, see saighdearachd. 

fsoighead, -ghde, -ghdean, see saighead. 

soie heam,** em, s.m. Precious stone or gem. 

soighidh, 8.f. Attack. 

soighlear, -eir, s.m, Jailer. Á 

soighme,** s.f. Thunderbolt. 2 Flash of light- 
ning. 

soighne, a, Pleasant-—R. 44, 

soighne, $. see soighneas. 

soighneadh,( MS) s.m. Condiment. | 

soighnean,** -ein, s,m, Puff of wind. 2 Thun. 
derbolt. 3 Flash of Lightning. 

soighneas, -eis, s.m. Pleasure, delight. 

—— — —aAch, -aiche, @ Delightful, pleasant. 2 
Rejoicing, glad. 

soignniomh, see so-ghniomh. 

— — —. —àch, see so-ghniomhach, 

tsoil, s. The sun. d 

soil! int. Cry to drive away a pig—Glen/yon. 
(sailin Argyll—DC.) 

soil-bheachd.** s. Jest. 

soil-bheum,** s.m. Flash of lightning. 2 Thun» 
derbolt, 

soilbhir, see suilbhear, 

-e, see suilbhice. 

soileach, see szileaci. 

$0i-leaghta, see so-leaghta. 














soileas 


eoileas, -eis, ¢.m. Officiousness, 2 Partiality. 3 
Flattery, adulation. 

soileasach, -aiche, a. Officious. 2 Partial, 3 
Flattering, given to flattery. 

—d, LI see soileas. 

ftaoilfeachd, s.f. Charm. 

soilgheas, -eis, s.m. Wind. 2 Fair wind. 

ach, -aiche, a. Windy, blowing a fresh 
-and fair wind. 

soilleadh,(DC) v. Roast, fry—Skye. 

soilleag, -eig, an, s.f. Willow, sallow. 

ach, o. Abounding in willows or sallows. 
2 Of or like a willow or sallow. 

Goller, e, a. Clear, not dark. 2 Bright,lumin- 
ous, shining. 3 Transparent, limpid. 4 Evi- 
dent, manifest, apparent. 5 Intelligible. per: 
spicuous. 6 Pure, clean. 7 Visible, discern- 

| ible. S Sensible, intelligent. 9* Shrewd,clear- 

' &ghted. 10* Conspicuous Tha sın s., that is 

` oovious; làs., a clear day ; s. mar chriostal, 

| clear as crystal; sruth s., @ limpid stream ; 
&' deanamh a’ ghnothaich s., making thebusi- 
ness clear. 

soilleir-dhonn, s.m. Light brown (colour.) 

&oiileire, comp. of soilleir. 

6oilleireachadh, -aidh, s.m. Enlightening, act of 
enlightening. 2 Illustrating, act of illustrat- 
ing 3 Explaining or making manifest. 4 
Explanation. 5 Clearing up. 6 Incipient 

; light. 7 Brightening, cleaning 8 Making in- 

. telligible, ascertainment. 9(MS) Air. ES 
Dawn. A’ s—, pr.pt. of soilleirich. A’ a a’ 
ghnothaich seo dhomh, making this affair evi- 
dent to me ; 8. aula, the dawn : anns an t-s., 
about the dawn. 

&oilleireachd, s.f.ind. Brightness, clearness, per- 
spicuity, intelligibleness. 2 The dawn. 3 
'ransparentness, limpidness, 4*Conspicuous- 
ness. 5*Accuracy. 

goilleirich, pr. pt. a’ soilleireachadh, v.a. & n 
Clear up, manifest, make manifest. 2 Become 
clear or bright. 3 Explain, illustrate. 4 
Point out, show, make clear or bright, eluci- 
date, enlighten. 4ftBrighten. Sh. au là, the 
day brightened up. 

—te, past pt. of soilleirich. Cleared up, 
manifested, made manifest. 2 Explained, il- 
lustrated, shown, pointed out. 

go!lleirse,** s.f. Axiom. 

&goilleirsinneachd,(MS) s.f. see so-léirsinneachd. 

soillse, sam. "ad, Light. 2 The light of the sun. 
3 Ray of light. 4 Clearness, brightness, ef- 
fulgence, 5* Luminary. 6 Elucidation. 7* 
Ligut from heaven. 

soillseach, -eiche, æ. Bright, clear, not dark. 2 
Clear, transparent, pellucid. 3 Shining, efful- 
gent. 4 That makes bright or clear. 5 Caus- 
ing to brighten up. 6 Causing light. 

Soiliseach,* s, Eyebright. 

Soillseachadh, -aidh, s.m. Enlightening, act of 
enlightening. 2 State of becoming clear. 3 
Act or state of shining. 4 Brightening. 65 
Illuminating. 6 Elucidation, explanation. 7* 
Gleaming, 4A'8—, pr.pt. of soillsich. 

goillseachan, s.m. Phosphorus. 

soillseachd, s.f. Brightness,clearness,effulgence. 
2 Transparentness. 

&oillseachd-nan-sül,$ s.f. Eyebright, see lus-nan- 
eg [McL & D & ** give soillse-nan-sàl, &. 
m. 

soillseadh, see soillseachadh, 

soillsean, s.m. Tinsel. 2 Taper. 

Soillsear,* -eir, -an, s.m. Lantern. 

S9illse-nan-sàl, see soillseachd-nan-sül. 

goillsich, pp pt, a’ soiilseachadh & a’ soillseadh, 
v.d. dn, Knlightea, brighten, 2 Shine, git- 
ter. 3 Become clear. 4 Show forth, illustrate - 














so-innsidh 

explain, elucidate. 6 Gleam, flash. 6*Dawm, 

Sh. an là, the day cleared up ; nach s. tuilleadk 

do chlaidheamh, that thy sword shall gleam fw 

more, 

soillsichear, e m. Lucifer match 

————, fut. pass of soillsich. 

soillsichidh, fut.af.a. of soillsich. 

soillsichte, past pt of soillsich. Enlightened, 
brightened. 2 Illuminated. 

soimeach, -eiche, a. Good-natured, of an easy 
disposition or manner, quiet, tranquil, peace- 
able 2 Comfortable, in easy circumstances, 
3 Idle, inactive. 4 Harmless. 5 Agreeable. 
Is s. fear-fearainn, ach is sona fear-céirde, the 
landed man 1$ at ease, but the trad-sman vs hap- 
py—like many popular sayings, sometimes 
true, sometimes not. Constant financial em- 
barrassmenut effectually dispels both ease and 
happiness where it exists. 

d, s.f. und. Comfortableness, exemption 











from toil ?ttGood nature, goodness of tem- 
per. 3ffldleness. 

an, -ain,-an, s. m. Good-natured, soft 
person. 


3 Idler. 
2 Comfort. 


2 One in easy circumstances. 
—————A5, -ais, s. m. Good natnre. 
8 Idleuess, freedom from labour 
soimh,** a. Quiet, peaceable, good-natured. 2 
Comely. 3 lame. 

soimhe, see saimle. 

soimheach, see soimeach. 

solmheachan, see soimeachan. 

suimheachd,ft s.f. Soítuess, gentleness. 

soimheagan, see soimeachau. 

soiunihneach,** a. Peaceable, agreeable, quiet. 

soiinhneas,** eis, s.m. Fretting. 2 Kecoucilia- 
tion. 

soin,** v.a. Sound, make a noise. 

soin, e, s&. f. Esteem. 2 Comeliness, 3 Sound, 
noise. 

so-in, (an so-in & an so-in-ich) Slang form of 
seo— Badenoch. 

soinchearb,** s, Synalsgepha, contraction by sup- 
pressing a fiual vowel or diphthong before an- 
other vowel or diphthong, so that the final 
syllable of one word runs or melts into the 
first syllable of the next, 

sojneach.** a. Noisy. 

soineachas,** -ais, s.m. Noisiness, noise. 

soinealachd, s.f.in/, Comeliness, handsomeness, 
2**Deceucy. 

soineann, see soinnionn, 

-———acch, -aiche, a. see soinnionnach. 

soineanta, see soinnionta., 

--——chil, see soinnivntachid. 

soineas, ** -eis, s.m. SulKiness, 

soineil, -e, @ Comely, handsome. 2 Esteemed, 
estimable. 

tsoinmheach,** a. Happy, fortunate. 

soinne, Air sgàth s., for the sake of peace—Sgeul.- 
nan-caol, p. 89. (sgoinne) 

soinneach, -eich, s.m. Racehorse. 

soinneachd, s.f. Starting. 

soinnionn, -inn, $.f. Fair or calm weather, sun- 
shine. 2 Cheerfulness, gaiety, 3 Mildness. 
pleasantness. 4 Blast. 3 

soinnionnach,** a. Calm, as weather. 2 Shining. 
3 Pleasant, gay, cheerful. 

soinnionta, -inte, a. Calm, fair. 2 Well-sheltered. 
3 Good-tempered, meek, pleasant. 4 Cheerfal, 
gay. 5 Gentle. 6 Serene, as weather. 

—-cnd, s. f. ind. Calmness, stillness of 
weather. 2Siate of being well sheltered. à 
Meekness, pleasantness of temper 4ftGeutle 
ness. 5**Comeliness. 

so-junseadh, a. Easily told, effable, expressible. 

so-inusilh, see su-innseadh. 





l eoiamohaira 


8 »-lomchaire, comp, of go-Jomchalr, 

a -lomairteachd, a find. Managoablaness, 

go iomchalir, ©, Q: l'olerable, eaally borne, port. 
aible, 

$0.iomohaire, como. of s0-lomahair. 

so-lo moharach |, a.f. neg so-gnidlainteaohd. 

so-lo mpnoh,** a. Kagily converted, convertible. 

so-ionnpachaidh, a. Convertible. 


.. sn iornpalonte, a. Convertible, easily converted. 


so-ionusaohnidh, a, Docile, 

soipein, -ein -an, s.m. dim. of sop. Little wisp or 
handful of hav or straw. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in small wisps 
or bunches, as hay or straw. 2 Scattered in 
small quantities, as hay or straw. 

goir, see ear. Sheòl am bata soir, the boat sail- 
ed eastward. 

soir, e, ean, a.m. Sack, bag. 2 Vessel, vase, 
bottle, 3 Womb. 4ffDish. S.nacloinne, the 
womb. 

soirbh, e, a. Easy, easily accomplished. 2 Calm, 

uiet, gentle. 3 Atfable, courteous, kind. 4 

liant, pliable. 5* Tractabie, docile. 6 Pros- 
perous. 7 Languid. 8 Apt. Duine s., a tract- 
able person ; ni 8., an easy thing ; righ math s., 
a, good qutet king. 

Boirbhe, gt see soirbheachd. 

soirbhe, comp. of soirbh. 

soirbheach, -eiche, @. see soirbh. 

—adh, -ailh, s.m. Act or state of pros- 
pering, succeeding or favouring, 2 Success, 
prosperity. 3 Growing affable, calm or quiet. 
À's—, pr.pt. of soirbhich. S. math leat ! $uc- 
cess to you ! 

soirbheachd, s.f.ind. Easiness, facility, possiblli- 
ty. 2 Calmuess, quietness, gentleness. 3 Af. 
fability, courteousness, kindness. 4 Pliable- 
ness, fiexiiility. 5 Prosperity, success. 6 Lan- 
guiiness. 7 Addibility. 8(MS) Readiness, 

soirbheas, -eis, s.m Prosperity, success, 2 Gen- 
tleness,docility. 3 Fair wind on the sea —Skye. 
4 Wind, fla: ulence-—-Arayll, 5* Easiness,quiet- 
ness. Saoghal fada is soirbheas ! long life and 
prosperitu ! là an t-soirbheis, the day of pros- 
perity ; s. math leat ! good speed to you ! cha 
"pn éirich s. leis. he will not prosper ; tha "n s. 
air caochladh, the fair wind is changed. Op- 
posite of doirbheas, 

»—— — —-ach, -aiche, a. Prosperous, successful, 
thriving, 2**l'air, as wind. 3 Breezy, 4 Fa- 
vourable. Gaoth sh.,a favourable wind; 
turus S3., @ prosperous journey. 

Boirbhich, pr.»!, a’ soirbheachadh, v.n. Prosper, 
succeed thrive. 2**Npeed. Ciamar a sh. leat? 
how did you succed ? soirbhichidh leis gach 
ni a ni e, eveything he dors s^ all prosper. 

»— idh, fut.a/?.a. of soirbhich, 

goirbhriste,** a, Duc ile. 

soirch,** a, Clear, bright. 2 Light, 8 Conspie- 
nous, 

soirche, comp. of sorcha. 

soirche,** &./, Clearness, brightness, light. 2 
Conspicuousness. 8 Joy, 

soircheachd,** et, Clearness, brightness, 

soircheal,** eil. s.m. Clearness, brightness. 

soire, see soir, 8.m. 

Een, æ. Abounding in sacks, bags, vessels, 

e, 

Bo;readh, seo solr, 

suireag, -eig, -au, s Jf dim, of solre. Little vessel, 
bottle or suck, 

solrcagaoh, -alcho,a, Pertaining to little vessels, 
bottles or sachs, 

solreanach, -aloi, s.m. Jolly, fat porgon, 

Selrcanach,** à, sev solunlonta, 

solroantn, dun, seo sulunionn, 

Solrcanta, «cinta, wu. sov 3aiunionta, 








, eg! 


goith!bhesehá 
golreit, -6, a7. Eaginoav of temper, &ecommorda- 


Aer coneíl]jatory disposition, (so-réite) 
noiralteach, aiche, a. Conoiliatory, ascormmta- 
ting. (mo-rditeach) 


solridh,** a, Convenient, 2 Agreeable, 

solridh,®* s, eee solrigh. 

solrigh,** s. Primrose. 

aoirionn, -inn, of. see soinnionn, 

soirionta, see soinnionta, 

soirmell, a. Harmonlously, 
soirmell, melodiously, 


Gu fonnmhorn^ch, 
harmoniously — Donn. 


Bàn, p. 35. 
séien Un db. sp -leidh, e.f, Baker's peel. 
soirthe, an. &8.f. see soire, 
sois,* -e, a, Fond of ease, snug. 
soise,"* s.f. Alteration, change. 
soise,* et Bolis or ball of fire moving majest)- 
cally iu the heavens, often neur the earth,sup- 
posed to presage the death of some personage 
or the fall of some nation. ‘These are very 
common in the Highlands. (soillse) 
soisealach,** a. Airy. 2 Hearty. S Proud, 
soisealta,* a. Fond of ease, effeminate, unmanly, 
—chd,* s.f.ind. Indulgence in ease, effem- 
nacv. 
soisgean (CR) s.m. Primrose—S, end of Arran. 
soisgeul, -eil, s.m. The Gospel. 2 Glad tidings, 
ach, -aiche, a. Evangelical. 2 Bringiug 
good news or tidings. 
————ach, -aich, 8.m. see soi 
soisgeulachd,** s. f. Evangelism, 
teaching. 2 Tale or tidings of joy. 
soisgeulaich,** v.n. Bring or bear good news. 3 
Preach the Gospel. 
— ——e,-an, s.m. Evangelist. 2 Bringer 
of good news. 
soisgeulta,** a, Evangelical. 
Soi-shinte, see so-shinte. 
soishion,** e, Freedom, privilege, (so-shion) 
soisich,* see soillsich. 
soisil,** a. Proud, haughty. 
soi-inn,* et, Taste, decency. 2tf Complacency, 
snugness, ease. 
each, a. Tasteful. 2 Snug. 
fsoisior,** a. Younger. 
soisle, s.f. Brightness. 
soislean,** -ein, s.m. Firm or bold standing. 
soislean, s. pl, The white feathery veniral fins by 
which the salmon balances itself. 
tsoistean, ein, s.m. Good habitation, residence. 
2 Sense, meaning. 
soithchean, (for soithichean) pl. of soitheash. 
so-ithe, o Eatable, edible. 9 Palatable. 
soitheach, Ach, -ichean, sn. Vessel of any kind 
in which meat, liquors,or anything is placed. 2 
Ship of any size. 8 Woodeu dish, pitcher. 
Ciùd nan soithichean, the désh-ctoth, 
8. crealha, «n earthenware vessel, 
8.-fuarachaidh, cooler, refrigerator, 
s.-fuail, a chamher-pot, 
s.-ionnlaid, @ basin, 
8.-teine, pot, pan, 
8, -t is, cenger, 
s.-ulsge, ewer, bucket, 
soitheachan, -ain, gan, Small dish or plate, 
soltheagan,** -ain e.m. Soft good-natured person. 
soitheamh, -eimhe, «&, Gentle, mild, affable, mod- 
eat, 2 Comely, fair, 3 Tractable, docile, ea- 
sily provailed upon, good-natured, tame, — 4 
Kasey done. bttPeacoanble, Duine s., a docila 
er tractable person ; mo laoghan a, siobhalta, 
my good-natured, civil lad, 
goltheamhachd, a. Eft, Duetility, traotability, 
deeility. QttPlacidnesa, 
goitheamha!eh,( MS) v.a. Plaoate, 
goithibh,* ace soitheamh, 


—— Gea0hd,* ave scitheamhackd, 





sgeulaiche. | 
evangelical 








- lt ee ee 


soithich 


sotthich, (gu)** adv. Badly. 

&oithichean, n.vl. of soitheach. 

eoithleag,** -eig, s.f. Circle. 

| an,** Ain, s.f. Little circle. 

ecithmheannach,** a. Covetous, (so-mhiannach) 

&oithneach,** a. Desirous. 

&oithnicn, v.a. Allure, entice. 

te.** past pt. Allured. 

soithsheamhach,( MS) a. Pacific. (so-shéimheach ) 
sO-ithte, see so-ithe. 

‘¢sol, s.m. The sun. 

&0l. adv. Ere, before that— Ross. 

wol,* s.m. Delight. 

&eola, see soladh.  9*f see so-lughadh. 

òia, (DU) s.m. Bottom thwart containing mast- 
step of a boat, 

eo-labhairt, -e, a. Expressible, easily spoken or 
pronounced. Opposite of do-labhairt. 

so-labharra,** a. Exorable. 

&o-labhrach, -aiche, a. Speaking with ease and 
fluency, affable. 

€0-labhrachd.** st Eloquence, affability. 

&o-labhradh,** a. see so-labhrach. 

sdlach,* -aiche, a. Highly delighted, jolly. 

soladh,(AC) -aidh, s. m. Broken food—whelks, 
cockles, limpets, mussels and other shellfish, 
broken and thrown into the sea to attract fish. 
Tuill solaidh, bait holes—hollows in the rocks 

repared to hold shellfish aud prepare bait. 
hey resemble cup cuttings, for which anti- 
quaries have mistaken them. 

eoladh,** .aidh, s.n. Profit. 

€9-lazhach,** a. Venial,pardonable, (so-lughach) 

————— -—d,** sf Venialness, pardonableness. 

solaidh, s. Advantage, good profit— Rob Donn. 

eolaimte,** a. Solemn. Gu s., solemnly. 
achd,** s, f. Solemnity. 

solair, pr.pt. a’ solar & a’ solaradh, v. a. 
solaraich. 

each, see solarach. 

eachd, see solarachd. 

solaithcach,** a. Venial 

edlamanta,** a. Solemn, solemnized. 

——— — chd,** s.f. Solemnity, solemnization. 

eolamh,** a. Quick, ready, dexterous. 

edlamuin, s.f. Solemnity. 

solar, -air, -an, s.m. Providing, preparing, pur- 
veying of useful things. 2 Things provided or 
furnished, provision. 3 Getting, providing, 
procuring, catering. 4*"*Forage. 5(MS)Gain. 
6**Shiftiny for. A’ s—-, pr.pt. of solair. 

solar, cont. for solaradh. 

solarach, -aiche, a. Provident, making provision, 
catering, purveying. 2 Industrious, 3 Frugal. 
Fear s., a provident man. 

—adh, -aidh, s.m. Providing, act of provi- 
ding, procuring or furnishing necessaries, ca. 
tering. A' s—, pr.pt. of solaraich. 

solarachd, s.f. Providence. 2 Business of a ca- 
terer, purveying. 

&olaradh, -aidh, s.n.& pr.pt of solair, see solar- 
achadh. 2 Provisions provided. 

&olaraich, pr pt. a solarachadh, v. a. Provide, 
gather, prepare. procure, cater, purvey, pro- 
vide accommodation. 2 Get, gain, acquire. 
3**Shift for. Sh. ij nead dhitb fhéin, she prom- 
ded a nest for herself ; a’ solarachadh lòin, pur- 
veying or catering provisions [*pr.pt. a’ solar.) 

solaraiche,** s.m. Provider, caterer, purveyor, 
forager. 

solaraichidh, fut.af.a. of solaraich. 

&olaraichte, pas? pt. ot solaraich. Provided, pro- 
cured, furnished, purveyed. 

solar-itheannaich, s.m. Ménu. 

solas, see solus. 

tsolas,*® -ais, s.m. Round: ball thrown into the 
ar 





2 Desire. 








see 











872 


solus We 


sòlas, -ais, s.m. Comfort, consolation, solace. 1 
Intellectual pleasure or gratification. 3 Che.er: 
fulness, contentment. 4 Joy, rejoicing, delijzht, 
calm luscious pleasure. 

——ach, -aiche, a. Comforting, comfortable 
giving comfort, pleasure or consolatioa. 2 
Comfortable, enjoying comfort or ease. 3 
Cheerful, content. 4 Joyful, causing joy or 
happiness. 5 Rejoicing, glad. 6 Pleasant to 
the mind, highly gratifying. 

solasach, see solusach 

sdlasachadh, -aidh, s.m. Comforting, act of com. 
forting, consoling, making glad, consolation. 
A’ s—, pr.pt. of solasaich., 

solasichd, s.f. Delectableness. 

solasaich, pr.pt. a'sólasachadh, v. a. Comfort, 
console, make happy or glad. 

idh, fut.a f a. of sólasaich. 

te, past pt. of sdlasaich. Comforted, 
consoled, made glad or happy, given contin. 
ued soothing joy. 

so-lasarach, ft -aiche, a. Inflammable. 

solasda, see solusach. 

chd, see solusachd. 

solastar,( AF) s.m. Starfish. 

so-leaghachd,ft s.f.ind, Liquation. 

so-leaghath,** see so-leaghta, 

so-leaghta, a. Fusible, easily melted. 2 Soluble. 

—— ch, -aiche, a. see so-leaghta, 

so-leizheas, a. Medicable, that may be cured. , 

so-leirseanta,(MS) a. Aspectable. d 

s»-léeire'nn,* a. Very visibie. 

so-lé:irsinnsachil. s.f. Obviousness. 

so-leiszealachi Tf s.f.::nd. Pardonableness, 

so-ledinte, see so-leónta. 

so-leonadh, see so-ieonta. 

so-leónta, a. Vulnerable. 

so-leudachaidh, a. Extensible. 

so-leughachi,ff s.f.ind. Legibility. 

so-leughadh, a. Legible. 

so-leugh'a, à. so-leuzhadh. 

soll,** s m. Bait for fish. 

sollach,** a. Jolly, stout, 2 Comely, handsome, 
personable. 

d,** s.f. Jollyness, stoutness, 
ness, personableness, handsomeness, 

sollain. -e, -ean, 8.f. Welcome. 2 R»joicing. 3 
**Carnival. 4 Gladness, mirth. Là s., a day 
of rejoicing. mirth or feasting—said of a day 
like Christmas Day or New Year's Day. 

sol mu'n, adv. Before, ere. 

so-loiszeach tt -eiche, a, see so-lasarach. 

EE d, et Combustibality. 

so-loisgte,** a. A:lustible. 

solt, prov. for sult. 

solta, a. see sultmhor. 9 Demuleent, mollient. 
3 Tender. 4(DMy) Meek, quiet, barmless— 
Lewis. Tha e cho s. ris an uan, he is as meek 
asa (amb. 

soltanas, -ais, s.m. Jollitv, mirth. 

so-lubacht,s. f. inl, Flexibility, elasticity. 2 
Exorableness. ( 

s30-làbadh, a. Flexib!e, elastic. 

so-làü^aidh, a. Flexible, 2 Exora*le. 

so-lughadh, a. Venial, pardonable. 

so-lnghta, see so-lughadh. 

so-lughtachd,tt s.f. Pardonableness, slightness, 

solumas.( CR? -a:s, ëm Abundance. 

solumta.fi a. So:e. nn, s»e solaimte & solamanta, 

solus, -uis, -an. sm. Light. 2 Light, as a iamo 
or candle, 3 Knowledge, information. 4 
Phase of the moon. 5 rarely, Quoit. 6 Rount 
ball tnrown into the air. An s. ur, the new 
moon ; an s. seo chaidh, the last moon ; athar- 
rachadh (or mùthadh) au t-soluis, @ change or 
phase of the moon ; s. Sathuirn a's t-fhogaar, 
bidb e aona chuid 'na righ air seachd no gabh- 

















2 Comeli- 





solus 


aidh e an cuthach seachd uairean, the harvest 
moon which comes in on a Saturday will eher 
be king of seven or go mad seven times—i.e it 
will bring in its train either very good or very 
bad weather S. is used adjectively in Ar- 
ran, as, uisge solus, clear water ; aodach solus, 
white or light-coloured clothing. — (** gives 7 
The moon, and 8 Heavenly body ] / 

solusach, -aiche, a. Full of light, Juminous,shin. 
ing. 





adh, -aidh, & m. Lighting, shining, 
kindlinz, 
d, $.f.ind. Luminousness. (soillseachd is 
better.) 
solusda, see solusach. 
-. ———Ch, -aiche, a. see solusach, 
solns-grabhaltach, æ. Photographie. 
solusmhor, -oire, sea solusach. 
solus-sionn, s.m. Electric lizht— Dain 1.GhobAa. 
solus-tharruing, v.a. Photograph. 
——--—, $., Photograph. 
soma,** et Flock of swans. 2 Learning. 
somichan,** -ain, s.m. Soft, good-natured, inno- 
cent person. 
eomailtean,( M9) s.m. Pith. 
somain,"* s.f. Wealth. 
each,** a. Rich, wealthy, 
somalta, -ailbe, a Bulky, large, 2 Gentle, mild, 
p'acid. 3 Liberal, generous. 4 Imprudent, 
5 Personable, comeiy. 6 Negligent.  7tfDull, 
beavy. | 
somalta,** a. Aspirate, 
somaltach, a. Decidiose, 
somaltachd, s.f.ind. Bulk, bulkiness, stoutness, 
largeness, 2 Geutleness, mildness, placidity. 
3 Liberality, generosity, generousness. 4 
Carelessnuess, indifference, negligence. 5 Lazi- 
ness. 6 Easiness. 7 QComeliaess, 8 Abun- 
dance. 9 Imprudence 
somaitas, s.m. s9 somaltachd. 
som ir, (AF) s.m. Wild sheep, chamois, 3 
so"mha, (AC) v.a. & n. Convert, convince. 2 Con- 
trovert, overturn, upset, ren.ler of no avail, 
. S0-mh»g3idh,11 a. Mockable, 
sòmhail, e a. see sùmhail. 
s0o-mhaithleachd, s.f. see so-leisgealachd. 
 So-mhutbhte, tf a. Ignoscible. 
so-mbaithteachail, ft a. Lgaoscible. 
so-mharbhachd,** s.f. Mortality. 
so-mharbhta,** a. Mortal. 2 Easily killed. 
So-inheallta, a. Deceptive. 
B0-mhealltachd, s.f. Deceptibility. 
s0-imn^asraichte,( MN) o Comprehensible. 
so-mherrbhidh, a. Digestible. 
so-mheudaen:s. -ais, 8.m. Addibility, 
so-mhiannach,** a. Desirable, 
S0-mhincachiaidh, a. Explicable. 
saóuihlach. see sümhlach. 
adh, -ailh, 8. m. & 
see sümhlacha:lh. 
sònhlachi, see «ümhlachd, 
Somh'aich, see sùmhlaich. 
| —ear, Bee «ümh;aichear, 
—idh, see sumhiaichidh. 
Ete, see sumhiaichte. 
somhian, -Ainé,a. Safe and sound, unhurt. 
somh'anach(,** s.f. Safeness, secureness, sound- 
Ness. 
— #0-mhothachaidh, a. Molliflable, 
. sómhrach,(MS3) s.m. Horsefoot. 
go-huinte ff a, Tractable, docile, 
indifferent. 3 Lazy. 
80-in'iàchadh.** a Commutablo. 
so-mhuthtachd, bt, Uhangeablonegs. 
soinolia, see somalta. 
vomuiitean,(OR) s.pl, Senses, wits—Skye, Ba tu 
&ncreuteir gun &, or nach tu a chaill do B., 














pr pt. of sómhlaich, 








2 Careless, 


873 


sonnadh 


(said to a stupid or careless person ) 
somult see somalta. 
somultachd, see somaltachd. 
son. em Sake, cause, account. 

advantage, stead. 

Air mo 8h -sa.on my accoun’, for my sake : 
air an s.-san, for their sake, in preparation for 
them ; dh'fnalbh e air mo sb.-sa, he went on my 
account, vn my place or stead, air mo sb. fnéin, 
for myself, for my own part, as for me , air 
na h-uile son [air na b-uile ear son—MM], 
Jor every reason ; air a sh. sin, nevertheless S 
air a son-se, on her acconnt ; air an son:san, on 
their account, 

Son, prep impr. & adv.(air son) adv. For,because 
of, on account of. 2 For the purpose of. 3 Be- 
cause, because that, 

Air sonl mo chodach-sa dheth, for my part 
of it; air son tighinn dhachaidh, for the purpose 
of coming home ; air soni dithis, as for two, in 
the matter of two; air sonh teicheadh, for the 
purpose of decamping, as œ reward or penalty 
for deserting ; air son dithis no triüir is coma 
leam có aca, as for two, or three 1 don't care 
as to which of them; air son} sin dheth,as far 
that matter ; c' arson? why ? wherefore? on 
what account ? air son siod fhéin, because I` 
judged it right ; air son falbh, as a reward for 
going, in order to go; Car son geo P why so I 
on whose account is this ? air son sgillinn, a3.to 
a penny, for a penny. (Son, where marked § 
above,—from * are mostly bad idiom influen- 
ced by for in English—M M. } 

tson, -din, s.m. Sound, voice. 2 Word. 3 Good, 
advantage. 4 Staxe, beam. 

tson,** a. ‘fall. 

sona, a. Lucky, fortunate. 2 Happy, in a stato 
of happiness, blessed, Is fèarr a bhitb s. na 
éirigh moch, luck is better than early rising( 3: 
s. bithidh tu is éiridh gu math dhuit, huppy 
shalt thou be and it shall be well with thee: ts 
s. a bhithinn-sa, happy would I be ; gu s. sò 
ach. happy and quite contented ; cha toir mnir 
no monadh a chuid o dhuine sona, neither 
sas nor mountains cam har the lucky. 

sonachas,(AC) -ais, s.m. Blissfulness. 

sonadh, see sona. 

sonairte, s.f. Strength, courage, 

sonann, -ainn, s.m. Fertile land, good soil. 

sonas, -ais, -an, s.m, Vexation, grief. 2 Passion, 
fit of passion, pet. Cuir s., vez, disoblige. 

SODAS, -ais, -an, s.m. Good fortune, prosperity, 
luck. 2Snecess, 3 Happiness, felicity, bliss, 
Sonas is àgh ort, success and prosperity to you; 
mo sh. fóiu, my own happiness ; sonas no don- 
aS, success or misfortune ; s. an lorg an caith- 
eimh, good luck follows the liberal ; sannt gun 
8., 6iridh an donas dba, hapless greed will not 
succeed, 

sonasach, -aiche, a. Happy. 
lucky 

sduasach, -aiche, a. Vexatious, grievous, ‘Q 
Easily vexed 38 Passionate, pettish. 

sonasan,(CR) Young frog in the tadpole stage 

—Skye & W. of Ross. 
sonn, -uinn, s.m, Stout man, 2 Hero,champton, 

3*Courier—Islay. Uamh an t-suinn, the hero’s 

cave, 

sonn, -uinn, s.m, Bait for fish, 2 Club, staff, 
cudgel, stake, beam. 8 Tree, 

sonn, v.a. Pierce, thrust. 2 Hew down. 8 Press, 
4 Oppress. 

sonnach, -aich, s.m, Palisade, 2 Peg, thick peg, 
8 Stout, ill-shaped person, 4 Ons le, fortress, 
6 Wall. Dail nan s., the plain of palisades, 

sonnadh, -aidh, a.m. Piercing, thrusting, acd of 
piercing or thrusting. 2 Act of UC E a down, 


2 Good profit, 


2 Prosperous, 


I 


sonnadh 


874 


sorchaich 


————————P———————————————— A o o € I ÓSUBBIM RI ttt 
$ Act of pressing upon or oppressing. 4 Con- | sopag,** -aig, s.f. Small bundleof straw. 2 One 


tention, strife. A's—, pr.pt. of sonn. 

8Sonnadh,** -aidh, 8.m. Fort, garrison. 

sonnag.(DC) s.f. Beehive chair, made of twist- 
ed «craw or sSea-bent — Uist. (sathag in Mu.) 

gounalta,* r. Liberal, hin lsome, very generous, 

chd,* &.£,ind. Liberality. 

sonn-b.roechan, 3. m. Gruel. 

sonn-mharcach, -aich, -aichean, s.m. Courier on 
horseback, post, messenger. 2 Aide-de-camp. 

sonnta, a. Heroic, courageous. 2**Confident. 3 
** Merry. 

sonnta, past pt. of sonn. 

&onntach, see sonata, 

sonntachd, s.f.ind. Boldness, heroism, courage. 
2**Coufilence, 3**Mirth. 

so-nochdadh,** a. Avowable. 

sonrach, -aiche, a. see sònraichte. 

sonrachadh, -aidh, s.m. Appvinting, act of ap- 
poiuting, choosing or ordaining. 2 Act of 
specifying, individualizing or particularizing. 
3 Intending, act of intending. 4 Arbitration. 
5 Noting, remarking 6 Determination. 7ft 
Marking. SffOrdering. 9 Pointing out, 10 
Appointment. A’ s—, pr.pt. of sònraich. "OG 
am sh., individualizing me, 

sónrachair,** s.m. Assigner, establisher. 

tsonraic, a. Righteous, 

sònraich, pr. pt. a’ sònrachadh, v.a. & n. Ap- 
point, ordain, fore-ordain,authorize. 2 Choose, 
specify, particularize, individualize. 3 Lntend. 
4 Note, remark. 5*Make a butt or tool of. 6 
Determine, Neach a sh. Dia ‘na iobairt- 
réitich, one whom God set forth as a propitia- 
tron. 

sonraicheam, 15t.sing. imp. of sònraich. Let me 
specify, &c. 2 Irish form of sonraichidh mi, 
Jut.aff.a. I will specify, &c. 

sonraichear, fut.pass. of sònraich. 

sònraichidh, fut.ajf.a. of sònraich. 

sònraichte, a. d past pt. of sònraich. Specific, 
special, notable, particular, novel, 2 Appoint- 
ed, specified, particularized, determined, or- 
daiued, fore-ordained, marked out. 3 Remark- 
ed. 4 Noted. Gu s., particularly ; gnothach 
s., a particular business ; air an là s., on the 
appointed day; sinagh a, a peculiar people ; 
duine 8., a cer'aia or notorious man ; bha adh- 
arc sh. aigo, he had a notable horn , gu s. an 
duina seo, particular/y this man. 

sonraichteachd,(MS) s.f.ind. Remarkableness. 

sòuruich, see sònraich. 

te, see sònraichte. 

sontach, æ. see sonnta. 

sonuige,** a. Lucky, propitious. 

so-oibrichte, a. Easily wrought, figurable, 

go-dilte, a. Drinkable, 

go-dlta, see so-oilte. 

sop, -uip, pl. -an & -uip, &.m. Wisp, loose bundle 
of straw or hay, 32 Loose or useless buneh of 
anything, 3 Uselessor cowardly fellow, 4** 
Top or crest of a hen or other bird, S, fodair, 
a wisp of straw ; 3, as gach sell, a wisp from 
every truss,—sald of those who have nothing 
but what they borrow ; (* said of those who 
court every one]; a relic, a (avern- or shop- 








sign, 

Sona, «aiche, a, Abounding in wisps of hay or 
straw, 2 Abounding in scattered straw or 
hay, 3 Cowardly, silly, 

gopachan,(DMK) s.m. Handful of fine heather, 
tied tightly together and ussd for scrubbing 
dishes, particularly milk-dishes —Caith ness 
SutA'd,, Gairloch, ée, (DU) small wisp of 
gtraw in which the ends of knittiug-needles 
are stuck, It js tied to the Knitter's belt or 
pinned to her drega—Gairteeh, 


drawn and combed out for thatching— Uist. 
3°* Well, 

sopan, -ain, -an, s. m., dim. of sop. Little wisp, 
little handful of hay or straw. S. saidhe, a 
wisp of hay. 

sopanacb, -aiche, @. see sopach. 

fsopar, prov. for tobar. 

8S»p-cheann,tt s.m. Bushy or uncombed head. 

sop-cheannach,--aiche, a. Having a bushy or une 
combed head of hair. 

Sso-phroinnte, d. see so-phronnaidh, 

s0-phronunaidh, o Friabie, easily pulverized. 

80-püronnta, d. gee so-phronnaidh. 

soplich, -aiche, a. see sopach. 2 Useless. 3 In- 
sign ficant, 

sop.ach, -aich, -aichean, s.m. Refuse of straw or 
provender, 

soplachan,(AC) -ain, 8. m. Wisp, tuft. 2 Suste- 
nance. 3 Handful of corn in ear given to à 
weak animal. 

soplas, s.m. Soap-suds. 

so-phdsaidh, a. Marriageable. 

80-phronntachd,(MS) s.f. Friability. 

Sop-reic, s.m. Sign of a tavernorinn. 2 Sign 
of a shop. 

sop-seilbhe, -an-seilbhe, s.m. Infeftment in house 
and land by the delivery of a wisp of straw to 
the entrant. 

sop-suiridhe,(DMy) s.m. Love or courting wisp, 
thrown at a person to attract his attentions, 

sòr, pr.pt. a’ sòradh, v.a. Hesitate, pause, delay. 
2 Grudge, give unwillingly. 3 Shun, avoid. 4 
Spare. 5 Refuse. 6**Scruple. Cha sh. e do 
mharbhadh, he will not hesitate to kili you, 

sor, $.m. Stop, hesitation. 

tsor,(AF) s.m. Louse. 

sorach,** a. Hesitating, scrupulous. 

sorachadh,** -aidh, s.m. Act of acervating, ace 
cumulation. 

sorachag,(AF) s.f. Jackdaw, jay. 

sorachan, see sorchan. 

sorachar, see sorchar. 

sorachda, see sorachta, 

sorachba,** a. Acerrated, accumulated,hea 

sòradh, -aidh, s.m. Hesitatiug, act of hesitating, 
delaying, pausing. 2 Grudging, act of grudg- 
ing. 3 Shunning, act of shunning. 4 Sparing, 
act of spariug. 5 Hesitation, delay. 6 Scru- 
pulousness, A’ s—, pr.pt. of sor. 

soradh,( MS) &.m. Demur. 

soraich,** v.a. Accumulate, heap 

soraideadh,** -idh, s.m. Salutation. 

soraidh, $.f. Farewell, blessing, compliments. 2 
Success, health, happiness. 3 Salutation, S 
slàn do 'n Gàidheal ghasda, success and h»altA 
to the handsom: d a leat, a ghràidh ! fare 
well, my beloved! thoir mo sh, le dùrachd, give 
my best respects, my sincere blessings. 

soraidh,** a. Happy, successful. 

tsorb, v.a. Contaminate, pollute. 

tsorb, -oirbe, a. Foul, dirty, 

+——, -oirb, s.m. Fault, blemish. 

sorbieh,** a, Foul, polluted, dirty, 

wilh,** aidh, am, Polluting. 

gorbaicu,** v.a. Pollute. 

gorb-aoireadas,** ais, $m. Satire, lampoon, 

sorb-ciiàinaadh,** -aidh, s.m, Satire, lampoon, 

tsorb-chàrn,** -ohairo, 5.7m, Puaghill. 

sorc,** san. Delight, pleasure, 

soroair,** -ean, s.m. Cylinder. 

sorcaireach,** a. Cylindrical, 1 

Vere d &. m, Pedestal, gantry. 9 Kminenoe, 

aap. 

soroha, soirehe, a. Light, bright, clear, oonspious 

ous, mauifest. Opposite of doron. 


2 Faulty. 





@orchaion, e.a, Kalighten, make clear, light ag 


INIVERSITY OF 


_ gdoruan sgreabach,(DMy) s.m. 


sorchaich 


manifest. 2 Heap up. Opposite of dorchaich. 

sorchaichidh, fur of o. of sorchaich. 

sorchaichte, past pt. of sorchaich. Enlightened, 
made clear, Debt or manifest 2 Heaped up, 

gorchàin,*^ 3. Satire, lampoon, scurrilous 
rhyme, slander. 

sorchan, -ain, pl. -an & -ain, &.m. Rest support, 
that on which anything leans or rests, 2 Stool, 
footstool, trestle. 3 Light-stand, peerman. 4 
++Place of rest. 5 Little eminence, hillock. 6 
*Bracket. 7 Bolster of a cart 8(MS) Horse- 
block. 9 Fireplace of a still (see p. 730.) 10 
Little one. 11 Piace for ball or cricket. S.- 
leigidh, o trestle or gantry. 

sorchanach, -aiche, @. Having rests or supports. 
2 Like a stool or trestle. 3 Having little emi- 
nences or hillocks. 

gorchan-cuigeil, s.m. Stand’of a distaff. 

sorchar,(AC) s. m. Brightness. 2 Clear man. 3 
Lightener. S. nan reul, lightener of the stars. 

gord, see sürd. 

sordail, see sürdail. 

&ordan,( AF) s.m, Animal. h, 

80-reamhrachadh,a. Coagulable, easily fattened. 

so-reamhraichte,a. Coazulable, easily thickened 
or fattened. 

so-réite, s.f. Propitiation, expiation. 

80-réiteach, @. see so-réitichte, 

go-réitichte, a. Easily arranged or adjusted. 2 
Easily reconciled, reconcilable. 3 Easily dis- 
entangled, as a string. 

80-riaghladair,** s. m. Mild governor, lenient 
ruler, 20ne who rules with facility. 

so-riaghladh, o Easily governed, easily manag- 
ed, governable, manageable. 

g0-riaghlaichte, see so-riaghlaidh, 

go-riaghlaidh, a. Governable, manageable. 

so-riaghailtiehte, see so-riaghlaidh, 

so-riaghluichte, see so-riaghlaidh. 

sorn,(AF) s. Eagle. 

sòrn, -üirn, s.m. Snout. 2 Flue of a kiln or oven. 
3 Coneavity. 4, DC) Kiln for drying corn— Uist, 
5**Disagreeable visage. 6 Hearth—Sar-Obair. 
7 Fireplace of an oven or kiln. S.-rac, an oven- 
rake or baker's peel ; damh-süirn, @ ki/n-joist, 
lantern of a kiln. (gen. soirn.**) 

sòrnach, -aice, a. Long-chinned. 2 Having a 
snout. 3 Pettish, ill-natured. 4 Having a 

flue or chimney. 

seornach,(J McF) s.f. Great heap of boulders at 
the foot of a precipice. Is iomadh linn o 'na 
thuit an t-sdrnach seo gu léir it is many gen- 
erations since the whole of this heap of boulders 
fell—Syeul.-nan-caol, p.125. 

Bornag, -aig, -an, EE, dim. of sòrn. Little kiln, 
2(DC) Shagreen ray (fish.) 

sórnair,** sm. Baker. 2 Long-chinned person. 

} 3 Peevish fellow. 

gdrnaireachd,** s.f. Business of a baker. 

sornairean, n.pl. of sornair. 

= gornan, -ain, -an, s.m. Thornback (fish.) 2 Small 
skate. 3fT Little flux. 4(DO) Ray, shagreen 
ray—Uist. 5 Little flue. 6 Little snout, 
Little chin. 81liliock. 9* Young skate. 

Sornanach,** a, Abounding in skate (fish.) 2 
Of, or like skate. 3 Having little hillocks, 

gornan biorach, ¢.m. Sharyp-8nouted white skate 
— Lewis. 

sgòrnan busach, s.m. White round skate— Lewis. 

Rooker (fish.) 

eorn-aoil, s.m. Lim?-kiln. [McL & D gives s.f.) 

so-roghnuichte, see so-roghnuidh., 

s0-roghnuidh, a. Eligible, preferable, excellent. 

s0-roinnzalh,** a. Divisibie. 

£o-roinnte, a. Divisible, easily divided, 

BOTS, see seòrsa. 

sòrt, Dirt, s.m. Sort, kind, species. 


875 


so-thaoscaidh 


EE s.m. (cies 2 Praise, glory. 

sorthan,** .ain, s.m. Reproof. 2 Prosperity. 

soruidh, see soraidh. Jb Mois 

so-ruigheachd,** a, Approachable, attainable, 
easily reached. 

8o-ruigsinn,** o Attainable, approachable. 

so-ruitheadh, a. Glib, 

sos, -Ois, s.m. Any unseemly mixture of food, 2 
Coarse mess. 3tf Large bellyful of food, 4 
Food for dogs—W, of Ross. 

S08,** s. m. Cessation, giving over. 2 Know- 
ledge. 

sosadh,** -aidh, s.m. Dwelling, abode. 

sosar,** a. Younger, youngest, r 

so-syaoileadh, tf a. Expansiblo. 

so-8zaoilte, æ. Dissoluble. dy 

so-sgaradh, a. Refrangible. | 

so-sgitheachaidh, o. Fatiguable, + 

so-sgoilte, @. Fissible. | 

so-sgoltadh, see so-szoltaidh. 

Sso-sgoltaidh, a. F'issible. 

so-sgriosadh,** a, Consumable, 

so-shailleadh, a, Conditive. 

so-shamhlachacdh,** a. Comparable, applicable, 
easily matched, 

KEE @. Applicable. 2 Coagula- 

e, 
so-shamhlachail,(MS) a. Comparative. 


80-shamhlachd, s.f ind. Imitability. 


So-shamhluichte, o. Applicable. 

so-shaoilsinn, a. Conceivable. 

so-shaoraidh, a. see so-fhuasglaidh, 

so-sharuchaidh, ff see so-sgitheachaidh. 

so-sharuichte,a, Couquerable. 2 Easily fatigued, 
3 Easily oppressed. 

so-sheachauta, a. Avoidable, easily shunned. , 

EE chd,** s.f. Avoidableness, ^ 

so-sheachnach,** see so-sheachanta, X 

so-sheachnadh, see so-sheachanta. 

so-sheachnaidh, see so-sheachanta, 

So-sheargta,** a. Adustible. 

Sso-sheasamh,11 a. Maintainable. 

so-sheilbhichte,(MS) a. Appropriable, 

so-shedlaidheachd. $t s.f.ind. Naviyableness, 

posset, a. Navigable, easily directed or guid- 
ed. 

so-shineadh,** a. Easily stretched, 

so-shinte,** a. Ductile, as wire, easily stretched. 

achd,** s.fiind. Duciility. 

sosmaid,(DC) s. m. Hash of meat, mixture of 
fragmenis of f ol—A rgyll. 

s0-smuaineachaidh,ff see so-shaoilsinn. 

so-smuainteachadh, a. Conecivable, 

——— — — — --— -aidh, s.m. Concevivablenes3, 

sosraich,(CR) s. Food for catule— GairlocA, 

Tsosta,** s.m. Abode, dwelling-houga, 

sostan, -ain, s.n. Noise. 9 Cry. 

ach,** a, Noisy, clamorous, 

achd,** et Noisiness, clamvorousnesg, 

so-stidraidh, e, @, Governable, manageable 

so-streapaidh, tt a. Mountable, 

g0t,** v.a. Boil anything overmuch, 














7|sotail,* oo & n. see ivan sodal, 


sotal, ail, sm. 899 so:lal, 


—ach, -aiche, a. see sodalaoh, 


—— uüchd,* &./. see sodal, 

——Aich, see sodalaioh. 

Both, sve Séch, 

so-thagrallücachi $? 2./.ind, Justiflablenega, 
sdthall, sve sòghail, 

go-thaiseachaidh, tf a. Molliflable, 
sothaisgean, ges suiegeau, 

sothan,** s m, Spruce fellow, 

go-thaomadh,* a, Exhaustible, 

su-thaosga, à, Exbaustibie, thas may ba drained, 
so-thos ;a/lh, gee so-bhaosgai 


so-tbaosgaildh, o Exhaustibi$ tann may Ba 


| phate comes me. - 


~~ go-thaosgaidh 876 spag 
drained spadair, ean, s.m. Fop. 2 Braggart. 3ttKiller. 
so-tharruing, see so-tharruingte. É 4tfDuli person.  5**Bruiser pugilist. o H 
so-Lharruingte, a. Easily drawn. Dandy. 7 Feiler. § [* spadaire Terribie 
so-thath,** a, Associable. swenarer, E . 


so-theagaisgte, a. Docile, teachable 
so-theagasg,“* a. Easily taught, docile. 
S0-theanndadh,** a. Easily turned 
so-thioundach,ft see so-iompachailh 
so-thionnsgalach, ff -aiche, a Contrivable. 
so-tholiadn,** a, Pertorable, easily bored. 


so-thollaidh, a. {{Permeable. 2 Boreable, per- 


forable 
80-thollta, a. Boreable 
so-thomhaiseachd If sf Measurableness, 
so-thomhasachd,ftf s.f Measurableness 
so-threabhach, -aiche, a. Arabie 
so-threabhaich, e a. Arable. 
so-thredruichte, a. Easily led or directed. 


so-thruaillidh, e, a. Corruptable, easily corrupt- 


ed. 
so-thruaillidheachd, sud. Corruptibleness 


so-thuigse, s.f.ind. Quickness of comprebension 


or understanding. 
so-thuigseach,(MS) a. Comprehensible. 
gso-thuigseachd, s.f.ind. Perspicuity. 


so-thuigsinn, a. Intelligible, easily understood, 


apprehen sible. 

so-thuigsinneachd, s.f.ind. Perspicuity. 

sotlaidh,** s.f. Harm, damage. 

——,** a. Bad, naughty. 

sotsach,** o Plump, fat, chubby. 

sotsag,** -aig, s.f. Plump young girl. 2 Pillion. 

so-uisgeach, a. Waterish,that may be moistened, 
moist, watery, apt to be moist, easily watered. 

so-uisgichte, see so-uisgeach. 

so-uisgidh, æ. see so-uisgeach. 

S0-ürachaidh, a. Renewable. 

8pac,** A, s.m. Sudden exertion, asin wrestling. 
S. cleachdaidh, wresiling, a wrestling-match ; 
tha iad a’ cur s. cleachdaidh, they are wrest- 


ling. 

spacadh,(CR) -aidh, s.m. Wrestling— Perthshire. 
Tha iad rs, or tha iad a cur spacaidh, they 
are wrestling. 

spachadh,** -aidh, s.m. Plucking by the roots. 

spad, pr. pt. a’ spadadh, v.a. Kill, knock down 
at a blow, fell. 2 flatten, strike flat to the 
ground. 

spad,* -aid, s.m. Gaelic spelling of spade. [**s.7.] 

Tspad, -a, -an, s.m. Clod, lump, sod. 

spad, a. Flat. 2 Dead. 3 Lumpish. 4 Flapping, 
hanging down. 

tspadach, -aiche, a. Full of clods. 
3 Stupid. 

spadach,** o Like, or full of, elods or turf. 2 
Like a spade, of a spade. 3 Felling, knocking 
down. 4 Flatvening. 65 Prone or ready to 
bruise. 6 Ready to strike or fell to the ground. 

spadadh, -aidh, s.m. Kilhog, Knocking down, 
felling. 2 Flattening, act of flattening,making 
flat. 3 Bruising. 4 Digging with a spade, A’ 
s—, pr.p!. of spad. 

spadag, -aig, Ap. s. f. Filip. 2 Quick blow, 
knock-down blow, 3 Oath 4Quarter of a 
limb of an animal cut off. 5trifam. 6**Kiud 
of play. TttLight blow. 

spadag, s./. Limb. Cha'n 'eil aig’ ach a cheithir 
spadagan fhéin, he has only his own four limbs 
—said of a man without encumberance— West 
coast of Ross. 

spadagach,tta. Abounding 1n light blows, or 2 
in quarters of animals, &c. 3**Fillipng. 4** 
Knocking down. 

8padaiche,** an, s.m. Feller. 

spailaidn, fut Off o of ~pad. 

spadail, -e, a. see spaideil. 

; gesing. of spadal, 


2 Sluggish. 


2 Bruiser, pugilist. 
Shall Knock duwn, 





Digitized by 
NTERNET AR 


LC HIV 


e & i 














eachd, s.f.ınd. Foppery. 2 Boasting, nabit 

of boasting gasconade. 3 Killing, slaughter. 
ing. 4 Bruising, pugilism 5 Frequent or con- 
tinued felling, Knocking down, 

spadal, -ail. an s.m. Paddle. 2 Plough-staf, 
for removing adhering earth 

s ar @ Pertaining to a paddle or plough- 

staff. 

spadalachd.(MS) s.f. Airiness. 

spadanach,** -aich, s.m. Sluggard. 

— — — —,** aiche, a. Slow § sluggish. 
spadanta, Sainte, a. Mean, niggardly 2 Slug. 
gish. slow 3 Benumbed.  4*ttDull, heavy 
spadantachd,ff s.f Meanness niggardliness, 2 

Sluggishness, laziness, slowness 
spadar,** fut. pass. of spad 
Lee) 8.f. Splay-foot. 
sole. 





2 Flat foot, plain 





—ach, -aiche, a. Splay-footed. 2 Clumsy. 

3 Plain-soled. die? d 

ach, -aich, s.m Splay-footed person 

Spad-chluas, .aise, -an, s.f Dull ear. 2 Flap- 
ping, hanging ear, flat ear. 

spad-chluasach, -aiche, a. Flat-eared. 2 Dull of 
hearing. 

--—————, -aich, s.m. Flat-eared person 2 
Deaf person. 

Spad-choisbheart,** s. Gaiters. 

spad-chos,: see spad-chas. 

spad-fhacal, -a1l, s.m. Vaunting expression, boast, 
rhodomontade. 

spad-fhaclach, -aiche, a. Vaunting, boasting,gas- 
conading. 2 Ostentatious. 

spad-fhaclair, s.m. Gasconader, braggadocio. 

spad-fhéath,(DC) s.m. Flat calm—A rgyll. 

spadh,* v.a. Jerk, twitch. 

spadh, -a, -an, s.m. Swathe of mown grass. 

spadhach,** a. In swathes, as mown grass. 2 
Having a good swathe. 

spadhadh, -aidh, pl. -an & -annan, s.m. Strong 
and quick pull when rowing or mowing. 2 Lhe 
utmost extent of the arms when stretched out. 
3 What grass is cut by one stroke of a scythe, 
layer of mown grass, swathe of grass. 4ttNpace 
from which aswathe of grass is cut.—Perth- 
shire, W. of Ross-shire, &c. 4 Bout or course 
by which a swathe is cut. 5 Elasticity. ott 
Pith. 7* Jerking, twitching, twitch. 

spad-phluic, s.f. Blub cheek, chubby face. 

—— -—each, -eiche, a. Blub-cheeked, chub- 
by faced. 

— — — ——each, -eich, s.m. Blub-face:l person, 
chubby-cheeked person. 

spadrach, s.m. Attention to dress—SutA'd. 

spad-shroin, -shrona, s,f. Flat nose. 

— ———--—each, see spad-shronach. 

spad-shrónach, -aiche, a. Flat-nosed. 

s.m. Flat-nosed person. 

spadta, past pt. of spad. Killed, knocked down 
at a blow, felled. 2 Flattened, laid flat. 

spadte, see spadte, i 

spad-thalamh, -thalmhaion, s.m. Unpcoductive 
ground, fallow ground. 

sp.d-thinn,** og, Apoplectic. 














spad-thinneas, -eis, s.m. Lethargy. 2 Apoplexy, 


3 Epilepsy (falling sickness.) 
—ach, -aiche, a. Apoplectic. 








spàg,** s.f. Fold of the leaf of a book, caused by 


improper usage. 2 Distortion of a shoe occa- 


s.oned by walking awry. 
spag, -aig, -an, s.f. Claw, 2 Paw. 3 Club-foot. 
4 Limb of an anal. 5**Foot of à cloven- 


6** Long flat foot, plain 


Original from 


footed quadruped. 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS Al 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 








ba dee gu 


TA 


rM Wer 


1 


~~ 


a 


= 
e 4 
po Ow TEN, 


BA 


epàg 


sole. 7** in derision, Clumsy foot, 8 Stilt of 


877 


spailpire 
3**Petticoat. 


a plough. 9 Ham. Oscionn a spagan, above | spaidhleireachd,tt s.f. Unnecessary climbing fid. 


her feet ; s..cüirn, the beam of a Sledge or 
waggon ; spagan dubha, hams dried in smoke, 

epàg, v.a. Make awry, distort anything. 2 Fold 
up the leaves of a book, 3 Distort a shoe. 

spàgach, -aiche, a, Uttering words indistinctly. 
2ttHaving along chin. 3**Folded up, as the 
leaves of a book by improper usage.  4** Dis- 
torted, as a shoe. 
each, -aiche, a. Clawed, having claws. 2 
Pawed, having paws. 3 Walking awkwardly. 
4 Having awkward legs or feet 5 Distorted, 
turned awry. 6 Club-footed. 7 Broa«d-footed. 
8 Out-toed. 9 Like or pertaining to hams, 

spàgach,* -aich, s.f. Club-footed female. 

spagada-gliog,** s. Balderdash, ostentation, 
gasconade, S. Chloinn Domhnuill, the Mac- 
Donald swagger. 

spàgadh, -aidh, -ean,s.m.Obliquity of the mouth. 

spagadh, -aidh, s.m. Distorting, act of distorting. 
A’ s—, pr.pt. of spag. 

spagair, -e,-ean, s.n. An awkward-footed fel- 
low. 20ne who walks awkwardly. 3 Flat- 
footed person. 4 Club-footed person. Stt 
Clumsy -footed fellow. [*nom. -e.] f 

-——-eachd,** s.f. Awkward, sprawling gait, 

Se s. m, Little grebe, see spag-ri- 

n. 

spagh, see spadhadh. 

spaghadh, see spadh & spadhadh. 

spagluinn, -e, s.f. Ostentation, show, conceit: 
bombast. 2* Attitude of having the arms a- 
kimbo and the foot stretched out. 3* fool’s 
pride. [*spagloinn] 

—each, -eiche, a. Ostentatious, showy, 

eonceited, bombastic. 

each,** s.m. 





person. 
—eachd, s.f. see spagluinn. 





Ostentatious, conceited 





Spàg-nam-mionaidean, s. f. Minute-hand of a 
timepiece— W. coast of Ross. 

gpàg-ri-tón,fl s.f. Little grebe, dabchick—podi- 

[**culymbus auritus) 


ceps minor. 





P i 645. xum a 

id, -e, pl. -eachan, Gaelic spelling of spade, 
e 2**Clod. RI KE 
——, gen.sing. of spad. 

T——. $.f. Drug. 2 Sluggard. 3 Eunuch. 4 Car- 


rion. [ fruitful. 
¢spaid, a. Dull, heavy. 2 Dead, insipid, 3 Un- 
spaide,*" s.f. Show, ostentation. 2 loppery. 3 


Slug gishness. 
spaideal, eil, s.m. Spatula. 2**Slice. 
dle. 4 Plough-staff. 
———ach, -aich, s.m. Baw-cock, spark, gay 
young man. 
æ achd, s.f.ind. Conceitedness, showiness, 
foppishness, gaudiness, 2**Sluggishness, 
spaideantachd,** $.f. Obtuseness. 
spaideil, -e, a. Weli-dres«ed, conceited, beanish, 
ri kee gaudy, showy, proud. 2**Sluggish. 
spaid-fhion,** -fhiona, s.m. Flat or dead wine, 
spaidhe, 8, Slide. 
idh-ilearachd, see speileireachd. 
spaidhir,* -e & -dhreach, pl.-ean, s.f. Pooket- 
hole of a petticoat, placket. 2 Flap of trousers, 


3 Spad- 


Digitized bry 
SY ea 
1 LJ A PS di 1 a 
WTERNET ARCHIV 


II) 


getting. 

spaidir,* v.a. Scatter carelessly. 

spaidreach,* -eich, s.f. The thing scattered, the 
state of lying here and there, 

spaidsear, see spaisdear. 

spaidsireachd, see spaisdearachd, 

spaidsirich, see spaisdirich. 

spaid-thalamh,"* -thalmhainn, s.m., Unproduct- 
ive ground. 

spa'g, -e, -ean, $.f. Wry mouth. 2 Long chin. 

spaig,** s.f. Lame leg. 

spail, v.a. Swaddle, swathe, wrap up. 

spailleach, see spaoileach. 

—aih, see spaoileachadh. 
spailleachdalachd, s.7.ind. see spailleichd. 
sprilleadh,** -idh, s.m. Check, 2 Abuse. 3 Fall. 
spàilleadh, see spaoileadh. 
spailleichd, -e, s.f. Vain-glory, boasting, osten- 

tation, conc»itedness, foppery. 
spailleichdeach,** a. see spailleichdeil. 
spailleichdear,** s.m. Coxcomb. 
Spailleichdear, -ir, -ean, s.m. Boaster. vain -fel- 
low, fop, ostentatious man, vaunter, egotist. 
——— ach, -aiche, a. Coxcomb-like. 
spailleichdeil,-e, a. Vain-glorious, ostentatious, 
conceited, foppish. 
spaillich, see spaoil. 
spaillichdealachd,** s. 7. Vain-gloriousness, os 
tentation, conceitedness, foppery. 


spailp, -ean, s.m. Pride, spirit, courage, bold- 
ne:s. 2 Conceit, self-conceit. 3 Foppish young 
man, bean. 4* Airs of importance. 5** Ar- 
mour, belt, 6**Kiss. 7 Lie. [**spealp.] 8** 
Attitude of the foot stretched out as of a self- 
important fellow. (** gives s.f. & gen. -e.} Cha 
ruig thu leas a bhith 'cur s. ort rium-sa, you 
nered not assume such airs in my presence ; 
shiubhail mi cian leat air m'eolais,agus spailp 
de ’n stròic air m’ aineol, I have truvelled far 
with you in parts known to m», and a credit- 
able length of the journey where I was not ac- 
quainted.— Agus ho Mi ora. 

spailp,** a. Notable. 

spailp, v.n. Strut, walk proudly or affectedly. $ 
Stamp authoritatively with the foot in oom- 
manding, 

spailpair,* see spailpean, 

spailpe, sf, see spailpeis 

spailpeach, -eiche, o. see spailpeil. 

spailpeachd.tt s.f. Ostentation. 

spailpealh, -idh, s.m. Strutting, aot of strutting 
or walking proudly. 2'Act of stamping author- 
itatively. A’ s—, pr.pt. of spailp, 

spailpean, -ein, -an, &m, Fop, benu, 2 Mean in» 
significant fellow. 8 Oonoeited fellow, spal- 
peon. 4**Intruder, 6** Rascal, 

spailpeanach, -niche, a. Beauish, foppish, 8 
Insignificant from vanity or ooneelt, 

— — d, s.f,ind. Yoppishness, beauishness, 
2 Silly vanity, 

sprilpeanta, a. see spailpeil, 

spailpear,** -eir, “an, 8, M, Beau, fap, spruce 
fellow, 2 Intruder, 

spailpearra, @, see spallpell, 

nh sn., gee spailpean, 

— — — ohi, s. find, Ooneeitedness, toppish» 
ness, 2 Hablt of silly boasting op vain-glor. 
ious talk, 

sp^ilpeag, -elg, a.m, Stareliness, ` 

spailpeil, «e, @, Uonevited, foppish, beauial 
spruce, 2 Boasting, vain-gloyjous, silly, 
Walking proudly, strutting, 4 ‘Notable, 

fal per, wan, Wee eil ge (?-air ] 


(spaoil.) 











3 


spailpeis, x, f, Self-conceit, 
epallpire,* seo apailpean, 


spailpire&chd 


878 ! 


—— -o 


o» o sg 


spailpireachd,* s.f. Self-importance. 2 Import- | spairteachd, s.f. Frequent splashing, daubing or 


ant airs of a silly person. 

spain, -e, pl. -ean & -eacnan, $. f. Spoon. Làn- 
spàine, snoonful. 

spain-aoil,** s.f. Trowel. 

8pàia-bhróg, et Shoe-lift, shoe-horn. 

spàineach, -eiche, a. Of or belonging to spoons. 
2 Like a spoon. 

spaineachan, n.pl. of spain. 

spàineag, -eig, -an, s. f., dim. of spain. Little 
spoon. 2{ispoonful. 

ach, a. Of, or belonging to, little spoons. 

spàinean, n.pl. of spain. 

epàinneach, see spainteach. 

&pàinteach, -ich, s.n. & f. Spaniard, long kind 
of fowling-piece understood to have been made 
in Spain. 2 Spanish sword, toledo. 3 Spoon- 
ful. Is lìonmhor s. air taobh cli aca, many a 
sword hangs by their side; s. imo, a spoonful 
of butter ; lann Spàinteach (a.), a toledo. 

epairis,* s,f. Conceitedness, foppishness, conduct 
or attitude of having the hands in the trou- 
sers’ pockets. 

gpairiseach, -eiche, a. see spairisteach. 

d, see spairisteachd. 

spàinn,** v.n. Strive, struggle, wrestle. 

spàirn, -e, s.f. Effort, hard struggle, violent ex- 
ertion. 2 Striving, contest, conflict. 3 Emu- 
lation, rivalry. 4 Pain, agony. 5 Difficulty. 
6 Stress, violence, force. 7**Log of wood. 8** 
Wrestle. Chas. sin orm, that is no hard task 
to me; ni mi sin gun S, I can manage that 
without an effort ; s. a’ bhàis, the death-agony; 
s. nan laoch, the struggle of the heroes. 

gpàirneach,** a. Emulous, causing emulation. 
2 Struggling, striving, making an effort. 3 
Rivalry, 4 Wrestling. (also spàirneil] 

spàirneachd, s.f. see spairnealachd, 

Spàirneadh,** -eidh, s.m. Wrestling. 2 Contest. 
exertion. 

Spairneag,** -an, &.f. Conch. 

-— — Bh, -aiche, æ. Shelly. 

spairneag-bàirneach,* s. Limpet. 

Bpàirnealachd, s.f.ind. Struggling, wrestling, 
continued and hard struggle. 2 Difficulty. 3 
Uneasiness. 4**Emulation, rivalry. 

Spairisteach, -eiche, a. Beauish, foppish, gaudy. 
2 Arrogant, conceited, strutting, showy. 

-——, -eich, s.m. Beau. 

-—d, s.f.ind. Foppishness, gaudiness. 2 
Arrogance, conceitedness, strutting gait. 
spairneag, s.f. Shell. 

--—ach, æ. Shelly. 

Spàirneil, -e, a. Making great efforts, struggling, 
emulous, striving, contending. 2 Enduring 
agony. 3 Causing agony. 4 Laying stress 
upon anything. 5 Using strength or force. 6 
Difficult, arduous, troublesome. 7 Requiring 
struggles or efforts, 

gpàirniche, $ m. Striver. 

spairnidh, fut.af.a. of spàirn. 

82airt,** a. Thick. 

spairt, -e, -ean, s.f. Turf, clod. 2 Splash of wa- 
ter. 3 Drop, least drop of any liquid. 4** 
Violent knocking down. 5**Smash, smashing. 
6**Daub, daubing. 7tfPlaster. 8**Inspissa- 
ted fluid. Le spairtibh ùire, with clods of dust. 

spairt, pr. pt. a' spairtealh, v.a. Plaster, daub 
over, as with lime or clay. 2 Splash with wa- 
ter. 3 Spatter, bespatter. 4 Pelt. 5**Knock 
down, throw to the ground with viulence, 61 
Brain, 7**5mash 

&pàirte, past pt. of spàrr. l'astened, fixed, wedg- 
ed in, bolted, thrust, jammed. 

spairteach,* -eiche, qa. Thick, as cream. 211 
Daubing. 31ff Splashing. GT Abounding in 
eleda. ottin large drops. 6**Smashing. 

















smearing. 2**Smashing. 

spairteadh, -idh, s.m. Daubing, act of daubing. 
2 Splashing, act of splashing. AT s—, pr. pt. 
of Spairt. [see spultadh.] 

spairtidh,tt-e, a. Tart, acid, alum-like. 

tspaisd,* v.n. see spaisdirich. 

spaisdear, -ir, -an, s. m. Saunterer, stroller 
rambler. 

spaisdearach, -aiche, a. Sauntering, strolling, 
walking, parading, rambling. 

»* s.m. Walk in a garden, promen- 








ade. 





——d, s. f. Walking, act of walking, 
strolling, sauntering, promenading, parading 
for pleasure. 2**Airing. 3 Kin of tune in 
ceól-mór. A’ s—, pr.pt. of spaisdirich. Tha 
mi dol a ghabhail ceum s., I am going for a 
stroll ; àite-s., a promenade. 

spaisdir," see spaisdirich. 

ich, pr. pt. a’ spaisdireachd & a’ spaie- 
dearachd, v.n. Walk, saunter, strut along, 
walk proudly, ramble, walk for pleasure, 
spaisdreach,* s.m. see spaisdearach. 

—— d, see spaisdearachd. 

spaisdrich, see spaisdirich. 

VERD -ein, 3.5. Term of contempt for & 

oy. 

spàl, -àil, -an, s,m. Wearer's shuttle, 

spàl, -a, -an, s.m. see spathalt, 

spalach, -aiche, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to 
shuttles. 2 Like a shuttle. 

spaladair, -ean, s.m. Shuttle-maker. 

spalag, -aig, -an, s.f. Cod or husk of any legu- 
minous vegetable, as a peaor bean. 2 Stroke 
of an oar in rowing. 3 Piece of dried bark. 4 
ttsmall spoon. 

spalagach,** a. Podded, having a large pod or 
husk. 2 Pertaining to pods or husks. 

spalagan, s.m. Oar-stroke. 

spàlan, -ain, s.m, see spalag. 

tspall,** v.a. Beat, strike. 

spalla,**s. Wedge, fragment of stone used in 
building. 2 Pinning in building. 

spalladh, see spalla. Y 

spallair,** -ean, s.m. Espalier, 

spalp, see spailp. 

-——adh, see spailpeadh, 

spalpair,* see spailpear. 

spang, -aing & -a, pl.-an, $.f. Any small thin 

late of metal. 2 Anything shining or spark- 
ing. 3**span. 4ttDrop. 51 Spangle. 

ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in thin plates 
of metal. 2 Like a plate of metal. 3 Shining, 
sparkling. 

spaugachadh,** -aidh, s.m. Spanning. 

spangaich,** v.a. Span. 

spangan, (pl.of spang.) Spangles,glittering toys, 
decorations, embellishments—Sar-Oharr, 

spann,-an, s. Hinge. 2 Hasp. see bann. 

spann, -adh, v. a. Sever, cut asuniler. divile, 
splinter. 2 Dash. 3 Wean, as a child. 4ft 
Kill with one stroke, despatch. 

spannach,* -aich, s.f. Splinter. S. iorgaill, @ 
bone of contention. | 

——adh,tt s.m. Knocking down flat. 2 
Killing with one stroke, despatching. A’ 
8—, pr.pt. of spannaich. 

spannadh, -aidh, s.m proku | act of severing, 
cutting asunder, dividing. A’ s—, pr. pt. of 
spann. Tha mi an dòchas nach faigh thu mixe 
fo d' s., I hope you wili not get me into your 
power— Lewis. | 

spannaich, pr.pt. a’ spannachadh,v.a. see spann, 

spaoil, v.a. Wrap up,swathe,swaddle. (fspaoili.] 

spaoile,* s.m S iudle of yarn. 

spacileach,** a Nwaddling, ewathing, wrapping 








spaoileachb 


up. 

sinc os di, -idh, sm. Wranping, act of wrap- 
ping up, swathing or swaddling. 2 (CR)Star- 
inz, gaping, looking in alarm —Suthd. A' 
s—, pr.pt. of spaoil. Brat spaoilidh, a swad- 
dling band. 

spaoileadair,** s.m. Swaddler, swather, 

spaoilear, fut. pass. of spaoil. 

spaoilidh, fut. af. a. of spaoil. 
sproileadh, 

spaoilte, past pt. of spaoil. Swathed, swaddled. 

spar, see spor— Árran. Spar a choilich for 
spor a' choilich. 

spar, -a, -an, see spàrr. 

spàrach, see spárrach. 

sparaz,(CR)s.f. Boasting, boastfulness, 

Sparan, see sparran. 

sparasach, -aiche, og see spairiseach. 

, see spairiseachd. 

spard,” see spàrdan. 

spàrdan. -ain, -an, s.m. Roost, hen-roost. 2 Lit- 

tle eminence or hill, flat at top. 3(CR)Short, 

steep acclivity.— West of Ross-shire. 4 Level 

shelf ona hill-side, where one would natur- 

ally rest. 

spar(lanach, -aiche,a. Having roosts. 2 Abound- 
ing in roosts. 3 Like a roost. 4 Roosted, 
perched as a roost. 

Sparn, see spàirn. 

. sparnag,** s.f. see spairneag. 

sparr, pr.pt. a’ spàrradh, v.a. Drive, as a nail 
or a wedge. 2 Induce by force. 3 Fix, rivet, 
nail. 4 Thrust. 5 Enforce by argument,incul- 
cate, 6**Dash, dash forward. S. ea lamh ann 
(no innte) ; he thrust his hand into it ; a air 
e, clap it on it ; a’ crannadh ’s a’ spàrradh an 
doruis bolting and wedging the door ; a’ sparr- 
adh an ni seo oirnn, inculcating this thing 
on us. 

sparr, A, -an, s.m. [f. in Badenoch & Gairloch) 
Joist, beam, spar of wood. 2 Cross-beam of a 
roof, purlin, see under taigh. 3 Roost, hen- 
roost. 4 Large nail. Am mac air ans, ’s an 
t-athair gun bhreith, the son on the roost and 
the father wnborn—i.e. the smoke of a fire not 
kindled, said of things loudly proclaimed be- 
fore they exist NO D. 

sparraban,(AG) Reay country for bannanan. 

spàrrach,**a.Having a roost. 2 Like à roost, 3 
Roosted, perched, as on a roost. 4 Joisted. 

Sparrach,** a. Driving, shoving. 2 Dashing. 3 
Nailing, riveting. 4 Inculcating, enforcing. 

sparrach,” ach, s.f. Sheath. 

sparradh, -aidh, s.m. Driving, act of driving, as 
anvil or wedge. 2 Act of inducing by force. 
3 Fixing, act of fixing, riveting or nailing. 4 
Thrusting, act of thrusting or shoving. 5 En- 
forcing, act of enforcing by argument, urging, 
inculcating. 6 Injunction, charge. 7**Nail, 
rivet. g** Dashing A Be pt. of sparr. 
Thug es. dhaibh, he gave them acharge ; a’cur 
8. orra, charging them; teann a, a strict in- 
junction ; firm nailing or riveting. 

sparrag, -aig, -an, s.f. Bridle bit. 2 Intricacy, 
dificulty 3 Undue vehem»nce in enforcing 
anargument. 4 Positiveness, petulance. 6 
Rivet, nail. 

ach, -aiche, a. Having a bit, as a bridle. 
2 Ditficult, intricate. 3 Obstinate. 4 Vehe- 
ment, petulant, 65**Nailed, riveted. 

sparragaich,** v.a. Drive. 2 Nail, rivet. 3 In- 
culcate. 4 Charge strictly. 5 Bridle, curb. 

——,** a. Having a bit, as a bridle. 2 

Nailed, riveted. 

—te, past pt, of sparragaich. 

aparraieh,* s.pl. Household furnituro— Islay. 

sparrall,** a, Peremptory. 


2 gen, sing. of 





à 











879 


spea! 

spartan, -ain, -an, s. »n., dim. of spàrr. Bolt or 
bat. 2 Crisping-pin. S.-doruis, a door-oolt. 

sparranan,* s.pl. Spisms. 

Sparrasaich, see spairiseach. 

———5 —d, see spaisiseachd. 

sparr-buinn, 8. Part of dealbh, p. 317. 

spàrr-ealaig,( DC) s.m. Pin projectiug above the 
roof at each end of house to which to fasten 
Ce ropes for holding the thatch in its place— 

ist. 

spàrr-gaoithe,(DC) s.m. Cross-joist near ridge 
of a house strengthening the couples— Uist. 

sparr-mullaich, s.m. Part of dealbh, p. 317. 

sparrta, past pt. Adacted. 

sparsan, -ain, -an, s.n Dew-lap of a beast. 2H 
Gizzard of a bird. 3 **Diminution. 4 Dim- 
inutive person. 5**Dry stalk. 6** in contempt, 
Flaccid, hanging lip 

—ach, -aiche, a. Dew-lapt, having a dew- 

lap. 2 Having a flaccid lip. 3tt Having a giz- 





zard. 
spart,*-airt, s. m. Essence, quintessence, 2 
see spairt, 3 Clod. S. an uachdair, the es- 


sence of cream, best of cream ; s. cabhruich,the 
farina, of sowens without the liquid part. 

tspart,** a. Heavy, dull, dense. 

spàt (DMK) s. m. Heavy shower of rain. 
uisge, @ heavy fall of raun—Caithness. 

Spat,*^ s.m. Flap. 

spathalt, -ailt, -an, s.f. Limb. 2 Large and 
clumsy limb, 3**Joint of meat. 

—ach, -aiche, a, Limbed. 2 Having large 
and clumsy limbs. 

speac,** s.m. Spoke, bar. 

ach, @ Having spokes or bars, as a whee! 
or gate 

speacaich,** v.a, Provide with spokes or bars, 

speach, -a, -an, s&.f.[€& m**] Wasp. 2 Any ven- 
omous little creature. 3 Bite or sting of any 
venomous creature. 

speach,(AC) s. Stone, doorstep, flat stone in a 
byre floor 2 Certain stone in a byre drain. 
S na bathcha, the doorstep of the byre. 

speach, -a, pl -an & -annan, s.m. Blow 2 Kick. 
3 Thrust. 4**Froth 5**Game called *'tillip.'' 
6 Stitch in the side. 7 Dart—Sar-Ohair. 8 
(DC) Cuts on face, hands, e. Or Smart, clev- 
er blow 

speach,(AC) s Claw, hoof. 2 Animal 

speach,* v.a. Bite, strike smartly. 2( DC) Mark 
as by cuts. Tha 'aodanu air a s., his face is 
marked by cuts. 

speachach, -aiche, a Abounding in wasps. 2 
Like a wasp. 3 Venomous, stinging 

speachag, Uist for spitheag. Tilg s. air a’ bhoin, 
throw a stone at the cow. 

speachadh, (MS) s.m. Gap. 

speachair, -ean, s.m One who strikes, beats or 
kicks. 2 Waspish, peevish fellow. 3 Little, 
trifling fellow. 

speachannach, -aiche, see speachanta, 

speachanta, -ainte, a. W vspish,peevish, vicious. 
2 Quick, nimble, 3**Deaiing blows. 

speachantachd, s.f. see speachanta;. 

speachantas, -ais, s.m. Peevishuess, waspis^iness, 
vViciousness, 2 Quickness, gimbieness,  3** 
Crossness. 

speacharra, see speachanta. 

—chd, see speachantas. 

speaclairean, see speuclairean, 

spead,* -a,-an, SI Very small foot or leg. 2 
Cow's or sheep's kick — Badenoch. 

speadach,*-aiche, a. Sheep-shanked, 
ing — Badenoch. 

———— ,* &.f. Sheep-shanked female. 

speadair,* -ean, 3.m. Sheep-shanked man. 

speal, -a, -an,2f/. Scythe, 2Sword 3$ Touch. 


3.- 








2 Rick- 


INIVERSITY OF HOIS 


| speal 
4 Scythe-blade. 5**Mowing hook. 6**Short 





spell at any kind of work. 8**Short spell of 
vigorous exertion. Vhoir a air an obair, 
bestow a short while at the work. (in Gawr- 
lodh, Nos. 1 £7 are represented by different 


Gaelic words,No. 1 being speall with the diph- 
thong short and the Z// short, and No. 7 speall, 
the e only being souncded— DU.) 

NAMES OF THE PARTS OF A SCYTHE:— 
pann, ring securing heel of blade tothe han- 


e. 

Cearcall-buana, (AH) hoop arranged on the 
shaft to belp in laving the corn evenly for 
binding. The ellipse formed by the hoop 
is sometimes covered with thin canvas or 
cotton. 

mm, n RM S, dorn,putag, handle-haft, 
shaft. 

Geinn, wedge tightening the ring. 

larunn, blade. 

E.Snathad, Snathad-feóir( AH),hook which holds 

the blade at the proper angle. 

speal, pr.pt. a’ spealadh, v.a. Mow, cut down. 2 
Scythe, cut with a scythe. 3 Use cutting 
words. 

gpealach, -eiche,a. Of, or belonging to, a scythe. 
2 Like a scythe or hook. 3 Mowiog. 4 Using 
cutting words, 

gpealadair,-ean, s. m. Mower, scytheman. 2 
Scythe. 





eachd, s.f.ind. Mowing. 

spealadh, -aidh, s.m. Mowing, act of mowing or 
cutting down. 2 Act of using cuiting words. 
3 Scolding, scold. 4**Shelling, (for spioladh.) 
A’ s—, pr.pt.:of speal. 

Spealain,** s.pl. Shavings. 

spealair, -ean, s. m. Mower, one that cuts or 
mows fast. 2 Satirist, one who uses cutting 
words. 

eachd, see spealadaireachd. 

spealan, -ain, s.m. Scythe. 

spealanta, -ainte, Y. Acute, cutting, that cuts. 
2 Quick, ready. 3 Sharp, satirical, using cut- 
ting words. 4{fClever, active. 

en. 








—chd, s.f.ind. Acuteness. 2 Quickness, 

readiness. 3 Sharpness of language. 4ttCley- 
erness, activity, acuteness. 

gpeal-bheóil,(DM K) s.f. Razor—Gairloch. 

speal-chraois,(Fionn) s.f. Razor, 

spealg, v.a. & n. Break with violence, make 
splinters of, split. 2 Chip, cleave. 3 Fritter. 
4 Fall iuto splinters or pieces. 

spealg, -eilg, -an, s.f. Splinter, fragment. 

ach, -aiche, a. Splintered. 2 That splits 

or sp'inters. 3 Full of splinters or fragments. 

4 Smashing, splitting. 

ach,if ach, s.f. Quantity of splinters, 

fragments or chips. 2* Splinter. 

spealgadh, -aidh, san. Breaking, act of break. 
ing with violence, smashing, splintering,split- 
ting. 2 Cleaving, clipping. 3 Splinter,chip, 
4 State of falling into pieces or frayments. A’ 
s—, pr.pt. of sp. alg. 

spealgair,-ean, s.m. One who splinters or breaks 
into fragments or splin:ers, cleaver. 

eachd,tt st Sul ncering. 

spealgan, n.»t. of spealg. 

sp.a'garra, a. Splinte: ing. 

Spealyta, past pt. of spealg. Splintered, broken 
into frae ments, 

8pealp, -eilp, s.m. see spailp. 

-——-— &r, See spailpear. 

aireachd, see spailpearachd, 

arra,** a. Keauish, spruce. 

—— —ürrachd, see spailpearachd. 

















spealt, pr.pt. a’ spealtadh, 


— —ach, -aiche, qa. 





5 Ready-spo- | 





880 speideach wal 
, Spealt, -a, -an, 8f. Splinter. 2 Lath. 3 Dash 


in writing (—.) 4* Tall person. 5 (DMy) 
Splint to keep a broken limb in place. 
v.a Cleave, split, 
break with force, smash. 2Strike with vio- 
lence. 3**Clash. 
Splintered. 2 Splitting, 
that splits. 3 Abounding in splinters or chips. 
4 Chipping, smashing 5 Clasühing 
——achd, s.fnd. Cleaving, splitting, shiver- 
ing, chipping. , 
———adh, -aidh, s.m. Splitting, act of splitting, 
cleaving A’ s—, pr.pt of spealt. 


spealtag, -aig, -an, s. f., dim. of spealt. Small 


splinter. 
‘ach, -aiche, a. 
splinters. 





Abounding in small 


spealtair, -ean, s.m. One who splits or cleaves. 


2 Any instrument to split or cleave with, 
cleaver, 
eachd, s.f.ind. Continued cleaving or 

splitting. 2 Violent striking. 3 Clashing. 
Lainn ri s., swords hacking 

spealtan, -ain' pl. -an & -ain, s.m.dvm. of spealt. 
Fragment, splinter, shiver, chip. 2 pl. of 
spealt. 

ach, -aiche, a. Same meanings as spealt- 

agach. 





spealt-chleas,** s. m. Mutual violence, giving 


blow for blow. 
achd,** s.f. Mutual violence. 








speansa,** s.m. Cellar, parlour. 


spearag,** -aig, 8.f. see speireag. 


spearl,** v.a. Spoil. 





ach,** a. Spoiling. 

adh,** -aidh, s.m. Spoiliation. 

spearrach, see speireach. 

spearrach, -aich, -aichean, s.f. Cow-fetter. 2 
(CR) Goat-fetter. 3 Fetter placed on one of 
the fore-feet and one of the hind-feet of an 
&nimal to prevent its climbing or jumping 
over dykes. 4**Ham-string. 5 (DMK) String 
tied tightly round the hamstring of an animal 
with the object of impeding its locomotion. 6 
6* Cross-fetters for sheep. Cuir S., ham- 
string. 

.— — — adh,** -aidh, s.m. Ham-stringing. 

spearraich, v.a, Fetter feet of cattle. 2 Ham- 
string. 

—— —— — ,** gen.sing. of spearrach, 

spearraichear, fut. pass. of spearraich. 

spearraichte, past pt, of spearraich. 
spearralach,* -aich, s.f. Ham-string, 
spearralaich,* v.a. Ham-string. 

spéic, -e, -ean, s.f. Spike. 2 Bar, spar, spoke. 3 
**Long nail. 4 Prop. 5 Blow, stroke. $S. 
cuibhle, the spoke ofa wheel; s.-laimie, the 
spoke or bearer of a bier. 

spéic, pr. pt. a’ spéiceadh, v. a. Spike, fasten 
with spikes. 2 Prop, support. 3 Strike. 4 
Spar, 

Meier -eiche, €. Spiked. 2 Of, or belonging 
to, spikes, nails, bars, spars or props. 3 Fix- 
ing with spikes, bars, &c. 4 Like a spike, &c. 
5 Furnished with spikes, &c. 6 Furnished 
with props, propped, 7 Like a prop. 8 Prop- 
ping. 9 Sparred. 10 Striking blows. 11 Apt 
to strike blows, 12**Nailing. 13 Sustaining. 

——eadh, -idh, sm. Spiking, act of spiking or 
tixing with spikes. 2 Propping, act of prop- 


ping. 3**Striking, act of strikiug. 4**Nailing. 


A’ s—, pr.pt. of spéic. 

speicean, s.pl. Tram or shaft of a cart. 

spéid,* e, $.f. sce spìd. 

speid,** s.f. Spate, sudden flood, as in a stream 
after heavy rain. 


—£&c0h,** g. Like, or pertaining to, & spate. 


3 


A 
vi 


edes: 


P. 


spéideach 


AVEN INY- OP ; speuc 


spéileach, see spìdeil. 

spéideil, -e, a. see spideil. 

speidhil, Go see spéil. 

speidhleachan, -ain, 8.m. see spéileachan. 

speidhleadh, -eidh, s.m. see spéileadh. 

spéidhleireachd,** see spéileireachd. 

speidich, v.a. see spidich. 

sp^il, -e, -ean, s.f. Cattle, herd. 2 Drove, parti- 
cularly of swine. (also speil-mhuc.) 

spéil, v.a. & n. Slip, slide, skate. 2* Climb— 
Islau. 

spéileach, -eiche, a. Apt to slip or slide. 

speileachan, -ain, s.m. Skate. 

| speileadaireachd, s.f. Climbing. 2 Sliding. 

| gpéileadh, -idh, s.m. Sliding, act of sliding,slip- 

| ping, skating. 2 Stumbling. A’ s—, pr. pt. 

| of spéil. 

| spéileag,tt see béilleag. 

" speilean, $.m. Uist game corresponding to the 
game of ‘‘ cat and bat." The necessaries for 
the game are the Speil or Cat, the Driver or 
Bat, and the Ball of worsted or hair. Two 
sides of equal numbers are picked, one side 
taking the first of the batting and the other 
of the tielding, as they win or lose the toss. 

A hole is mae in the ground with the heel, 
and one end of the Speil (a small piece of 
woo) is pul into it. The ball rests in the hole 
on the inner eud of the speil. The first batter 
strikes tbe end which protrudes with the dri- 
ver, thus sending the ball into the air. While 
the ball is in the air, he smites it with all his 
power, the object being to drive it as far as 
possible from the hole. If any of the oppos- 
ing side catch it before it touches the ground 
the striker is out, but if no catch is made the 
first fielder to reach tne ball gives a bowl 
(faireag) to the batsman. The latter again 
drives the ball as far as possible, and if a 
catch be male he is out, If,however,no catch 
be made, the first player of the opposing side 
to reach the ball, throws the ball into, or as 
near as he can, the hole. This is called'* pic: 


eaih." If it goes into the hole the player is 
out. If not, he measures the length of the 


ball from the hole by means of the bat. If it 
is not one bat’s length he is out, if it is one or 
more, he plays on until he is out, when an: 
other member of his side comes in in his place. 
This continues till one side counts 100, or is 
all out, when the opposite side comes in, If 
neither side reaches the set number of points, 
whichever scores the highest is said to be the 
winuer. This game is fairly popular still and 
is one of the healthiest and best of Uist games 
—Cvliic Review, Vol. IV, p. 362. 
spéilean, -ein, -an, s.m, Slippery place, place to 
slide on. 
achd,tt s.f. Sliding, slipping. 2 Amuse- 
ment of sliding or skating. 
. speileanta,* -einte, a Eloquent. 
—— ———chd,* s.fiind. Eloquence, 
spéilearachd, see spéileireachd. 
speile-cheann,(AF) s.m. Leader among pigs. 
spéileireachd, $.f. Amusement of sliding or skat- 
ing. 2 Frequent slipping or stumbling, A’ 
s—, pr. pt. of spéilich. 
Perii pr.pt. a’ spéileireachd, v.a. Slide, 
skate, 
—-speilg,* s.f. Sheep-shank. 
8p-ilzeach,* -eiche, a. Sheep-shanked. 
—— —— —,* -eich, s.f. Sheep-s'ianked female. 
Speilceir,* -ean, s. m. Sheep-shauked inan. 
Trifling-looking fellow. 
speiligein,tt -ean, s.m, Spindle-shank,weakling. 
——--——each, a. Haying spiodle-sbanks. 
speill, v. gee $paoil 





spéiread, -eid, son. 








speilleach, a. see spaoileach. 

speilleadair, see spaoileadair. 

speilleadh. see spaoileadb, 

spéilleag tt -eig, -an, s.f. Curled bark. 

-— —— ach, -aiche, @ Pertaining to curled 
barks. 

speillear, See spaoilear, 

spéillidh, see spaoilidb. 


Spéillte, see spaoilte. 1 
speilp,** sf. Armour. 2 Belt. 3 Pride, foppery, 
conceit (spailp) 


speilteir,** s.m. Zine. 
speinnse,** s, Partition, 
Speir, -e, pl. -ean -eachan, s.f. Ham or hough of 


a beast. 2 Hoof, claw, talon, 3 Ankle and 
thereabouts of the human leg. 4**in derision, 
Sparrow-hawk. 5** Spades. 6 Clutch. 7 


Hamstring ofa horse. Cha'n fhagar s. dhiubh, 
not a hoof of them shall be left. 


spéir gen. of speur., 


speirbh,* s.f. Very slender leg or foot. 


speirbheis,* e, -ean, 8.7, Sheep-shanked female, 
speird, s.f. Energy, force, — Dàin 1. Ghobha. 
speireach, Ach, -ichean, s.f see spearrach. 
speireach, -eiche, à. Sleuder-limbe.t. 


2 Hoofed. 
4 Cloven-footed. 5 Shanky. 6 Like 

7 Having houghs or hams. 

Strength, force, vigour, 2 
3 see spiorad. 


3 Clawed. 
a hawk, 


Courage, bravery. 


spéireadail, -e, a. Spirited, bold, brave, courage- 


ots, 


speireag, -eig, -an, s. f. Sparrow-hawk—accipi- 


ter misus. (also Soeir-sheabhag.) 2**Slender- 
liinbed girl. 3** Any siender-limbed creature 
of the feminins gender. 4"*3hank. 


speireagach, -aichs, a. Of, or belonging to spar- 


row-hawxs. 2**Slender-limbed. 3**Shanked, 
4**Having claws. 


speirean,** ein, s.m. Spindle-shank. 

—— ——Aaách, a. Spindle-shanked. 

Speirge, see speireag. 

speirid,* s.f. Energy. 2Speed, expedition. 
speirideil,* -e, a. Active, expeditious, 
spéirleag, -eig, -an, $.f. Spurling. 
speir-sheabhag, -aig, -an, see speireag. 
speir-sneog, -oig, -an, 8.f. see speireag. 

spéis, -e, s.f. Liking, regard, attachment, endear- 


ment, affection, fondness, esteem. Thoir S., 
bestow regard or affection ; ma bheir mi s. do 
dh’ aingidheachd, if L regard iniquity ; tha 8, 
aige dhith, he «s attached tu her ; féin-s., self- 
concet. 


Spéiseal, see spéiseil. 
spéisealachd, s.f ind. Fondness, attachment. 2 


Pride. 3 Ksteem. 

speisealta, ele, @ Clean, neat, tidy, cleanly, 
as a cook or housewife. 2 Well-arranged, 
regular. 3 Acceptable. 4Tight. 5**Becom- 
ing, comely, having à good appearance, —6* 
Neatly-dressed, tasteful, Gu a, becoming- 
ly, handsomely. 

—civd, s.f.ind Cleanness, neatness. 2 
Regularity, order, arrangement, comeliness, 
seeiuiiness, handsomeuess. 3 ‘Tightness. 4 
Fouduess, attachment, state of being esteem- 
ed. 5 Tastefulness, 

gpéisenr,** s.m. Admirer, 

sLéiseil, -e, a. Fond, attached, loving. 2 Loved, 
esteemed, 3 Estimable, 4 Acceptable. 5 
Cleanly, tight, tidy. 6 Proud, having selt-es- 
teem. Th. thu agam ro S., L esteem you very 
much, 

spéiseileachd, see speisealtachd. 

8péis-Lhabhairteach, -eicne, a, Observant, 

speubhaidh (CR) s.f. Sprvin—Suth’d, j 

speuc, pr. pl. a’ speucailh, v.a. & n. Diverge, d'- 
varicate. 2 Cause to diverge. 3 Tear asunder, 


speuc 


8p^uc, see spéic. 

speucach, -aiche, a. Diverging, divaricated. 2 
Causing to diverge or divaricate. 3 Tearing 
asunder. 4(MS) Ansated. 

speucadh, -aidh, s.» Diverging, act or state of 

, diverging. 2'l'earing, act of tearing asunder. 
3 Rent. A's—, pr.pt. of speuc. 

epeuclair, -ean, s.m. Pair of spectacles. 2**Spy- 
glass. 3**Optieian. 4* Object of surprise or 
wonder. S.-lüghainn, temple-spectacles. 

each, -eiche, a. Spectacled, wearing 
Spectacles. 

—— ——-eàch, -eich, s.m. Optician. 

eachd, s. f. ind. Optician's trade, 2 
Speculation. 3 surprise. 

——- —— ean, n.pl. of speuclair. 

&peuclairiche, s.m. Optician. 

speuclan,(DU) s.m. Spectacles. [In Gairloch 
spiaclan.] 

Speur,* -a, s.m. [ f. in Badenoch] The sky, firma- 
ment, heavens, heights. 2 Star. 3 Climate. 
4 (DU) The buttoned opening iu trousers, &c. 
Nèamh nan speur, the firmament ; Mar theine- 
sp2ur, like star-Light, the fire-ball ; nochdaidh 

Dä speura guiomh a làimhe, the firmament 

| sheweth forth his handiwork; a’ cur speura 
mo chinn troimh a chéile, muddling or confus- 
eng the skies of my head—a brown study. [gen. 
spéir.**] 

speur, v.a. Blaspheme, swear by the heavens— 
Isiay & Gairloch. 

Speurach, -aiche, a. Heavenly, celestial. 2 Eth- 
ereal. atmospheric. 

Speurad, -aid, see spéiread. 

ach, -aiche, a. see spéireadail. 

speuradair, -ean, s.m. Star-gazer, astrologer. 2 
Astronomer. 3 Meteorologist. 4 Blasphemer. 

—eachd, s.f.ind. Star-gazing, ascrology. 
2 Astronomy. 3 Meteorology. 4 *Oaths. 6 
Aeroscopy. 

speuradh,* -aidh, s.m. Blasphemy, 
heaven—Argyll, 

speuraibh, dat.pl. of speur. 

speuraidhean, s. pl. of speuradh. Curses, im- 
precations. Used in Gairloch, where the oc- 
currence of the sing. is rare. Thug e speur- 
aidhean air, he cursed and swore at him. | 

speuran, n.pl. of speur. 

speuranta, -ainte, a. Ethereal. 

speur-bhodaieh,( DU) s.m. Old form of button- 
iog usually seen in old men's garments. 

speur-choimhead,* -id, $n. Aeroscopy. : 

speur-dh»alrach, -aiche, a. Sky-glittering, 

speur-eolach, a. Versed in astronomy or astro- 
logy. 

speur-eólas, -ais, s.m. Astronomy, astrology. 

speur-ghlan, -ghlaine, a. Clear-skied, cloudless, 
serene. 

speur-ghlan, $.f. Clear sky. 

speur-ghorm, -ghuirme, a. Blue-skied. 2 Azure. 

spiac, see speuc, 

spiacach, -aiche, see speucach. 

spiacair, -ean, s.m. see spiocair, 

spiacaireachi, see spiocaireachd. 

spiaclan, Gairloch for speuclan. 

spial, see spiol. 

6pian, see spion. 

spiantag,* -aig, -an, s.f. Maggot. 

ach, -aiche, a. Maggotty. 

tspic, -e, -ean, see spéic. 

tspice,(DMK) s.f. Pinnacle, 
thing pointed —Caithness. 

spìceach, see spéiceach, 

Spiceach, see spiocach. 

spìd, s.m. Spite, malice. 2 Reproach, shame. 
8 Censure. 4 Contempt. 5 Ep expediti- 
On. 6 Activity, quickness. Preparation, 











an oath by 





conical peak, any- 

















spidean 

order, 
stir yourself ; cuir s, air siod no 
this or that guickly ; a’ caitheadh 
ing me contemptuously ; fo d 
tyranny or con'emptuous sway ; duine 
an inactive, weakly man. 
spideach,** 
Shameful. 3 Reproachful. 4 Contemptible, 
Gu s., spitefully, 


spideachas,** -ais, s.m. Spitefulness. 


(at & gen. ei 





; 646. Spideag. | 

spideag, -eig, an, s. f. Nigntingale—philomel 
luscinia. 2 (AF) Robin. 3 (AF) Any delicate- 
ly formed creature, 4 Any slender creature. 
5 Spiteful young female. 6 Taunt, affront. 7 
ttLittle blow [**spideag.] 

--—-——ach, -aiche, a. Taunting, apt to taunt. 
2Spiteful, as a female, 3** Abounding in 
AE een 4 Like a nightingale, 5**Melo- 

ious. 


spideag-Muire,(A Fy;s.f. Robin. 

spideal, eil, -an, s.m. Spital, hospital, 
spidealach,,aich, s.m. 
spidealachd, s.f.ind. Contempt. 2 Reproachful- 


Meagre, sickly creature. 


ness, reproach. 3 Malicious disposition, de- 
sire of reproaching. 4 Malicious and ma- 
lignant couduct. 5 Spitefulness. 6 Shame- 
fulness. 


spidean, s.m. Game which resembles closely 


the common game of “ pitch 
difference being that buttons are always used 
in place of coins. A small stick is set up asa 
“spid,” and a line drawn at a distance of a- 
bout 10 feet. At this line the players bake 
their stand. The game is open to any number 
of players—in fact.the more players the better 
the game, Each player tosses his button 
at the spid, his object being to come as near it 
as possible. He whose button lies nearest the 
spid gathers the other buttons in his hands, 
shakes them, and finally tosses them in the 
air. All which fall face downwards he gath- 
ers and Keeps ; the remainder are lifted by the 
player whose button lay second, and thrown 
by him, those falling face upwards being in 
turn claimed by him. This continues till the 
buttons have all been gained, the first man of- 
ten getting a secon! throw if the buttons last 
solong. The players all take their stand a- 
gain on the liue, the last tosser of the former 
time being the first to play this time,and con- 
tinue throwing till they have lost all their 
buttons, or are otherwise forced to desist. 
Should the spid be hit fairly by any man 
except the first, all buttons, no matter how 
near, must be lifted and re-tossed. The ad- 
vantages in being first man consist in the fol- 
lowing. The first player may, if he choose, re- 
claim his toss by saying, " Cha luigh mi ” (I 
shall not lie,) but if his toss be good enough, 
he says '* Luighidh mi,” (I will lie.) thus com- 
pelling all who follow to ‘‘lie,” no matter bow 
poor their attempt may be. If, bowerer, the 


aud toss,” the 


8*fyranny. 9 Infamy. Cuir S. Ort, be. ` 
8e0, prepare 
S. orm, ts. 
8., under your 


gun S., 





-eiche, a. Spiteful, malicious. í 


. E e L ps 
- Daa Le 
TR is ies 


7 * 

"^m. 
GT Get 
dë A E nd Fr 


rA. 
efit a 


pion 


a ee eegen, 0 o oo oos 


first player says “Cha luigh mi,” those follow- 
ing can all say the same, till such time as 
someone remarks *'' Luighidh mi,” after which 
they are all forced tor: lie." Another advan- 
tage the first man hasis,that though he strike 
the spd fair he can yet “lie.” Still popu: 
lar, this was one of the mogt cherished games 
of the young Gael of former times, and many 
were the severe thrashings meted out to them 
for its sake. A boy departed to schoo) with 
perhaps 30 buttons on a string and returned 
home with none, yea, without one on his 
clothes, which were held in place by pieces of 
wood or strinz —Uist Games in Celtic Review, 
Vol. IV. (Called an * Uist " game in above, 
but it ıs in reality as much an English as an 
Uist one.] 
spideiz, gen. sing. of spideag. 
spìdeil, e, a. Reproaching, reproachful. 2 Con- 
temptuons, 3 Censuring. 4 Clever, hasteful, 
business-like, making speed, making progress, 
quick. 5ftHealthy. 6 Spiteful. 7 Infamous. 
8 Despicable. 9 Shameful. 
spideileachd, see spidealachd. 
spidich, v.a. & n. Speed, cause to make speed. 
spid-shuileach, -eiche, a. Purblind. 
spig.** v.a. Mock, scoff. 
spigeil,** a. Mocking, scoflfing. 
Bpile,** see spalla. 
spilgein, see spiligean. 
spiligean, -cin, -an, s.m. Small grain, as of corn. 
2 ‘hin, light grain—-W. of Ross-shire. 3 Seed- 
ling. 4 in derision, Dwarfish person. 5 
Single grain of oats, barley, &c. mullaich, 
the iop pickle on an ear of corn ; s. arbhair, a 
grain of corn. 
—ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in small 
grains, or 2in seedlings. 3 Like a seedling. 
4 Dwarfish. 
spille,** ert Measure of yarn, 
Tspin, s. Thorn. 
fspineil,** a. Thorny. 
spinn, -e, -tean, s.f. Measure of yarn, 
spinnle, see spinn. 
Spioc, -a, $. f. Dastardliness, cowardice. 
Meanness, insignificancy, 3 Niggardliness. 
spiocach, -aiche, a. Dastardly, mean-spirited, 
cowardly. 2 Mean, insignificant. 3 Niggard 
ly, miserly, avaricious 
svìocalh, -aidh, s.m. see spioc, 
spiocaiche, s.f Niggardliness, stinginess, 
mony 2 see spioc. 
&apiocaicheachd,** s.f. Avarice. 
spiocaid, -e, -ean, s.f Spigot, tap 2(MS)Rowel. 
spiocair, -ean, s.m. Dastardly, mean-spirited fel. 
low 2 Niggard, churl. 3 Insignificant fel- 
‘low, dwarf, ninny. 
eachd, s.find, Dastardliness, pusillani- 
mity. 2 Meanness, insignificance. 3 Niggard- 
lin-ss, parsimony, churlishness, shabbiness 
8pi chag,** -aig, s,f. Purse, bag. 
————ach, a, Like a purse, 2 Of a purse. 
8piochan^, -ain, s m. Wheezing 1n the throat. 2 
**Person who has a wheezing in the throat. 
3**Purse, bag (piochan ) 
ach, -aiche, s f. Having a hoarse or 
wheezing voice 2 Like a purse or bag 
aich, -e, &./. Continued wheezing in the 
throat, 
spiocnard, -aird, $. Spikenard—va/eriana nar- 
doxiachys. 
spiod, see spid. 
God, -a, -an, see bioda. 
eviod,* v.a. Tug, pull tightly—Jslay 
tspiodach, -aiche, @. see biodach. 
&piodadh,* -aidh, s. Tugging, quick pull or 
. tug. 9 Hint. A's—,vr.pt. of spod, 






















2 


parsi- 











spiol,s.m. Woo! from a dead sheep,pluek. A skin 
ofthis sort (marbhchann) is often washed first 
in the strong lye in which clothes have been 
stesped for the wash. It is washed in eacb 
lather as the clothes are taken out, and after 
rinsing, hung on a pailing to drip and nearly 
dry When a skin is sufficiently dry to be 
plucked, it ıs placed on the back of a chair 
near the fire—the warmth makes the pluck- 
ing easier —with a clean creel underneath into 
which the tuftsof wool fall asthey are pluck- 
ed. The cutch. or coarse wool, remains on 
the skin, if the fingers are deft enough The 
wool is then either teazed for carding, or dyed 
should ıt be nee‘led for mixtures. This kind 
of wool is not generally considered so excel- 
lent as that shorn from the sheep, but serves 
admirably for tweeds, or for dyeing and mix- 
ing with the better quality of wool in common 
use—K.W,G. in Mod priz’ paper. 

spiol, pr.pt. a’ spioladh, v.a. Pluck, pull,snatch, 
2 Nibble, bite at. 3 Peel. 4 Unsnell, as au 
egg. 5 Tease, carp. 6 Grasp. 7 Browse, as cat- 
tle 8* Pick in a childish way 

spiolach, -aiche, o Plucking, snatching, that 
plucks or soatches, tugging 2 Nibbling, bit- 

ing at. 3 Grasping. 4 Browsing. 

—acth, -aidh, see spioladh. 

spiolachair, -ean, s.m. see spiolachan. 2 One 
who digs out of the earth. 

-——eachd, see spioladaireachd. 

spiolachan, -ain, -an, s.m. One that nibbles or 
bites at anything, 2 Dwarfish person, 3** 
Spaddle. 4 Instrument to pluck or dig with. 

spioladair, -ean, s.m. One that plucEs, or tugs, 
plucker, snatcher. 2 Pair of pincers, forceps, 
or nippers. 3 Teaser, carper. 

spioladaireachd, s.f.ind. Continual plucking or 
snatching. 2Tugging. 3 Constant nibbling 
at anything. j ^ 

spioladh, -aidh, sm. Plucking, act of plucking 
or snatching. 2 Nibbling, act of nibbling or 
biting at anything. 3 Carping. 4 Grasping. 
5 Browsing. 6 Snatch, tug, pluck. 7 Tug- 
ging, picking. A’ s—, pr.pt. of spiol, 

spiolag, -aig, -àn, s.f. Snatch, slight bite, small 
crumb, as of bread ? Little mouthful of any- 
thing. S. tombaca, @ chew of tobacco. 

ach, -aiche,@ Plucking or biting slightly. 

2 Abounding in small crumbs, 

an,(DMK) s. m. Grain, as of oats, hand- 
shelled for eating. ? Hand-shelling of grain 
and eating the kernel. 

spiolaich, v. see spiol. — 

-—te, past p! of spiolaich. 

spiol-bhót,** s.m. Boot-jack. 

spiolg, pr pt. a spiolgadh, v.a. Unhusk, unshell, 

..— -ach,.-aiche, @ Shelling, that shells or un» 

















husks s 
».— —adh, -aidh,s.m. Unhusking, act of unhusk- 


ing or shelling. A s—, pr.pt of spiolg. A 
s. nam faochag, shelling the winkles. 

--——alr, -ean, s.m. One who unhusks or shells, 
husker 2 Lightly-formed person, 

.-——alreachd, Lut Continued unhusking or 
shelling 2 Slenderness or slightness of form, 

spiolgan,** Ain, s.m. Plucking, tugging 2 Nip- 

ers. 

See past pt of spiolg. Unhusked, shelled, 

spiolta, past pt of spiol, Plucked, snatched, 3 
Nibdbied at, shghtly bitten. 

spion, pr.pt. a’ spionadh, v.g. Pull, pluck up, 
tear, 2 Suatch. 3 Drag, tear or take away 
by torce or violence. 3 Root. 4 Pesl—Ar- 
ran. bttKhraleate. Na s.o m’ ghaol mi, do 
mot tear m” away from inu Love ; S. a8 & bhua 
e, eradicate it, voot it ovt; 8 Gu enap, peet 


spion 
the potato—Arran. 





plucks, plucking, 
drag, pull, tug or tear. 





emaciated creature. 

fspionad, -aid, s.m. Sinew. 

ach, a. Sinewy. 
spionadair, -ean, s.m. 


tears, drags, or snatches away  2**Nippers. 


spionadh, -aidh, s.m. Plucking, act of pluckiag 
2 Act of snatching or taking sud- 
denly away. 3** Motion, action.§4 Pull, pluck, 
3(AH)Drizzle. A’ s—, pr. pt. of spion. 


or pulling. 


tear. 
S. uisge, a slight drizzle of rain 


8pionadh. aidh, s.m. Plucking sheep instead of 
clipping—Garrloch (called roong in Shetland.) 
A’ s. na 


2(DMK) Plucking feathers off birds. 
circe, plucking the hen. 


———, 3rd. pers. sing. & pl. imp. of spion. 2 


past pass, of spion. 


gepionag,(DU) s.f. Poorly-nourished girl 2 Feck- 
less person. 3 Poorly-grown tree, bush, &c.— 


Arayll. 
spionaidh, fut.aff a. of spìon. 
spiouan,** -ain, s.m Gooseberry-bush, [ 


spionar, fut.pass. of spion. 

spionn, see spionnadh. 

spionna, see spionnadh. 

spionnadach, -aiche, a Strong, vigorous, 

spionnadail,(MS) a. Robust. 

sSpionnadar, -aire, a. see spionnadach. 

spionnadh, -aidh, s.m. Strength, might, force, 
pith, power. 


spionnadh-iasaid, s. m. Loan-strength. Gheibh 


cobhartach s., à helper will get loan-strength. 

spionnag, (CR) s.f. Bandage round the forehead 
as for a headache—Suth’d, 

spionnar,** a. Strong, powerful, pithy. 

Spionndach,* -aiche, a. see spionnadach. 

spiontachas, see spionnadh. 

spionniail,(CR) a. Strong—W. of Ross. 

spionta, past pt. of spion. Pulled, plucked. 2 
Snatched, torn away. [chann. ) 

spiontach,* s.f. Skin-wool—Perthshire. (marbh- 

—an,* -ain, s.m. Person like a plucked 
fowl. 2**Searcher. 

spiontag, -aig, -an, s.f. Currant. 2 Gooseberry. 
3 Particle in the throat that causes coughing. 
4 Kind of maggot. 5 Small drop of rain or 
flake of snow preceding a shower. 

—ach,** a. Abounding 1n, or pertaining to 
currants, &e. 

spiorad, -aid, an, s.m. Spirit (ghost.) 2 Spirit, 
mind, vigour, heart, animal spirits. 3* Spirit- 

. uous liquors. S. briste, a broken spirit or 

{ heart ; an S. Naomn, the Holy Spirit ; droch 

' s., an evil spirit ; s. beo, a lively spirit ; s. 
buidhe, spirits of salts (ht. yellow spirits.) 

&pioradail, -e, a. Spiritual. 2 Devoted to spir. 
itual things 8 Like a spirit. 4 Lively, spirit- 
ed, courageous. Gliocas s., spiritual under- 
standing. 

— —t, see spioradal. 

spioradalachd, s.f.«nd. Spirituality, immaterial- 
ity. 2 Vigour,liveliness, 3(MS) Raciness. 4 
Soiritedness. 

spioradan, n, -an. $.m.,dvm, of spiorad. Tri- 
fling dwarf. 2 Ghost. 3 Fairy. 

spiorad-buidhe, s.m. Spirits of salts, 

spiorad-lodain, san. Ignis-fatuus, 

spiorag, see speireag. 

spiorsag,"* s.f. see speireag. 

Spios, -a, -an, s.m. See spìosradh. 

-——, v.d. Spice. 

spiosach, see spìosrach. 

adh, see spiosrachadh. 














Digitized ba 
|. CFEPARET ANS Y) 
d [FIXE AR W 


884 











ach, -aiche, @ Pulling, that. pulls or | spiosadach,** 
dragging. tearing, apt to |spiosaich, v a. Spice 


ach,tt ach, -aichean, s.f. Plucked or 


One who plucks. pulls, 


| splaidseil 

Spiosachan,** 

a. Spicy, spiced 

2 Embalm. 

spiosrach,* s.m. Spicery 

spiosrach, -aiche. a Abounding in spice or Spi 
ces spiced. 2 Spicy. 3 Aromatic, perfuming, 

——adh, -aidh s.m. Seasoning, act of sea 

soning with spices, 2 Process of perfumiug 

or embalming A s—, pr.pt. of spiosraich 

-—an, **.ain, s.m. Embalmer. 

spiosrachd,** s.£ Embalming 
Spicery. perfumery. 4 State of being embalm- 
ed or perfumed. 

spiosradh, -aidh, s.m. Spice, spicery. 

——ach, -aiche, see spiosrach. 

Splosraich, pr pt. a spiosrachadh v. a. Spice, 
season with spice or spices. 2 Aromactize, per- 
fume, 3 Embalm. 

e,** s.m. Embalmer. 2 Perfumer. 

—— —— —ear, fut.pas8s. of spiosraich. 

—idh, fut. af. a of spiosraich. 

——te, past pt. of spiosraich. Aromatized. 
2 Embalmed. 

spiosraidh, s.f. Spices, spiceries. 

spiothag, -aig, -an, s.f see spitheag, 

————ach, see spitheagach. 

spiothair,** s.m. Spy, scout. 
——-—eachd,** s.f, Spying, frequent spying. 

spire,(AC) s,f. Welkin. Mac na spire, son of the 
welkin. 

spiric, s Steeple, spire. 2 Pinnacle. 3 Acme. 

spiriceach,** o Apeak. 2 Pertaining to, or 
like, a spire or steeple. 

spiricean,** -ein, s.m. Acme. 2 Little spire or 
steeple. 

-—ach,** a. Having spires or steeples, 

spiris, -e, -ean, $.f. Hen-roost, cock-loft. 2 Ham- 
mock. 3* Spire. 

spiriseach,-eiche,a. Having roosts or hammocks. 
2 Like a roost or baimmock. | 3**Conical. 

spirlinn,** s, Fall. 2 Chance. 

spirseag,** An, $.f. Sparrow-hawk. 

—ach,** a. Like a sparrow-hawk. 2 A- 
bounding in sparrow-hawks. 

spisneachail, s.f. Aromatization. 

spisnich, see spìosraich, 

spisniche,(AC)s.m. Prop, pillar, column, support, 

spisreadh, -idh, -idhean, s.m. see spìosradh. _ 

spiteal, -il, s.f. Spittal, 

spitheag, -eig, -an, s. f. Small hit of wood. 2 
Small stone to throw with the hand, pebble. 
3 Bite, nip, pinch. 4**Flake 

——_——ach, -aiche, a. Full of small pieces of 
wood. 2 Full of small stones or pebbles, peb- 
bled. 3 That nips or pinches. 

spitheagaich, v.g. Bite, pinch. 

. S.f. Pinching, nipping. 

spithear,** s.m Emussary, scout, 

spiul, see spiol. 

spiulgan, -ain, ëmt, see spiolgan. 

spluthair,(MS) s.m, Filcher, robber, depredator. 

spiuthaireachd, s.f Depredation. 

splad, -aid, sm Squasb. 2 Fail, tumble, fall- 
ing flatly on the ground, 3**Noise, as of a 
door shutting. 4 Bang 

splad,** v.a. & n. Fall. 2 Bang. 3 Slam, shut 
as a door with violence. 

splaid, s m. Thud. Thuit ele s. air an ùrlar, Ae 
fell with a thud on the floor—as when a child 
falls flat in running, or a door 1s suddenly 
shut by the wind, &c. [McL & D gives souse 
in Eng.-Gael. part.] 








—À * 
































| splaid,* v. see sp'ad. 


splaidse, s.f. Squelch, squash. 

ach, a. Squashing. 

—adh, s.m, Squash. 

splaidseil, (DU) s.f. Falling with a thud. 2 Bang- 
Original from 








UNIVERSITY OF 


ain, s.m Spice-box. 2 Embalmer — 





2 Perfuming. 3 


Cb. Lap m nut a 
Ka EZ? 


mg 


banded 


et 


u 


ts s.d b* S 
iu Mu e fen 


"E 


Hs > 
-- 


~ 


«iS v. 


-ida 2. rf M Ta KS E 


- "(4,8 ast y Se 
ds, fol" 





—À 


splaidseil 
ing, as a door with the draught, 
tsplang,* s.f. Sparkle, flash, blaze. 

t—— -,* v.n. Sparkle, flash. 

splang, (DC) s.m. Share, lot, as of fish, Se 2 
(DMy) The belly from the ribs to the thighs 
of a person or animal. The region of the fat 
on the maodal of sheep or cattle. 

——ach,** s.m. Nill. 2**Ashes of a smithy. 

——aiih,** -aidh, s.m. Sparkling, blazing, flash- 
ing 

splangaid, -ean, s.m. Snot, mucus, phlegm. 

--——— euch, -eiche, a. Snotty, mucous, phleg- 

matic. 

--——-—— eachd,s.f ind. Snottiness, phlegminess. 

spleacan,(AC) see sleabhag. 

spléachd, pr.pt a’ spleachdadh, see spleuchd. 

spleachdair, see spleuchdair. 

spleadh,* v. Fall with a crash. 

spleadh, -a.-an, s,m, Romance, fiction, tale. 2 
Ostentation, boasting, vain-glory, hyperbole 
3 Falsehoods told with a view to flatter. 4** 
Flattery, 5 Dependance. 6 Exploits. 7 
Splay-foot. 8* Enormous splay-foot. Cuma 
staigh do spleadhan, keep in your ugly feet, or 
toes. 

———ach, -aiche, a. Fabulous, fictitious ,ro- 
mantic. 2 Given to fiction. 3 Ostentatious, 
boasting, gasconading. 4 Flattering by false- 
hoods, dependence, hyperbole. 5ttSplay-foot- 
ed. 6*Having enormous feet, having ugly feet. 

achas, -ais, 8.7n. see spleadhaireachd. 

adair, -ean,s.?n. Teller of tales or roman- 

2 One fond of the marvellous. 3 Boast- 

4 One who flatters 








ces. 
er, vain-glorious person, 
by telling falsehoods. 
—adh,* s.m. Fall, crash, falling. 
spleadhaich,(MS) v.n. Amplify. 
spleadhair, -ean, s.m. see spleadhadair. 2 (AF) 
Bully, despotic man. 
spleadhaireachi, s.f.ind. Romance, fictilious- 
ness. 2 Disposition to deal 1n fictions or ro- 
mances. 3 Disposition to flatter by retailing 
falsehoods. 4 Amplification. 5**Errantry. 6 
Dt. surprising nature or quality of any- 
thing. 
gpleadhan, -ain, -an, s.m. Wooden paddle, used 
in digging for shell-fish and sand-eels. 
spleadhas, see spleadhaireachd. 
_spleadhnach,** a. Gorgeous. 
Spleadhnas,tt -ais, s.m. Fiction. 
spleadhnasach,tt a. Fictitious. 
spleadhrach,* -aiche, a. Romantic.'2 Incredible. 
3 Enormous. 4 Gasconading, romancing. 
spleadhraich, s.f. see spleadhaireachd, 
peamant -ais, s.m. Affected surprise, vulgar 
snow, 
spleangaid,**s.f. Snot, mucus, phlegm. 
————- —ach,** a. Snotty, phlegmy. 
spleicean, s.m, see sleabhag. 
. Spleoid,** s.m. Satan. 
spleuchd, v.a. dn Stare, gaze. 2Squint. 3 
Spread out by trampling. 4tt Plaster awk- 
wardly. 5*Flatten awkwardly 6*Open one's 
mouth and eyes and stare like a fool. 
spleuchd, a, -an, s.m. Squintness of the eyes, 
squint. 2 Gaze, stare. 'S ann ort a tha 'n s., 
how you do stare! 
spleuchdach, -aiche,a. Squinting, having squint 
eyes, 2 Staring, gazing, apt to stare or gaze 
3 That spreads out by trampling 4 Spread 
out by trampling. 5* Flat, ugly as stamp- 
ed cloth or print, (*spleucach.) 
spleuchdadh, -aidh, s.m.Squinting,act of squint- 
ing. 2 Staring, act of staring 38 Gaze,stare. 
4 Act of spreading out by trampling. A’ 8—, 
pr.pt. of spleuchd i 
leuchdag, aig, -an, s.f. Squint-eyed female. 





D 


Digitized by 


NTERNET ARCHIVE 


885 


spoch 


| spleucdaid,* s.f. Foolish stater, (*spleucaid) 

spleuchdair, -ean, 8 m. Squint-eyed person, one 
who squints. 2 Starer, gazer. 3**Eye-glaa;. 
(*spleucair) 

—— ——eachd, s.f.ind. Staring, continued 
staring or gazing, 2 Squinting, habit oj 
squinting. 3 Spreading out of anything by 
trampling. 4ffPlastering awkwardly. 

— —— ——ean, n.pl. of spleuchdair. 

spleuchdan, -ain, an, sm. Pair of spectacles, 
prov. 2 Tobacco pouch—Arran. 

spleuchdlan, see spleuchdan. 

spliachil, see, spleucnd. 

sphonach,** -aich, s.m. Il. thriven animal. 

spliongag,(AH), s.f Sharp sound produced by 
drawing the bulb of the middle finger quickiy 
aud firmly across the bulb of the thumb. 

spliot,** va. Dash or throw carelessly aside. 
spliuc,* s.f. Fluke of au anchor, 

spliucan, see splidchan. 

ich, see spliuchanach, 

spliàchaa2, -ain, -an, s.m. Tobacco pouch. ?** 
Leather purse, 3**Dladder. (also splivchan 
in Gaurtoch DU 

spliùchanach, -aiche, a, Of, or belonging to, tò- 
bacco-pouches, 2 Like a tobacco-pouch, 

spliüdrach,** -aich, s.m. Bad beer, swipes. 

spliug, -a, -an, s.m. Snot. 2 Icicle. 3 Anything 
hanging down. S. a’ choilich Fhrangaich, the 
turk'y cock's proboscis. , 

spliug,ff -11ix, an, s. f. Discontented lonk, 
hanging lip. 2**Wrv mouth ‘such as is ocea- 
sioned by crying. 3* Blubber-lipped person's 
mouth. 

spliugach, -aiche, a. Splay-footed. 

spliugach, -aiche, a. Suotty, 2 Snivelling. 3 
Drivelling, stupid. — At Discontented. btt 
Having a hanging lip. 

spliugaid,* s.f. Blubbering female. 

spliügair, -ean, s.m. Splay-footed person. 

spliugair, -ean, s.m. Snotty person. ? Sniveller. 
3 Driveller, idiot. 4tfBlubvering fellow. 5tf 
Slovenly fellow. 

spliügan, -ain, s.m. Splay-footed person. 

spliuig, -e, -ean, s.f. Discontented and disagree- 
abie countenance. 

spliüigeach, -eiche, a. Discontented, having a 
discontented and disagreeable look. 

spliüigear, Ar, -an, s.m. One who has a discon- 
tented and disagreeable look. 2ftSlovenly 
fellow. 

spliut, -&, -an, s.m. Lame hand or foot. 2* Splay- 
foot [pliut, a cat’s paw.) 

spliut, v.a Slop, splash. 2 Flounce. 3 Circum: 
fuse. 4 Dash. 5ftGush out. 6* Gash. 

spliutach, -aiche, a. Lame of a hand or foot. 2 
tiGushing out suddenly, as any liquid, owing 
to the vessel containing it being broken. 

spliutadh, -aidh, s.m. Gushing, act of gushing 
out suddenly, as liquor from a broken vessel, 
A’ s—, pr.pt. of spliut. 

spliutaichs, s.f. Lameness of one hand. 2 Any 
liquor that has been spilt by the breaking of 
the vessel containing it 3 Bad or stale beer. 

spliutaire.* em, Splay-footed man 2 Splay- 
footed female. 

spliutradh, aidh, $. m. Mean and parasitical 
flattery. 2 Going from house to house for 
parasitical ends. 

spoc, :a, -an, s.m. Spoke of a wheel, 

spocach, aiche, æ. Having spokes. 

spoch, v.g, Address one angrily and quickly, 2 
Intimidate by speaking hastily or angrily. 3 
Provoke. 4 Affront, 5 Rob, spoil, despoil. 6 
*Attack angrily. 





spoch,(DC) grat, Bite, blow, and especially the. 


marks resulling—Lochaber, Kintail, &e. 'S 


D 
[| d 


D ës 6 mola l= 
ES Sng V 


i | | P 


i, i J 
LIBI 
V DNE M Tum haat = 
| r3 mi Fi A Fi = n Ng 

ENET ym | as IN 
Get i oo i i um. [| 


PAIGN 


NOIS A 


WH 


spoed 
un dìol gach righ 'bheir spoch aisde, (a 
E noineid). and every king who clips it will re- 
gret (his act.) — Filidh, p. $8. 2*5uddeu attack 
or assault, as of a cat. ! 
spochadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of addressing one hur- 
riedly or angrily. 2 Provoking, act of provo- 
king, provocation. 3 Depredation. A’ s—, pr. 
pt. of spoch. 
spochanach,* a. Fond of picking quarrels. 
—— — -.—4d,* sf. Picking quarrels, as a feeble- 
natured person, 
&po'th, see spoth, 
epodha, see spothadh. 
spollhadair, see spothadair. 
spodhadaireachd, see spothadaireach1. 
s»odhadh, see spothadh. 
spor, -oig, -an, $.f. Claw, talon, paw. 2 in ridi- 
cul», the foot or hand. 3 Fluke of an anchor. 
4**Spoke of a wheel, 6 Tram or shaft of a 
cart or barrow. 6**Clumsy leg. 7* Flat foot. 
epog, pr.pt. a’ spogadh, v.a. Seize upon with 
the claw or talon. 
spozach, -aiche, a. Clawed, pawed, armed with 
talons, 2**Clumsy-footed. (spagach.) 
epogadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of seizing upon with 
tne paws or talons. A’ s—, pr.pt. of spòg. 
spòg an uaireadair,( DM K) s.f. Hand of a time- 
piece— W. coast of Ross. S. nan uairean, the 
en dida 8. nan mionaidean, the minute- 
hand. 
spòg bheaz,( DU) s.f. Hour-hand of a time-piece. 
spòg mhór,(DU) s.f. Minute-hand of a time- 
piece. 
spog-na-cubhaig,} s.f. Heart’s ease, pansy, see 
bróg-na-cubhaig. 
gpoz-shnamha, 8./. Web-foot. 
spoid,** s,f. Hasty word. 
spoidear,** er, s.m. Hasty person. 
&poilinn,** s.f. Small joint of meat. 
spoineadh,** s.m. Bite. 
spoingeach,** see spongach. 
spoinnich,* v. Bristle against. 
epdirneach, see spairneach. 
spoithte, a. & past pt. of spoth, see spothta. 
€pol. -oil, s.m. see spathalt. 
epold,** s m. Piece of a joint of meat. S, laoigh, 
a joint of val. 
epòlda, see spathalt. 
spoldaich,** s.pl. Slain bodies, carcases, 
spoll,* -a, s.f. Quarter, leg or joint, as of a 
sheep or fowl. 
spoll, v. see spolt. {veal. 
epo!la, s m. spathalt, Spdlla laoigh, @ jont of 
spollachdach, -aiche, a. Sottish, sluggish. 2 
Stupid. 
Wier NH -ean, $. m. Stupid person, block 
head. 
epolladach,* @. see spollachdach. 
spollaidh, s.f. Shape of the head. Dh’ aithnich 
mi thu air do s., Z knew you by the shape of 
your head. 
epollan,(DC) s.m. Senseless blockhead, sumph, 
epolt, pr. pt. a’ spòltadh, v. a. Tear, mangle, 
2 Quarter, 3 Hew down, slaughter, as in bat- 
tle. 4** Abuse. 
epolt, v a. Sprinkle, bespatter. 3 Splash, 
E diy. ^ 
epolt, s m. Piece or joint of meat. 
epolta, see spòlt. 
epoitach, -aiche, o That hacks or hews down in 
battle, 2**Tearing, mangling. 3 Apt to tear, 
mangle or devour. 4 Abusing. 6 Devouring. 
spoltach, -aiche, o Sprinkling. 
epoltadh, -aida,s.m. Hacking, hewing down,slay- 
ing. slashing, massacring 2 Mangling, tear- 
ing. 3 Abusing. A’ 8—, pr.pt. of spòlt. 


spoltadh (CE) -aidb,s.m.Soattering drops of we 


sporraich ` 


ter &c. from a vessel, sprinkling— Perthshire, 
2 Bespattering. 

spoltair, s.m. see spultair, 

spoltaidh, fut. aff. a. of spòlt. 

sp»ltan.(CR) s.pl. Drops of water, &e. scattered 
from a vessel— Perthshire. 

spon, see spain, 

spónag,** -aig, s.f. Spoon, little spoon. 

spong, -uing, -an, s. m. Sponge. 2 Tinder, 
pith, touchwood. 3 in contempt, Niggard. 4 
(DMK) Excrescence that grows on the roots 
of birch-trees— W. coast of Ross. 5*Meanness. 

spongach, -aiche, a. Spongy. 2 Niggardly, par- 
simonious 3 Fungous. 

sponzail, -e, a. see spongach. 

spongair, -ean, s.m. Niggard, churl,"moucher. 

spongaireachi, $.f.ind, Niggardliness, churlish- 
ness, mean disposition. / 

sponzairean, n pl. of sponzair. (ish, 

spongalach,** a, Parsimonious, niggardly.churi- 

spongalachd, see spongaireacnd. 

spor, ~ur, pl. -an & -uirean, s. m Riding-spur. 
2 Claw, talon. 3**Dew-claàw. 4 Gun-flint. 5 
Incitement. 6f Flint. 7(DU) Piece ot quartz 
or quartzite used ın lieu of flint tor making a 
light—Gairloch. 8f Tinder. 9** Spur of à 
cock. 10 Goad. Spuir air à spògan, spurs on 
his legs. [* s.f.] 

spor, pr.pt. a’ sporadh, v.a. Incite, spur, push 
EOR A Leni ` : 

spor, ) v. a. Searc scratchin oping 
or fumblinie--Pastighien mengen 

sporach, -aiche, a. Spurred, as a horseman, hay- 
ing spurs, 2 Having talons or claws. 3 Hav- 
ing flints. 4 Like a flint. 5 That spurs or in- 
stigates. 6**l'enacious, 7**Apt to grasp, of 
a grasping disposition. 

o s.m. Spurrier, spur-maker. 2 Flint- 
cutter. 

—— ——-eachd,** s.f. Spur-making. 2 Flint-cut- 
ting. 3 Greediness. 

sporadh, 3rd, pers. sing. imp. of spor. S. e, let 
him spur. 

sporadh -aidh, s.m. Inciting, act of inciting. 
spurring on, instigating, voading. 2 ch, 
grope, fumble. A s—, pr. pt. of spor. 

sporag,4 s.f. House-sparrow, see gealbhonn, 2 
Hedge-sparrow, see gealbhonn-nam-preas. 

sporaidh, fut.aff.a. of spor. 

sporaM, see sporthail. . 

sporalaich, see sporthalaich, ; 

sporan, n.pl. of spor. 

sporan, -ain, -an, s.m. Purse, 2 Dewlap. The 
sporan molach of the Gael is a purse made of 
badger-skin, goat-skin, &e It is fastened by 
a leathern belt round the waist and hangs 
gore 1n front, often having tassels dangling 
rom it. 

sporan,§ (an), 8.m. Shepherd’s purse (plant), see 
lus: na-fola. 

sporanach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to, purses. 
2 Like a purse. 

sporan cas feannaig, see sporan feannaig. 

sporan f annaig,(DC) s. m. Mermaid's purse— 
egg of the skate or dogfish. It is enclosed in 
a tough, square-shaped sac, which, on develop- 
ment, the ovum can op-n from the inside. 
The sac has stringers for attaching itself to 
seaware, stones, de 

spor-an-teintein, see losg-bra-teine. 

sporas,(DU) s.m. see sporag. 

spordhail, see sporthail. 

sporg,* v. Ruzzle, struggle without effect. 

sporgail,* sf. Ruzzlin« noise, strugyling§with- 
out effect, ruzzle. A’ 8—, pr.pt. of spor. ` 

sporraich,* gw, Bristle. S. e rium, he bristled 
up to me. 


spór3 —— 


spòrs, -a, 8.f. (m. in Badenoch.] Sport, play, di- 
version, fun. 2 Derision, mockery, scorn. 3 
Pride. Gheibh sinn s., we shall get some fun ; 
'8i an s. a thug ort sin a dheanamh, sheer 
pride made you do that ; luchd na s., scorners. 
órsach,** -aiche, a. Sporting, fond of sport. 2 
Playful, funny. 3 Causing sport or diversion. 
4 Prone to deride or scorn. 

sporsail, -e, a. Sportful, jocose, merry. 2 Scorn- 
ful, proud, disdainful, haughty, 3 Foppish, 
beauish, gallant. 4**Jeering,deriding.  6** 
Funny. 

—— ——eachd, see sporsalachd. 

sporsair, (MS) s.m. Amuser 

sporsalachd, s.f.ind. Sportiveness, playfulness. 
2 Fastidiousness. 3 Pride, foppery. 4 Sport- 
fulness. 5**Habit of jeering or deriding. 6** 
Conceitedness, haughtiness, disda nfulness. 7 
(MS) Air, Fears., a fop. 

sporthail, s.f. Noise of scratching on boards, 2 
(AH) Subdued rattling noise, such as is made 
by a stone wall about to fall, rats, mice, &c. 
in a hole, box, &c. 

sporthail (CR) v.n. Make a rustling noise in 
searching for anything.—W. of Ross-shire. 

"sportbalaich, sf. Rustling. ^ Crubagan aa 
'nam faiche, crabs making a clawing or rust- 
ling noise 1n their burrows. A’ 8—, pr. pt. of 
sporthail. 

gpot,** v. a. Spot. 

spot, -oit, -an, s.m. [ f. in Badenoch.] Spot,stain. 
blemish. 2 Plot of ground. Air an s., imme- 
diately. 

spotach, -aiche, a. Spotted, speckled. 2 Stained. 

spotag, s.f.dim. of spot. Little speckle,blemish. 

Bporagach. -aiche, a. Spotted, blemished. 

spotaich,** v.a. Spot, speckle, blemish. 

spotaichear, fut.pass. of spotaich, 

spotaichte, past pt. of spotaich. 

spoth, pr.pt. a’ spoth &a' spothadh, v. a. Geld, 
castrate, spay. 2* Prepare straw for thatch. 
S. an t-sìl, separate the grain from the straw 
and beard after the threshing is over—DMy. 

spoth, s.m. see spothadh, 

spothadair, -ean, $.m. Gelder. | 

spothadaireachd, s.f.ind. Operation or business 
of gelding or aka E ) 

spothadh, -aidh, s.m. Gelding, castrating, spay- 
ing. 2 Castration. A’ s—, pr.pt. of spoth. 
spothaidh, fut. aff.a. of spoth. 

spothar, fut.pass. of spoth. 

spothta, past pt Gelded, castrated. 2*Prepar- 
ed for thatch, as straw, 3* Very bare, as a 
measure, 

| tsprac,**-a, s.m. Spark. 2 Life. 3 Motion. 

spracach,** a. Strong, vigorous. 

spracadh, -aidh, s.m.Strength, vigour, exertion, 
sprightliness, boldness, courage. 

spracail, -e, a. Strong, active, powerful. 2 Com- 
manding 

'epracalachd, s. f.ind. Strength, activity,exertion. 

spraic, -e, -ean, s.f. Reprimand, severe or harsh 
reproof. 2 Frown. 3 Imperious mandate. 4 

Vigour, 5 Exertion, effort. 6**Sprightliness. 
7* Augury. 8 Authoritative tone of voice and 
attitude, 9* Cleverness, 

spraiceach, -eiche, o. see spraiceil. 

spraicealachd, s.f.ind. Habit of gel dee with 
harshness or severity. 2 Habit of frowning or 

—. threatening by looks. 8 Imperiousness in or- 
dering. 4 Habit of perseverance. 65tfSevere 
ceusoriousness, 6**Arbitrariness, 7**Vigor- 
ousness. 8**Much exertion,frequent exertion. 
9°*F requent scolding. 

&praiceil, +e, a. Reprimanding severely or harsh- 
ly, scolding. 2 L[uclined to reprove severely 
or harshly. 6 Frowuing. € Impenous, lift. 


R87 


spreige 

ed, proud. 6 Harsh, severe. 6 Vigorous, 

strong, powerful, lively, active, energetic. 7 

Persevering. 8**Passionate. 9 **Sprightly. 10 

Arbitrary. 11 Authoritative, commanding. 

spraid,** s.f. Blast, puff. 2 Reportofagun. -> 

spraidh, enn, s. m. Loud blast. 2 Shot, report 
of agun. 3 Any loud and sudden sound, 4 
**Crack. 5**Jerk. 9 Explosion. 

spraidheach, -eiche, a. see spraidheil, 

spraidheil, e, a. Loud, as a blast. 2 Squally. 
3 Causing any loud or sudden sound. 3 
Sounding, as the report of a gun. 4 Bluster- 
ing. 

spraigh, v.n. see spreadh. 

spraigheadh,* -eidh, s. m. 
see spreadhadh. 

spreadh, pr.pt. a spreadhadh, v. a. & n. Burst. 
2 Emit a loud sound in bursting. 2 Kill, des- 
patch, finish. 4 Scatter, dismiss, disband, 5 
ttExplode. 6(DMy) Spray. 

spreadh,** s.m. Crack, 2 Stirring up, provoca- 
tion, 3 Rude onset, sudden onset, as of two 
fowls fighting, sudden shock, 4(DMy) Spray- 
ing. 5(DU) Explosion. 

spreadh,(DC) an, s.m. Sherds, fragments, 

spreadhadajir,* -ean, s.m. Cartridge. 

spreadhadh, -aidh, s.m. Bursting, act of burst- 
ing. 2Act of emitting a sound in bursting. 3 
Killing, act of killing, finishing or despatch- 
ing one. 4 Sudden and hard blow. 5 Loud, 
sudden sound, noise, 6 Scattering, dismiss- 
ing, disbanding. 7 Activity. 8ttLife. A’ 8—, 
pr. pt. of spreadh, 

spreadhan, -ain, s.m. Potsherd. 

spreadhan, s.m. Pot for melting cod-liver. or for 
roasting or frying, frying-pan. 2;:DMK)Ves- 
sel to hold oil for anointing wool— Lochbroom. 
3 see spreighean. 

spreadhta, past pt. of spreadh, Burst suddenly. 
2 Scattered, disbanded. 

spreag, see spreig. JR 

spreagach, -aiche, see spreigeil, 

spreagachadh, -aidh,s.1n.& pr.pt. of spreagaich, 
see spreigeadh. 

spreagadh, -aidh, $.m. & pr.pt. see spreigeadh, 

spreagaich. for spreigich, see spreig. 

spreagai!,** a. Bold, active, smart, 

spreagair, ean, s. m. Reprover. 2 Inciter, pro: 
voker. 

spreagaireachd, see spreigealachd. 

spreaganft -ain, -an, see spreangan, 

spreamb,** v.a. l'ighten one's clothes about one, 
confine oneself with tight clothes. 

spreambach,** a. Drawing one’s clothes tightly 
about one. 

spreangan, -ain, -an, s.m. Cloven stick used to 
close the wound when cattle are bled. 

spréid,(AF) s.f. Flock of sheep. 

spréid, v. Gaelic spelling of spread.— Perthshire. 

spréideach, a. Spreading, apt to spread or dif- 
fuse, 

spréidh, e s.f.coll, Cattle of any kind. 2 (AF) 
Sheep. 3 Live-stock, 4 (AF) Marriage por- 
tion of cattle. | 

spreidh, see spreadh. 

spréidh,(AF) s.f. Shoal of fish. ` 

spréidheach, -eiche, a. Abounding in cattle, 2 
Having many cattle, — 

spréidte, past pt. of spréid. Spread out. 

spreig, pr.pt. a’ spreigeadh, v.a. Blame, chide, 
reprove, scold, accuse. 2 Prompt, incite, stir 
up, instigate. 3 Enforce, press. 4 Divulge 
anything you are enjoined to keep secret. 6 
(MS) Pronounce. 6 Govern, in grammar. 7 
ttEnforce with words. 

spreige,** s.f. Disparagement. 211 Reproof,scold, 
accusation: S(DUY o). spreigeachan, le 


& pr. pt. ot spraigh, 


| sprefge ; 888 sprogaill 


for a boot. 

spreigeach, -eiche, a. Inclined to scold, blame 
or accuse. 2 Enforcing. 3 Expressive. 4 
Forcible. 5 Active, in grammar. 

spreigeadh, -idh, -ean, s. m. Blaming, accusa- 
tion, act of blaming, reproving, chiding or 
scolding. 2 Inciting, act of inciting, prompt- 
ing, instigating or stirring up. 3 Enforcing. 
pressing, act ofenforcing. 4 Reproof, scold. 
b*Pith, energy.  6* Divulging a secret. A’ 
8—, pr.pt. of spreig. Mòine gun a, pithless 


ats. 

Spreigealachd, s.f.ind. Habit of reproving, repri- 
manding, chiding or scolding. 2 Tendency or 
readiness to reprove, reprimand, chide or 
scold. 3 Proud language, insolence of speech 
4 Boldness, audacity, undauntedness. 65 Ac- 
tivity. 6 Authoritativeness, imperiousness. 7 
Provoking, provocation. 

gspreigeanta, -einte, a. see spreigeil. 

——chd, see spreigealachd. 

spreigear, fut. pass. of spreig. 

spreigearra,** a. Scolding. 2 Smart in speech, 
expressive, forcible. Beurla s., expressive 
English ; expressive language. 

&preigearrachd, sf. Scolding 2‘Smartness of 
language, expressiveness of speech. 

gpreigeil, -e, a. Reproving, censuring, blaming. 
2 Prone to reprove, censure or blame. 3 Scold- 
ing, prone to scold. 4 Authoritative, imperi- 
ous. 5 Bold, undaunted. 6 Active, lively, 
smart, energetic. 7 Vehement. 

gpreigeileachd, see spreigealachd. 

Spreigh, v. see spreadh. 

spréigh, s.f. see spréidh. 

spréigh, s. Velocity. 2 Gallant movement. 3 
Gliding. Sàr-Obair. 

spreigheadh, -idh, s.m. & pr. pt. of spreigh, see 
spreadhadh. 

spreighean,(DMK) s.m. see spreadhan, 

spreighich, -e, s.f. see spreadhadh. 

spr ighte, past pt. of spreigh, see spreadhta, 

Spreigich,*" v.a. Reprove. 2 Provoke. 

Spreicich, v.a. see spreig. 

spreigichidh, fut of o. of spreigich. 

spreigilh, gen.sing. of spreigeadh. Cha bu tu 
fhéin crioch t' aobhar spreigidh air sluagh 
ach teicheadh gu 'n tearamunn, you were not 
yourself the aim of your inciting of the people, 
but they to flee to their protector—Dain Iain 
Ghobha. 1 

spreigidh, fut.aff.a of spreig. | 

spreill, -e, -ean, $.f. Blubber-lip, 2 The tongue 
hanging out in contempt, or from discontent. 

spreilleach, -eiche, a. Klubber-lipped. 

gpreilleachd,**s. f.The deformity of blubber-lips. 

&prcilleag,** -eig, s.f. Blubwver-lipped female. 

spreiliear, -eir, pl. -a & -an, s.m. Blubber-lipped 
feliow. 

apreilieasachadh,(MS) s.m. Distortion. ` ` 

&8preócainn. s.m. Sick person, valetudinarian. 2 
Any fragile or tender thing— Skye. 

apreochainn,(MS) st Strength. 

Spreochan, -ain, s. f. Weakness, pithlessness, 
langour. 2 Weakling, weakly, decayed or de- 
crepit person, infirm old person (most fre- 
quently applied to a female.) 3ttWeak exer- 
tions. 4* Person or thing hardly hanging to- 
gether. [*spreochainn.] S. truagh cailiich, 
an infirm old woman. 

spredchanach, -aiche, a. Languid, decayed, de. 
crepit from age, infirm, weak. 2** Imbecile. 
Gus., feebly. 

spredchanachd, 8.f. Weakness, infirmity, debili- 
ty, fat Ae 8t1 Weak efforts. 

spreóchanta, -ainte, d. see spr 
Piping. 





spreóchantachd, see spreochanachd, 

spreóchdainn, s.m. see spreócainn. 

spreòd, pr.pt. a’ spreòdadh, v.a Incite, set on, 
excite, provoke, goad on. 2 Abuse by worda. 
3 Enforce. 

spreòd, -eoid, -an, s.m. Projecting beam. ?ff 

Bowsprit. Crann spreòid, the bowprit ofa 
ship. (also spreod.) 

spreod. (CR) v.a. Spread (peats to dry, &c.)— 
Arran, 

spreodach,tt a. Exciting. 

spreòdadh, -aidh, s.m. Exciting, act of exciting 
or inciting. 2 Provoking, act of provoking. 3 
Abusing, act of abusing by words. 4 Cavil- 
ling. 5 Censuring. A’ s—, pr.pt. of spreòd. 

spreódaich,(MS) v.a. Animate. 2 Tempt. 

spredid,** v.a. Cavil, censure. 

spreoid, see spreód & spreoit. 

spreoit,** s.m. Useless thing. 2 Idler, drone. 3 
Fragment. 4 see spredd. 

spredtadh, see spreodadh. 

sprineag,** -elg, An, s.f. Pebble. 

sprineagach, a. Pebuly 

spriolag,(MS) s f. Boutefeu, incendiary. 2 
Quarreler. 3 Baffler. 4 Wag. 

spriollagach, a. Wagvish. 

spriong,*" v.a. Wrinkle, corrugate. 

sprione,** s.m. Wrinkle, corrugation. 

spriongach,** a. Wrinkling, corrugating. 

spriongadh,** s.m. Corrugation, wrinkling, 

sprios,** -a, s.m. Twig, wicker. 2 Bramble. 

spriosach,** a, Abounding in, of, or pertaining 
to, twigs or wicker. 

spriosan,** -ain, s.m. Small twig or wicker. 2 
Bramble. 3 Poor, diminutive creature. 4 n. 
pl. of sprios. 

spriosanach,** o Likea twig. 2 Diminutive. 
3 Slender. 

spriuchar,** air, s.m. Sting. 

spriudhan,(DC) -ain, s. m. Thin, undeveloped 
arms, legs, &c. 2 Stunted bushes, &c. 

spriumhachan,** s.m. Budget. 

spriunan,§ Ain, s.m. Red or white currant, see 
raosar dearg & raosar geal, 

spriunanach,** -aiche, a. Abounding in, of, or 
like, currants, 

spriütan,** -ain, s.m. Finger-end. 2 in ridicule, 
Finger, hard finger. 

spriütanach,** a. Hard-fingered, 

sproch,** -a, s.m. Robbery. 

sprochadh,** -aidh, s.m. Robbing. 

sprochaill, see sprogaill. 

sprochailleach, see sprogailleach. 

sprochair, -ean, s.m. Robber. 

— ——— —eachd,** s.f. Robbery. 2 Commission 
of robbery. 

sprochd, s.m. Sadness, dejection, lowness of 
spirits, melancholy. 2 Bitterness. 3 Lament. 
dog s. au laoich, raise the hero's lament ; a 
chuir m’ anam fo s., that brought sadness on 
my soul. 

sprochdach, -aiche, @. see sprochdail. 

sprochdail, e, a, Sad, dejected, in low spirits. 2 
Causiug sorrow or dejection, 3 Melancholy, 
mournful. 

sprochdaileachd, see sprochdalachd. ` ` 

sprochdalachd, s.f. Dejection of spirits or mind, 
mournfulness, 

sprodb,** -a, -an, s.m. Sprat. 

sprodhach, o Abounding in, or of sprate. 2 
Like a sprat. 

sprodhan,** -ain, s.m. Young sprat. 

sprog(CR) s.Sturdy, a disease of sheep—Arran. 

sprog,* s. Dewlap. 

sprogail, Suth'd for brogail, 

sprogaill, -e, -ean, s.f. Cropofabird. 2 Dewlap- 
of cattle. 3 Doubie chin. 4**Cock's comb or 


sprogail) 889 spulgan 


erst. [In N. Argyll dewlap and double chin 
are sprogan—AH. 

sprogailleach, -eiche, a. Having a large crop, 
dewlap or double chin. 2 Like a crop or dew- 
lap. 3 Hanging down, as a dewlap or bird's 
crop. 

sprogan, -ain, -an, s.f. see sgròban & sprogaill. 
2(DC) Small tuft of hair under the chin of a 
deer, extended in use to a goat and a ram. 
Greim air s. a’ Bhlair, hold of Blair's whis- 
ker— Fionn an Taigh a’ Bhlàir bhindhe 

-sproganach, -aiche, a. see sgròbanach. 

spronnag,** s.f. see spronnan, 

spronnan,f -ain, s. m. Crumb, 2 pl. Crumbs, 
fragments. 3 Refuse. 

spronnanach, -aiche, &. Abounding mn small 
crumbs or fragments. 

sproth, see sprodh. 

spruacach,** a. Pettish. 

spruacanach,** a. Pettish, 

spruacanachd,** s.f. Pettishness. 

spruan, -ain, -an, s.m. Brushwood, firewood. 2 
*Shortbread. 3f1Crumbs. 

spruanach, -aiche, a. Abounding in brushwood 
or firewood. 

spruanach, -aich, 3. m. Quantity of brushwood. 

spruchag,(CR) sf. Hoard, savings—S. end of 
Arran. 

sprüdan,f s.pl. Fingers, sprouts. 

sorudhan, * s.m. see'spruileach. 

sprüidhean,** -ein, -an, s.m. Claw, paw, clutch. 
2 in derision, The fingers. 

spruidheanach, a. Clawed, pawed, having hard 


the side of the head. S. theanga, a diseams 
im catt!». 

spuaiceach, -eiche, a. Breaking, that breaks or 
splinters. 2 Thumping,that thumps or knocks. 
3 Blistered, having blisters or pustules, 4 
Causing blisters. SIT Scabbed. 6** Bruising, 
mauling, 7**Pinnacled. 

spuaicearra, æ. see spuaiceach, 2**Pettish, 

spuaichde'ch, see spuaiceach. 

spuaiche,** s./. Pet, pettishness, 

spuaieneach, a. Pettish. 

spucaid,* -e, s.f. Wheal. 2(DU) Pustula 

spueh, pr pt. a’ spuchadh, v.a. Strike with the 
paw, asa cat. 

spüd,** s.m. Balderdash. 

spudan, s.m. Chute of a still (p. 731.) 

spui treach,** -ich, s.m. Slip-siop. 

spuidsear, a zm. Baiinz-dish for a boat. 9 Bnck- 
et with a wooden handle to lift water from the 
sea— Arran. IAH) Watering-can, 

spuill, -e, -ean, s.f. see spùinn, ? 

spùill, pr zt a’ spùilleadh, see spùinn, 4 

spuille,' see spùinn. | 

spüilleach, see spüinneach, P 

spüilleadair, see spùinneadair, ' 

spinlleadaireachd, see spüinneadaireachd. ` 

spuilleadh, see spüinieadh, A 

spüillean, -e, -ean, see spùinn. J 

spuillear, see spuinneadair, 

e » fut.pass. of spuill. 

spüillearachd, see spi'nneadaireachd, 

spuillearan, ».»l. of spüil!ear. 

spui!le-chogadh, see spuinne-chogadh, 

















ngers. ^ d spuillinn, «ee spùinne. 
sprüidheanachd, s.f. Pawing or fingering clum- spuillir(e)-buidhe, (AF) ¢.m. Marsb harrier, 
silv. spuing,$ -ean, s.f. Cork-like-fungus growing on 


spruidhleach, -eiche, see spruileach, 
spruileach, -eiche, &. m. Fragmonts, crumbs, 
refuse, | 
offals. 
spruileach, v.a. Distinguish. 
spruille,** s f. Crumbs, fragmenta, dross, refuse; 
Ese, eig, -an,s.m.Small crumb, fragment, 
al. 


trees—polyporus. 2 Sponge. 3 Tinder, touch- 
wood. 4 in drision, Niggard. 

sping, gen sing. of spong. 

spuingealachi,** s.f. Sponginess, 2 Parsimoni- 
ousness. niggardliness, 

Ka 4 AAA a. Spongy. 2 Parsimonious, nig- 
gardly. 

spuinn, -e, -ean, sf. Spoil, booty, plunder, 9 
Capture. 3 Burglary, robbery. [** gives nom. 
spüinne.] 

spùinn, pr.pt a'"spüinneadh, v.a.Spoil, plunder, 
rob, 2 Deprive of anything. Ans. duine Dia? 
shall aman rob God ? 

spuinneach, -eiche, a. Spoiling, robbing, plun- 
dering. 2 Having much spoil or plunder, 

spùinneadair, -ean,é.m. Robber,plunderer, spoil- 
er. 2 Brigand. 

spuinneadaireachd, s.f Robbing, spoiling, plun- 
dering, robbery, practice of robbery. 

spuinne-chogadh,** -aidh, s.m. Predatory war- 
fare 

spuinneadairean, n.pl. of spùinneadair, 

spùinneadh, -aidh, s.m. Plunderin:, act of plun- 
dering, robbing or spoil g, 2 Depriving. act 
of depriving or taking away 3 Spoil, booty, 
robbery. A’ s—, pr.pt. of spùinn. 

spuinnear, -ir, -an, see spüinneadair. 2 fut, pass. 
of spuinn. 

spüiuuear, s.m. Tarry rope—Arran, 


spruilleagach, -aiche, a. Ful! of small crumbs 
or fragments. 2(MS) Roguish. 
Spruis,** s, f. Spruce (tree.) 
spruisealachd, s. f. vnd, Neatness, spruceness, 
trimness, 
spruiseil, -e, a. Spruce, neat, well-dressed. Gu 
s., tidily. 
&prunnan, see spronnan. 
—— — — -ach. see spronnanach. 
spruthan, see spruan. 
spuac,(MS) v.a, Strike, 2Swaddie. (spnaic. 
spuacach,** a. Pettish. 2 (DU) Shy and awk- 
ward, diffident. 
spuacachadh, pr.pt.'of spuacaich. 
spuacadh, -aidh, s.m. Breaking. act of breaking 
orsplintering. 2 Act of thumping or knock- 
ing on the head. 3 Act of blistering or raising 
blisters or pustules on the skin. 4 State of be. 
coming blistered. 5 Daubing or plastering 
awkwardly. A'Ss—. pr.pt. of spuaic. 
spuacaich, pr.pt. ar spuacachadh, v.a. Dint. 
spnaic. pr. pt. a’ spuacadh, v.a. d n, Break or spü/nnearach, @. Piratical. 
splinter 2 Thump, knock onthe head. 3 spuinnearachd, see spuinneadaireachd. 
Blister, raise blisters or pustules on the skin. spüinnearan, n.pl. of spüinoear. 
4 Become blistered or covered with blisters spuir,* gen.sing. & m.pl. of spor. 
— or pustules 6* Plaster awkwardly with spuir, see spor. S. na h-iolaire, the eagle’s claw. 
. ell your might. 6 ttSmudge. 7 Bruise, maul. spuirean, n.pl. of spor. 
spuale, -e, -ean, s.f. The crown of the head. 2) spuirse, s.f.ind. Spurge, milkweed—euphorbdia 
Pinnacle of a tower. 3 Callosity,kind of swell- exque & e. helroscoyia, 
ing 4 Blister, pustule, 5 Scab. 6ttSpeck. | spuirseach, -eiche, a. Abounding in spurgo. 2g 
7 Smudge. &** Blue mark. 9 (CR) Moe or Like spurge or milkweed. | 
spot on the face—Suth’d. 10**Pettishness. 11 spuis, -e, -ean, s.f. Pocket.” 
trWound, 12* Bruise, maul, 13* Tumour on spuigan,(DU) sm. Kiln-dried a 2 Small 


a 


p "mp "ém omm "frt ta^ weng o tou 


epulgan 


890 


stradach 


peu EE Sd gg 


quantity taken and eaten after hnsking with 
the teeth. Used coljectively, see spiolyan, 

ER s.f. Nail of a cat. 2 Clutch. 3ttCat’s 
claw. 

spullach,* -aiche, a. Nailed. 2 Greedy. 

spullach,* -aich, s.m. Greedy, monopolizing fo- 
male. [*s./.) 

spullair,* -ean, s.m. Greedy man. 

spult, v.a. Spatter, bedalbble, sprinkle. 2 Splash. 
spr.nkle. 3 Tear, mangle. (also spolt.) 

spult,** s.m. Splash. sprinkling. (also spolt.) 

spultach, a. Splashing, bespattering, sprinkling, 
2 Tearing, mangling. 3 Devouring. (also spol- 
tach.) 

spultadh, -aidh, s.m. Respersion. 2 Splashing. 
sprinkling. 3**Aspersion. 4 Tearing, mang- 
ling. A’ s—, pr.pt.of spult. (also spoltadh.) 

spultaidh.fut.af.a. of spult. 

spultair,** s.m. Dabbler, one who splashes or 
bespatters. 2 Tearer mangier. (also spoltair ) 

spultaireachd,** s.f. Splashing, bespattering, 
sprinkling. 2 Tearing, mangling. 

spultairean, n.pl. of spultair. 

spultar, a. Apt to splash or bespatter. 

spultar, fut.pass. of spult. 

spungail,** a. Niggardly, churlish. (spongach.) 

spungair,** Gun, s.m. Niggard, churl. 

spungaireachd, s.f. Niggardliness, churlishness, 

spungairean, n.p/. of spuagair. 

spungalachi, s.f. Niggardliness. 

spuran, see sporan. 

SoD'ir-an, -Ain, -an, sve spàrsan, 

spursanach, see sparsanach, 

spurt, see spors. 

gput,** s.m.. Kunuch. 

sput,(DMK) s. The smallest particle. Cha’n 
"eil s. céille aige, he has not the smallest part- 
cle of sense—W. coast of Ross. 


&pü^, -a, -an s.m. Spout, spout of water. 2 Pour 
of rain. 3 Flux. 4 Cascade. 5 tn contempt, 
Rad drink. 6(DMv) Disease in cattle, diarr- 
hoea in cattle or sheep. Bòs., uan s., @ cow 
with diarrhoea, a lamb with diarrhoea ; tob- 
raichean 'nan spütaibh dian, fountains in im- 
petvous torrents ; gunna-spüt, @ syringe, [** 
gives gen. spüit.] 

spùt, pr.pt. a’ spùtadh, v.a. & n. Spout, pour 
out, squirt. 

sputach, -aiche, 0. Spouting, squirting, that 
spouts or squirts. 2 Sloppy, miry or vapid (of 
drink.) 3**Pouring. 3 (DU) Worthless, con- 
temptible. 

sputachan, -ain, -an, s.m. Syringe, squirt. 
na snutachain, @ syringe 

spùtadh, -aidh, s.m. Spouting, act of spouting 
or squirting. 2 Pour of water. 3 Torrent, 
cascade — A' s—, pr pt. of spùt. 

sputaidh, fut, Of a. of spùt. 

sputair,* Gan, ëm Bird.. 2 Syringe. 

&pütan, -ain, -an, s.m.,dim. of spùt. Small spout 
or squirt. 9 Small cascade, jet orrill. 3 
Syringe. 

spütanach. -aiche, a. Full of little spouts,squirts 
or cascades. 2 Like a syringe,, 

sputar, f^!.pass. of spùt, 

sputarsaich,** s.f. Slip-slop. 

sputhuinn, (CR)s. Straw not threshed but seed. 
less— Argyl. 2(DC) Straw drawn and comb. 
ed for thatch. 

srabag. (AF) s.f. Cockle, 

gra'adh,** s.m. Abstertion. 

sràbh, -aibh, an, s.m. Straw, 2ttStraw fuse for 
blasting. 3**Plenty. 4 Falling water,  A' 
trusadh nan s. agus a’ leigeil nam boitean leis 
an abhainn, gathering straws and allowiny the 
trusscé to go with (he stream; & uisgo, water 


Gun- 


pouring, as from the roof of a house, 
Gavrloch sràibhean—DU.] 

srabh,* v.a. Scatter here and there, 

srabhach, -aiche, d. Strawy, full of straws. 9 
Like a straw. 3* Scattered. 4**Plentiful, 6 
Squandering, 

srabhadh,** sm Diffusion. 

srabhag, -aig, -an, s.J. dim. of sràbh. Little 
straw, 2 Straw laid on wood ina kiln under 
the grain. 

srabhagach, -aiche, a. Full of little straws. 

tsrabhan, ain, sm Superfluity. 

sràbhan, -ain, -an, s.m. Little straw. 2 pl. of 
of srabh. 3(DU) Broken straw mixed with 
kiln-dried corn. 

srabhanach, -aiche, æ Full of little straws. 

srabhard, s.m. Quarrel, dispute,riot.— Rob Donn, 

srac,(DU) v.a. Stroke with a tawse, &c 

srac, pr.pt. a’ sracadh, v.a. (f n. Tear, rend, cud 
asunder. 2 Rob, spoil, plunder. 

srac, sraic, s m. Noise of cloth in the act of 
tearing 2 Noise made by a scythe in the pro- 
cess of mowing. 3 Prattling. 

sràc,( DU) s.m.Stroke given with a tawse or rod. 
2 Strickle for sharpening a scythe. S. speal- 
ain, scythe-strickle. 

sracach, -aiche, a. Tearing, that tears or rends 
2 ull of rents, 3**Apt to tear. 

sracadair, see sracair. 

eachd, see sracaireachd. " 

sracadh, -aidh, s.m. Tearing, act or state of tear. 
ing or rending, rent, tearing, cutting asunder, 
fissure. 2 Robbing, act of robbing;or plunder- 
ing. 3 Twig, shoot, sprout. 4**Pulling. bag 
Fissure, tear, rent. 6 Robbery, spoil, extore 
tion, A’ 8—, pr. pt. of srac. 

ghee Anti s.m. Act of striknig with a tawse 
or rod. 

sracair, -ean, 8 m. Tearer, render, one who 
tears or rends, 2 Spoiler, robber, 3 Cham- 
pion. 4 Extortioner. 

sràcair,"* s.m. Gossip. 

sracaireach, -eiche, a./Tearing, rending, 2 Giye 
en to extortion. 3 Given to fighting. 

sracaireachd, s.f. Tearing, continued tearing or 
rending. 2 Habit of tearing. 3 Extortion, 
4 Hard fighting. 5 Oppression. 

sràcaireachd,** s.f. Gossiping. 

sracanta,* -ainte, a. Turbulent. 2 Oppressive, 
apt to extort. 3 Vigorous, stout. 4 Tearing, 
(see sracaireach. ) 

sracantachd, see sracaireachd. b. Ké 

srachd, see srac. 

ach, see sracach. 

air, see sracair 

aireach, see sracaireach. 

aireachd, see sracaireachd. — .— 

srachdta, see sracta. 

SE past pt. of srac. Torn. 2 Spoiled, rob- 

e * 

srad, pr.pt. a’ sradadh,v.n.Sparkle, emit spar 
strike fire. 2ttRun swittly. pgs 

srad, -aid & -a, pl, -an, s. f. Spark of fire. 9 
*Quick temper. 3**Drop. 

srada-bianain, $.f.pl. Ignis-fatuus. 

praa, -aiche, a. Emitting sparks. 2 Fall of 
sparks. ; 

sradadh, -aidh, s.m. Sparkling, act of sparkling 
or emitting sparks. A s—, pr.pt. oí srad. 

sradag,-aig, -an,s./.dim. of srad. Little spark. 2 
Nettle— Hebrides, see deanutag. Beum nan 
sradagan, the stroke that causes sparks. 

sradagach, -aiche, a. Emitting sparks. 2 Full 
of sparks. 

sradaich,( MS) v.n. Glisten. 

sradanta,* -ainte, a. Quick-tem 

gradrach,* -aich, s.f£. Sparkle. 


[ pl. in 


tA 














red, 
Half tnebristy 


- A pi e rm ` om on 


srAibhlean 


ee — — — e — 


gràibhlean, ein, -an, s.m. Little straw. 2 Sin- 


gle straw. 

—ach, 

straws, 
sràid, -e, -ean, s.f. Street, lane. 2 Walk, prom- 
enade.saunter, act of walkin 7, as for exercise, 
3 Row, rank. S.-leth-taoibh, a by-s're»t ; mar 
pholl nan sraidean, like the mire of the streets; 
gabh s., take a walk. 

gràid,* v.n. Walk, pace. 

-——each, -eiche, a. Full of streets. 
many or fine streets. 3 Like a street, 
Walking, fond of walking. 

-——,* s.m. Lane. 

sraiileachan, -ain, s.m. Saunterer. 2 Vagabond. 

sraideachd, s.f. Habit of walking or sauntering. 
2 Act of walking or sauntering, promenad- 


ing. 

Sràideag, -eig, -an, s f., dim. of sràid. Little 
street or lane. 2 Skip, leap, long pace. 3 
Short walk. 4 Street walker, whore, 5**Mat. 

gràideamachd,* s.f.ind. Walking for pleasure or 
exercise. 2 Pacing. 

sraideamaich,* v.a. Walk for pleasure or exer- 
cise. 

fsraidean, -ein, -an, 
(plant. ) 

sràidean, -ein, -an, s.m. Little street. 2 Village. 
3 n pl. of sràid. 

Sràidear, -ir, -an, $.. Saunterer, lounger. 

— achd, s.f.ind. Lounging, sauntering 
about, promenading, promenade. 

sràideas, -eis, s.m. see sràidearachd. 

sraideasachd,** s.f. Airing, 

sraideisich, v.a. Stroll, walk, 

sraidheag, -e'g, s.f. Cake. 

sraidich, v.a. Jaunt. 

sraid-imeachd, s.fand. Walking about at ease, 
promenading, lounging, sauntering, 

sriid-sheomar, s.m. Gallery. 

sraigh," e s.f, The cartilage of the nose. Cuir, 
idh mi car an sraigh do shròine, Z will twist 
the cartilage of your nose. 

sraigh, pr.pt. a’ sraigh, v.a. see sreoth. 

eartaich,* s.f, see sreothartaich. 

sraing, s.f. Lace, embroidery-work—Dain Iain 
Ghobha. 

fsrait, * s.f. Tax, tine. 

sraith, see sreath. 

Sram,** s.n. Matter running from the eyes. 

-——ach, a. Blear-eyed. 

sramh, -aimh, s.m. Jet of milk running from a 
cow’s udder. +2 Matter running from the 
eyes. 3(DMy) Jet of beeror whisky that comes 
through the hole in the cask. 

grang,"* -aiug, s,m. Frown. 

srann, -ainn & -a, pl -an, 8.f Snore, snorting. 
2 Whizzing or whistling sound. 3 Whistling 
of the wind, as in the cordage of a ship. 4 
Lond noise of a bagpipe. 5 Hum. 6 Any aér- 
ia! sound produced by quick motion. 7 ** 
Twaneing noise. 8** Noise of a bowstring. 9 
Impetus of one walking fast. 10 Drink as 
deep as one’s breath will permit. Pioba’s 
beachdaile s., a pipe of the cheerwest strain: tha 
S. aice, she 18 snoring , S, na sine, the noise of 
the blast. 

srann, pr.pt. a’ srannail, vn. Snore. 
3 Make a humming or whistling noise. 4t* 
Buzz. 5'*Twang. 6ttHum. 7* Drink deep. 

erannach, -aiche, a. Snoring, snorting. 2 Hum- 
ming, making a humming sound, 3 Making 
a whistling or whizzing sound. 4 (DMK) 
Speaking through the nose— Caithness. 

an, -ain, -an, S. M., dim. of srann, see 

srannan, 

, "aidh, s.m. d pr.pt. Same meanings as 


-aiche, a. Abounding in little 





2* Walk the streets. 
2 Having 


4tt 


8, m. Shepherd’s purse 








2 Snort, 





The oomai weg geng ——— < a— M Áo o —— 


Digitized by 


PRITCORICT Amen] 
INTERNET ARCHIVE 


801 


SCR RO, o 2.. 
srannail. 2* Great offence. ; 


srannaich, see srannail. 
we -ghaoithe, s. f. Loud-sounding 
wio. f 
srannail, s.f. Snoring, act of snoring or snort- 
ing. 2 Humming, acb of making a humming 
sound. 3 Act of making a whistling or whiz- 
zing sound. 4*Great offence, 5 Neighing. 6 
Loud hoarse noise.  7ffBuzzing. 8**Contin- 
ued whizzing. A’s—, pr.pt. of srann. S. a 
chuid each, the snorting of his horses. [Not 
neighing —MM.] | 
ZP a. Humming loully. 2 Snoring, 
snorting. 3 Neighing. 4 Whizzing. 
srannair, -ean, s.m, Snorer. 
srannan, -ain, -an, 8. ?n. dim. of srann. 
(child's plaything.) 2 Grasshopper. 
ming noise. 4 Whizzing noise. 5 Great 
hoarseuess, 6 Rattling in the throat. 71f 
Buzzing toy. S. séididh, à kind of whirligig. 
(see srannchan.) 
ach, see srannach. 
aich,(MS) v.a. Hum, as bees. 2 Hiss. 
sraunartach, -aiche, o Snorting. 2 Timid. 3 
Skittish (of horses.) 
srannartaich, -e, s.f. see srannail, Thoisich e 
air s., he began to snort, 
srannchan,** -ain, s.m. Humming-board, thin 
notched piece of wood attached at one end to 
a string, and making a loud humming noise 
when moved with a swift vertical motion. 
[Srannan in Argyll. | 
sranndanaich, see srannanaich. 
srannrach, see srannach, 
srannraich, -e, s.f see srannail. Beachan gheug 
ri s.. the bees of the branches humming. 
tsraodh, -a, s.m. Sneeze. 
srioithleagan, -ain, s.m. Battledore. 
tsraoil, v.g. Push. 2 Scatter. 3 Tear. 
sraoileach, æ. Apt to tear, given to tearing. 2 
EAas:)v torn. 
sravileadh, see fraoileadh. 
sraoilesgacb, qd. Queanish, sluttish. 2 Spark- 
ling, as fire. 
sraoilleag, s.f. Scullion, dirty hussy. 2 Spark 
of fire. 3 Species of berry. 
sraoilleanach, s.m. Scullion. 
sraoin, -e, s.f. Huff, pet. [pride. 
—— —e, s.f. Hutf, pet, swell of petulance or 
eiseach, a. Hutfish, petulant, pert, queru- 
ous, 
sraon, -aoin, s.m. see sraonadh. 2(DU) Shove 
toa floating body Cnir s. fodha, shove it off. 
sraon, pr pt. a’ sraonadh,v.a. Make a false step, 
fall sideways. 2 Stumble, slide. 3 Rush for- 
ward with violence. 4 Stray. t5 Turn. t6 Scat- 
ter. 7(DU) Shove. 
sraonadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of making a false step, 
or falling sideways. 2 Stumbling, act of stum- 
bling 3 Act of rushing forward with violence, 
4 Great offence. 5ttDigression, ship. 6 Huff, 
7 Impetus of one walking fast. 8 tfRush. 9 
**(uiex motion. A' s—, pr. pt. of sraon. 
Guiniche sraonadh, keenest speed— B. Doran, 
l. 50 
sraonag. $.f. Vessel with a strong forward mo- 
tion.— Dain 1. Ghobha. 
sraonais, can, s.m. Huif, swell of sudden anger 
or arrogance. 2* Great snuffiness.: 
sraonaiseach, -eiche, o Huffish, snuffy. 2 
Arrogant. 3 Querulous, petulant. 
sraoniiseachd. sf. Pettishness, querulousness, 
huffishness, 2 Arrogance. 3 Pertness. 
srath, -a, -an, s.m. Valley through which a river 
runs. 2 Low-lying or flat part of a valley dis- 
trict or farm. 3 Any low-lying country along a 
river, strath, 4 *Meadow. 5 Mag «t inhabi- 


Rattle 
3 Hum- 





srath 


ted part of a country, in contra-distinetion to 

ils hilly ground. 6 Del. 7 rarely, Marshy 
ground. 8 Plain beside a river, Eas a’s ài!le 
srath, a waterfall in the prettiest dell , luchd- 
àiteachaidh an t-srath, the inhabitants of the 
valley. 

fsrath, -aith, an, s.m. Tax, fine, amercement. 

srathach, -aiche, a. Full of straths or valleys. 
2 Dwelling in valleys. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Act or circumstance of 
imposing a genera) fine. 2 laxing, taxation. 
tsrathaich, v.a. Impose a general fine, tax. 
srathair, -ean, s.m. Stroller, lounger. 

srathair, -e & -thrach, pl. -thraichean, s.f. Cart- 
saddle. 2 Pack-saddle. 
na caidearan a tighinn air na srathaichean, 
the ca/dlgers will be talking of pannier-saddles. 
—i. e. every one to his trade. 

srathan, -ain, an, s m. dim. of srath. Little 
strath or valley. 

srathanach,-aiche,a.A bounding in little valleys. 

srathanach, auch, s.m. Inhabitant of a little 
valley. 

sreabh, see sramh., 

tsreabhan. .ain, s.m. Cake. 

sread, s. see sreath. 

sread, see sreadan. 

fsréad, -a, -an, s.m. Herd, flock. 2 Troop. 3 
Row, rank. 

sreadach, see sreathail. 

sreailachacdh, see sreathachadh., 

sreadaich, see sreathaich. 

srea(laichte, see sreathaichte. 

sreailan.tt s.m. Tirade, torrent of words. 

sreadh, see sreath. 

sreafan, see streafon. 

sream, -a, -an, s.m. See sreamadh. 

Stream, mr nt. a’ sreamadh, v.a. d n. Wrinkle, 
become wrinkled or corrugated. 2 Corrugate, 
contract into furrows or wrinkles. 3 Grin, as 
anangry dog. 4*Rheum. 

ereamach, -aiche, a. Wrinkled, corrugated. 2 
Corrugating, causing wrinkles. 3 Grinning, 
as an angry dog. 5 Blear-eyed. 

sreamadh, -aidh, s.m. State of becoming wrin- 
kled. 2 Act of corrugating, or causing wrin- 
kles. 3Grinning, act of grinning, as an an- 
gry dog. 4 Wrinkle. 5 Distortion of the face. 
6 t Curbing or checking by the nose, 7 ti 
Rheum. 

sreamald,® e -ean, s.f. String of slaver or snot. 

fsreamh, v.n. Stream. flow 

tsreamh, -eimh, sm Stream, spring. 

sreamhaich, v. Blear. 

sreamh-shuil, -shul, s.f. Blear-eye. 

sreamh-shuileach, -eiche, o Blear-eyed. 2 Hav- 
ing wrinkled eyes or eye-hds. 

sream-shuileach.ff -eiche, a. Having wrinkled 
eyes or eye-liis. 

Tsrean, s.m. Wheezing. 

sreang, v.d. Extend. 2 Draw out into threads, 
3 Tear. 

sreang, -einge, -an, 8. f. String, line. cord. 2 
Rope. 3 Charm to prevent harm from an evil 
eye. 4 Ridge. 5 The part of a hand fishing- 
line held in thehand, 6 In pl. applied to fish. 
inz.lines.— DU. lasgach shreangan, ttne-fish- 
ing ; tharruing i an t-sreang le rogha beachd, 
she drew the string with the best arm. 

&reangach, -aiche, a. Stringed, furnished with 
strings. 2 Stringy. 3 Composed of strings. 4 
Capillary. 5 Dilute. 6 Lineal. 7 Strung, 
threaded. 8* Like a string or thread. 

Breangachadh, -aidh, s.m. Stringing, act of 
stringing or fitting with strings. 2 Actof at- 
tenuating or making slender. A’ 6—, pr.pt. of 
greangaich, 


D 


NTERNET ARCHIVE 


892 


3Straddle. Bithidh } 


sreath | b Wëien 
ire oui ‘alg, -an, s.f. Small string, thread, 
cora. 


sreangagach, -aiche, a. Full of little threads or 
strings, stringy. 

sreangaich, pr.pt. a’ sreangachadh, v.a. String, 
cord, fit with strings or cords. 2 Draw out in- 
to strings. 3 Attenuate, make slender. 4 
Make subtle. 5**Bend with strings. 6*Get 
capillary. 

sreangaichte, past pt. of sreangaich. Fitted with 
strings or cords. 2 Attenuated, made slender. 
3 Tiel. 4 Capillary. 

sreangair,** s.m, Sneaking, half-starved fellow. 

sreangan, -ain, -an, s.m. Small string. 2 Thread 
Mid which shoes are sewn. 3 Littlerope or 
ine. 

sreaganach, -aiche, d. see sreangagach. 

rr seges (DC) s.m. Reef-points of a sail— 

ye. 

sreang-art,** -airt, 8.f. see sreang-tart. 

sreangartach,** -aich, s.m. Tail raw-boned man, 
in derision. 

, a. Like a loadstone, magnetic. 

sreang-bogha,$ s.f. Rest-harrow —ononis arvensis, 








647. Sreang-boqha. 

sreang-chumail, s.f. Awe-band. 

sreang-lion,** -liontan, s.f, Casting-line, casting- 
net. 

sreang-riaghailt,** s.f. Plumb-line, plummet, 
ruling-line, mason's parallel line. 

sreang-stiüiridh,** EI Stern-rope. 

sreang-tart,** s.f. Loadstone. 

sreang-thombhais,** s.f. Measuring-line. 2 Sur- 
veyor's line or chain. 

sreang-thrian, see sreang-bogha. 

sreann,* see srann. 

sreannartaich,* see srannartaich, 

sreann-chor,* s.f. Whirlwind—/s/ay. 

sreap, see streap. 

sreat, sm. see sreatan. 

greatan,* -ain, s.m. Screech. S. lughadaireachd, 
a screech of blasphemies. 

sreath, a, -an, s. m. Series, class, order, row, 
rank, stratum, layer, 2 Issue, 3 Round, 
circle. 4(AH) Reef ina sail. 5(AF) Herd, 
troop. flock. 6**Swathe, as of grass. 7 Drill 
or row of potatoes.  8** Long line, 9 (DU) 
Line of printing, print. 10(DU) Furrow. Tha 
e ‘cur feamainn ‘san t-s., he puts seaware in 
the furrow ; 8. aghaidh, or sreath beoil, the 
van or front rank of an army ; 8. meadhon, 
centre rank ; s. chül, the rear rank ; an dà sh., 
in two rows; le sreathaibh, with rows (of 
jewels.) On stated occasions of carousal it was 
customary among the Gael of old to sit in & 
circle, which they called sreath. The cup- 
bearer filled the cup to the brim at every 
round, &nd however potent the liquor might 


UF 


Dën" i 
m gd 5 d SE d. . mm A, = 3 
LI nmi kd RA 3 P 
i ‘| jd. H mi m | E LD ET Eel | ` 
"9 Pus L Re i (bk, 


m Pm SE RT h 
ZA lz VH ka "E 
| Jj 


4 
x= b 


sreath 


be, it was cleared off at a draught. These j 
scenes of intemperance often lasts for three 
days, and it was deemed effeminate in anyone 
to retire sober. At such drinking matches 1b 
was usual for two men to be in attenilance at 
the door with a litter, to carry off tu bed every 
individual as he fell senseless from his chair. 
—** Let, 

greathach, -aiche, a. see sreathail. 

—adh, -aidh, s m. Arrangement, 2 Act 
of setting or arranging in ranks or rows. 3 
Drawing up in lines. 4 Rolling into swathes, 
as grass. A's—, pr.pt. of sreathaich. 

sreathadh, s.m. Sneezing. 

greathaich, pr.pt. a’ sreathachadh, v.a. Place or 
seb in ranks or rows, draw up in ranks. | 

—— —— —te, past pt. of sreathaich, Placed in 
ranks or rows, drawu up in lines. 

sreathail, -e, @ Ranked, in ranks or rows. 2 
Iu classes. 3 Lineal. 4 Full of ranks or rows. 
5** Full of rolls or swathes, as grass. 

sreathainn, e, s.f Straw on which corn is laid 
in a kiln. 2 Kiln-straw. 3 Materials of a be, 
i.e. drawn straw. 

sreathal,** -ail, a. That is in rows. 

sreathan, n.pl. of sreath, 25$.m. Little row or 
rank. 3 see sreothan. 

sreathan,** s.m. Vellum, 
covers an unborn calf. 3 Film. 
s., as thin as a fiin. 

sreathart, v. see sreothart. 

——-—aich, s.f. sea sreothartaich. 

greathnaich,** v.a. Wet, moisten, 2 Spread out, 
extend. 





2 Filmy skin which 
Cho tana ri 





te, past pt. Wetted, moistened, 2 
Spread out. ` 

gréine, gen, of srian. 

sreing, -e, -ean, see sreang. 

sreinge, gen.sing. of sreang. 

greinglean,* s.f. see sringlean, 
sréip, gen. of sreup. 

sreódadh, (MS) s. m. 
giving advice. 

sreoth, v.n. Sneeze. 

sreoth, s.m. see sreothart. 

sreothan, -ain, -an, s.m. Caul. 2 Semen, 8 
Film. Sreothan óig-aoin, after-birth. 

sreothart, -airt, -an, s.m. Sneeze. 

-ach, -aiche, a, Sneezing, 2 Causing to 

sneeze, 

aich, -e, s.f. Sneezing, frequent sneez- 
ing. Thòisich e air s., he began to sneeze, 

ereud, -a, -an, s.m. see sreath & treud. 

sreud,(CR) s.m. W. of Ross for sreath. 

-—ach, see sreathach. 

&reup, see streup. 

——--ach, -aiche, a. see streupach. 

srian, -éine, pl. -ean & Lan, s. f. Bridle. 
curb, bridle and reins. 2 Restraint. 3 Stripe. 
streak. 

Brian, pr pt, a’ srianadh, v.a. Bridle. 2 Curb, 
restrain. 3 Control. 

srianach, -aiche, a. Bridled, like a bridle, of a 
bridle. 9 Curbing, that curbs or restrains. 
3 Cackled, 4*Streaked. Each s., ceumnach, 
a bridled, prancing horse ; an seillean s., the 
ring-streaked bez. 

@riauach, see strianach, 

—d, s.f. Brindle. 2 State of being ring- 
streaked. 3 Ruling or mavaging by means of 
& bridle. 

srianadair, (MS) s.m, Lorimer. 

erianadh, -aidh, 3.1m. Bridling, act of putting in 
a bridle. 2 Bridling, act of curbing or restrain- 
ing. 3 Reining. 4**Pulling down the power 
of an enemy. A’s—, pr.pt. of srian. 

srianaich, v.g. Bit, bridle, as a horse, 2 (M$) 





[*sringlein.] 


Inciting, encouraging. 











893 sroineiseachd 


Hold, 3* Marble. 

srian-bhuidhe, a. Streaked with yellow. 

srian-chlais, -e, -ean, s.f. Furrow in a column, 

——each, -eiche, a. Furrowed, as a cole 
umn or pillar. 

srianta, past pt. of srian. Bridled. 2 Restrained, 
checked, curbed, reined. [*sriante] 

srid, v.n. Dribble. 

RE -eiche, a. White, streaked with dark 
colour, 

srideag, -eig, -an, s.f. Drop. 2 Spark. 

srideagach, -aiche, a. Falling in small drops, 2 
Tabby. 

srideagaich. v.a. Besprinkle, 

sringlean, -ein, s.m. ‘T'he strangles, a disease in 
horses. 

sriod, see srad, 

sriod, pr pt. a’ sriodadh, v.a. Run swiftly, run 
like wild fire. 

sriodag, see srideag. 

aich,* v see srideagaich. 

sriut, awt, s.m. Torrent of quick sounds,tirade, 
2 Rote. 3**Long tedious rhyme  4**Quick 
rehearsal, as of rhyme. 5**Speech rapidly de- 
livered, 

sriutach, -aiche, a, Rapid in rehearsing. 2 Ree 
hearsing rapidly. 

sriutach, -aich, s.m. Rapid rehearsal, 2 Rhym- 
ing. 3 Long and rapid rhyme, tedious rhyme, 

sriulaiche, -an. s.m. One who repeats or recites 
rapidly, 2 Rhymer. (sriut3ich—McL & DJ 

sriutan,** -ain, s.m, Long and quick repetition 
of news or poetry. 2(DU) Quick, jerky walk. 
S. ghuidheacnan, @ torrent of oaths or swears 
nn. , 

srohach,** a. Apt to push, thrust or shove, 

srobadh, -aidh, -ean, s. »». Push, thrust, 2 
Pushing, thrusting, shoving. 3 Small quantis 
ty of i'euor. 

tsroghall,t -aill, s.m. Whip, lash. 

sròil, gen.sung. of srol, 

sròin, v a. Deviate, turnfaside. 

sroin,* s.f. Huff. Tha s. air, he is huffed or of 
rended. 

sroin-adhareach, s.m. Udicorn. 

sroin-audach ** -aich,s,m. Pocket-handkerchief, 

sroine, gen,sing. & n pl. of sron. 

srdineach,** a. Projecting, asa rock. 2**Large- 
nosed, 3 Sharp-nosed. 4 Apt to smell, snuff 
or snuffle, 5 Sharp-scented. 6 Nasal, like a 
nose. 7 Likea headland. 8 Projecting, asa 
headland, 9**Having headlands or promon- 
tories. 

sroineachadh, -aidh, sm, Breathing. 2 Smell- 
ing. 3 Snorting. 4 Snuffing, snuflling. 

sroineadach,ft -aich, -aichean, s. m. Handker- 
chief. 

groineadh, gen.sing. of sron—Skye. 

sroineag, s.f. Projecting rock. 2 see sronag. 

ach, a. Having numerous promontories 

or jutting points. 

sroineagaicn, see sronagaich. 

sróineall, s.f. Musroi, nose-thong of a horse’s 
brille. 

sroinean, s.m. see srdineall. 2(DU) dim. of sròn. 
Toe of a stocking- 

sroineann. a. (sròin -- fhionn) White-nosed.; 

sróinean, n.pl. of sròn. 

sroineil,** aq. Nasal. 

sro.neis, e, $.f. Snorting. 2 Snufüing. 3 Smell- 
ing. 4 Puffing. blowing from shortness of 
breath. 5* Huffiness. 

sroineiseach, -eiche, a. Smelling, snuffing. 2 
Snorting. 3 Apt to smell, snuff or snort. 4* 
see sraonaiseach. 

sroineiseachd,** $.f. Habit of smelling, snuffling 
or snorting. 








sroineisich 894 


gróinetsieh.tt pr. pt. a’ srdineiseachadh, v. a. 
S&melling. 2 Rubbing noses. 

sroin-eudach,** -aich, s m.Pocket-handkerchief. 

sróin-fhionn,** a, White-nosed, as a quadruped. 

sroin-iall, see sróineall. 

srdinich, pr.pt. a’ sroineachadh, v. a. Breathe 
through the nostrils, 2 Smell, apply the nose 
to anything. 3 Snort. 4 Trace with the scent, 
as a dog, scent. 5 Snuffle. 6 Pant. 

sróinich, s. see sróineis. 


sroinnionn,a. (for sroin-fhionn) Na laoigh òga, 


sroinnionn guailleach, the young, white-nosed, 
well-set-up calves ` Donn. Bàn, p. 60. 
sroin-sréine, see sroineall. 

srointean, m.pl. of sròn. 

sròl, -dil, pl. -an & -tan, s. m. Banner, ensign, 
flag 2 Silk, satin, gauze, lace, crape. 3 Any 
flowing or fine part’ of a lady’s dress.  4** 
Flowing ribbon,streamer,sash. Le'n sioda’’s le 
"n sroltaibh, with tharr silks and their sashes. 

sròlach, -aiche, @ Having banners or ensigns. 
2 Like a banner. 3 Abounding in, or like, silk, 
satin, crave or gauze. 4 Flowing, as the deli- 
cate parts of a lady’s dress, ribbons or sashes. 
5* Dressed with crape. $ 

sról-bhratach, -aich, -aichean, $.f. Silken ban- 
ner, pennon or flag. 

——— — ——, -aiche, a. Silk-flagged, having silk 
pennons, flags or banners. 

sròn, -òine & -a, [sróineadh — Skye] pl.-an, -e** & 
sròintean, s.f. Nose. 2 Promontory, headland 
running from a mountain to a '*strath." 3 
Ridge of a hill. 4 Point of à plough. 5** 
Nostril. 6ttProw. "7(DU) Toe of a stocking. 
Ghabh e sin anns an t-sróin,Ae took offence at 
ihai—ii',-he look that wn the nose ; tha s. air, 
heis huffed, he i$ offended ; bràigh na sròine, 
the bridge of the nose ; s. chrom, aquiline nose ; 
s. dhireach, Grecian nose ; s. smutach, a pug 
nose. [srom—Gairloch & Lochbroom—DU.] 

sronach, -aiche, a, Nosed, nasal. 2 Having a re- 
markable nose. 3 Abounding in promontor- 
ies or headlands. 3** Sharp-scented. ` 5** 
Apt to smell or snuff. 6(DU) Ready to take 
offence. 

sronach,* s.f. Nose-string 

srónachaidh,(AF) s. Sea-stickleback. 

sron-adbarcach,* -aich, s.m. Rhinoceros. 

sronag, -aig, -an, 8.7., dim. of sròn. Small nose. 
2 Small promontory. 3 Hillock. 
prominent or projecting part of a rock or hill. 
Feadh nan s., among the jutting rocks. 

——-ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in small prom- 
ontories. 2* Having numerous headlands or 
promontories. 3 Jutting, as rocks. 4 Abound- 
ing in hillocks. 

Sich, -e, s.f. Smelling. 2 Tracing by scent, 
asa dog. 3**Snuffing, snuffling. 

-— -—raich,** s.f. Smelling, 2 Snuffling. 3 
Snorting. 

Brónail, e, a. see srònach. 

sronaiseach, -eiche, a. Affectioned. 2 Apt to 
smell, smelling. 3 Snuffing. 4 Snorting. 5 
(DC) Petted. 6(DC) Supercilious. 

—— ——-—4,** s.f. Habit of smelling, snu fing 
or snorting. Ciod an t-s. a th’ ort? why do 
you snufie so ? 

sronaisich, see srónagaich. 

————— —, v. Scent. smell, nose. 

sronamh,§ s.m. Onion, see uinnean. 

srón-an-laoigh,$ s.f. Snap-dragon—antirrhinum 
orontium. Known only in gardens in Scot- 
land, and rarein Ireland as a wild flower, but 
itis found wild in various parts of the south 
of England. (ill. 648.) 

srónan, -ain, s.m. see sroineall, 

sron-fhionn, -a, a, see aróin-fbionn. 





D 


L pee p= — H. V Pn rg Lope og m 
5 d P "n LI! H ATI 

1 n d ie; EN | LT, 
RK RN L— LE S X RN i 


4** Any. 





648, Srón-an-laoigh. 

srón-ghaothach, -aiche, a. Following the chase 
by scent or smell. 

sron-teud,** s. Bow-line, cable. | 

tsroth, -a, -an, s.m. Foam of water. 2 Stream. 
3 Whirlpool. j 

srothan, see sruthan. 

sruab, po & n. Drink up any liquid with a 
noise of the lips. 2 Sweep off with eagerness. 
3 Pull anything hastily out ofthe water. 4ff 
Make a paddling noise in water. 

ach, -aiche, a. Making a disagreeable 
noise in drinking liquids. 2 Sweeping any- 
thing off with violence or avidity. 3 Pulling 
anything hastily out of water. 4{{ Making 
a paddling noise intwater, 

sruabadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of drinking water 
witha noise of the lips. 2 Act of sweeping 
anything away hastily or eagerly. 3 Act of 
pulling anything hastily out of water. 4 
Noise of the lips in drinking. 5 Sudden or 
eager pull at anything. 6ttPaddling in water. 
A’ MOT. ofsruab. [sruabladh in Poolewe 





sruabair, -e, -ean, s.m. One who makes'a noise 
with the mouth in drinking. 2 One who 
sweeps away anything greedily or eagerly. 3 
Coarse, awkward fellow. 4{fOne who paddles 
in water. 

——-eachd, s.f.ind, Drinking of liquids with 
a noise. 2Snatching of anything with eager- 
ness. 3 Coarseness and awkwardness of man- 
ner. 4{{Paddling in water. 

sruabta, past pt. of sruab. Swallowed with a 
noise of the mouth. 2 Swept away eagerly 
or hastily. 3 Puiled hastily out of water. 

sruaic,** s.f, Pustule. 

sruall,(AF) s. Ruall (bird)—Dean of Lismore. 

sruamach,** a. Streamy. 2 Powerful in armies, 
having great armies. 

-- —_—__—,** -aich, s.m. Meeting of streams. 

sruan,* -ain, s.m. Shortbread cake having five 
corners—Islay. 2**Triangular frame on which 
bread is set to bake before the fire. 

srub, -uib, an, s.m. Spout, as of a pump or ket- 
tle. 2t{Piece of timber, hollowed and placed 
in a falling stream for the convenience of fill- 
ing vessels with water. 

srùb, pr.pt. a’ srübadh, v.a. & n. Suck in or 
drink any liquid with the teeth set. 2 Suck, 
draw in, imbibe. 3 Inhale. 4 Drink with a 
noise of the lips. 5tf Pull anything hastily 
out of water. 6* Drink as long as your breath 
will permit. 

——ach, -aiche, a. Sucking in. 2 Apt to suck 
or inhale. 3 Snuffing. ` d 

eru bach, -aiche, @ Furnished with a spout. 2 
Like a spout —— Ze 


grübadh 


erübadh, -aidh, sm. Sucking in of liquor, act 
of sucking or drawing in. 2 Large mouthful 
of liquid, draugnt. 3 Inhaling. 4 Imbibing. 
5t¢Drinking noisily. 6tf Snatching hastily. 
A’ s—, pr.pt. of srùb. 

grubag, -aig, -an, s.f. Little spout or pipe at the 
mouth of a vessel. 

erabag, -aig, -an, s.f. Small draught, gulp or 
mouthful of any liquid. 2 (AF) Cockle. Tha 
s. aige, he has a fair amount of whisky (bit of 
a spree.) 

ach, -aiche, a. In little dranghts, gulps 
or mouthfuls. 2 Drinking by email draughts, 

srubavach,-aiche,a.Furnished with small spouts, 

srubail,tt see srùb, v. 

srubair, -ean, s. m. Sucker, one who sucks in 
drink, 2 One who gulps or drinks greedily. 
3 Sucker of a pump. 4 Inhaler 6(AF)Cockle 

eachd, st umd Noisy sucking in of li- 
quors. 2 Frequent sucking. 3 Gulping, 
drinking greedily. 

srüban, -ain, -an, $. m. dim. of srib. Drawing 
or sucking in, 2(AF) Cockle. Tha s air, he 
has had a drop—i.e. he 1s the worse of drink— 
Arran, 

ach, -aiche, a. Abounding incockles. 2 
see grübagach. 

grubh,** -a, s.m. Snout. 

--——ag,*® -aig, s./. Cake baked before the fire. 

Pes ch laoigh,§ s.m. Snap-dragon, see sròn an 
aoizh, 

erubhan na muice,$ s.m.Wall hawkweed—hAiera- 
cium piloselia. 











Ra 
De: Léin, 
LL 


ET 
rpi- 


649. Srubhan na muie. 
ferudhar,** a, In small pieces. 
sru!:l,* see sruthail. 
sruit, s. see sriut, 
= g&ruith,** er, Harangue. 
cerning. 

sruithean, pl. of sruth. 

arulach, -aiche, @. see sruthach. 

srulachan,(DMy) s.m. Loop on point of the flap 
which covers the foot of the headless stocking. 
Also called ** srulachan an osain.'' 

sruladh, -aidh, see sruthladh. 

grulag. see sruthlae. 

ach, see sruthlagach. 

srülamas, -ais, s.m, Person that speaks as if his 
mouth were fllled with liquid. 

sruth, pr.pt. a’ sruthadh, v.n. Flow, run on, as 
a stream. 2 Melt, become liquid. 3 Shed, 
drip. 4 Stream, pour. 5 Derive. Sruthaidh 
na beanntan, the hilla shall melt. 

sruth, -a -uith, pl. -anna, -an, -uithean & -aidh, 
s.m. River, stream, torrent, brook, running 
water. 9 Stream, current, tide. 3 Fountain. 
4 Motion of running water, or of any liquid 


12 Knowledge, dis. 





895 


stabh 


flowing, 5 see struth. 

Tha 'n s. ‘nar n-aghaidh, the stream is a- 
gainst us , the current is running right ahead; 
saobh-sh., an eddy-tide : am marbh-sh., slack 
water; coileach an t-sruith, the ripple of the 
current ; 2 (WC) the middle of the stream ; le 
8. agus soirbheas, having a favourable tide 
and fair wind : tha ‘n s8. leinn, the current ts 
Javourable (to us); sruthan na beatha,the foun- 
tains of life ; onfhadh an t-sruith, the rage of 
the torrent ` bhris faire air monadh nan sruth, 
dawn broke on the hill of streams ; a’ dol leis 
et La, going with the stream, going down- 

ill. 

tsruth (AF) s.m. Man of letters, 2 Ecclesiastic. 
3 Astronomer 

ach, -aiche, a. Streaming, streamy, flow- 
ing. 2 Abounding in streams or currents. 3 
Like a stream. 4 Dropping, as a liquid. 

sruthadh, -aidh, s2n Streaming, act or state of 
streaming or flowing. 2 Dropping, shedding. 
8 Spending, as corn in the shock, A’ s—, pr. 
pt. of sruth. A’ s, dheur, shedding tears ; a’ 
s. a nuas, dropping down. 

sruthag, see sruthlay. 

——-ach, see sruthlagach, 

sruthaibb, dot oi of sruth. 

— —— -., 2nd. pl imp of sruth. Stream ye. 

sruthaidh, fut.aff.a. of sruth. 

sruthail, -e, a. see sruthach, 

, pr.pt. a’ srutbladb, v. a. Rinse with 
water, cleanse, scour. 2*Gulp, drink, S. ort 
e, gulp it up. (*sruil.) 

sruthain, gen.sing. d nom.pl, of sruthan. 

sruthan,(AF) s. m. Man of letters, 2 Eccles 
laslic. 3 Astronomer, 

, n.pl. of sruth S. ànradhach na h-aoise, 
the mournful streams (tears) of age. 

, -8in, pl. -ain & an, s.m.,dim. of sruth. 
Streamlet, brook, rill, rivulet. Tharta tha na 
sruthain a’ breabail, over them the streams 
gurgle. 

— ——— ach, -aiche, a. Full of streamlets or rills. 
2**Purling, gurgling. 

sruth-chlais, -e, -ean, s. f. Water-channel, con- 
duit, canal, 2 Bed of à river or stream, 

————— ——each,** a. Like a conduit or canal, 
2 Full of channels. 

sruth-chlaon, v. Derive. 

sruth-fhacal, s.m. Alliteration. 2**Derivative. 

sruthlach, -aiche, a, Washing, rinsing, scouring, 
scrubbing. 2 That has the quality of cleans- 
ing or scouring. 3*Coming in streams. 

sruthlach,tt -aich, see sruthladh, 

sruthladh, -aidh, s. m. Rinsin«, act of rinsing. 
2 Cleansing, scouring, scrubbing. 3 Violent 
motion of waves advancing upon and reced- 
ing from the shore. 4* Half-washing. —5** 
Dirty streamlet. 6 Gulping. 7 (*sruladb) 
Suction of air, Ans. a tha bho ’n dorus, the 
suction or stream of air that comes from the 
door, A’S—, pr.pt of sruthail. 

sruthlag, -aig, -an, s.f. Small brook, rill. 2 
Water conducted through a pipe. 3 Small 
spont of water falling from a pipe. 4* Dis- 
charge of a water-mill. 

ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in, or like, 
small brooks or rills. 

sruth-lionaidh, s.m, Flowing tide. 

sruth-mhillseachd, s.f.ind. Mellifluence. 

sruth-tràghaidh, s.m., Ebbing tide. 

fsta, v. see stad. | 

sta. s.m.ind. Use, profit, advantage, adhibition, 
service, serviceableness, avail, utility, Gun s; 
useless ; rud gun s., @ useless thing. 

stabh, -a, s.m. Iron vessel chained,to & well be 

the way-side. 








— open e -q 


stabh, v.a. Gaelic form of stave. 

etabhach,** a. Straddle. 2 Striding. 8 Wide- 
forked. 4 Asunder. 

atabhach, -aiche, a. Wide asunder, divaricated, 
straddling, badger-legzed. Bòs., a cow with 
wide-forked horns ; caora s., @ sheep with 
horns turned outwards. 

a@tabhachadh, -aidh, s.m. Straddling,act of strad- 
dling. A’ s—, pr.pt. of stabhaich. 

&tabhaic,* e -ean, s./. Wry neck. 2 Sullen or 
boorish attitude of the head. (pron. staoi'c, 
ataghaic, in Argyll.) 

stabhaich, v. n. Siraddle, walk with a strad- 
dling gait. 

&tàblair,* -ean, s.m. Stabler. 

&tàbull, -uill, an, s.m. Stable, stall, Gille stà- 
buill, a stable-boy. 

* — NAMES OF THE PARTS OF A STABLE :— 

; Kach-lann, march-lann, stable. 

Kach-chliath, horse-rack, manger. 

Mainnsear, manger—W. Ross-shire d Perthsh. 
Prasach, manger. 

Seic, rack. 

stabullach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to a 
stable. 2ttLike a stable. 

stac, -a & -aic, pl. -an & -annan, s.m. Precipice, 
steep, high cliff or hill. 2 Projecting rock. 3 
Conical hill. 4 *Dullness of hearing. 5 (CR) 
Thick-set little man— Perthshire. A’ leum- 

naich o s. gus., bounding from rock to rock. 

etac,** v.a. Deafen. 2 Drive stakes into the 
ground. 3 Make a false step. 

stac,**3.m.Stake or post driven into the ground. 
2 Pillar, column. 3 Little eminence. 4 False 
step, hobbling step. 6 Halt. 6 Stack. 7 
Thorn. Tha s. chrübaich ann, he has a halt 
in his gait. 

8tacach,** s.m. Halter, lame man. 

stacach, -aiche, a. Abounding in cliffs'or preci- 

ices, 2 Rugged, uneven, peaky, rocky. 3 
ull of hearing, deaf. 4** Halt, lame, hob- 
bling. 6* Uninflammable, very unready to 
take fire. 6**Pillared, columned. 7**Full of 
impediments, 8**Full of little eminences. 9 
**Causing deafness. 10 Full of heaps. 11** 
Full of stakes. 12**Thorny. 13 Coacervated. 
adh,** -aidh, sm. Heaping up, coacer- 
vation. 

d,* s.f. Deafness. 2 Uninflammability. 

stacadh,** -aidh, s.m. Deafening. 2 Driving 
stakes into the ground. 3 Pillar. 4 False 

step. 5 Hobbling step. 6 Stack, 
stacaiche,* s.f. Degree of deafness. 

stacaich,** v.a. Heap up, coacervate. 

Stacag,( DC) at Stubborn woman— Harris. 

stacan, -ain, -an, s.m.dim. of stac. Little preci- 
ice or steep hillock. 2 Hinderance.  3** 
ittle stake or post. 4 Pillar. 6 False step. 
6**Little halt. 7**Little stack. 8**Knoll. 9 
(DC) Stubborn man— Harris. 

— —àch, -aiche, a. Abounding in little preci. 
pices. 2 Founded. 3**EKnolled. 4**Rugged. 
6** Full of impediments. Na clachan s., the 

ies stones; cnocanach 8., knolled and 
rocky. 

stacarsaich,** s.f. Tramping or walking awk- 
wardly. 

stachaill,* s.m. Bar, barrier. 

stad, -a,-an, 3. m. Stop, cessation, pause. 2 
Interruption, hinderance, impediment. 3 
Period. 4 Abode. Thas. "na chainnt, there 
is an impediment in his speech ; cuir s. air, put 
a stop to him or it; gun s, incessantly ; dean 
B., wait, stop, pause ; s. a h-aon, a comma ; S. 
dhà, a semi-colon ; 8. tri, a colon ; S. ceithir, @ 








find ; stad ceist, a note of interrogation ; 8 
longantais, @ note of exclamation- DMy. 


stabh 808 


staidhreach 


stad, pr.pt. a’ stadadh & a’ stad, v.a. & n. Stop, 
cease to go forward, pause. 2 Stop, cause to 
stop, hinder, impede. 3 Stay, stand, wait for. 
4 Rest. 5 Cease, desist. 

stad, s.m.ind. Stopping, act,of stopping or ceas- 
ing. 2 Act of hindering or causing to stop. A’ 
8—, pr.pt. of stad. 

——ach, -aiche, a. Stopping, ceasing, 2 Hesi. 
tating. 3Apt to stop. 4 Stammering, lisping. 
51ilmpedimental, obstructive. 

——achd, s.f.ind. Tendency or proneness to stop 
or cease. 2 Hesitation delay, delaying, hin- 
derance, abiding, detention, pausing. 3 Im- 
pediment, obstruction. Ciod an s. a th’ ort ? 
why do you pause or delay ? 

——adh,** -aidh, s. m. Stopping, pausing, de- 
laying, waiting for. 2 Stop, pause, delay, ob- 
struction, impediment, A’ s—, pr. pi. of stad, 

stadadh, past subj. of stad. Would stop. 

stadag, s.f. Stagger. Ise'gacur'na stadagan, 
and he sent her staggering. 

stadaich, -e, s.f. Stopping, hesitating. 270b- 
stacle. 3 Impediment of speech. Duine aig 
an robh s. "oa chainnt, a man who had anim- 
pediment in his speech. | 


stadaidh, fut.aff.a. of stad. 2 gen. sing. of stad- 


alh. 

stadail, -e, $.f. see stad. 

stadail, -e, s.f. see stàideil. 

stadar, fut.pass. of stad. Shall be stopped, 

stad-chur, -uir, s.m. Inhibition. 

stadh, pr.pt. a’ stadhadh, v.a. Stretch, rax, ex- 
tend, jog. 

stadh, -a, mi an & -annan, s.m. see stagh. 

stadh,** -a, s.m. Use, utility, service. 2 Work, 
working. 3(CR)s.m.Swathe of cut corn or hay 
—Skye, &c. 4 see stagh. Cha’n 'eil 8, ann, Ae 
is of no use; gun a, useless. 

stadhach,tt a. Raxing, jogging. 

stadhadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m, Sudden bending 
to a side, lurch. 2 Erect position. 3 Raxiug, 
jogging. 4(WC) Bend backwards or curve in 
anything. Tha s. ann, there ita bend in it. 

stadhar,** a. Useful, serviceable, good at work- 

ing, industrious. 

staduit,** -ean, s.f. Gaelic form of statute. 

-each,** a. Pertaining to a statute. 

staga boireannaich,(DMy) s. Stout, immodest 
woman. 

stagarsaich,* s. f. Gaelic form of staggering. 2 
Stammering. 

stagh, -a, pl. -an & -annan, s.m. Stay, certain 
rope in the rigging of a ship. Ars. ’s ar tarr- 
uing cum fallain, preserve our stays and our 
halvards. 

staghannan,(AH) 8.9. Stays of a ship. 

stàid, -e, -ean, s.f. Estate. 2 Proprietorship. 3 
Furlong. 4**Rank. bfpfSituation, 6**Craft, 
wile. Is truagh mos., sal is my cond:tionr 

staid, -e, -ean, s.f. State, condition. An droch 
staid, in a bad state. 

staidealachd, s.f.ind. Stateliness. 2 Portliness. 
3 Sedateuess. 4 Pompousuess of manner, 
self-importance. 

staideil, -e, a. Stately. 2 Portly, self-important, 
having a portly gait. 3 Sedate. 4**Airy. Is 
s. sìos is suas à cheum, stately is his pace te 
and fro. 

staideileachd, see staidealachd. 

staidhineach,** a. Having stays. 

staidhinnean, $.pl. Stays of a female, 

staidhir, -dhreach, -richean, $./. Stair, pair of 
steps. An àird an staidhir, up-stairs ; mull- 
ach ha staidhreach, the top of the stair; s. 
shniomhach, (or shnìomhain );,æ winding stair. 

staidbre, see staidhir. M 

— ee-Aoh, Ge, A. Having stairs or many 





& the 


= s 
`à —— 9 


é 
ka e > 
ie? te ot EE 


ee 


staidhreach 


stairs. 2 Like a stair. 3**Storied. . 
Staidhreach, gen.sing. of staidhir or staidhre. 
staidhrichean,* nol of staidhir. 
staid-radh, s.. Statistics. 
staifeid, see taifeid. A 
staizean, s.m. Punch (not whisky.) 2**Stout lit- 

tle fellow. 

staigeanach,** a. Having a stout and squat per- 
son. 

,** s.m. Squat fellow. 

——— — ——4,** s.f. Squatness of person. 2 
Gait of a stout, squat person. 

'’staigh, (anns an taigh) adv. Within, in. 2 
Within, [“ To within,” given as one of the 
meanings by McL & D, should be steach — 
MM.] Generally spelt 'stigh. Tha iad a staigh 
air a chéile, they are reconciled. [See note un- 
der steach.] 

staigheir, -ghreach, see staidhir. 

sataighineacn,** a. Having stays. 

staighinean, s.pl. Stays, 
staigh-shealladh, -aidh, s.m. Introspection. 
fatail, sr, Throw. 

stail, -e, -ean, s.f. Bandage, strap. 2 Still. 3tt 
Whisky-pot. [stal—Gairloch & Lochbroom.] 
Taigh stail, a disttllery, a smuggling bothy. 

stailc, pr.pt. a’ stale & a’ stailccadh, v. a. £n. 

Drive, press forward. 2 Butt. 3 Strike, 

Knock against, 4 Stamp, put down the foot 

suddenly. 5 Lash against. 6** Cram, 7** 

Prick. 8tt Busk a fishing-hook. 9(DC)Stiff- 


en oneself. 

stailc, -e, -ean, a.f. Stop. 2 Stubbornness. 3 
Thump. Akt Pride. 5ttStump, 6** Driving, 
pressing or pushing forward. 7**Prick, thorn, 

stailceach, -eiche, @. Driving, that drives or 
pushes forward. 2 Striking, that strikes 
against. 3 Stamping, striking with the foot 
4 Stubborn, obs! inate. 5t Beset with im- 
pediments. 6 **Prickly, thorny. 

stailceadh, -idh, s.m. Driving, act of driving or 
pushing forward. 2 Striking, act of striking 
against. 3 Stamping, act of stamping. A’ 
s—, pr.pt. of staile. 

gtailcidlh, fut.af.a. of staile. 

staileneach, -ich, s. f. Stubble.. 2** Standing 
roots of burnt heath. 

staileach, a. Of, or pertaining to, a still, 
whisky-pot, or 3a bandage. 

stàilinn, s.f.ind. Steel, 

each, -eiche, a. Abounding in steel 2 








2 Like stays. 


2a 





of steel. 3 Like steel. 4 Chalybeate.  5* 
Adam:ntina. 
ich,** v.a. Harden, as iron. 2 Convert 





into steel. 

—ichte, past pt. of stailinnich, 

staillinn, see stàilinn, 

- stailmrich, s,f.ind. Noise, tumult. 

stain,** er lin. 

staing, -e, -ean, EE Ditch, moat, trench. 2+t 
Peg, cloak-pin. 3ftPrickle. 4 Small, pointed 
rock, 5 firm, well-built person or beast. 6* 
Insurmountable bar or barrier. (AC) Site, 
stance, situation. 8(AC) Stronghold, impreg- 
nable position. 9 (AC) Sacred enclosure, sa- 
cred ring. 10(AC) Gap in a wall, rock or 
mountain. 11(AC) Distress, difficulty. 12 pl. 
(staingean) Ribs of a creel. 13* Object not 
easily got rid of. S. dhomhain, a drep ditch, 

staingeach, -eiche, a. Abounding in ditches or 
trenches, 2 Furnished with pins or pegs. 3 
se hea in small pointed rocks. 4* Diff- 
cult, 

siaingeacha lh, -aidh, s.m. Digging, act of dig- 
ging a ditch. 2 Act of sticking in, or falling 
into, a ditch. A’ s—, Rég staingich, 

staingsan, s,m. Obstinate, boorish person. 





897 


stale | ST: 
Staingich, v.a. &n. Dig a ditch or ditches, 3 
Fall into, or stick in, a ditch. ` ` 
te, past pt. of staingich. Dug inta 
ditches. 2 Fallen into, or ide in, à ditch. 
3 Ditched, trenched. Talamh s., trenched 
ground. 
Staipeal, -il, -an, s.f. (CR) Handful of drawn 
straw, tied at one end for thatching—A rran. 
2 see stapull & stoipeal, 
tstair, -e, s.f. History. 
Noise, confusion. 
sirife. 
stair, -e, -ean, 8./. Stepping stones in a river. 2 
Path made over abog. 3* Temporary bridge 
for cattle—Skye,«&c. S. chasa-chaorach,tempor- 
ary bridge suitable for sheep. 
stairbheanach, em. Athletic, well-built person 
—Sàr-Obair. [starbhanach—Argyll.] 
fstairceach,** a. Light. i 
staireach, -eiche, a. Laid with stepping-stone. 
stairean,(DMy) s.m. Path for man and beasb 
between a house and the main road, 
staireanach, -aiche, @. see staireach. i 
staireanachd, s.f.ind. Stepping on stones. 
stairirich, e, s.f. see dairirich. Clachan meal» 
ain le s., hailstones with a rattling noise, 
stairleag,(AF) s.f. Sea-maw, black-headed guld 
— Badenoch. 
stairmeil,(CR) a. Sturdy, plucky. | 
stairn,(CR) s.f. Particle, small quantity. Am 
bheil s. ann ? is there anything in it ? j 
stairn, -e, s.f. Noise as the tread of horses’ feet. , 
2 Violent push or throw. 3tftBrain-swimming' 
from liquor. 4**Loud noise, clamour, confus- 
ion. 5 Tramping. 6tfRumbling, as of stones. 
7(WC) Pride, haughtines. 8 (DC) Rank 
thick grass growing in fresh-water lochs. 
stàirneach, -eiche, a, Making a loud noise, 
noisy, clamorous. 2 Pushing violently, | 
——, s.m. see stàirn. H 
stàirneal, see steàrnal. 
stàirneil, -e, a. Foppish, conceited, forward, og 
tentatious, 2**Obstreperous. i 
stairneil,( MS) s.f. Fuss, noise, | 
stairneineach,tt Ach, s.m. Robustious fellow, | 
-tairseach, see stairsneach. 
stairsneach, -nich, -nichean, $. f. Threshold. 9$ 
Bar, barrier, 3(AC) Stone step. 4 Obstacle, 
impediment. 5(MS) Rub. "Na s. (*starrsach) 
an siod, as a barrier yonder. 
stairt,* s.f. Trip, considerable distance. 
eadh,(DMy) s.m. Going to a place and re» 
turning without delay, as a hasty call at @ 
house an one’s way. 
stait,* -ean, s.m. Magistrate, great man of a 
place or city. Stàitean na tire, the great men 
of the country ; stàitean a’ bnaile, the magise 
trates or chief men of the town. 
staiteal,* a. Magisterial, portly. 
achd,“ s.f. Magisterial conduct or gai 
stateliness. 
stal,** -ail, s.m. Stallion. i 
stalac, see stalc. , 
ach, see stalcach. | 
stalag,(DMy) sy. Drink as long as one's breath 
will allow. Stalagan,'drinks between breaths. 
stalan, -ain, -an, s.m. Stallion, entire horse. 
——ach,tt a. Abounding in stallions, 
stalc, v.d. & n. Stiffen, make stif. 2 Become 
stiif, 3 Tie or dress a fixhing-hook. 4 Walk 
with a halting gait, 5 Starch. 6* Tap. T°” 
Gaze, stare. 8* Dash your foot against -—71$- 
lay. 9ttStalk, as in hunting deer. 10*Thump. 
stale,(CR) s.m. Stout burly man. 
,** aile, s.m. Starch, 3 Stare. 3(DO)Thick 
food, as soup or porridge. S, lite, @ plate of 
thick dees 





2 Tumult, strife, 8 
Euchdach an s., deadly in 

















stale 


stalc, (AF) a. Falcon. 2 Starling. 

etalcach, -aiche. a. Stiffening, making stiff. 2 
Hobtbling, walking awkwardly. 3} tStalking. 
4ffGazing, staring. 5**Starching. 

stalcadair, -ean, s.m. see stalcair. 2f1Starch. 

atalcadh, -aidh, s.in. Pigs t act of stiffening 
or making stiff. 2 State of becoming stiff. 3 
Act of tying or hooding a fishing-hook. 4 Hob- 
bling, act of walking awkwardly. 5 Dashing, 
thumpiug. 6 Starching. 7ff{Stalking. 8 
EE 9 Fowling. A’ s—, pr.pt. of 
stale. 

stalcaich, v.a. see stale. 

stalcair, -ean, s.m. One that hobbles or walks 
awkwardly 2 Dresser of hooks. 3 Starch. 4 
Blockhead. 511 Hunter, fowler, deer-stalker. 
611 Gazer, starer. 7** Arrow-maker. 8**Pac- 
ing-horse. 9 Bully. 10 Robust fellow. 

stalcaireachd, s.f.ind. Stupidity. 2 Occupation 
of a fowler. 3 Deer-stalking. 4 Habit Of star- 
ing. 5 Frequent staring or gazing. 6 Busi- 
ness of dressing fishing-hooks. 7 see stalcadh. 

stalcanta, -ainte, a. Firm, thick, stout, stiff. 2 
Rigid. 3 Starched. AT Strong. 

—-ehd, s.f.ind. Firmness, stoutness, ro- 
bustness, thickness, 2 Stiffness, 

stalda,*? a. Stale. 

stall (CR) s. m. Bandage or swathe over the 
crown of the head aud under the chin —W. of 
Ross. 2(DMy) Edge of the floor next the byre 
in old thatched houses, 

stall, T s.n. Peat-bank. 

stall, s.m. Bearing, trim, proper state. Cha’n 
urrainn mia thoirt gu s., J cannot bring wt into 
proper trim. 

Stall, v.a. Dash violently against. 

sialla, chan, s.m. Overhanging rock, lofty pre- 
cipice, craggy steep. 2ttSea-rock, — 8(DMy) 
Ledge on the face of a rock. 

Rtalla, a. Craggy, steep. 

stallacaire, -an, s.m. Blockhead. 

—achd, see stalcaireachd. 

&etallach,t* a. Abounding in sea-rocks. 

stallachdach, a. Stupidly deaf, 2 Careless. 
Argyll. 3tfrFoolish. 

stalladh, -aidh, s.m. Dashing, thumping, dash 
thump. 2(DC) Solid rock underground-- Uist. 

stallag,(CR) s.f. Bandage over the cheeks, as 
for toothache— Suth'd. 

stallan, s.m. Gaelic form of stallion. 

stamac, see stamag. 

stamag, -aig, -an, $.f. The stomach. 2 Appetite. 

gtamb, see stamp. 

adh, see stàmpadh. 

te, see stampte. 

stamh,$ -aimh, s.m. Sea-girdles, tangle—lamin- 
aria digitata. Barr-staimh & bragair are the 
broad leaves on the top. 2(DC) Stalks of the 
oar-weed— Uist. 8* Bull's —— dried for the 
purpose of lashing horses, 

stamha,** s.m. Vase. 

stamh, pr ot a’ stamhadh, v.a. Subdue, train, 
tame, subject, reduce to order. 2 Break a 
young horse. 3 Drub lustily. 4* Press down, 
compress, 

adh, -aidh, s.m.Taming, training or break- 
ing, as of a young horse. 2* Subjection. 

stamhuadh,** adi, s.m. Managing. 2 Taming 
or breaking, as of & young horse. 2 Mak- 
ing pliable. 

stamhnaich, pr. pt. a stambnachadh, v. see 


stamh., 
stamhnaidh,-e, a. Manageable. 2 Pliable. 3 
[ atathail) 


Tame. 

stamhor, -oire, a. Useful. 

stamp, pr.pt. a' stampadh. Gaelic form of stamp. 
2 Trample, 





(stalcair) 











"UN 


Stao 


stàmpadh, -aidh, s.m. Stamping, act of stamp 
ing. 2 Trampling, act of trampling. 3''Trainp- 
ing ” blankets. A cure for leum-droma (luin- 
bago ?) was for a person of different sex to 
kneel on the patient's back and walk over 
him on all fours, This was called stàmpadn 
—DU. A’ s—, pr.pt. of stamp. 

iron dan past pt. of stamp. Stamped. 2 Tramp: 
ed. 


stampts, see stàmpta. 

stan, (i.e. a stan) adv. Thig a stan, com» down 
—Suth'd. 2 Down, downwards— Rob Donn. 
(Down, below, form of a bhàn—1] 

stan, -ain, s.m. see staoin & stàin. 

stan, pr.pt. a’ stanadh, v.a. Make awry, bend, 

stànadair, s.m. Tin-sinith, tinker. 

stanard,** -aird, -an, s.m. Stint. 2 Yard-wand. 
3 Yard. 4 Upright piece of wood to which is 
affixed the rock of à spinning-wheel. Gun 
8., without stint. 

stang, -aing, -an, s.m. Pool, standing water. 2 
Ditch, trench. 3f{Sting. 4**Peg, pin. 5* 
Tank. 

stang, po. Sting as a bee." 

-——ach, -aiche, a. In pools. 2 Full of pegs. 3 
Pettish. 4 Having upright horns. 5 Full of 
ditches or trenches. 6 Drained, trenched, as 
land. Gabhair nan adhaircean s,, the upright- 
horned qoats. 

stangach (AF) s.m. Beast with upright horns. 

stangaich,** v.a. Dig a ditch or trench. 

stangail, v.a. Fit a hook to a fishing-line, prov. 
stangan, -ain. -an, $.m., dim. of stang. Little 
pool or ditch. 

stanganach, -aiche, a. Abounding in little pools 
or ditches. 

stangar,tt air, s.m. Stickleback. 

stangaram, -aim, s. m. Sticklebaca, stinger— 
Dàin I. Ghobha. 

Stangarra,(AF) see stangar. 

stann, -à,-an, s.m, Tub, vat. 2 Meal-tub. 3 
Stall, stand, stance, as at à market. (stanna 
—MeL & D.) 

stannach,tt a. Abounding in large vata. 

stanua-cléithe, -n- s. f. Worm-stand. 2 Tab, 
vat, worm-tub. (p. 731.) 

stannadh, Hebrides for stamhnadh. 

stannair(e),( AF) s.m. Buzzard. 

stannart, -airt, -an, s.m. Stint, limit, bound, 2 
Yard in measure. 3 Measuring-wand. 3 Af. 
fected shyness, coyness, 4ttGauge. 6 Gaelie 
form of standard, see stanard. 

———ach, -aiche, a. Affected, coy, shy. 3 
Pertaining to standards or gauges. 

achd, s.f. see stannart, 

stannd, s.m. see stanna, 

stannt, see stanna. 

staof,** a. Gaelic form of stiff. 

staofainn,** s.f, Starch. Gaelic form of stiffing. 

staoig, -e, -ean, s.f. Collop, steak, piece of flesh, 
cutlet. 2/DC) Senseless woman— Uist. 3 Tax. 
S.-rathaid, blackmail— Perthsh., (cis-mheach- 
ainn in Argyll.) 

staoig,* v.a. Cut into clumsy steaks or lumps. 

staoigeach, -eiche, a Abounding in collops. 2 
Like a collop or steak. 

staoigich,( MS) v.a. Hack. 

staoile, see staoileadh. . 

staoileadh, s. m. Title, style. Staoileadh Eir- 
inn, stéidh na creidimh, Ireland's title. Faith's 
defender—Donn. Ban, p. 80. ‘Se Gleann Ur- 
chaidh do staoile(adh), '* Glenorchy’ is your 
style or title— Dunn. Ban, p. 86. 

staoin, d. Awry, oblique, bending, crooked. 2 
Shallow. 3 (DU) *' Soft," silly, applied to a 
person lacking in perspicacity. Truinnsear 6., 
o shallow tin plate—Dain I Ghobha, 


staoin 899 steach RI 
` [" 
i 


staoin, -e, sf. Pewter. 2 lin. 3 in derision,; Argyll.] e 

Soft, inactive fellow. 4 Lazine s. , Starrach,** a. Propelling, pushing. 2(DMK)see 
staoin,§ e, s.f. Juniper, see aitionn. 2 see eidh-| starach, 

eann thalmhainn. Caoruinn staoine, PP als s. f. Roaming —Skye. 2 Taking a 








berries. walk--Skye. 
staoineach, -eiche, og Abounding in pewter. 2;starradh, -ailh, -aidhean, s.m. Sudden and vio- 
Like pewter. 3 Like tin. 4 Lazy, inactive. lent motion. 2 Whim, freak, odd fancy. $ 
—d, s.f.ind, Laziness, inactivity. Failin ;, imperfection. 4 Fit of anger, passion. 
staoineag, -eig, -an, $.f. Juniper-berry. 28ily| 6 Tramping. 6{tLeap, start. 7f Pushing vio- 
or foolish woman. lently,dashing against. S8 (DMy) Twist of the 
staon, -a, a. Awry, askew, oblique, inclined,| heal and neck to one side, Cnap-starradh, æ 
erooked, bent. stumbling-block, obstruction ; ball on the end 
staon, v.a. see staonaich. of à spear. 
siaonach, a. Crooked, wily—Dain I. Ghobha. 2|starrag,"] s.f. seefeannag ghlas. Hooded crow 
** Apt to bend or turn. 3 Oblique. 2 see staoa.| — Harris. 


staonachadh, -aidh, s.m. Bending, act of bend- | starrag ft -aig, -an,s f. Wry-neck, twist. 
ing or making awry. 2 Curbing, act of curb- | -- ach, a. Having a wry-neck, twisted. 
ing or restraining. 3 Bending, obliquity. 4|starraich,* s.f. Complete intoxication. 
Bias, inclination. A’ s—, pr.pf. of staonaich. | starrair,** s.m. Historian, 

staonadh, -ailh, s.m. & pr.pt. see staonachadh. | starram,tf -aim, s.m. Noise, din, tramping.! 





staonag,* -aig, An. s.f. Slayer, spittle, snot. starran, 8. m. Place for crossing a river ‘or soft 
ach,* -aiche, a. Catarrlial, abounding in ground on stones, stepp:ng-stones—Lewis,  ı 

spittle, snotty. starran, -ain, -an, sm. Old dwarf, 

staonaich, v. a. Bend, incline, make awry. 2] starr-chosail, -e, s.f. Staggering. 
Curb, restrain. starr-fhiacail, -cla, an, s.m. Tusk, gag-tooth. 

-————te, past pt. of staonaich. Bent, made | starr-fhiaclach, -aiche, a. Having gag-teeth, 
awry, inclined. 2 Restrained, curbed. starrs,* s.m. Gaelic form of starch, 

staonard,** -aird, s.m. Crick in the neck. starrsach,* s.f. see s airsneach. 

staota, past pt. of staon, see scaona1ehte. starrsaich,* v.a. Starch, stiffen. 

staorum, -uim, s.m. Bending of the body to one |starr-shuileach, -eiche, a. Having the eyes dis- 
side. torted, squint-eyed, moon-eyed. 

Stap,** -a, -an, s.m. Step, asof a stair. 2 Step|starr-shuilich,(MS) v.a. Stare. 
of a dance. 3 Step, pace. starsach,(AC) see stairsneach. 


stapach,** a. Having steps. 2 Stepping, pacing.|s:àt, -àit, s.m. Pride, haughtiness. 
stapag, -aig,-an, s.f. Mixture of meal and cream, | stàta, s.m. State, government. 
milk or cold water, crowdie. statail, -e, a. Stately, proud, self-sufficient, 
Stapagach, a. '' Dùthaich nan stapag,” or “‘ am | statalachd, s.f.ind. Stateliness, air of importe 
fearann stapagach," is the name given toj ance. 
Trotternish, (Skye) by the MacLeods. The|stath,* s.m. Good purpose or end, 2 Use, bene- 
compiler has lively recollections of partaking| fit. Gnothach air bheag s., a thing worth lit- 
of stapag uachdair in Trotternish over 20| te; cha'n 'eil s. an sin dhuit, that serves no 


years ago. enl to you ; cha’n "el s. a bhi 'tighinn air 
stapal, -ail, s.m. **Lamp. 2 see stapull. sin, to speak of that serves no qood purpose ; cha 
Btaplaich, e, s. f. Loud noise. 2 One ofthe| "n 'eil s. air seo, this is useless ; chan "el fios 
noises of the sea. airs. an tobair gus an traigh e, the value of 
staplainneach, -eiche, a. Noisy.- the well 1s not realized till it dries—Arran; 
staplan, -ain, s.m. Noise of the sea. tha do mhathair fo dhubhron agus t’ athair 


stapull, -uill, s.m. Bar, bolt, staple, 92**Link.| gun sunnd air ri stàth ! your mother is in deep 
8 Torch. 4 see stabull. S. nan spéilearan,| sorrow and your father takes no pleasure in 
runner-staple of a cart. doing anything usefut— Duanaire, p 13. 
stapullach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to, bolts, | stath (DC) a. Supporting. 
bars or staples. 2 Like a bolt, bar or staple. | stathail, -e, a. Useful, profitable, advantageous, 
starach,(CR) a. Sagacious, wily, cunning, art-| serviceable, 





ful—Suth’d. stathalachd, s.f.ind. Usefulness, advantageouse 
d,* s.f.ind, Romping, blustering. ness, . 
staraidheachd, s.f.ind. Chicane. stathmhor, -oire, œ. see stàthail. 
stararaich, see dairirich. stathrum,** s. Clash, see starram, 
starbanach,* s.m. Stout fellow. statuid, see stàtuinn. 


starbhan,** am, s.n. Noise. 2 Rustling noise. | statuin, see statuiun. 


^ ach, -aich, s.m. Strong, robust fellow. | stàtuinn, -ean, s.f. Act,decree,statute. 2 Short 
Dithis s., two robust men. distance. S.o ’ntaigh, æa short distance from 
-——-ach, -aiche, a. Firm, steady. 2 Robust.| the house—W.H 1. 13. 
3 Noisy, rustling. statuis, see statuinn. 
starbhanachd,** s.f.ind. Stoutness, robustness. | steabhag, -aig, s. f. Switch. 2** Staff, stick, 
2 Steadiness, firmness. club, Gille-steabhaig, was a foot-messenger 
Starbhanaicn,** s.f. Continued noise. 2 Contin-| or letter-carrier who ran from place to place 
ued rustling noise. with a long staff in his hand—**.] 
starcach, -aiche, a. Firm. steach, (i.e. a steach) adv. In, to within, iuto. 2 
starcaiche, s.f.ind. Firmness. In the house, into the house. Steach is used 
stard,* s.f. Moon-eye. with verbs of motion See note under staigh. 
stard-shuileach,* -eiche, a. see starr-shuileach. Nuair à thàinig iad a s., when they came in; 
starn,* -airn, -airnean, s.m. Upsiart. cuir a steach e, put him in ; [am bheilea 
-— —,(DU) s.f. Pride, haughtiness, conceit. staigh ? is he in?) is he in the house ? A mach 
starnach,** o Like an upstart. 'S à steach, out and in, implies motion to and 
stiurr,* v, n. Shove violently, dash. 2 Propel,| from a place, but, a muigh 's a staigh me 
push with a jerk. (sparr) rest in a place. > 


starr,* sm. Sort of grass,—Lewis [seasg in| tsteach, v.n. Enter. 


Original from 
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
| 


INTERNET ARCHIV 


In URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


L4 


EE 4:9 ' gteadhainn 


eteadhainn,* s. f. Firm or punctual mode in 
speech. 

-—, @. see steadhainneach. 

——- each,* -eiche a, Firm or punctual in 
speech. 2 Making a slight pause after every 
word in speaking or reading 

steafag, -aig, -an,s. f. Little staff, cane, stick, 
crutch or club. 

ach,tt a. Having canes or small staves. 

steafaineachd, s.f.ind. Idle sauntering, 

&teair, see stear. 

—dean,(CR) s.m. Sea-swallow, tern—Skye. 

,Steaireadh,(AC) s.m. see stearadh. 

steairn,(CR) s. Roaring flre—Perthshire. Tha 
S. alr, he is tipsy. 

Stealdrach,* s.f. Torrent, state of being a good 
deal intoxicated. 

;gteall, pr.pt. a’ stealladh, v. o & n. Spout, as 
from a squirt or pipe, squirt, gush, pour out 

i irregularly, plash. 2 Cause to spout. 

steall, -eill & still, s.7 Spout of any liquid, as 
if from a squirt. 2 Squirt. 3 Cataract. 4 

, Heavy shower of rain. 5 Considerable quan- 

| tityofany liquid. 6 Diarrhea. 7 Torrent, 
gush, plash. Mar steall aonaich, like a 
mountain torrent. 

Bteallach, -aiche, a. That squirts or spouts, 
spouting, squirting. 2 That causes to spout 
or squirt. 3 Gushing suddenly, as water. 4 
Showery. 

stealladair, -ean, ¢.m. Squirt, syringe. 2 Squirt- 
er. 3(AF) Spout-fish, razor-fish. 

———eachd, s.f.ind. Squirting of any liquid 
as through a syringe, syringing. 

etealladh, -aidh,s.m.Squirting, act of squirting 
or spouting. 2 Gushing, plashing. 3 Spout, 
sudden gush of water from a pipe or squirt. 

4**Heavy sudden shower, 5**Pissing. A’ s—, 
pr.pt.of steall. A’ s. bainne an cuachan, spout- 
ma milk into a pail. 

eteallag, ag, -an, s. f. dim. of steal. Little 
spout, small quantity of liquid. 2(DU) Wild 
mustard— Gairloch & Lochbroom. 

ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in small spouts 
squirting. 

steallaich, oa Engrail. 

steallair, -ean, s.m. Syringe, squirt. 2 Squirter, 
one who squirts. 3 Cascade. cataract. 4 Tap. 

| B5 Clyster. 6 Piston. 7**Faucet. 8*Watering- 
can. 

















eachd, see stealladaireachd. 

steallairich,(CR) s.f. Sloppy food, thin drink— 
W. of Ross. 

steallt, see steall. 

steamadh,(WC) -aidh, s.m. Ramming the shot 
of powder in blasting a stone. 

&teapach,€4 s.m. see snàigear. 

steapag,(DMK) s.f. see stopag-fhraoich. 

stèapan, (DMK) s.m. Candle-wick. A Skyeman 
who was eating a penny dip is alleged to have 
said, An ith mi an s.? shall I eat the wick £ 

etear,** v. Cudgel, knock. 

stear,(AC) s.m. Pole like the butt of a salmon- 
rod, used for stunning birds. 2**Rude blow. 

€tearadh,(AC) -aidh 53$. m. The operation of 
stunning birds with a rod as they fly over- 
cR the pole-man sitting on the edge of a 
cliff, 

stearair,(AC) (stear) s.m. Pole-man, one who 
sits on the edge of a cliff, and strikes the 
birds with a pole (stear) as they fly overhead, 
causing them to fall stunned to the ground. 

steardal, see stearnal, 

etearnag, Suth’d. for steàrnal. 

steàrnal, ail, -an, 8.7n. Inn-keeper's sign, 2 
Arctic tern—sterna arctica. 3**Bittern. 4** 
Butterbump. S. taigh-osda, an innkeeper's 





E 


NTERNET ARCHIVE 


900 








stélleag ę 


a a 
sign. 

steàrnal beag, s. m. Lesser tern—sterna minui 9. 

dubh,@ s.m. Black tern—sterna nigre,. 








650. Steàrnal dubh. 
steárnall,4 -aill, s.m. see corra-ghrain. 
Steàrnan,*"l..ain, -an, & m. Common tern, Gei 

swallow—sterna hirundo. 





651. Stearnan. 


stearr, see stear. 

stéibh,* Suth’d. for stéidh. 

stéibheach,(MS) s.m. Base, basis, 

stéibhich, see stéidhich. 

steic.* s.f. Cow’s stake or stall. t 

steic,(OR) s.m. W. of Ross form of Eng. stick, 
Nach b’e 'n droch s. e ! whata bad boy he 
is! 2 (with £ sounded broad) Severe blow— 
Gairloch. 

steic-bhràghad, -aid, -ean-bràzhaid, 8. f. The 
wind-pipe, weasand. 

stéidh, e -ean, s. f. Foundation, basis. 2** 
Ground. 3**Piling of peats. °S imo làmh a 
leag s. na talmhainn, it is my hand that has 
laid the foundation of the earth. 

stéidh,* v.a. see stéidhich. 

stéidh-dhaingnich,** s. f. Foundation, basis, 
ground. $S, na fìrinn, the ground of truth. 

stéidheach, -eiche, a Having vrround fora 
foundation. 2 Having a strong foundation. '3 
Solid in judgment, judicious, sensible. 

stéidheachadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of laying a foun- 
dation, grounding, establishing. 2* Piling 
peats. A’ s—, pr. pt. of stéidhich. Air 
dhuibh bhi air bhur s., you being grounded. 

stéidheadh, 8. m. Stay, support—Dain Iain 
Ghobha, 2 (MS) Erection. 3 (DU) Upper 
built-up part of a p»at-stack. 

stéidhealachd, s. f. ind. Steadiness, solidity, 
stability, punctuality, firmness. 

stéidheil, -e. æ. Steady, well-grounded, "ewell, | 
founded. 2 Solid in judyment, judicious, ^ 
sensible. 3* Decisive in character, firm. 4* 
Punctual. 

stéidhich, pr.pt. a’ stéidheachadh, v.a. Estab. 
lish, found, settle, lay a foundation. 2* Pile 
peats. AO 4 

——.———te, a. & past pt. of stéidhich. Firm, 
founded, es! ablished.s»ttled.zrounded,steady. 
An Faglais stéithichte,the Established Church. 

stéi lh-theagaisg. s.f. Text, as of a sermon, 

stéig, -éige, Garlic form of steak. 

— each, a. In st. aks or collops. 

stéich T see stéidh. 

stéigheil, see stéidheil. 

stéighich, see stéidhich. 

-—————-te, see stéidhichte, 

stéigich, v.a. Cut into steaks or collopa, 


stéileag, t see stinleag. / 







ze "rn EEN e 


T gteill 


Stéi, s.f. Peg or pin on which to hang things, 
bracket. 2 Long fellow. 3(AC)Shelf. "l'hoir 
an gunna thar na stéill, take the gun off the 

+ bracket , cuir an cuman air an 3., put the pail 
upon the shelf. 

stéill, gen.sing. of steall. 

etéille,** s./. Lustiness, stoutness, 2 Ruddiness. 
3 Laziness, 4 Laxativeness, looseness. 

stéilleach, -eiche, a. Lusty, robust, stout. 29% 
Ruddy. 3**Lazy. 4**Loose, laxative. [also 
steilleach. } 

steillean,** -ein, -an, s.m. Gantry, trestle. 

steillear, -eir, -an, s.m. Strong and lazy fellow. 

——-——adh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. see steillear, 

Bteimhleag,* s.f. Hasp of a lock. 

stéineadh, pr. pt, Tha iomadh cànain ann a’ s. 
anns na Leabhar-lann—Sgeul.-nan-caol, p. 3. 
see stéiuneadh, 5. 

Bteing,( DC) s.f. Hook for hanging things. 

fsteinle,| s,f.ind. Itch, mange. 2** Ulcer, Tha 
ma ort, you have the itch. 

ach, -eiche, a. Itchy, mangy. 2 Purulent. 
3 Ulcerated. 

steinleachadh, -aidh, ssm. Exulcerating, state of 
exulceratiug,exulceration. 2 Becoming mangy. 
3**Itch. A’ s—, pr.pt. of steinlich. 

"Bteinleachd,** st State of being affected with 
itch, mange or ulcer. 

steinlich, v.n., Ulcerate. 

te, past pt. Exulcerated. 

steinloch,(AF) s.m. Coal-fish full grown. 2 Sten- 
lock. 

steinn,* pr.pt. a’ steinneadh, v.n. Disappoint. 2 

= Fade in colour. 3(DMy) Explain, rehearse. 

, S. e "pam chluais e, he rehearsed it minutely 

. in my ears ; 3. e orm, he disappointed me, de- 
feated my purpose. 

steinn, v. Gaelic form of stain. 

eadh.* -eilh, s.m. Disappointing. 2 Dis- 

' appointment. 3 Staining. 4 Stain. 5(JMcF) 

| \Fading. 6 (WC) Piece of string fastening a 
buoy to disc. 

—-—eil,** a. Keen, 
endeavouring. 

stèir, see stéic. | 

gteirneal, see steàrnal. 

steoc, -a, s.m. Any person or thing that "stands 
upright. 2 Attendant. body-servant. 3 Idler. 
4 Bayard.  5** s.f. Idle female, one who is 
fond of staring idly at persons. 

steoc, v.n. Walk, strut 

-——ach, -aich, s.m. see steoc. 

-——ach, -aiche, a. Standing erect. 
Standing idly. 

steocair, -can, s.m. see stedc. 

eachd, s.f.ind.Habit of standing or saun- 
tering in idleness. 

steoll, see steall. 

steòrn, pr.pt. a’ steòrnadh, v.a. Guide, direct. 2 
Manage prudently, regulate, govern. 8* 
Guide by the stars, 4 (DC) Strut, swagger in 
walking— A rgy'l. 

tsteorn,* s. m. Star. 

steornach, -aiche, a. Guiding,directing. 2 Man- 
aging prudently, governing. 3 Starry, 

steòrnadh, -aidh, s.m. Directing, act of direct- 
ing or guiding by the stars. 2 Managing, act 
of managing prudently or econ mically, gov- 
erning. A' s—, pr pt. of steòrn. Fear- 
steòrnaidh, steersman, ruler ; luchd-sbeòrn- 
aidh nan crioch, rulers of the land. 

steòrnaidh, fut.af.a. of steòrn, 2 gen. sing. of 
steòrnadh. 

stedrnail, -e, a. see steornach. 

steothag,* s.f. see steabhag & steafag, 

gteothaireachd,* s.f. Sauntering with a switch 
in your hand, 











ardent, eager, emulous, 


2 Idle. 3 





wee -_—-- -— „~ óv - 


[ ! | 
Lé i 
L op ——— nop - 
i e T." A j y IE 
n H lr j =i | "as 
— " ri LE! i! 
i l E m K Ka 


901 


steudseach,** -eich, 


stiall, stéill,-an, sf. 





stiallaich, 


stiallair, -ean, 


stic 


steud, -a, -an,s.f. Race. 2 Horse, steed. 3 

War-horse. 4 Wave, billow, surge. 5*Stride. 
6* Fine young mare. 7**Charger. 
Fonn nan s ’s nan rìbhinn òigh, land of steeds 
and virgins fair; sgaoth eunlaith air steuda 
sàil, a flight of birds on the briny billows; thoir 
s., take a run, or race; chuir siod 'nan s. iad, 
that set them running. 


steud, pr.pt. a’ steudadh, v.n. Run, run a race. 


Bu luaithe steudadh e nagaoth, he could run 
faster than the wind. 


steudach, -aiche, a. Running, that runs or ra- 


ces. 2 Abounding in horses. 


3 Managing 
horses. 4 Billowy, stormy. 


5**Speedy,swift. 


steudadh, -aidh, s.m. Race, running, act of run- 


ning, racing or darting forward. 2 Wave, bil- 
low, surge. A’ s—, pr.pt. of steud. 


steudag, -aig, -an, s.f. Tidy girl. 


ach, -aiche, a. Tidy, neat, trim. 
s.m. Swift horse. 
3 War-horse. 


2 Race» 
horse. 


steud-shruth,tt a, -an, s.m. Rapid stream. 


—ach, a. Abounding in rapid Strang, 


steur,** s, Bang. 
stiall, pr.pt. a’ stialladh, v.a. 


Streak, strips, 
2 Tear away 


mark with streaks or stripea. 
3 Scourge, beat, bestow 


in stripes or slices, 
siripes. 

Streak, strip, stiipe. 2 
Stripe, lash. 3 Rayoflight. 4 Slice, piece 
taken off, as of leather or cloth. 5 (MMeD) 
Head-post in a byre— Lewis, Mar stiallan 
soluis, like streams of light. (Zem, 


gtiallach,** -aich, s.m. Stripe, streak. 2 Split of 


a plank. 3 Chop taken from anything. An 
s. tana, thin streaky cut of bacon. 

,-aiche, a. Striped, streaked, brindled, 
2 That scourges or inflicts lashes. 3 Tearing 
in shreds, pulling asunder. Spréidh s., streak- 
ed cattle, 
d, s.f. see srianachd. 





stialladh, -aidh, s.m. Streaking, colouring with 


stripes of various colours, 2 Scourging, flog- 
ging, act of scourging. 3 Act of tearing away 
in strips or slices. 4**Streak, stripe. <A’s—, 
pr.pt. of stiall. 


stiallag, -aig, -an, s.f.dim. of stiall. Small slip, 


streak or stripe. 

ach, -aiche,a. Marked with small stripes 
or streaks, pied. 2 Abounding in sinall strips 
or pieces. 
v. a Diaper. 2 ** Streak, stripe. 
3 Rend in pieces or in strips. 4(MS) Flog. 5 
(MS) Interweave. 


stiallaichte, past pt. of stiallaich, Listed. 2 


Streaked, striped. 
s. m. Anything large. 2(AF) 
Badger. 3ttf Big man. 4*Long, ugly fellow. 
5 Drawling f—-. 


stiall-chu, see stiallair 2, 


stiall-cotain, s.f. Tape. 


stic, see stéic. 


stic, -ean, s. m. Fault, blemish. 2 Defect. 3 
Pain, unensiness of mind or body. 4 Black- 
guard. 5**Kiln-rafter. 6(AC) tmp, demon. 7 
in derision, Long-legged person. 8* Stake. 

Droch s., evil imp ; s. an donais, irap of the 
devil ; s. an deamhain mióir, imp of the great 
demon ; S. taighe, houws2-imn ; 8. stairsnich, & 
doorstep-imp—generally applied to a quarrel- 
some woman, occasionally to a quarrelsome 
man. 

stic, s. Inclination, leaning, peculiarity.— Rob 
Donn. 

stic,** e.f. Stitch in sewing. 2 Slice. 3 Staff, 
stick, pole. 4** in derision, Long-legged per- 
son. ir a, sew @ stitch, 


Li 1 - 
[^] ed KA e d [| J 
— & R " = n m SEM - 
| I| Ll Al [ j i ] Fi r a, 
JRBANA-CHAMPAIGh 
T ga. i i Lm ! 1 - ! 14 WW C 


stic 
etic, v.n, Gaelic spelling of stick. 
sticeach,tt a. Painful. 2 Clammy, adhesive, 
glutinous. 
sticeadair, s.m. Sticker. 
sticeadh,** s.m. Agglutination, sticking, cleav- 
ing. adherence. 
sticean,** -ein, s.m. Little stitch in sewing. 2 
Little slice. 3 Little staff. 4(DU) Small piece 
put on the sole of a boot. 
Bliceanta,** a. Adhesive. 
sticeartach, -aich, s.m. Long person. 2*Appari- 
tion that stalks aside houses. 
sticil,tt pr.»f. -cleadh, po Cram, stuff. 
sticil mhór, (CR) s.f. One of the beams, of which 
there were three, laid across a corn-kiln to 
support the sticlean beaga. The latter were 
laid across the sticlean méra or simidean to 
support a layer of drawn straw upon which 
the grain was spread.—W. of Ross-shire, 
sticleadh, -idh, s.m. Cramming, stuffing, prov. 
stid, f v.n. Peep. 
Stideaz,(DU) -eig, -an, s.f. Drop formed by 
splashing water or other liquid, e.g. drops off 
a revolving grindstone or a cycle-wheel. 
stidean, ein, s. m. Cat. 2 int. Call for a cat. 
[fstidean.] 
stididh, Badenoch for stidean. 
stifinn, Perthshire for stuthaig (starch.) 
Btig, -ean, s.m. Skulking or meanly-abject look. 
2ttSneaking fellow. 
stigeach, -eiche, a. Skulking, mean, sorry, ab- 
ject. 
gtigear, Ar, -an, s.m, Skulking, mean, sorry, ab- 
ject fellow, 
achd, s.f.ind. Mean, sorry skulking or ab- 
ject manner. 2ftSneaking. 
stigh, see staigh. 
stigleagan, see stiligean. 
stil, (CR) -ean, s. Strain, trait, trick. [General- 
ly used in the pl.] Tha droch stilean ann, he 
has bad traits or tricks,—said e.g. of an evil- 
disposed person, or of a refractory horse—W. 
of Ross. 
stiligean, s.m. Small pieces of wood in kiln laid 
across the simidean. 
atill,** s.f. Swift motion. 2 Violent and sudden 
exertion. Earb 'na s. air astar, the roe bound- 
ing swiftly afar. 
gtill, see steall. 2**Speed in water—Dain Iain 
Ghobha. 
still,** v.a. Divide. 2 Move swiftly. 3 Push 
suddenly and violently. 
stim, -e, pl. -ean & -eanan, see stiom. 
stinle,** s. Scab, see steinle. 
stinleag, -eig, -an, s.f. Hinge of a trunk. 2 Hasp 
of a lock. 3 Hank of yarn. 4 Staple. 
ach, -aiche, a. Hinged, of or belonging 
to hinges, hasps, or hanks of yarn. 2**Salient. 
3**Having staples. 
stiob, v.a. Gaelic form of steep. 
— —a(h.* s.m. Steeping, soaking. A’ s—, pr.pt. 
of stiob. 
stiobhard, s°e stiùbhard. 
stiobull, -uill, -an, s.m. Steeple. 
ach, -aiche, a. Having a steeple or 
steeples. 
stiocach, -aiche, æ. Crippled, limping. 2tfWeak. 
stiocaiche, see stiocaireachd. 
stiocail,(MS) s. Halt. 
stiocair, -ean, s.m. One who limps in walking, 
cripple. 2ttFeeble man. 
eachd, s.f. Halting, limping, 
stiocall,* -aill, s.m. Buttress—4siay. 
s'iocanta,* -ainte, @ Adhesive. 
stioda,* see stidean. ` 
stiedach, see stidean, 


stiog,* $.f. Stripe in cloth, &c. 
D 


i L 
Lop———— fa, 8 = regen m mms ës re 
NV = KA NIK ru ES | iT E 

j| i i pmi ^ ul 
— i — i 1 a " E 








902 


stiüir — pal 
stiog, pr.pt. a’ stiogadh, v.n. Crouch, skulk, lit. 
close to the ground. th 
stiog,** s.m. Stéak, piece of meat. 
stiog,(DU) s.f. Crouching attitude. 
stiogach,* -aiche, o Striped, streaked. 2 Sorry 
—,* -aich, s.f. Slim, sleeky female. 
stiogadh, -aidh, s,m. Crouching, act of crouch. 
ing, skulking or lying close to the ground. 
stiol,** s.m. Thread, string. 
stiolan,** s.m. Latch, little thread, little string. 
2(DC). Thin dress, as a woman's. 
ach, -aiche, o Stringy. 
stiolpan,* -ain, s.m. Truncheon. 
stiom, -a, pl. -an & -annan,s. f. Hea.l-band, band- 
let, narrow white band of silk, satin, hnan 
or wool worn round the head of maidens, 
snood. 2 Hair fillet, hair-lace. 3 Ringlet, 
wreath. 4 Tape, ribbon, 5 Ferret (kind of 
tape.) 6ft Coarse ribbon. 7 Streak, stripe, 
line in any texture or device. 8**Belt. 9** 
Brace. Stioman dh’ obair shlabhraidh, 
wreaths of chainwork. 
stiomach, -aiche, o Having a head-band or hair- 
fillet. 2 Curling, in curis. 3 Ribbed. 4** Like 
a ribbon. **Like a belt. 6 Streaken,striped. 
stiomadh, see stiom. 
stiomag, (AF) s.f. Caddis-worm. 
stiomag, dim. of stiom. s.f. Small head-band or 
hair-fillet. 2 Small curl. 3 Maiden in cons 
tradistinction to breideag (wife. ) 
——ach, -aiche, a. Having small hair-filleta. 
2 In small curls. 3 Having small curls. 
stiomaire, see stiom-éisg, 
stiom-amha'ch, s.f. Scarf. 
stiom-bhraghaid, pi, -an-br-, s.f. Neckband., 
stion-cheangail, p}. -an-c-, s.f. Bandage, 
stiom-éisg,(AF) s.m. Ribbon-fish. 
stiom-oire,* s.f. Moulding. 2 Brace. 
stiopall, see stiobull. 
stiopan, see stipean. 
stiopas, -ais. s.m. Drowsiness. 
stioradh, see tioradh. 
stiorap, -aip, -an, s.m. Gaelic form of stirrup. 
ach,-aiche, a. Of, or belonging to,stirrups. 
2 Like a stirrup. 
stiore, v. Stretch (at death)— A ray. 
stiorlacb,* s.f. Sorry, long female. 
stiorlag, -aig, -an, s. f. Thin, worn-out rag. 2 
Slender or emaciated woman. 
ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in rags. 
stiorlan, -ain, -an, s.m. Tall, slender person, 2* 
Any ugly lonz thing. 
— ————Aach, -aiche, a. Slender, thin,emaciated, 
stiornach,* -aich, s.m. sea stirean. 
gtiorrach, s.m. Short and curly wool. 
stipean, -ein, -an, s.m. Gaelic from of stipend, 
stipeanair,* -ean, s.m. Slipendiary. 
stirean, ein fan, $. m Small, slender tail. 2 
Sturgeon (fish.) 3** in derision, Insignificant 
person. 
stipinn, see stipean. d 
ear, see stipeanalr, 
stireanach,** a. Like a sturgeon. 
in, or pertaining to sturgeon. 
stiübhard, -aird, -an, s.m. Steward, overseer. 
—achw, s.f.ind. Stewardship, bailiwick. 
stiubhart, see stiubhard. 
ach, see stiübhard. 
achd, see stiubhartachd. 
stiug, s.f. Sleet —Uist. 
stiuidheag,(WC) -an, s.f. Trick in an animal or 
man, 
stiùir, pr.pt. a’ stiùireadh & a’ stiùradh, v.a. Di- 
rect, steer,lead,conduct,guide. 2 Superintend, 
rule, manage. 3 Bridle. S. am bàta, stesr 
the boat ; s. dhachaidh e, guide him kome. 
stiùir, gen. -e & -each, pi. -ean &-ichean, 4. f. 
Jriginal fron 














2 Abounding 


ENHEDUME VS da wv: 

F Lj F 4 
(IDDANA / AMIDALA 
i E 15] GA LI La i 
= i LJ 1 i p i 1 i LE i 


c dmt atum i. ——— n fen ee Ee 


Be! Ee 5 "T 
— d d - d in CH 


= 


stiùir 


Helm, rudder, stern. 2 Rule. 8 Tail. 4 
Cock’s tail. 5 Lobster’s tail. 6 Guide. Fear na 
stiùireach, the heimsman; cha tig e an uisge 
na stiùireach dha, he won't appear in his rud- 
Ger € water—wouldn't hold a candle to him; air 
an 3., at the stern; iarunn s., helm-hinge, pivot. 
stiùireach, -eiche, a. Steering, guiding, direct- 
. ing. 2 Havinga rudder. 3 Likea rudder, 4 
Tailed, having a tail, 5**Having a stern, 

——, gen.sing.,of stiùir. 

stiùireadair, see stiùradair. 

——eachd, see stiüradaireachd, 

stiùireadh, see stiùradh. 

—, 8rd. pers.sing. & pl.imp. of stiùir. S. 
e, let him steer. 

stiuireag,f s.f. Gruel, see stiùrag. 

stiup, -a, -an, s.m. Long tail, train. 2 Foolish 
person, 

——ach,-aiche, o Long-tailed or trained. 2 
Stupid. 

stiupaiche, s.f.ind. Awkwardness of dress, 

stiur, see stiùir, 

stiuradair, -ean, s.m. Steersman, helmsman, one 
who steers a vessel. 2 Quartermaster of a 
boat.  3**Pilot. 4**Director. 

——— ——eAchd, s.f.ind. Steering, helmsman's 
occupation, steerage, piloting. 

stiùradh, -aidh, s.m. Steering, act of Steering, 
guiding or directing. 2 Managing, act of man- 
aging or superintending. 3 Management Guil, 
ance, direction. 4ttSteering,piloting, A’ s—, 
pr.pt. of stiüir. 

stiùrag, s.f. Gruel,hot oatmeal drink-—Bad»^noch. 

stò, (AC) s.m. Pail. S. bleoghainn, milking pail. 

&tob, v.a. Push. 2 Stab, thrust. 3 Fix in the 
ground, as a stake. 4 Mark off with stakes. 
5 Prick, set, as potatoes, &c., by first making 
a hole, 

atób, see stòp. 

&tob, -uib, -an, s.m. Stake. 2 Any pointed iron 
Stick. 3 Prickle, thorn. 4 Remaining stump 
of anything broken or cut. 65 Stab, thrust. 6 
Puneture. 7 Instrument used by shoemak- 
ers for perforating leather in which tacks are 
to be fixed. 8**Any sharp-pointe' stick, 

stobach, -aiche, d. Abounding in stumps. 2 
Like a stump. 3 That pushes or thrusts., 4 
Prickly, thorny. 5(DU) Crusty, short of tem- 
per, applied to & person over ready to take 
offence. 

gtobadh, -aidh, s.m. Pushing, act of pushing. 2 
Stabbing, act of stabbing or thrusting. 3 Act 
of driving stakes into the ground. 4 Act of 
marking off with stakes, 5 Push or thrust, as 
with a pointed weapon. 6 Planting potatoes 
by first making holes. 7 Pricking. 8 Stab, 
lunge. A’ s—, pr.pt. of stob. 

Stóban, see stópan. 

stoban, -ain, -an, s.m.dim.of stob. Little stump, 
stick or prickle, 

—ach, -aiche,a. 

sticks or thorns. 

thick. 

ach, -aich, s.m. Stout boy. 

stobh, -dibh, -an, s.m. Stove, 

stobh, v.a. Stow. 2 Stick to, as a person. 
Feel affection for, 

stobh, pr. pt. a’ stobhadh, v.a. 
Crop. 3 Cut. 

stobhach,tt a. Abounding in stoves, 2**Stew. 
ing. 3**Cropping. 4**Cutting. 

stobhadh, -aidh, s.m. Stewing, act of stewing. 2 
Cropping. 3 Cutting. 4**Stew. A’ 8—, pr.pt. 
of stobh. 

stobhta, past pt. otstóbh. Stewed. 2 Cropped. 
3 Out. [stobhte] 

stoc, -Uic,é,m.Stock,.trunk, root, stump. 2 Póst, 
































Abounding in small stumps, 
2 Like a stump, short and 





3 
Stove, stew. 2 


— 


stocach, -aiche, a. Having a trunk, as a tree. 


stodach 


pillar. 3 Sounding horn, trumpet. 4 Family, 
race, progenitors. 6 Wealth, store, cattle, 
capital. 6* Pack of cards. 7*Cravat. à 
Cravat stiffener. 9 Stock ofa rudder, see rud- 
der 3, p. 78. 10 Principal part of any wooden 
structure. 11 Base of a spinning-wheel. 12 
Stock of a bagpipe, p. 722 $S. luinge, the dack 
or gunw@le of & ship; 8. bata, gunwal» or a 
boat ; s. leabaidh, bedstead or the sides of a bed. 
stead; ged à bhagvicheadh an stoc, though 
the trunk should perish, 

Stoc,* v.n. Object, cast up. Tha e a’ stocadh 
siod agus seo rium, he objects this and that ; 
cha ruig thu leas a bhi a’ stocadh sin rium, 
you need not cast that up to me. 

fstoca, -n, s.m. Wallet-boy. 2 Rider's foot-boy, 
page. 3**Stocking. 

stocach, -aich, -aichean, 8. m. Kitchen-idler, 
lounger. 

2 


Like a stock, 3 Having posts or pillars. 4 
Having sounding horus or trumpets, 5 Like 
a sounding horn or trumpet. 6 Wealthy, 
rich, having much stock or cattle. 7tt39ad- 


ing. 
stoeachadh, -aidh, s.m. Stocking, act 0f stock- 

ing or furnishing with stock, as of cattla. 2 

State of becoming cold, stiff or benumbed. A’ 

8—, pr.p'. of stocaich. 
stocadair, sm. Stockbroker, 2 Stock-jobber. 
-—enchd, st, Stockbroking. 





stocaith, -ailh, s.m. The flourisning or soun of 


& trumpet or signal-horn. — 2** Beaumbing, 
growing stiff, S. nam buadh, the jlourish of 
victories. 

stocadh, -aidh, s.m. Stocking. 2 Foot-boy, wal- 
let-boy, Stoeaidh gheal’ air do chalpa, white 
stockings on thy legs. 

stocaich,* s.f. see stocainn. 

stocaich, pr.pt. a’ stacachadh, v.a. & n. Stock a 
farm. 2 Grow stiff or numb. 3tf Become rich. 

—te, past pt. of stocaich. Stocked. 

Stocaidh, -e, -ean, $.f. see stocain. 

, g?n.8ing. & n. pl. of stocadh. 

stocail, a, Radical, in gram. i 

stocainn, -ean, s. f. Stocking, hose. Dealg-stoc- 
ainn,stockin wire, knitting-needle. Vignea lair 
S., & stocking-weaver, 

stocainneach,tt a. Having stockings. 2 Like a 
stocking. 3**Wearinz stockings. Brógacn, s., 
wearing shoes ani stockings. 

stocainnean, n.pl. of stocainn. 

stocainnich,* pa, Season, as a cask. 2 Provide 
with stockings, 3 Put on stockings. 

stocainuis,** s.pl Stockings. — Perthshire, 

stocainnte,** æ. Stiff or numbed, as the legs 
after sitting a Jong while. 

stocair, -ean, s.m. Trumpeter. 2** One 
sounds a horn. 

eachd, s.fiind. Continned blowing of a 
trumpet or horn, 2 The business or office of a 
trumpeter, 

stoc-cuidhle, &. m. The stock of a spinning- 
wheel. 

stoc-cuimhne, sm, Memorandum. 

stoch:l, see stoc. 

stoc-leabach.** s.m, Bedstock, front board of a 
bed. 2 Bed-post. 

stocnaich, see stocainnich. 

stocnais, see stocainnis. " 

Stoc-steibhinn, s.m. Huge log formerly procured 
the day after Christmas and burned for eight 
days, ? Person always in the way. 

stod,* stoid, s.m. Huf, pet, sudden fit of peey- 
ishness, Ghaba e ’n s., he was quite hufed at 


it. 
stodach,* aiche, d. HuZy, peitisu, peevish. 








wbo 





3 


stodach 


**Restive. 
stodach * -aich, s.f. Pet, huff. 
gio. iag,** -aig, -an, s.f. Pettish or peevish young 
female. 
gtodair,* -ean, s.m. Pettish fellow. 
gtodan,** s. mn. Huffish person. 2 Sulky child. 
3(WC) Thick-built person. 4(WC)Stammerer, 
ach, s.m. see stodan. 
ach, -aiche, a. Sulky, pettish, peevish. 
achd,** s.f. Huffiness, sulkiness, peevish- 
ness. 
gtoóiblite, past pt. of stòbh, see stobhta. 
ato-toil ! int. Cry to drive away a pig —E.Perth. 
(** foil ” in Argy!lshire—AM J 
fstoic, -e, -ean, s.f. String of beads. 
gtoich,** s.f. Stink. 
tatoid, -e, s.f. Pet, fit of passion. 2** Peevish- 
ness. 3 Restiveness. 
gtoideag,** -eig, -an, sf. Pettish or peevish girl. 
stoidhii, Gaelic form of style. 2 Title. Ans, ur, 
an seann s., bad forms Jor an cunntas ur, an 
seann chunntas. 
ptoilean,** ein, s.m. Membrum mas. 
ach,** a. Wanton,lewd,l!echerous,bawdy. 
—— ——achil,** s.f. Wantonness. 
stoim,t s, Particle, whit,faintest glimpse of any- 
thing. 
gtoipeal, -eil, -an, s.m. Bung, stopple, plug. 
gtoipealach,** a. Like a stopple, having a stop- 
je. 
itoipoalaich,* v. Bung. 2 Provide with a stop- 
ple. 
fstoir, see tstoid. 
BLoir, see stair. 
Btoirean,** -ein, ¢.m. Sour, sulky fellow. 
——ach,** a. Sulky, boorish. 
etoiridh, -ean, Gaelic spelling of story—applied 
both to a tale and the story of a house. 
stoirm, -e & -uirm, pl. -ean & -eannan, s.f. Tem- 
pest, storm. 2* Tingling or ringing sensation 
in the ear. 
etoirmeach, see stoirmeil. 
stoirmeachd, s.f. Storminess, 2 Stormy weather. 
stvirmealachd,s.f.ind. Storminess, tempestuous. 
ness. 2**Mauliness. 
fitoirmeil, -e, a. Stormy, blowy, keen, tempest- 
vous. 2** Manly. Gaoth s., a stormy wind. 
étoirmich, (MS) v.a. Bluster. 
stòite, a. Prominent. 2 Projecting. A cìochan 
8., her prominent breasts ; & ciochan geal crios- 
tail. na’m faiceadh tu s. iad, her crystal-white 
breasts, if you saw them projecting—Mol, Mór- 
aig, 65. 
ial cA & ail. -an, s.m. Stool, seat, settle. 2** 
Stool of repentance. S.-coise, æ footstool ; air 
an s., on the stool of repentance, doing penance, 
undergoing church discipline ; s.-posaidh, or s.- 
posda. where the bride and bridegroom stood in 
olden ti es when being married by the minis- 
ter or priest. (gen.sing. & n.pl. in Gairloch is 
siuil | 
sto!, pr.pt. a' stoladh, va. dn. Settle, become 
calm, rangu- l or sedate. 2 Settle, calm,quell, 
asa disturbance or tumult. 
stòladh, -aidh, s.m. State of settling, or becom- 
ine cabin or tranquil. A’ s—, pr.pt. of stol. 
Bolla, Sroiilo, a, & past pt. of stòl Steady, 
compose, sedate, staid. 2 Settled. quelled. 
4 jame., + Slow, at leisure. S. 'na chleachd- 
aibh. composed tn his demeanour ; thusa bu 
8.oiide ‘iad bheus, thou who wast staid in thy 
Manners. 
-vidachadh,-aidh, 3. m. Contemperation. 2 Be- 
c«m rge. A’ s—, pr. pt. of stóldaich. 
rtolJachd, s.f.ind. Steadiness, sedateness, staid- 
ness, quietness. 2 Tameness. 3 Slowness. 
Phoidaich, pr.pt. &' stoldachadh, v.a. Contemper, 











m 


904 


stoth 


2 Becalm. ` ~ 
stol-luthaidh, -an-l-, s.m. Joint-stooL ] 
stolta, sae stolda, i 
chd, see stòldachd. 
stonta,** s. Tub, vat. 
stòp, -oip & -uip, An, s.m. Wooden vessel used 

for bringing home the milk from the sheilings 

or for carrying water. The mouth is covered 
with a piece of sheepskin called an imideal. 

The stop is narrower at the mouth than the 

bottom and about 18 in. in height. 2 Meaa- 

ure for liquors, stoup, wooden vessel like a 

flagon. Leasaich an 8., replenish the stoup ; a. 

siolaig, a gill pot ; s. muisginn, @ mutchkin. 


stop, pr. pt. a’ stopadh, v.a. Stop, close up. 2° 
Prevent from running, bung. 

stòpach, -aiche, a. Having flagons. 2 Like & 
flagon. 3 Of, or belonging to, measures for 
liquids. 4 Like a measure for liquids. 

stopadh, -aidh, s.m. Stopping, act of stopping 
or bunging. A’ s—, pr.pt. of stop. 

stopag-fhraoich,(DMD) s.f. Single stalk of hea- 
ther with the root attached —Caithness. [stea 
pag —DMK.) 

stopainn,** v.a. Stop, restrain. 

stópan, -ain, An, 8. f. dim. of stop. Little flag- 
on. 2 Small measure of liquids. 

F 





stopan, -ain, -an, sm. see stoban & streaban, 

stopanach,fr a. see stópach. 

stopanach, s.m. Four-year-old stag. 

stòp-bodaich,* s.m. Half-quart measure. 

stòp-ceathramh,* s.m. Gill measure. 

stop-leth-bhodaich,* s.m. Half-pint measure, 

stòp-pìnnt,* s.m. Half-quart measure. 

stòp-seipeinn,* s.m. Quart measure. 

stopta, past pt. of stop. Stopped, bunged. 

stor, -dir, sm. Store, ammunition. 
3 Hoard. 4 Quantity of goods. 5 Magazine. 
6 Store-house. "laigh-stoir, a store-house. 

stor, -òir, s.m. Steep, high cliff. 2 Broken or 
decayed tooth. 

stòr ! int. Cry used to incite a bull towards a 
cow. 2 Cry to call à bull towards one—Perth- 
shire, [toraidh ! toraidh ! in /slay.)} ; 

stòr,** v.a. Store, treasure, hoard up, lay by. 2 
Furnish. 3 Replenish. 

storach. -aiche, @ Having broken teeth. 2 
Treasuring, hoarding, saving. 2 Having trea» 
sure or hoard. 4 Rich. 5 Having good man- 
ners. 6** Having goods or ammunition. 7 
(WC) Having irregular or too many teeth. 


storail, see stórasach. 

stòras, -ais, &.m. Store, wealth, riches, treasure, 
money, plenty, abundance.  S.-cogaidh, am- 
munition, 

ach, -aiche, a. Wealthy, rich, full of 
stores, hoarding, treasuring, having goods or 
ammunition. 

storb, (DC) v.n. Be filled with, as with food, 
be stiffened. 

storbadh, s.m. Filling, stiffening. AT" s—, pr. 
pt. of storb. Gu dana, colgail, làn air s., 's 
àrda stoirm an t seórs' ud, bold,fierce, forward, 
stiffened, high-reaches the fury of such— Donn, 





Ban,—O an nam Fineachan, p. 134. 
stor-fhiacaill, -ean, s.f. Broken or distorted 
tooth. ?(DMy) Buck-tooth, 


stór-fhiaclach, -aiche, a. Broken-toothed. 

storr,tt pr.pt. a’ storradh, v.a. Overfeed, surfeit, 
cloy. 

storr-fhiacaill, see stór-fhiacaill, 

stot,** v.g. d n. Rebound, as a ball from the 
ground. 

—ail,** s.f. Rebounding from the ground. 

stoth,* -a, s.m. Steam, Dok stream, vapour. 
Stench, An s à thàinig as a’ choire, the 


2 Treasure, . 


| 


^X 





k hisset wk 


E woth 


905 


straoidhil 





steam that came out of the kettle, 


stoth,pr.pt.a’ stothadh, v.a. Lop off branches. 2 


Cut corn high and irregularly. 
stothadh, -aidh. s.m. Lopping, act of lopping or 
cutting off branches. 2 Cutting of corn leav- 
ing long stubble. a’ s—, pr.pt. of stoth. 
Stoth-bhàta,* st Steamboat. 


Strabaid, -e, -ean, s. f. Strumpet, prostitute. 2 





Low drab. 
each, -eiche, o. Whorish, like a strum- 
pet. 2 Drabbish. 





eachd, s.f. Whorishness. 2 Drabbishness. 
strabair,* -ean, s.m. Whoremonger. 
atrabh, see sràbh. 


atrabhaig, v.a. Lay straw on a kiln, on which to 


dry corn. 
atrabhag, s.f. see srabhag. 





of laying straw on a kiln to dry corn, A’ 8—, 
pr.pt. of strabhaig. 

stràbhan, see sràbhan, 

stra-bhuille,tt s.m. Staggering blow. 

strac, see srac. 

atrac, pr.pt. a’ stracadh, v. Strike, thrust, 
beat violently, thrash. 2 Strike corn level 
with the top of a measure, by applying a rule 
diametrically along the brim. 3 Fill to the 
brim without heaping. 4**Aim at. 

stràc, -àic, an, s. m. Ruler to measure grain, 
meal or saltin a vessel, by drawivg it along 
the brim. 2 Mower’s whetstone. 3 Blow, 


thrust or.stroke. 4 Stroke of the scythe, strike 


orstrickle. 5 Loud crashing sound. 6ttStrake 
or plank of a boat. 7tt Copious eruption. 8tt 
**Strickle. 9ttStripe. 10** Crashing sound. 
11 Thrash. 12 (DU) The fill of any vessel. 
Fhuair mi s, na meise, £ got the basin full, 
Rush with the top. 

stràc, -àice, -an, s. f. Accent. S, gheur, or s. 
bhrisg, acute accent ; 8. mhall, grave accent. 

stràc, CR) s. m. Quantity — Loch Tay side. S. 
math shneachdaidh, @ heavy fall of snow. 

stracach, see sracach, 


Btràcach,** æ. Striking, thumping, thrashing. 2 


**Prone to thump or thrash. 3 Like, or per. 
taining to, a strickle. 
stracadair,* s.m. Strickle. 


stracadh, -aidh, s.m. Striking, act of beating, . 
2 Act of adjusting a 
measure by drawing à rule across the brim. 3 


thrashing or striking. 

Act of filling a vessel to the brim. 4 Aiming 
at. 
Aer, A' s—, pr.pt. of stràc. 

&tracadh, see sracadh. 


@tracair, -ean, s.m. Troublesome fellow. 2 Wan- 


dering or gossiping fellow. 3(CR) Vagabond. 

4** Vurasher, bruiser. 

each, -eiche, a. Troublesome, 2 Wander. 
ing. 3 Gossiping.  4** Inclined to gossip 
or are 5 Inclined to beat, thump, bruise or 

. thrash, 








oSsiping, tattling. 3 Giving of blows, — 4** 


isiting. 


| Btracaireachd, s.f. Continued beating, frequent 


thrashing 2 Hard fighting. Sùrd le sunud 

air s,.— Filidh, p. 64, see sracaireachd, 
stràcan, (CR) s.m. Tour, excursion—Skye. 
etrac-beoil, s.m. Saxboard of a boat, (E8, p, 73.) 


-stràc gheur, s.m. Acute accent (ó.) 


strach,** s.m. Arch, vault. 
strachd, see srac. 
atrachd, see stràc. 

ach, see stracach, 





| gtrachdach, see sracach, 


| ac 


Stràchdair, see stracair. 
( Bä, Grave accent (5.) 


——eadh, s.m. Straw laidon 8 kiln. 2 Act 


A’ S. oirre, aiming at her, bent on getting 


eachd, s.f. Troublesomeness, 2 Habit of 


stradadh,(MS) s.m. Aspersion. 

stradagaich, v.a. Speckle. 

stradhag, s.f. E. Ross. for sràbhaig. 

stradhaigeadh, Caithness for stràbhaigeadh. 

stragh,** .aigh. -aighean, s.m. Arch, vault. 

stralc, -e, s.f, Pride, self-conceit. 2 Swell of aw 
ger or passion. 3 see stràc (roller, &c.) Mar 
sin a bhitheas luchd na stràice, 80 shall fan 
the proud ; gun 8., without being proud og 
wealth. 

straiceach, -eiche, a. see straiceil. 

stràicealachd, s.f. see stràic. 

stràicean,** -ein, ¢.m. Truncheon,baton. 2 Con- 
ceited fellow. 

stràiceil, e, a. Proud, haughty, conceited. 4 
Huffish, pettish. 3 Arrogant, insolent. 4° 
Purse-proud. 

Straidhear, see struidhear, 

straid-imeachd, see sràid-imeachd, 

tstraif, 8. Sloe-bush, se» preas-nan-airneag. 

straighil,* v.a. Thump noisily. 

straighleach, Ach, s.f. Fit of intoxication. 

straighleadh,* sm. Thumping noisily. 2 Noisy, 
almost harmless blow, A' 8—, pr. pt. ot 
straighil. 

straighlear,(CR) s.m. Noisy fellow.—Perthshire. 

straighlich, e, s.f. Great noise, bustle. 2 Rat- 
tiing. 3 (**straoilich) Rattling noise, as of 
metal. 4 Sparkles, flashes, 

straill,** s, Harlot. 

tstraill v.a, Pluck, tear jo pieces. 2 Thump, 

straille, -an, 4.5», Carpet, mat, rug. 2**Delay. 
neglect. 

stràilleach,(CR) s.m. Sea-ware, sea weed— Suth'd 
& Easter Ross. 2 Seaweed left by the tide— 
Moray Firth. 

strailleadh, -idh, -idhean, 8. m. Loud stroke, 
Thump, knock, 

strainnsear, s. m. Guest—Rob Donn. Gaelig 
form of stranger. 

straipealair, sn. Worn-out race-horge. 

stramp,(CR) v.n. Tramp, trample, stand on, 
stamp with the foot. 2 Impact. 

ach, a. Tramping, trampling, stamping 
with the fout, prone to tread, tramp or tram- 
ple. 

strampail,** s.f. Tramping, trampling, treading, 
stamping with the feet. 

adn,** s.n, Impression, 

strampair, s.m. Tramper, 

strangach,** a. Plucky, 2 Twitching, 3 Quar. 
relsome. 4 Confused. 65 Lazy. 

strangadh,** -aidh, e am, Pluck, plucking. 2 
Twitch, twitching. 3 Quarrel, quarrelling. 4 
Confu-ion, 4 Laziness, [iow. 

straugair, -ean, 8, m. Lazy or quarrelsome fels 

fstransaireach, -eiche, a. Wrangling, Quarrel 
some. 

stranzaireachd,** s.f. Laziness. 2 Contentious 
ness, quarrelsomeness, 

strangal,t! ail, s.n. Brawl, 

strangaiach, -aiche, a. Wrangling, quarrels me. 
2 Perverse, Gu s., contentiously. 

——— ——4, 8f.imnd. Contention, strife, con. 
test, skirmish. 2 Quarrelsomeness,  3**i're- 
quent skirmishing or fighting, 

strann, see srann. 

achan, (for srannachan) see srannan. 

strannan,( M3) s.m, Gig, whirligig. 

strannraich,** s.f. Whizzing noise, 2 Snorting. 
3 Loud, hoarse sound, S, nap speur, (4e loud 
noise of the heavens. 

straoi, see stri. | 

straoidheach, -eiche, see struigheach & stroth- 
ail. 

straoidhear, see struidhear, 

atraoidhil,*" g, Bastinade, 


2 Conspersion. 











‘ 

A L Su 
» 

t» 


Pers sabse nte 


^ gtracidhit `, 


stracidhil, v. Bang. 
stracidhle, s.f. see straoile. 
straoidhleadh, s.m. Bastinading. 
straoidhleagan,** s.m. Battledoor. 
straoidhlear,** s.m. Hammerer. 
Straoile,** an & -annan, st Rude, heavy blow, 
thump, buffet. 
————.ach,** @. Striking rudely or heavily. 2 
** Half-seas-over.”’ 
straoileach,(MS) s.m. Inebriation. 
straoileadh, see straoile. 
etraoileag,** s.f. Slattern, slovenly female, 
straoilearachd, s.f.ind. Verberation. 
wtracileid, see straoileag. 
jStraoilich, e, s.f. see straighlich, 
straon, see sraon., 
straon,** v.n. Stumble, tumble. 2 Slip, slide. 3 
Go awry. 
ach,** a. Prone to tumble. 2 Causing to 
tumble. 8 Awry, oblique. 
adh, -aidh, s.m. Tumbling, slipping. 2 
Turning. 
Btraothag,(DC) s. f. Bed of straw in a kiln on 
which to lay corn when being dried — Uist. 
.Strapadh,** -aidh s.m. Strap, latchet. 
strapaid, see strabaid. 
strapainn,** v.a. Strap. 
straplaich,** s. Clash, din. 
strath, see srath. 
strath,** s.m. Stay between topmast and fore- 
mast, by which it is supported. 
‘streabhon(AC) -oin, s.m. see streafon. 
Btreachail,**pr.pt.&' streachladh, v.a. Lacerate, 
etreachladh,** -aidh, s.m. Laceration. A'.s—, 
pr.pt. of streachail. 
streachlan,** -ain, s.m. Band, garter. 
&treafon,(AC) -oin, s.m. Fringe, frill, fragment, 
beard, thin beard. 2 Tallow, thin tallow. 3 
Pellicle, filament, film. 4 Film that covers the 
bone. 5 Membrane. 6 Membrane coverin 
the calf and other animals in the womb. 
isd Thin skin or membrane on tallow. 8 
arpet. S. stiallach a’ ghille ruaidh, the rag- 
ged beard of the red fellow ; S. glas na caora 
duibhe, the watery tallow of the black sheep ; 
8. sìoda fo 'dà bhonn, a carpet of silk beneath 
her two soles. 
stroangachadh,(M9) -aidh, s.m. Question. 
streangaich,(Ms) v.a Rack. 
streap, pr.pt. a’ streap & a’ streapadh, v.a. & n. 
Climb, scale. 2 Labour with difficulty, strive 
against obstacles, struggle. 3 Scramble, 
clamber, mount with difficulty. 4tf Aspire 
vainly. Thar rós-chrann gàraidh cha s. iad, 
they shall not climb the rose-tree of the garden. 
Btreap, s.m. & pr.pt. see streapadh. 
streapach,** o Fond of climbing, scrambling, 
clambering. 
streapachas,(MS) s.m. Arduousness, 
streapadair, -ean, sm. Chim! er. 2* Ladder. 
streapadh, -aidh, s.m. Climbing, act of climbing 
or scaling. 2 Labuuring, act of labouring with 
difficulty, or of striving agaiust obstacles, 
struggle, strife, struggling. 3 Scrambling 
upwards, A’ 8—, pr. pt. of streap. Leinn 
dearbhar 8.nan lann, we shali try the strife of 
swords, 
streapag,** «.f. Confusion. 2 Passionate female. 
3 see streupag. 
ce &ch,** a. see streupagach. 
stréapaid, s f. Broil. 
streapaid, see streupaid. 
ge o pd a. Quarreleome, [streupaid- 
each. 


aideachd.] 
Mreapaidh, fut.a7.&, of streap. 

















d, sr Quarrelsomeness, (streup- 


striochadh 

streapan, -ain, -an, sm. Tuft or single stalk, as 
of heath or fern. 

streapanach, -aiche, @ Full of tufts or stalks, 
as heather or fern. 

streaphon, see streafon. 

sireathaig, Lewis for sràbhag. 

streathainn,(MMcD) s.f. Membrane —Lewts. 

streathan, see streafon. 

streathla:th, -aidh, s.m. Laceration. 
pt. of streachail. 

streathart, -^irt, -an, see sreothart. 

streódag,(CR) sf. Small quantity of liquor— 

ye. 

Streothart, see sreothart. 

streup, -éipe, ët Strife, contention. 2 Quarrel. 
3 Skirmish. 4 Insurrection. 6 (DU) Rough 
play, horse-play. [also streupaid.] 

streupach, -aiche, a. Contentious, quarrelsome. 

————,(AF) s. m. Creeper(bird.) 2 Bark- 
speeler. 

streupag, -aig, -an, 8.f. see streupaid. 

———ch,** a. Fond of squabbling. 2 Of,or 

belonging to, a squabble. 


A’ 8—, pr. 


streupaid, s. f. Squabble, skirmish, conflict, 
row, fray. 2**Passionate female. 


-— ————each, -eiche, a. Quarrelsome, prone to 
squabble. 2 Litigious. 

eachd, s.f. Quarrelsomeness, conten- 
tiousness. 

strì, s find. Strife, contention. 2 Striving, en- 
deavouring, earnest exertion. 3**Rivalry, con- 
test. 4** Buttle. Dèan s., end-avour, attempt ; 
s. nam fonn, the contest of strains, musical 
competition ; strìth àrda, loud-sounding bat- 
tles ; is coma leam 8,, 4 dislike strife ; cuir 8., 
strive. 

gis AR v.n. Strive, struggle. 2 Contend, emu- 
ate, 

striall,** s.m. Strip, as of cloth. 2 Shred. 

,** v.a. Cut or tear into strips or shreds, 
as cloth. 

striall, s.f. see stiall. 

ach,** æ. In strips or shreds. 

striam,* s.m. Long shred. ` [strian—MM.] 

striamalach,* -aich, s. f. Anything long and 
ugly. 2 Tall, ugly person. 3ttf Long trailing 
appendage.  [strianalach—M M. s.m. in Ar- 
gy —DC.] 

strianach,( CR) s.m. Beam or ray asis sometimes 
seen radiating from the sun among-t clouds 
near the horizon—Suth’d. [from srian. | 

strianachas,(MS) s.m. Brindle. 

strianach, -aich, -aichean, s.m. Badger. 
Badge. 

-——_—_—, -aiche, d. see srianach. 

strianagach, a. Brindled. 

strianaich, see srianaich, 

strideach a. P rindled. 

stridich, v.a. Chamblet. 

strigh, see stri. 











Gi 


strighmhor,** a, Emulative, contentious, ` 


stri-gill, s.f. Emulation. À 

strilinn,** 8.f. Garter. E 

strillean,** -ein, s.m. Mop. i 

stringlein, see sringle:n. 

stringleir, see sringlean. 

striobh,* v.n. Gaelic form of strive, 

striobh, s.f. Gaelic form of strife. 

striobhail, -e, a Kmulous. 

Strioc,** $. see strìoch. 

ach, see striochach. ; 

strìoch, pr.pt. a’ striochadh, o, &. Delineate, 
draw lines. 

strìoch, a. Brindled. 

, A, An, sf. Streak, line. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Streaky, brindled, 

————adb, Aidh, ent. Delineating, act of de» 











striochadh 


lineatingor drawing lines, A’ s—, pr. pt. of 
strioch, 

striochd, v.n. Yield, submit. 2 Surrender. 3 
**Bow, cringe. 4 Strike. Cha striochdainn 
do dhuine, 4 world not yield to anyone; b’ 
fheudar dhaibh striochdadh, they were com- 
pelled to yield or surrender ; an gaisgeach nach 
S., the hero who will not yield. 

striochd,** s.m. Yielding, submission. 2 Obeis- 
ance, bow. Dean s., yield, 

striochdach, @ Submissive, submitting. 2 Caus- 
ing to submit or yield. 3 Prone to yield. 

strìochdadh, -aidh, s.m. Surrendering, act of 
surrendering. 2 Submitting, yielding, sub- 
mission. 3 Obedience, 4 Concession. A’ s—, 
pr. pt. of striochd. 

striochdail, -e, a. Submissive, yielding. 

striochdalachd, s.f.ind. Buxomness. 2 Lowness. 

striochdar,** o Submissive. 2 Under submis- 
sion. 

Striochdta, a. & past part. Yielded, submissive, 
compliant, [striochdte.]} 

striochlan, -ain, s.m. Rag. 2 Any valueless 
thing. 

striodag, -aig, -an, s.f. Speckle. 2 Meretricious- 
ness, 

striodaich, v.&. Speckle. 2 Bésprinkle, 

strioll,* s.j. Girth, girdle. (**striolla.] 

striop,(DMy) s. The same kind of cloth as stuth 
(11), except that it had red stripes in it, and 
was used for Sundays, market-days and other 
occasions when the best clothes were worn. 

striop,* s.f. see strìopachas. 

——— ach, -aich,;-aichean, s. f..Prostitute, strum- 
pet, harlot, whore, Mar ri s., as with a har- 
tot. 

striopachail, -e, æ.: Whorish. Le mnaoi s., by 

means of a, whorish woman, 

striopachalachtl, s. f. Merctriciousness, 

strìopachas, -ais, s.f. Fornication, whoredom, 
prostitution, Torrach les., with child by 
whoreiom ; fear-strìopachais, a whoremonger. 

striopaich, gen.sing. of striopach. 

striopair, -can, s.m. Whoremonger. 

Striopais,"* s. Tritie. 


strioplach, -aiche, a. Dirty, foul. 2 Mixed, con- 


fu. d. 

striteach,(MS) e Brocaded, brindled. 

strìth, see stri. 

stritiicil, e, o Contentious, quarrelsome, caus- 
ing disturbance. 2 Exerting onese!f earnest- 
ly, striving emulous. 

strithmhor, see strigimbhor & strìtheil. 

Striub, see srub, 

atriutan,( DC) s.pl. ** Kinks" of whooping-cough 
— Benbecula., 2 see striutan. 

(WC) s.m. Hurried run. Ghabh es., 
. he ran quickly. 
ach, a. Running quickly or hurriedly, 

always out of breath, 

fstro, s.n. see strodh. 

8trob.vid, -can, sf. Strumpet. 

eachd, s.f. Whoredom, whoring. 

fstroda,"* s. Strand, shore. 

strodh, -didh, s.m. Prodigality, dissoluteness, 
extravagance, 

stro ihach, see struidheil. 

stròdhail, -e, a, see struidheil 

— $t:ódhalachd, s.f. see struidhealachd. 

. S'rógh, see stròdh. 

stroghail, -e, a. see struidheil. 

siròghair, see struidhear, | 

stroghalachd, see struidhealachd. 

stróglias, see struidheas. 











907 


struladh TN s 


(srac) 

stròiceach, -eiche, o Abounding in rags, shiv- 
ers or fragments. 2 Cutting into rags or frag- 
ments. 

stròiceadh, -idh, s.m. Act of tearing into rags or 
fragments, teasing asunder. A’ s—, pr. pt. oF 
stròic. 

Stroiceil, see stràiceil. 

stroid (UR? South end of Arran for rotach. ` 

stroidh, see struidh. 

stroidheal, see struidheil. 

stroidhle, s. see straighleadh., 

stroidhleagan, -ain, s.m. Battledoor. ` 

Mirari gp -ein, s,m. Mud and straw mixed for 
a wall. 

stroill, s.f, Delay. 

stról, see sròl. 

stropach, -aiche, a. Wrinkled. 

stropaiche, $.f.ind.State of being wrinkled or De 
coming wrinkled. 

Stroth, see strórih. 

strothaich,( M3) v.a. Palter. 

strothail, -e, a. see struidheil, 

strothalachd, s.f. see struidhealachd., ' 

stron, see srón. | 

struabanach, s.m. Fish that lashes the water: 
S. math bric, @ good-sized trout, as the troub 
of Loch Struaban. 

Strüan,(AC) s. m. Cake made on St. Michael's 
Eve of all the cereals grown on the farm, and 
eaten on St, Michael's Day. 

struban,( DC) s.m. Cockle— Uist. 

Strubladh, s.m. Wetting, hard experience, 9 
e fhuair an s., sail of one who has been out 
in wind and rain— Arran. 

strubhladh, -aidh, s.m. see sruthladh, 

strudhan, see strdan. 

struidh, pr.pt. a’ struidh & a’ struidheadh, v.a, 
SH SG, spend lavishly, dissipate, waste, 
abuse, 

ye do sm. & pr, pt. of struidh, see struidh- 
eadh, 

struidhe,** s,f. Extravagance, waste, 
Luchd-s., extravagant people. 

t uilheacn, -eiche, see struidheil. 

——d, see struidhealachd. 

struidheadh, -idh, s. m. Squandering, act of 
sjuandering, wasting, is-ipating, dissipation, 
A’ s—, pr.pt. of struidh., 

struidhealachd, sr, Prodigality, dissoluteness, 
extravagance, squandering, profusion, waste- 
fuluess. 2 Chargeableness. 

struidhear, -ir, -an, 8.2. Prodigal, spendthrift, 
abuser, 

—————achd, see struidhealaehd. 

struidheas, -eis, s.m. see struidhealachd. 

—ach, -aiche, à. see struidheil. 

———-—achd,* s f. see struidbealachd., 

struidheil, -e. a. Profuse, lavish, squandering, 
consumptive, dissolute. extravagant, 2 Abus 
ive Gus. extravijantly. 

————— —eachd, see siruidhea lachd. 

struilhleacn,( DU) s.f. Wicked woman, one who 
act: from evil motives, 

struighe, see struidhe, 

il, see struidheil. 

struileag, s.f. An imaginary boat used in a con- 
test Of wit or singiug at à marriage or other 
gathering. When oue has sang or otherwise 
contributed to the amusement of the party, 
he says “ cuiream s, seachad orm gu —,” 
naming some other persun, who makes the 
same remark when he has finished his share 
of entertaining, 


profusion, 





siroic, s.f. Tatter, long rag. 2 Ragged person. ' struill, -can, s.m. Baton, cudgel, club, 


3 Long piece toru out of anything. 


siroic, v.n. Tear asunder, 2*Lacerate. [**stroic]. 


Asse es! b , 


ealn, -eidh, s.m. see struill, 
struladh,(AC) s.m. Rattie. '"N SCH Die an 





— e =e o — 


struladh 


908 


atuideaftrachd 


anail d' @ s., when the breath shall cease to | stuaigh, see stuaidh. 


rattle. 

strump,* s.m. Spout of a kettle. 

strumpaid, -ean, s.f. Gaelic form of strumpet, 

strup,* s.m. Spout, as of a kettle or teapot. 

atrupag, s.f. Little drop of spirits—Arran. 

struth, -a, -an, 3.m. & f. Ostrich. 

ach,** a. Like, of, or belonging to, an os. 

trich. 2 Abounding in ostriches. 

aich, (M53) v.a. Run. 

an, see sruan. 

struth-chamhal, s.m. Ostrich. 

hun dod -aiche, a. Stupid, boorish, churlish, 
gruff, 

cl, D s.f.ind. Stupidity. 

stuacair,* -ean, s.m. Blockhead. 

— — ——eachd,* s.f.ind. Stupidity. 

stuach, a. Short-tailed. An cù s., the short-tail- 

* ed, or tailloss dog — Lewis. 

etuadh, -uaidh, n. pl. -an, -annan, stuaidhean 
& stuaidh, dat. pl. stuadhaibh, s.f. Wave, 
billow. 2 Summit of a mountain. 3 Pinnacle. 
4 Pillar, column. 5 Gable ofa house. [Ga- 
ble of a house built of stone and lime, see note 
under binneag—JM.] 6 Wall of a house. 7 
Sheet of paper. 8 Scroll. 9 Flush on the face 
from anger. 10** Undulation.  11** rarely, 
Street. 12(DU) Weal formed by the lash. An 
stuadhaibh deataich, en pil/ars of smoke ; s. 
osaig air an fheur, the grass undulating with 
the breeze ; iomall nan stuadh, the shore; o 
stuaidh an t-sàil, from the briny billow; cas- 
an ‘nan stuadhan dearga, legs covered with red 
weals. 

Stuadh, v. see stuaidh. 

stuadhach, -aiche, a. Billowy, surgy. 2 Having 
huge waves. 3 Peaked, having peaks or cliffs. 
4 Pinnacled. 6 Having pillars. 6 Having 
thick walls or gables. 7**Tempestuous, Ruith 
sinn o ’n chuan s., we sailed before the tem- 
pestuows sea. : j e 

stuadhadh,* -aidh, s.m. Approaching, approxi- 
mating. 2 Coming near in excellence. A’ 
s—, pr.pt. of stuadh. 

stuadh-bheannach, -aiche, @. Abounding in lofty 
or peaked hills. 

stuadh-bheinn, -bheanntan, s.f. Lofty and peak- 
ed mountain. 2**Stormy hill. Mullach nan 
stuadh-bheaun, the top of the stormy hills. 

stuagh-bhraighaideach,** a. Stitf-necked. 

gtuadh-chorrach,a. Having mountain-like waves 


Oran nam fineachan. 

gtuadh-zhias, -aise, a. Having azure, or green 
waves, as the sea. 2 Having grey walls. IA’ 
mhuir s., the green-waved sea. 

gtua:th-ghreannach, -aiche, a. Wave-furrowed. 
2**Teimpestuous, as the sea. 

gtuadhmhor, -oire, a. Broad-chested (of horses.) 
2* Proud, high-spirited. 3 see stuadhach, 
Each a, @ high-spirited horse. 

stuagh, -aigh, see stuadh. 

stuaghar, see stuadhmhor. 

stuaic, CR) sf. Glum or sullen look—Sut^'d. 2 
Wry neck—Arran. see stùic, 

stuaic, -e, -ean, S.f. Little hill, projecting 
crag, cliff or hillock, small round promontory. 
[tistuaichd.] 

#sLuaidh,*® af. see stuadh. 2 (AF) Flock or herd 
of animals. Dà uan as an s. mhoir, two lambs 
frem the great flock, 

stuailh.* v. n. Come near, approximate. Cha 
stuaidh thu air, you will not com» near him ; 
ihis will not approximate it ; cha stuaidh seo 
air a honadh, this wild not nearly fill «t. 

iii th, gen.sing, of stuadh. 
uaidh-bh-unnach,**a tHigh-spirited, 2 Quick- 
p.cel. Hach B., a quick-paced horse. 

Wo | 


d IT = = MET AE " 











ITI 


d LL 


stuaim,-e & stuama,s.f,Temperance,moderation. 
2 Modesty, bashfulness. 3 Guardedness. 4 
Continence. 65 rarely, Air, mien. A’ reuson- 
achadh mu fhireantachd, s. agus breitheanas, 
reasoning about righteousness, temperance and 
judgment ; 8. agus macantas, meekness and 
modesty ` geal làmh na stuama, the fair, pru- 
dent (cautious) hand; a’ teagasz sutama, 
teaching us to spend our lives soberly. 

stuama, -aime, o Temperate, moderate; ab- 


stemious, sober. 2 Continent. 3 Modest, 
bashful, 
stuamach, -aiche, o see stuama, 


——ü, s.f.ind. Temperance, sobriety, mod- 
eration. 2 Continence. 3 Modesty. 

stuamag, -aig, -an, s.f. Modest woman. 

stubh,** -a, 8.m. see stuth. 

stubhach, see stuach. d 

stubhachd,(MS) s.f. Substantiality. 

stuc, “UC, pl. -an & -annan. 2**Baluster. 

siuc, -üic, pl. -an & -annan, s.f. Little hill jut- 
ting out from a greater, steep on one side and 
rounded on the other. 2 Clitf. 3 Pinnacle of 
a roof. 4 Horn. 5ttScowl. 6 Rock. 7*Lump. 
8 see stuic. 9* Conical steep rock. 10*Preci- 
pice. Aig bun na stùic, at the foot of the 
rock; an sealgair air na stucaibh, the hunter 
on the rocks. 

——ach, -aiche, @. Abounding in small pro- 
jecting hills. 2 Abounding in cliffs or rocky 
pinnacles. 3**Cragsy. tt Scowling, surly, 
morose. 4 Looking sideways. 6**Stiff, rigid. 
7** Horned. 8 Hilly, rocky, rugged. 9**Pro. 
minent. 10* Full of bare rocks. liffJutting. 

gstucach,* a. Not inflammable. 

——air,-ean, s.m. One that looks sideways. 2 
Stiff, formal person. 3 Conceited fellow. 4 
Churl, surly fellow. 

——aireachd, s.f. Stiffness, coldness. 2 Looking 
askance. 98 Seowling. 4 Surliness. 

—— An, -ain, -an, $.?5.,dim. of stùc. 
ting hill. 2 Conical hill. 
corn, 

——anach, -aiche, a. Abounding in projecting 
cliffs, hillocks or rocks. 2 Abounding in rickg 
or shocks of corn. 3 Having little hills. 

stucanach, a. Established. d 

stùchd, -üichd, see stùc. e t 

ach, see stücach & stüiceach. 
air, see stucair, | 
an, see stücan. 

stuc-bheinn,** gen.pl. -bheann,s.f. Rocky moun- 
tain. 2 Precipitous hill. A’ siubhal nan 8.- 
bheann, travelling over rocky mountains. 

stuc-shread,** s. Balustrade, i 

stughaig,* v.a. Starch. 

stuib, gen.8ing. & n.pl. of stob. 

stuic, gen.siny.& n.pl. of stoc. 

stùic, -e, -ean, s.f. see stuaic. 2 Angry gloomy 
look. 3 Surliuess, lowering expression. 4** 
Scowling side-look of & bull or any quadru- 
ped. 4*Scowling side-look of a morose per- 
son. 6 Wry neck and sullen countenauce. 7 
Extreme boorishness. [* gives stuaic for 6.] 

.—— each, -eiche, a. Surly, morose. t Pi 

-——eag, -eig, -an, 8f. Surly or augry-looking ` 
woman. d UR 

stüicear, see stücair. 

stüichd, see stüic. 

stuilear, -an, ëm, Student. 2 Study. 

ra,* a. Contemplative, studious, 2 Com- 

posed, steady. 3ttMorose. 

rach, a. Studious, see stuidearra. 

rach, -al& 1, s.m. Student 


Little jut- 
3 Rick or shock of 

















— — —raehd,* s.F.ind, Study, meditation, stu» — | 


diuusaess, 2% Composute Sëtz Së, ` 
UNIVERSITY OF MOLIS. D 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 








stuig 

stuig, pr.pt. a’ stuigeadh, v.a. Incite, spur on. 
as dogs. 2* Instigate, 

stùig, (CR) a. Projecting, jutting out.—Perth- 
shire, 

stuig,* see stic, 8. 

stuigeadh, -idh, s.m. Inciting, act of inciting or 
spurring on, a3 of dogs. A’ 8—,'pr.pt. of stuig. 

Stuirc,(D My) see stùic 4. 

stuirc, hd), s.pl. Storks-- Dàin lain Ghobha, 

stùird, -ean, 8.m. Vertigo. 2Sturidy, a disease 
in sheep caused by water in the head. 3 
Drunkeuness. 

stüirdean, -ein, s.m. see stùird, 

stuirichd,** s.f. Pinnacle. 

stu'rt, -e, SL Huffiness, sulkiness, 2 Pride. 3 
(Ms) Prudery. 4“Resolution, firmness of 

| mind. 5 Gravity, sedateness, assumed gravity. 
6trAnger 

etuirtealachd, et Sulkiness, sullenness, morose- 
ness. 2 Iutractableness, see siuirt. 

stuirteil, «e, a. Sullen. supercillious. 2 Reso- 
lute. 3 Steadv, grave, sedate. 4 Dignified 
and morose but insignificant. 5ftAngry. 6 
(MS) Prudish, 7(DU) Sulky, buffy. 

stnicach, -aiche, a. Stubbed. 

$tulp,(CR) s.m. Knob, as of a chair or bed— 
Perthshire. XAH) Dour, taciturn, inaffable 
person, more ofteu applied toa woman than 
a man. 

stumpach,** a. Stumpy. 

stir, v.a. Cover or obscure with dust. 

stùr, -dir, sm. Dust motes. 2 see stor. Lur 
gun s., an unsullied diamond ; daoimean nach 
gabh s., a diamond that catches no dust ; cuir 
s. riu, disperse them, sca/t-rthemas dust. 

Storch, -aiche, a. Full of dust. 2 Of, or be- 
longiug to dust, dusty, 

— —— ——4Q, s.f.ind Dustiuess. 

Stüradh, -aidh, s.m. Act of covering or obscur- 
ing with dirt or dust, A’ 8—, pr.pt. ot stir, 

sturd, see stùird & sturdan. 

sturdailh, sve stùird. 

sturdail,** o, Surly. 

sturdaa,* -ain, s.m. The plant darnel. 
stüird. 

sturr, -a, -an, s.m. The rugged point of a rock or 
hil. 9 Suriiaess. 

sturrach, -aiche, a. Rough, rugged, uneven. 2 
Rough, surly in temper. sttRocky. 

sturrag, -rig, -an, s.f. Turret. 2 Pinnacle. 
Butting clit, 4tfLittle hill. 

——-—acii, -aiche, a. Pinnacled. 2 Turreted. 3 
Like a turret or pinnacle, 

sturraic, -e, -ean, s.f. tt Head or cap turned to 
one sile. 2 see stürr, 

each, -eiche, a. see stürrach. 

gturraiceau, -ein, -an, 8.0. Undress for à wo- 

.  man'shead, prov, 
sturrail, -e, a. Gross, thick. 

sturranta, -ainte, a. Gross, thick, fat. 

sturt, see stuirt & stuird. 

—— —-ail, seo stüirteil. 

—-aileachd, see stüirtealachd. 

stuth, -uith & -uithe, pl -an & -nithean, $. m. 
Metal. 2 Any stuff, substance, matter or body. 
3 Katables, anything eatubie. 4 Strong drink 
of any kiad. 5 Camlet, kind of cloth made of 
wool and goat’s hair. 6**Serge. 
Strength. 9**Mettle. 10*Particle. 11(DMv) 
Kin: of cloth made in olden times for petti- 
coats and jackets for women (cota stuth, 
saavaid stuth.) The worstel or turead used 
was Bun on the distaff and the thread re- 
quired to be very even and was pressed, the 
process being termed lisrvajadh, and the press 
employe, am * press” lisreagaidh. Gach s. 
a tu’ agam, everything I possess ; droch s., vad 


2 see 


g** 





"op ro age e 


Kë 


909 


Zorn 8 


suaigh ` | pd 


stuff; cha bhi s. ort,|nothing wi/l be wrong with 
you; Ss. na Toiseachd, the stuff of Ferintosh, 
Le whisky ; deagh s., good stuff. 

stuthadh, (MS) s.m. Afflux. 

stuthaidh,(DMK) s.f. Large buoy usually made 
of the skin of a dog, and used to mark the off 
end of a drift of nets or long fishing-line— W, 
coast of Ross, Argylish. & Invernesa-sh. 

stuthaig, s.f. Starch. 

Stuthaig, pr.pt. a’ stuthaigeadh, v. a. Stiffen 
dress with starch, f 

eadh, -idh, &. m. Starch, starching, acò 

of starching. 

te, past pt. of stuthaig.Starched, dressed 

with starch. 

stuthail, ** a. High-mettled. 2 Of good stuff. 3 
Tough, pithy, hardy. 4 Infinitive in gram. 

suab, s.m. When fishing-lines are set, suab ig 
the portion over and above the depth of the 
sea. Put suab, see under put, 

stuth-chridhe,* s.m. Coriial. 

stuth-curainn, s.m. Tammy. 

tsuabus, -uis, s.m. Disease in horses by which 

their gums grow over their teeth, 

tsuabh,** a. Mild, gentle, mannerly, 

t as,** s.m. Mildness, mannerliness, 

suabharaich,(AC) v.a. Illumine, explain, 9, 
oirnn e, explain it to usg. 

suacan, -ain, -an, s.m, Earthen pot, earthen fup. 
nace, crucible. 2 Crosiet. sttAwkward mix- 
ture, anything wrought together awkwardly, 
as clay. 4 Basket containing wood, hung in 
the chimney to dry ; 8. cre, an earthen fur- 
nace 

suacan-leaghaidh, s.m. Fining-pot, 

suadh, v. see suath. 

7 see guaxdh. 

—,** a, Prudent, discreet. 

tsuadh, -aidh, s.m. Advice, counsel. 2 Learned 
man, 

suadhadh. -aidh, s.m. Rubbing, friction. 

suag,** -aig, s.f. Rope, cable, 

-——air,** s.m. Rope-m iker. 

suaib, see suip. 

suaib-chuthaich, s.f. Touch of madness, Is trig 
a bha s. air leanabh bodaich, an old man's 
child has often had @ touch of madness. 

suiite;* sj. Oar. 

suaibhreach,** a. Gentle, quiet, 2 Not proud. 3 
Easy. 

suaicean, -ein, -an, s.m, Bundle of straw or hay 
twisted together. 2 Deformed person, 3 see 
süicean. 4AF) “et calf or lamb. 

suaicheanta, -einte, @ Remarkable, notable, 
sie AL, 2 Kasily known by reason of dress og 
ba ige, banner or armorial bearings, 3 Km. 
blematie. 4tfConsp;cuous, 3ttRare, 6 New, 
novel, Eididh s., @ notable dress, conspicuous 
dress. 

suaicheanteach, -aiche, og. Armorial, heraldic, 

——— d, s.f. Blazonry, heraldry, 

suaicheantaich, v.g. limblazon. er. 

e, s. m.^* Herald, standard-bear- 

suaicheantas, -ais, 3.71. Flag, streamer, ensign, 
standard, flag of a voat having crest or desigu 
on it, as that of a yacht-club, &c. 2 Escutch.- 
eon. 3 Any distinguishing mark. 4 Badge, 
crest. 5 Novelty,euriosity,rarity, 6 Portent. 7 
Cockade. SttDecoration. Cha s. corr air clad- 
ach, @ heron on the shore is no novelty—nvo 
sign of anything wonlerful about to bap- 
pen ; dha’m bus, giubuas, whose badge was 
the pin’; slat-siuvicheantais, @ sceptre. 

su uichneas, 822 suricneantas, 

suaidh,* v à. see suach, 

—— —te,* see suathta, ha 

suaigu,*” @ Prosperous, mJ 


























aua 


(nno aaa Oe VL ER PE ate e Sate n omoes o — M  Áá———À 
"»guail,-e,G. Small, inconsiderable, moderate, 
insignificant, mean. | 
guaile,** a. Weak. 2 Weary. 3 Pale. 4 Dejected, 
suaill,** s.7. Small quantity. | 
—-.,** d, see suail. 
.suailmheasta,** a. Homely, ordinary. 
guaim,** $.f. Sound, tone, note. accent, 
suaimh,* s.m. Luxurious kind of rest. 
euaimhne, see suaimhneas. 
enaimhneach, -eiche, a. Quiet, calm, secure, 
safe, composed, gentle, tranquil. 2f Genial, 
S8*Enjoying a kind of luxury in ease and quiet, 
as after great danger or fatigue. Gu e., com- 
posedly. | 
guaimhneas, -eis, -an, s.m. Rest, quietness, se- 
curity, calmness, peace, repose. 2 Luxury of 
ease and rest. 3* Great tranquility or quiet. 
Bheir mise s. dhuibh, 7 will give you rest ; 
greim tioram is s. leis, à dry morsel in peace. 
—ach, see suaimhneach. Is a an 
rìbhinn òg, sedate is the young maiden. 
guaimhnich,** v.n. Take rest, be at rest, take 


ease. 

guain,(CR).s.f. Cord fastening the skin of a 
buoy round the edge of the wooden disc— 
W. of Ross-shire. 

suain, -e, sf. Sleep, deep sleep. O sh. an éig, 
from the sleep of death. 

suain, v. a. Wreathe round, envelope or twist 
a cord or rope round anything. [trsuaineadh.) 

guain-airm,** s.m. Dormitory, 

suaineach, -eiche, a. Sleepy. 2 Causing sleep, 
narcotic. 3 Plaid. 4 Lethargic. 5* In a sound 





sleep. 
guaineach,(DC) s.m. Sleepy person, 2 (DU) s.f. 
Narcotic. Is mis’ a ghabh an t-s. á làimh 


mhic Ghillanndrais, it was I who took the nar- 
cotic from the hand of Gillanders’ son. 

guaineach, (DMy) s. m. Swede (i. e. a Swedish 
turnip.) 

suaineachan, -ain, s.m. Sofa. 

suaineachd,( MS) s.f. Sleepiness, 

suaineadh, -idh, s.m. Twisting, act of twisting a 
rope round anything, wreathing, entwining. 
2 The rope used for twisting round anything. 
8 Roof of a house. A’ 8—, pr.pt. of suain, 

guaineadh-muineil, s.m., Cravat. 

guaineag,(DC) s.f. Girl up to three months of 
of age, during which period she sleeps most of 
her time. 

suaineamh,** -eimh, s.m. Confluence of rivers, 

guainean,(DC) gan, Boy up to three months of 
age, during which period he sleeps most of his 
tiine. 





e , ein, -an, 8m. Thong, string. 2 En- 

velope. 3(MS) Napof sleep. 

ach,ff a. Abounding in thongs or en- 
velopes. 

suaineartach, -aiche, a Sound asleep, narcotic, 
that sleeps soundly. 

guaineas, -ais, $. m. Twist. Càradh suaineis 
gruag do chinn, the twisted arrangement of 
the hair of your head—W.Ross, p. 35. 





suain-ghalar, -air, -an, @m. Lethargy, habitual | 


drowsiness. 
guainich, v.a. see suain. 
suainig,(MS) v.a. Swaddle. 
suain lann, 8. Dormitory. 
suaiomhor, see suaineach. 
—achd, s.f.ind. Sleepiness. 
suaint, (DMK) adv, High degree of excellence, 
Tha e s, maith, it is exceedingly good—Caith- 


(suainich.] 





ness. 

suainte,(AH) a. Quiet, peaceable. 2 Circum- 
spect. Easter Ross. 

sual), -e, -ean,s. f. Likeness, faint resemblance, 2 
kixchange of commodities, bartering. "ha e 


910 














` guaraiche 
eatorra, they somewhat resemble one another , 
rinn iad s., they have bartered commo:itizs. 


ha s. mhór aige ris, he has @ great sesem- 
blance to him. 


suaip, v.g, Exchange or barter commodities, 


swap. Sh. iad na h-eich, they exchanged the 
horses. | 


--——each, -eiche, a. Exchanging, bartering. 2 


Fond of bartering. 


suaipeachail,( MS) æ. Sweepy. 
suaipeadh,-idh, s.m. Exchanging,act of exchang- 


ing commodities. A’ s—, pr.pt. of suaip. 


suairc, -e, G. Civil, kind,affa^»le, polite. 2 Meek, 


gentle. 3 Urbane. 4 Courtly. 5 Generous. 6 

Accostable. 7**Amicable. Le giulans., with 

generous conduct; s. sìobhalta, afable and civil. 
suairceachd,* s.f. see suaircead. 


suaircead, -eid, s.m. Civility, degree of civility, 


kindness or affability. 

suaircealachd, s.f. Gentleness. 2 Mannerliness.% 

suaircean,(AC) s.m. Bird. 2(DMu) Term of en- 
dearment, applied to a meek and lovable 
man—Black Isle, 

suairceas, -eis, 8. m. Urbanity, affability. 2 
Kindness, gentleness. 3** Amicableness. 4 
Civility, complaisance. 5*Politeness. Gun s. 
ri damhaich, unkind to strangers—MacCodrum. 

suaite, see suaithte. 

suaiteachan, -ain, s.m. Shrugging of the shoul- 
ders, 2 Rubbing the body against the clothes. 
3** Mixer. 4**kKneader. 


suaiteachanach,-aiche,a.That shrugs the should- 


ers and rubs the body against the clothes. 


tsuaiteachd, s.f.ind. Fatigue, labour. 2 Teme 
pering. 3 Mixing together. (Seeming. 
suaitheantas, s. m. see suaicheantas. 2 (MS) 


suaithte, past pt. of suath. Rubbed. 2 Knead- 
ed. 3 Mixed. 4 Much broken, fatigued. 5** 
Stirred about, as posset, 

sual,** -aile, a. Famous, renowned. [This and 
following word are spelt suall by ** in his 
appendix.] 

,** ail, ¢.m. Wonder. 2 Tumours—Sà-Obair, 

sualach,** a. Famous, admirable. 

suanihnas, see suaimhneas, 

suan, -uain, see suain, 

suanach, -aiche, -aichean, 8$. f, Hide, skin. 3 
Plough-rein. 3 Covering or coarse garment. 4 
Fleece. 5**Pall. 6 Plaid, 7* Mantle. Gun 
S., without covering. 

suanaich, s.pl. Tha 'mhacraidh 'nan s. fo stéidh 
nam ballachan, the race (lit. sons) are sleeping 
lower than the foundations of the walls—FW- 
idh, p. 60. 

guanaran,** -ain, s.m. Sleeper. 

suantach,** a. Lethargic, drowsy. 2 Narcotic. 

suarach, -aiche, a. Insignificant. triflin:s, of lit- 
tle worth, valueless, not valuable, paliry, ab- 
ject, mean. 2 Despised, contemued, of no 
repute. 3 Trifling. 4 Contemptible, silly. 
br Indifferent. Dealbh s., a despised idol ; na 
cuir s., do not despise ; tha mi s. uime, J ain in- 
diferent about it; duine no ui suarach,a paltry 
person or thing;bu shnarach dhuit ged a dhean- 
adh tu sin, it were a light matter thoug^ you 
should do that ; gnothach a, a paltry or shab- 
by thing ; cuir S., despise. 

suarach,f æ. Careless. 

suarachan,(WC) s.m. Worthless person. ‘ 

suirachas, -ais, s.m. Neglect, abjectness, indif- 
ference, 2 Iusiguifleance. 3 Contempt. A7 
Nought, trifling nature or quality. S. an ni 
seo, ihe contemptible mature of this thing; na 
cuir an s, an ni seo, do not set tits thing at 
nought, do not mak» light of tt. 

suarai-h, v.a. Derogzate. 

guaraicho,e.^, soe suarachas, 2 comp. of.a.suat- 





ro 


ach, 


Suara chead, -eid, s.f. Meanness, degres of mean- 


suaraichs’ 


hess Or insignificance. 2* Conte 


3** Diminution in value, j 
ference. A’ dol an s. uime, getting more in- 


diferent about it. 
suaraicheas, see suarachas. 


Suarcas, ** -ais, s, 


suarrach, -aiche, 


see suarach. 


suarrachas, see suarachas. 
suarrachd, (MS) 8./. Baldness. 


suas, (i.e. a suas) ad», Up, 
one.) 2 Westwards. Shuas, above, above there, 


above yonder ; o seo s,, henceforth 


up with you ! chaidh e 
e suas air boinn, 


' are not more than t 


tog a, rear, educate 


' when completion of movement 


meant, a3, tha e 9., 
w Ghàidhlig ! up 


tsuas, -ais, $.m. Urbanity. 
suasaid, sea tuasaid. 


tsuars-mhol, v.a. 
puff up. 


Magnify, extol, flatter, exalt, 
suatn, pr.pt. a’ suathadh, v. 


Mix any soft substanees together 


move about, as 
substance. 4 


m 


j 6 Thrash out barley by rubbing 


feet. 7**Claw. 


8**femper. 9 


Fray. 11 Chafe. 


eurthach,tt a. Rubbing. 2 Afflicted. 
suathadair, -ean, 
——sachil, t+ s./. Rubbing. 
sm. Rubbing, act of rubbing 
2 Act of mixing any soft 
3 Act of stirring or mov- 
ing anything about, 4 Mode of thrashing 
barley by rubbing it with the feet. 5 Knead- 
7tt Wringing of the hands. 
na fuaizheal ri crois, better 

than be bound toa pest ; 
aol-tathaidh gun s., untempered mortar, A’ 





uathadh, -aidh, 


or wiping, friction. 
| substances together. 
i 


ing. 6 Affliction. 
Is fèarr s, ri crois 
rub agæinst a pest 


8.m. Rubber. 


S—, pr.pt.of suath. 


suathaid,( DMy) a. Notable. 
^ eas,(DMy) sn Mark or 
& blow. Is tu a chuir an s. orm, 





marked me ! 


suathan-innseanai 


suathran,** s,m. 


suathta, past pt. of 


mech, 8. 


Vertigo. 


ch, 


subaiste,** s.f. Mouth. 
| gubas,** -ais, s.n. Mishmash, mess 


ries and milk. 
subh, -dibh, -an, 


3tfFruit generally, 4(AH)Plai 
. Oran excision in 


s.m. Berry. 2(AH) see sùdh. 
t, series of plaits 
a garment to tighten it—the 


opposite of gore. 
sübh, s m. Raspberry. (also subhh.] 
—Subh, s. m. Raspberry, 2 Fruit 


Aryyll. 
| fsübh, see sùgh, 


| fsubh,-4, ¢.2. Pleasure 


4* Degree of indif- 
m. Wit, drollery. 


upward, 


S., he went up ; chaidh 
he went up into (on) a mount- 
, @in; cha'n'eil a suas air fichead ann, there 
wenty (lit. in it) ; sios is 
S., eastward and westward (on the E. coast); 
dean s., make up, consti- 
tule, Suas also conveys the idea of resting 


he or it is above ; suas leis 
with the Gaelic ! 


o. Rub, wipe. 2 
. 9 Stir, or 
porridge or any inspissated 
Mash, as potatoes, 5 Knead. 


cut caused by 
how you have 


ch, s.m. India-rubber. 


suath. Rubbed. 2*Mashed. 
| $ubaz,** s./. Hood, kerchief. Currac sübaig, o 
sow-backed mut 
sùbailte, a. Supple, 


flexible, pliant, agile, nim- 
ble, elastic. Spiorad s., a fte 


cible mind. 
. Suppleness, flexibility, nim- 
` bleness, elasticity. 


BE ee aan 


mairg a dheanadh a ri dubnachas fit silo, pity 
him who rejoices in another's woe ; deireadh an 
¿subhachais sin, the end if that ( mirth) laugh- 
er. 

subhag, -aig, -an, s.f. Raspberry. 2 Strawberry, 
see sübh-thalmhainn. [falso sübhag.] 

——~-~ach, -aiche, o, Abounding in raspberries 
or strawberries, 

sübhag-làir, s./. Strawberry. 

subhaich,(MS) v.a. Rejoice. 

subhaiche, s.f.ind. Happiness, state of being 
happy or joyful. | 

subhaile, -e, -ean, 8.7. Virtue, moral goodness, 
moral excellence. Bean na 8., G virtuous wo- 
man, 

subhailceach, -eiche, o. Virtuous, of or pertain» 
ing to virtue, moral. Cda gheibh bean sh., 
who can find a virtuous woman 1 

subhailceachd, s. f. Virtuousness, quality of 
possessing virtue, 

subhaileead,tt s. Degree of virtue, 

tsubhallach,** q, Religious. 

tsubhaltach, -aiche, a. see subhach. 

fsubhaltas, -ais, s.m. see subhachas. 

subhan,** -ain, s.m, Juice, sap. 2 Water im- 
pregnated with the juice of corn-seeds, of 
which a coagulated kind of food, called sow- 
ens, is made. [sübhan— Gairloch.) 

sübhan-làir, see sübh-làir. 

subhar, @ see sùghmhor., 

sübh-chraobh, süibh-ch-, sübhan-ch-, s.m. Rasp- 
berry-bush. 2 Any bush that yields wild bere 
ries. 

sübh-craobh, süibh-c-, "an-C-, & m. Raspberry, 
2** Dewberry. 

subh-chraoibh, see sübh-chraobh. 

subhlach,** -aich, 8. m. Juice pressed out of 
apples or other fruit. 2 Liquor. 

sùbh-làir, -üibh-, -an-, 8, m. Wood-strawberry, 
see sùbh-thalmhainn. 

subhmhor, see sùghmhor. 

subh-nam-ban-min, s. m. Stonebramble, see 
caora-bad-miann. 2 Bogberry. 

subh-nam-ban-sithe,$ Stouebramble, see caorae 
bad-miann, 

subh-thalmhainn,§ s.m. Wood-strawberry. 

sublachadh, -aidh, s.m. Act of making supple or 
flexible. A' —s, pr.pt. of süblaich, 

süblaich, pr.pt. a’ süblachadh, v.a. & n. Make 
supple or flexible. 2 Grow supple. 3 (DO) 
Recede, become less in bulk, as a swelling. 

süblaichte, past pt. of süblaich. Made flexible 
or supple. 2 Grown flexible, 

sucan,-ain, 8. m. Earthen pot. 2 Anything 
wrought awkwardly together, ag clay. 

sucar, see siùcar. P 

sücarach, see siücarach. i] 

tsuch, v.a. Suck, imbibe. 2 Saturate, fill, 

such, s.m. Whispering noise. 

suchadh, -aidh, s.m. ¢{imbibing, TZFilling, sate 
urating. +3 Wave. 4 Suction, evaporation, 
A’ s—, pr.pt. of such. 

Schan, -ain, s.m. Sucker. 

süchd, s.m. Sake, account. Air a mhaitheis, 
Jor goodn?s8’ sake ; air s. Chrìosda, for Christy 
sake ; air s. nan achd, for the sake of these ob, 
jections. 

suchdar, see siùcar. 

suchta, past pt. of such, see süghta. | 

generally— | tsucraidn, a. Easy. 

suc ! suc ! (repeated several times) int, Cail to 
sheep —Is/ay, 



















mptibleness, 


*. 
~ 


(away from 


; thoir a ort! 


upwards is 


ib with the 
Foment, 10 


of wild ber- 


» delight, joy, mirth. sud, see siod. 


, subhach, -aiche, a, Merry, happy, cheerful. | sudag,** -aiz, s.f. Cake. 
Bha iad s , they were merry, 
7 —788, rais, som. Mirth, haopin 


Ress, gladness, 


merriness, pleagu 


sudar, s.m. Currier. 


'88, cheerful. | sùdh, -didh,-an, s.m. Overlap in planks of a boat, 
re, joy. Is| see bata, b, B. 73, TA 


— Mila € m mee Atha ra t 





Il -— ` N. J " | REN 
IK an ON DN 0-1 =| 4. MI 


sudh 


912 


suidho ` 





fsudh, a. Secure. 

sùdh, see sùgh. 

sùdhair, see sùghmhor, 

sùdhar, @. see sughmhor. 2 (MS) Alimental. 

&udral,** -ail, s.m. Light. 2 Candle. i 

sùg, -a, 8m. Cheerfulness, hilarity, mirth, hap- 
piness. 

sig, pr.pt. a’ shgadh, gë Suck, imbibe. 

. Soak, 3** Attract. 

&üg,* s.m. Lamb. 2 int. Mode of calling a lamb 

. — A rgyll. 

sürach, -aiche, d. Merry, cheerful, pleasant, fes- 
tive. 2(MS) Humorous, comical. 8(MS)At- 
tractive. 

sùgach, -aiche, a. Sucking, that sucks. 

sicachas, -ais, s.m. Jocularity, mirth. 

sgùradh, -aidh, s.m. Sucking, act of sucking or 
Ae as suction. 2**Attraction. A’ pr. pt. 
of sug. 

sügag, -aig, -an, s.f. Little drink or suck. 

——,§ -aig, sf. Red clover, see seamrag-chap- 
uill. 2**Bloom of clover, so called from its 
containing a honeyed Juice. 

sugag,(G) s.f. Sheep—Islay. 

sügaich,(MS) v.a. Joy. | 

sugaiche, s.f.ind.Cheerfulness, merriness, hilar- 


grt 


iby. 

sugaidheachd,** $.f. Joyousness. 

sùgair, -ean, s.m. Droll or merry fellow, merry- 
andrew. 2 Sucker, 3 Mountebank. 

sügair,* v.n. Make merry, sport. 

—— —eachd, $.f. Drollery, buffoonery. 

sùgan, -ain, -an, 3. m. Rope of twisted straw. 
2 Rope of twisted heath, 3(DC)Thatch-rope— 
Uist. 4 Horse's collar—Mull & Islay. 5** 
Straw collar for cattle. Corra-shügan, a twist- 
handle. 

sugan, -ain, -an, s.m. Pet lamb. 

sùgan, $.m. (i. e. corra-shugain) The reflection 
of the rays of light on the walls or roof of a 
house, from any luminous body in motion. 

suganach, -aiche, a. Abounding in straw-ropes. 
2 Like a straw-rope. 

sugar,** s.m. Band for the neck. 

sùgh, -a & -üigh, pl. -an, s.m. Juice, sap, moist- 
ure. 2 Sense, meaning. 3 Wave, billow. 4 
Substance. 5** Berry. 61i Juice of meat, 
broth. 7ttMotion of the waves. 8* Huge re- 
ceding wave. 9* Dearest object, darling. A 
shùgh mo chridhe ! my dearest ! my darling ! 
s. feòla, soup ; tha’n s. fuar, the moisture on 
the earth is cold ; gnothach gun s., a senseless 
or sapless affair ; s. nan ubbal, the sap of the 
apples; s. nan gran-ubhall, the juice of the 
pomejranates ; s. am poit, broth ina pot; 
druim nan s., the backs of the waves ; a ceann 
ris va süghaibh, her head against the billows. 
| pl. süghaichean in Sgeul.nan caol, p. 101—Na 
sughaichean lün-corrach, sinteach a’ gleann- 
adh gu Cinn Inbhir-Air, the billows and their 
troughs rolling towards the Heads of Ayr.) 

stich, v.a. & n. Drain, dry, dry up, drink up. 2 
secome dry, dry up. 3 Suck in, imbibe, swa- 
low as if by suction. 4 Absorb, 5 Evaporate. 
6 Season, shrink, as wood. 7 Extract. S(«DMy) 
Drip. 

| Sb. e 'm fallus, it absorbed the perspiration ; 
gh. am fiodh, the wood seasoned ; sh. an t-om- 
bar an dùradan á m’ shùil, the amber extracted 
the mote from my eye ;sh. an còs an t-uisge, 
the sponge absorbed the water ; s. ort e, suck it 
in; sh. a’ phòit, the pot dried up ; sh. a h-uile 
deur, every drop evaporated. 

sùghach, -aiche, a. Attractive. 211Juicy. 
\boundi: œ in berries. 

sus hachan, s.m. Syphon. 

sighadair,(MS) s,m, Attracter. 


g** 


sughadh, -aidh, s. m. Draining, act of draining, 
drying up or drinking up. 2 State of becom- 
ing dry. 3 Sucking, act of sucking or swal- 
lowing. 4**Absorption. 5 Seasoning, as wood. 
6 Motion of the waves. 7 Leakage—Dain I. 
Ghobha. 8*Extracting the juice. A’ s—, pr. 
pt, of sùgh. S. nan tonn, the flux and reflux 
of the waves ; tha 'm fiodh air s., the wood is 
seasoned ; & s. an smior as, extracting the very 
marrow trom it; thug ans, leis e, the receding 
waves carried it away. 

süghag, see sübhag. 

sughail, -e, o see sùghmhor. 

fsüzhainte, -an, s.f. Whirlpool, gulf. 

sughair, see süghmhor. 

süghaireachd,* s.f. see süghmhorachd, 

sighalachd,(MS) s.f. Alimentariness. 

sùghan, ain, $.m. Juice of sowens, or liquid 
zen which they are made by boiling, (sübh- 
an. 

sughanach, see sùghmhor. 

sùgh an daraich,$ s.m. Mistletoe, see uil'-ioc. 

süzhar, see sùghmhor. 

sugh-bhrigh, see sügh-bruich. 

sugh-bhrigheach, a. Juicy. 

sugh-bhrighear, see7sügh-bhrioghmhor. 

sugh bhrioghmhor, a. Juicy. 

sugzh-bruich, s.m. Decoction, juice. 


sagh-cadail,ff s.m. Opium. * 


sügh-chraobh, see sùbh-chraobh. 

sügh-dharaich,** s.m. Mistletoe, see uil'-ioc. 

sugh-lar, see sùbh-làir. 

süghmhor, -oire, a. Juicy, sappy, moist. 2 
Substantial, having much substance or solid- 
ity, solid, strong. 3 Sensible, intelligent, 4 
isses:  b**Billowy. 6* Pithy. 7*Succu- 
ent. 

süghmhorachd, s.f.ind. Juiciness, succulency, 
sappiness. 2 Substantiality, solidity,strength. 
3 Under intelligence, acuteness of 
mint € 

sügh-pheuran, s.m. Perry. 

süghta, past pt. of sügh. Absorbed, dried up, e- 
vaporated. 2 Saturated, filled, tightened. 3 
Seasoned, as wood. 4 Boiled in. 5 Sucked, 
Fiodh s., seasoned wood. (sughte.) 

sügh-ubhall, s.m. ©) |r. 


sùgrach, -aiche, a. ‘iirthful, sportful. 

— ———aAjil, -e, see sügraeh. 

sùgradh, -aidh,-s.m, Mirth; diversion sport,play, 
sporting, joke. Cha'n "el thu ’nad sh., it is 
no joke to deal with you ; cha'n e an s. a chur 
ris, it i8 no joke to manage, or master him ; 
dh'éirich iad suas gu s., they rose up to play; 
ri s., in sport ; nigheann donn an t-sugraidh, 


the brown-haired sportive maiden; a’ s. ri- 


Leien sporting with his wife ; mu sh. about 

mn rin. 

suyradh-baoth,(MS) s.m. Apishness. 

sùibheag, -eig, -an, s.f. see subhag. 

—— ——ach, see sübhagach. 

snibhealas,** -ais, s.m. Sponging, sharking. 

suibheallan,** -ain, s.m. Parasite. 

suic, g^n.sing. & n.pl. of soc. 

suicean, -ein, -an, 's.m. Gag to prevent a calf 
from sucking. 

suidh, pr. pt. a’ suidhe, v.a. Sit down, 2 Incu» 
bate, sit on eggs. 

guidh, ** s.m. Hero, champion. (saoidh.) 

süidh, see sùith. | 

süidh, v. see sùgh. 

suidhe, pl. -an & -achan,s.m. Beam or supporter 


ofa house. 2 Seat, 3Sittinz. 4 Séjant, in - 


heraldry. 5 Sederunt, session. 6tfIncubation. 
7 Level shelf on a hill-side, where ons would 
naturally rest. 8seesüithe. 9* Act or state 
of sitting. A’ s—,pr. pt. of suidh. Maide- 








LIS 


e 


sz L 


Vi 


L Ai "UE P 
j e P738 i | 


d 
y“ 
dl méi 


suidhe 


suidhe, couple of a house ; the epar to which ts 
attached the chain or crook on which to hang 
pots over a fire in the middle of the floor, also 
called maide-slabhraidh ; dean s., sit, be seat- 
ed ; 'na sh., he sitting; 'na s., she sitting; 8. 
bìdh, a meal. 

suidheachadh, -aidh, s.m. Settling, arbitration, 
act of settling, appoiuting. arranging, p'an- 
ning. 2 Planting, act of planting. 3 Letting, 
act of letting forrent. 4 Setting the pattern 
for tartan or other cloth to be woven, formed 
by placing threads on a small piece of wood, 
according to the design proposed and kept as 
a key to the number of threads of each colour 
and the positions of the various colours in the 
pattern. 5tt Specimen, pattern. 6 Set or 
pattern, as of tartan, 7 Order,arrangement, 
disposition. 8* Laying foundation, making 
framework, 9* Planting, colonizing, establish- 
ing. 10* Situation, posture. 11 Betrothing, 
arranging terms of marriage. 12 *Plan, mo- 
del. A‘ s—, pr.pt. of suidhich. Air a’ cheart 
sh., on the same plan or pattern, as cloth ; s. 
fearainn,a letting of lands for rent ; s. inutinn, 
gravity, 

Buidheach ail, -e, a. see suidhchte. 

suidheachan, -ain, -an, s.m. Seat, chair, stool, 
pew, bench to sit on, settle. 2**Rustic seat, 
3 Cushion. 4 Stern-seat ina boat. 56 (DC) 
E of corn (6 or 8 sheaves) —Uist, 6* Turf- 
Sofa. » 

guidheachas, s.m. see suidhichteachd. 

süidheag, see sübnag. 

ach, see sübhagach. 

an, dim, of suidbeag. 

suidheagan, see suidheachan, 

suidhealachd,** s, 7. Gravity. 

süidhean, s.m. Seam joiniug divided planks in 
a boat (see p.77.) (sùdh.) 

suidheann,** -einn, s.m. Ship's cable, 

süidhe-bhalach, see suith-bhalach, 

suidhe-bidh, s.m. Meal, diet. 

süidhe-làir,* see sùbh-làir, 2* s.m. Framework, 
groundwork. 

suidhich, pr.pt. a’ suidheachadh, v.a. Settle, ap- 
point, order, plan, arrange. 2 Place, plant, 
set. 3 Set. let for rent. 4* Betrothe, settle 
terms of marriage. 5 Win.  6**Pitch, 7** 
Repose. 8ttLease. 9**Make an appointment, 
agree. Sh. ean taigh(no am baile) he let 
the house (or the farm); sh. e anigheann air,he 
betrothed his daughter to him; S. àite far an 
tachair sinn, appoint à place where we shall 
meet ; sh. iad an stéidh, they laid the founda- 
tion ; sh. Fionn an t-seilg, F.arranged the hunt; 
agus sh. an Tighearna gàradh, and the Lord 
planted a garden; sh. e beoshlaint oirre, he set- 
tled an annuity on her; sh. e a bhùth, he pitch- 
ed his tent ; sh. iad faire, they set a watch. 

suidhichdeachd, see suidhichteachd. 

suidhichear, fut.pass. of suidhich. 

suidhichte, a. & past pt, of suidhich. Planned, 
settled,arranged, appointed,determined,fixed. 
2 Placed, planted, set. 3 Let, let for rent. 4 
Sedate, grave, steady. 5 Pitched, as a tent. 
6 Established. 7 Composed. 8* Laid, as a 
foundation. 9* Pointed out. 10**Stationary. 
12(DC) Married or deforis familiated (applied 
to the daughters of a family)—Arggl/. Tha 'n 
t-àite s., the place is appointed or determined, 
the property is let ; tha ini suidhichte air sin a 
dheanamb, I am determined to do that ; duine 
s., a sedate person ; air an là 8., on the anpoint- 
ed day ; is coir do na mnathaibh 'bhi s., 
wines ought to be grave. 

suidhichteachd, s.f.ind. Steadiness, 
9 Consideration, 





eguanimity. 


013 


| 
| 


eee AETAT Age 


Süidhte, see suithte. ; 

Sui’eag, see sübhag. 

Suig,(AF) s. Pig. 

Suiz, v.a. & n. see sug. 

suigean,1f ein, s.m. Place made of straw-ropes 
to contain grain in a barn. The grain placed 3 
a heap on the floor is confine from spreading 
by straw-ropes set round the margin. 2 Crup- 
per. 

suigeanta,(MS) a. Alacrious. 

suigearl, -eirt, -an, 8.m. Gladness, cheerfulness, 
joy, frisking of an animal for joy. 2(M$) Pith, 
3* Biustering kind of expression of joy. Ola- 
maid slàinte Thearlaich le s.,lete« drink Char- 
lie’s health with gladn-ss; a’ dol les. do'n 
choille, going frisking to the wood. 

suigeartach, -aiche, a. Frisking for joy, glad- 
cheerful, blythe. 

suigeartachd,** s.f. Blythesomeness, 

süigh, see stith, 

sùigh, v.a. «& n. see sùgh, 

suigheach,** a. Absorbent, 

suighean, (for suidhean) pl. of suidhe, 

süighte, see sughta. 

süighteach,(MS) a. Attractive. 

suigionnach, -aiche, a. see suigeartach, 

suigleadh,** .idh, s.m., Snot. 

sùil, gen.sing, sùl & sùla, dat. sùil, voc. & shùil 1 
n.pl. sùilean, gen.pl. sùl, dat.pl. sùilean & sùil- 
ibh, voc.pl. a shùla, 8.f. Eye, the eye, 2 Look, 
glance, cast of the eye in any direction,sight. 
3 Hope, expectation. 4 Care, oversight, super- 
intendence. 5 Orifice, opening. 6 Willow, see 
seileach, 7 Eye of a quern. 8**Regard, res- 
pect. 9**Loop-hole. 10** rarely, Tackle. 11 
Eye throngh which the wool passes to spin- 
ninz-wheel, 13 Thimble of a boat. 14**l'he 
letter S. I6(DC) Small cluster of herring in 
the water, less than a shoal —Lochfyne. 16 
(AH) Hole in which the shaft of a tool like & 
pick-axe is fixed. 

Bha mo cheud s.,my first glance or sight was; 
thog e a sh., he raised his eye; gun s, r’ a 
theachd, not expecting his coming; tha s. ag- 
ainn ris, we expect him ; na bitheadh s. no dùil 
agad ris, neither have expectation nor hope of 
him; bitheadh s. agad orra, watch or k-ep 
your eye on them ; an cuir tobar a mach as an 
aon sh. uisge milis is searbh ? will a fountain 
send forth from the same opening sweet and 
bitter water ? tha 'sh. ri teachd, he expects to 
come ; dh’ fhalbh na süilean.geala, the blind- 
ness has gone ; nach ann agam bha na sùilean 
geala ! how stupid I was! fiiuch do sh., wet 
your eye,(or, fliuch dosh. mu'n lean e rithe, wet 
your eye lest it sticks to it) i.e. in case you 
have the evil eye, and the thing referred to 
becomes yours or dwindles away. The remark 
is usually made'when relating something of 
an auspicious nature about a person in the 
hearing, who in turn would say *'*fliuch do 
shùil,” meaning that the narrator was not to 
be envious of the prosperity of the other. The 
remark may be used iu reference to one's pro- 
perty, as well as to his fame, &c. Cha’nimo 
sh. is eagal duit,therets nothing for you to fear 
from my eye(Anotlier saying of the same natu- 
re as the last. only it vom a from the paity 
who has made the favourable remark about 
anyone, and ad iine, '* Cha’n e mo sh. a's eag- 
al duit;’’); 's mo làn do sh, na làu do bhronn, 
the full of your eye is more than the full of 
your belly; 3, mo thrnaivhe, the eye that de- 
serves pity—the equivalent of a woe begone 
look ; tha 'n s. ri lear, their eye is towarus the 
seas moralachd nash , majesty in his aspect; 
thas. chrom aigr, is said of ong who Wwoxs 


sùil 914 guiri lhea^h 
- —— —— ————ÁÀ ÀM— 
from the outer corner of his eye in a furtive süilean,(DC) s.m. Boy child after three months 
, manner; s. mu 'n t-sròn, fo his cheek —used| of ag» when he opeus his eyes aud looks 
-~ in this way, chaidh iuuseadh dha a mu 'n t- 


about him. 
8., t£ was told him to his cheek. Beul mu 'n suileasz,** -eisg, s.f. Osier. 
fhiacail, has the same meanine, only the süil-fhrasachd, s.f. Lachrymation. 
. mouth and teeth are mentioned instead of the suilleach,(CR) a. Clear, bright —SvtA'd, 
ı eye and nose; s. na bràthan, th» eye of the 


suilleag,** .eig. -an, s.f. Beil, bubble. 
quern ; 8. rag, @ dim eye ; s. gheur, @ sharp ach, a. Full of bells or bubbles. y: 
| eye. 















suil-léigh, -ean, s.m. Oculist. : 

Suil-leigheas,** -eis, s.m. Eve-salve. 

suil-leusach.** sr Wall.eye. 

suil-lighiche,* see suil-léich. 

suil-lionnach, -aiche, a. Watery-eyed. 

suil-mhalair, s.m. Cockatrice. 

suil-mhala-righ, see sùil-mhalair, 

suil-mhargach,** a, Forestaller. 

suil-mhargaidh, -ean, s.m. Forestaller of she 
market. 

suil mu'n, adv. Ere, before. 

suil-radharc,*, s. Fascination. 2 Foresight. 3 
Sense of sight vision. 4 Fate, 

——ach,** a, Fascinating. 2 Having the 
sense of sight. 

süilteach, -aiche, a. see süileach. 

suim, v.a. Sum, compute. | 

suim, -e, -eannan, s.f. Sum, amount. 2 Consii- 
eration, respect, regard, care,attention. 3 
(AH) Number of cattle, sheep and horses as- 
signed to a certain holding as that which the 
tenantis entitled to keep, see sum. Cha bhi 
8. aige dh’ éiric, he shall not regard a ransom ; 
chan ’eil s. ann dhomh-sa, it makes no differ- 
ence to me; gabh s, pay attention ; mur diol 
sinn an s. cheart, if we do not pay the right 
sum; cha ’n 'eil s. sam bith aige do d’ ghnoth- 
ach, he pays no attention whatever to your 
business. 

suim-bhliadhnail, s.f. Annuity. - 

suimeachadh,(AH) s.m. The periodical counting 
and adjusting of stock by tenants holding 
grazing in common, 

suimealachd, s./.ind. Respect, regard. 2 Im- 
portance. 3 Attentiveness, care, considerate- 
ness, 

tsuimear, -ir, -an, s.m. Shin, shank. 

suimeil, -e, a. Attentive, regardful. 2 Moment- 
ous, important, considerable. 3 Considerate. 
4 Respectful. Gu s., regardfully. 

eachd, see suimealachd. 

suinn, gen.sing. & n.pl. of sonn. 

suineann,** s.m. Stammering. 

suip, gen.sing. d n.pl. of sop. 

suipean, see sopan. 

suipear, -ach, -an, see suipeir. 

suipeir, -e & each, pl, an, s. f. pee. S. an 
Tighearna, the Lord's Supper, Eucharist ; an 
déigh na suipeireach, after supper, [*suipear.]. 

suipeireach, -eiche, a. Cenatorv, 

————-—-, gen. sing. of suipeir. 

suirbhe, see suiridhe. 

suirbheach. Ach, s.m. see suiridheach. 

suire, s.f. Maid, nymph, mermaid, syren, fairy, 
nereids. Also used in a pl. sense.—** 

suireach,* -eiche, o. see suiridheach. 

,* -eich, s m. see suiridheach. 

suireadh, -idh, -idhean, s.m. goe suite, l 

suireadh, see suiridhe. | 

suirghe,tt s.f. see suiridhe. 

suirgheach, see suiridheach. 

suirich, see suiridhe, 

suiriche, s.m. Wooer. 2 Fool. 

suirichean-suirich,$ s, m. Burdock (Jit. foolish 
wooer)—arclium lappa. (ill. 653.) 

suiridhche, see suiridheach. 

suiridhe, s.f.ind.Courting, address, wooing,mak- 
ing love. 

ach, -ich, -ichean, s.m. Lover, wooer. 2 





652. Sùil, 
PARTS OF AN EYE— 

1 Malaidhean, eyebrows. 

3 Rosgan na süla, fabhraidhean, eyelashes. 

4 Toiseach na sùla, end next to nose. 

5 Deireadh na süla, end farthest from nose. 

6 An dubhagan, fradhare na süla, dubh na 

na sula, pupil. 

7 Cearcall na sila, iris. 

8 Ball na sila, eyelid. 

9 Clach na stla, rinn an ruisg, ubhal, eyeball. 

10 Geal na süla, gealagan na Sula, the white. 

tsuil, conj. Before that, ere. see seal & sol. (sul.) 

guil-an-toin,(AF) s. Cuttle-fish. 

tsuilbh, -e, s.f. Cheer, hospitality, geniality. 

suil-bhalair, see suil-mhalair. 

&uilbhear, -a, a. see suilbhir. 

———--——achd, s.f. see suilbhireachd. 

suil-bheum, -a, -an & -annan, s.m.Hurtful influ- 
ence of the evil eye, 

8üil-bheumach, -aiche, a. Having an evil eye. 2 
Blasting with the eye. 

suilbhir, -e, a. Cheerful, merry, joyful, hearty, 
pleasant. 2 originally Eloquent. Laoich nan 
gorm-shuil s., hero of the cheerful blue eyes. 

suilbhire, comp. of suilbbir. 

suilbhireach, -eiche, a, see suilbhir. 

suilbhireachd, s.f.ind. Cheerfulness, jovfulness, 
aiety, hilarity, 2 Alacrity. 3ttCivility. 4 

rankness. 5 Merriness. 

guilbhirich,** v. Animate, 

güil-charbh,(AF) s,f. Silver haddock, 

suil-chrich, Arran for süil-chritheach. 

&üil-chrith, see suil-chritheach. 

suil-chritheach, -ich, s.f. Quagmire, deep bog. 

suil-chruthaich, -e, see süil-chritheach. 

süileach, -eiche, o, Having good eves, sharp, 
quick-sighted. | 2* Knowing. 3**Ocular, 4 
Like an eye. 5 Eyed, having many eyes. 6 
Of, or belonging to, the eve. 

sùileachan, (CR) s.m. Warning, lesson, eye-open- 
er. Bheir siod s. dha, that will bea warning 
or lesson to him—W. of Ross. 

suileachd,(AC) s. f. Influence of the evil eye. 

güileag, -eig, an. s.f.dim. of sùil. Little eye. 2 
Small orifice. 8 Small bubble, bell on liquor. 
4 Little circular wooden vessel. 5**Pore. 6 
(MMcD) Small vessel made of clay contain- 
ing one Scots pint, and used for keeping milk 
-—Lewis. 7(DC) Girl after three months of 
age, when she opens her eves and looks about 
her. 8$ Common sallow (plant)—sa/iz caprea 
d s. aquatica. 9 Earmark on sheep, see un- 
der comharradh-cluais. —10*sSpot in cloth. 11 
Little loop. j 

———ach, aiche o Having little eyes, 2 Full 
of little eyes. 3 Full of small orifices. 4 Full 
of small bubbles. 5* Spotted. 6 Full of loop- 


holes. 
@uilean, n.p. of sùil. 





— "reg" em e EN, —À 1 
A 








e 


TE du 


ew $ V 
"w de Abde SÉ i, A 


suiridheach ` — 


sum IT 


(a mem Re a a a Un EE Lf AE TE sete EE EE EE ntn 


Shuffler. [f says better suirtheach & suireach, 
but he retains suirilhe & suiridheach as the 
principal spellings.] 





653. Suirich^an-svirich. 

-eiche, a. Courting, wooing, that 
2 Ready to court or woo, 
——ail, -e, a. Gallant. 

suirighe, see suiridhe. 

euirim, -ean, s.m. see surram, 

suirtheach, soe suiridheach, 


suiridheach, 
courts or wooes. 





—adh, see s'iridha, 

suirtheadh, see suiridhe. 

suirthiche, -an, s.m. Suitor, lover. 

suisdealadh,* -ailh, a.m. Drubbing. 
work, working by night ant day. 

sùist, -e, -ean, zt Flail. 2 Battle-flail, an im- 
plement of warfare much used in ancient times. 

PARTS OF A FLAIL— 
: Buailtean, swiple, the part that threshes the 





—- 


2 Hard 


corn. 
Lorg, staf, handle, Tamh argan—A rran. 
Sail shüiste, iall, iall shüiste, the thong of 
sheepskin which attaches the staff to the 
buailtean.  . i 
sùist, pa. Thresh. 2 Beat, thump. 
suisteach, a. Pertaining t» a fliil. 2 Like a flail. 
sùisteachadh,** -aidh, s. m. Threshing with a 
flail. 
sùisteachd, s. € Threshing, employment of a 
thresher. 
sùisteadh, -idh, s.m. Threshing,act of threshing, 
2 Thumping or beating, act of thumping or 
beating. A’ s—, pr.pt. of sùist. 
güistear, -ir, -an, s.m. Thresher, one who thresh- 
achd, s. f. Process of threshing. 2 tt 
Business of threshing. 
` güith, s.m. Soot. Neul an t-suith, the colour of 
soot. [süthaidh in Gairloch, ** gives süithe 
as non.) 
güith.** v a. Soot, cover with soot, 2 Season or 
dry in smoke. 
guith-bhalach, s. m. Chimney-sweep. [siithe- 
bhalach.] 
sùith dubh. sm. The black sooty drops that fall 
from the inside of a thatched roof after a rain- 
storm, 
suithe, ** s. Balk, beam. (suidhe.) 
súitheach, -eiche, æ. Sooty, of, or belonging to, 
soot, 2 Ful of soot. 
sü1'5neachd,/ MS) s.f. Sootiness, 
suithte. past pt. of sùith. 
Tal ON JI conj. Ere, before. 
sùl, 9nd" of sùil 2 see sula. 3 see sult. 
¢sul, | 





s.m. The sun. 





sulchair, -e, æ. Cheerful. 


sul mu’n,(MM) adv. Ere, bef 


sùla, (a sh— !) voc.pl. of sùil. 6 

sulag,(MMcD) s.f. see sùileag, 

gülaiche,(AF) see sülair. | 

sülair, -ean, s.m.Gannet, solan goose—sula dass- 
ana. 2AF) Any voracious bird, 3 Voracious 
person, (sulàir—-AH.) . — (yit unm 


sùla, gen.sing. of sùil. dis Uu ue PROLES 


1 





vi Mit, o aec cuc 


654. Sülair. 
sülaireach, -eiche, a. Of, or belonging to gan- 


nets. 3tiSharp-e 


2 Like a gannet. sed, .. 
sülas, see solas. ge, 
sulas,* -ais, s. m.Complaisance, over-joy showing 
itself by gestures and expression of counte- 
nance. Airson sulais riut-sa, out of sheer com- 
placency to you; 'S e a rinn an 8, ] how over- 
Joyed he was ! ! 
AP tae -aiche, à. Over-joyed,complaisant—- 
slay. SE? e 
sül-bheachd, -an, s.m. Attention. 2 Watchful, 
diligent observation. 8 Eyesight, Air gach 
taobh tha s.,on every side there is watch fulness. 
———ail, -e, a. Attentive. 2 Observant. 
2 Affable. 3 Hospit- 
A Jocular. 5* Overjoyed, Gu s., heart. 
[ fsulehar.1 
e, see sulehaireachd. 
— — —eacht, s.f.ind. Obeerfulnegs. 
lity, frankness, heartiness. 
Jocularity. 





able. 
ily. 


2 Affrbi- 
8 Hospitality. 4 


sülmhor, -oire, @ Quick-sighted. 





—achd, sf. Quick-sightedness, 

ore. 

su!-radhare, -aire, s.m. Eye-sight. 2 Foresight. 
3 Fate. 4 Fascination. 

-—ach,** a. Provident, foresighted, 

foreseeing. 2 Fascinating. 3 Sharp-sighted. 

-——achd, $.7. Providence, 2 Sharp- 

sightedness, 

sül-sgàilich,( MS) v.a. Blindfold, 

sult, -uilt, s.m.Fat, plumpness, fatness. 2 Come- 
liness, beauty. 3 Mirth, joy, jest. 4(/AF)Fat 
herring. 5ttBlubber. De sh. na talmhainn, 
of the fatness of the earth; s. is igh, fatness and 
plenty, 

sultach,** a. Fat. 2(MS)Flabby. 

MAR LA EO -aig, 8.f. Fat little girl or female 

east. 

sultaireachd,* see sultmhorachd. 

sultan,(AC) -ain, s.n. Fat little boy or male 
beast. Mios sultain, the month of fatness (Oct- 
ober.) 

guitar, see sultmhor. 

sultmhor, -oire, a. Fat, plump, in good conli- 
tion, corpulent, lusty. 7 Fertile. 3 Fair, come- 
ly. 4 Merry, joyful, jolly. 5 Jesting, pleas- 
aut, jocose. 

achd, sfiind. Fat, fatness, plumpness, 
corpulence. 2 Comeliness, beauty. 3 Mirth, 
jov, jest. (**sultmhvireachd ] 

Sultaine. Su, September, [Preceded by the 
art. an. DC sriys second half of October and 
first half of November. | 

gum, uim, S12. Sum. © Ag much ground as wih 








sum 


suffice four sheep (sowme.) 

@umach, -aich, s.m. Piaid. 

sumag, -aig, -an, s.f. Cloth below a pack-saddle, 
saddle-cloth. 2 Rug onthe back below a bur- 
den. 3 Anything ragged. 4 Footcloth, galli- 
Gaskins. 5 Panel. 6**Pad. 7**Pack-saddle. 

ach, -aiche, o Ragged. 2 Patched 3 
Like, of, or beionging to, a pack-saddle. 

sumaich,* v.n. Give the due number, as of cat- 
tle for joint pasture. 

qümaid, -e, -ean, s.f. Billow, surge, large wave. 
2**Ridge. 3 The external senses [1sumaid.] 

each, -eiche, a. Wavy, billowy. 2 Bois- 
terous, 3**Ridgy. 

gumaidean, s.pl. W.of Ross for somuiltean., 

sumain, pr.pt. a’ sumanadh, v.a. Summon, cite, 
prosecute. 

sumain,f s.f. see sumanadh. 

sümainn, -e,-ean, s.f. Billow, surge, great wave. 
Cha siùil na sumainnean glasa, the blue bil- 
cows are not sails. [**sumain.] 

each, -eiche, a. Billowy, stormy. 2** 
Flowing. 3**Causing great waves, 

gumair,-ean, s.m. Gulf. 2 Whirlpool 3 Suck- 
er. 4 Swallower. 6 Drinker. 6 Glutton. 7 
Sucker of a pump. 8 Droneof a bagpipe. (p. 
722.) 19 Generation. 

sumaire, s.m. Coarse cudgel, lethal weapon, bee- 
tle—Sàr-Obair. 

sumaire,(AF) s.m. Leech. 2 Serpent. 3 Reptile. 

guman,** s.m. Cital. +2**Interpellation. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Summons. 92 Act of sum- 
moning. A’ 8—, pr.pt. of sumain, 

gumanaich, v.a. Billow. 

sumbaid, e, -ean, s.f. see sumaid. 

sumgadh,** -aidh, s.m. Aporrhoea. 

sùmhail, e, v. Close-packed, unbulky. 2 Tidy. 
3 Quiet, peaceable, tame.  4** Strait-laced. 
5* Humble, obedient, obsequious, as a person. 
6tt$moothed, Opposite of dùmhail. Gu 8., 
tightly. [pron. sùil in Arran.] 

sumhaileachd,** s.f. Tightness. 

suümhlach.**. a. Crowding, pressing together, 
abridging. 

gümhlachadh, -aidh, s.m. Packing closer, act of 
packing closer. 2 Taming, act of taming. 3 
State of becoming tame or peaceable. 4 Ab- 
atract, abridgment, diminishing. 5 Bending 
tightly. 6 Bending tozether. 7* Creeping in, 
sitting or lying closer;and closer. 8* Lessen- 
ing or abridgment of bulk. A’ s—, pr.pt. of 
sumhlaich. | 

sumhiachadh, -aidh, s m. Syllabus, 

gumhlachair,** s.m. Abrideer. 

gumhlachd, s.f.ind. State of being closely pack- 
ed, 2 Condensation. 3 Peacealleness, quict- 
ness. 4 Tameness, 5* Obsequiousne:ss. 6 
Abjectness. 7* Littleness of bulk. 8 Tight- 
ness. 

&ümhlaich, pr.pt.a’ sàmhlachadh,v.a. Pack clos- 
er together, diminish in bulk, abridge, lessen, 
make less bulky. 2 Get less bulky. 3 Tame, 

; make tame. 4 Become quiet or peaceable. 5 
Bend tightly, tighten. 5*Lie closer together. 

-— — ear, fut.pass. of shmblaich. 

— iilh, fut.a/.a. of sùmhlaich. 

- —--te, past pt, of sùmùlaich.Packed close. 
2 Tamed, maile tame, d&c. 

sumhlas, -ais, s.m. see sümhlachd. 

gunais, -e, Gun, $.f. Loveage—ligusticum scoti- 
cum, (ill, 655.) 

gunn,** s,» Putt, blast. 
tion. 4**Wall. | 

——ach,** -a ch, s.m. Strong fort. 2 Milking- 
Place, 3 "ummiit. 

sunnag, -aig, -au, sf. Easy chair made of twist- 
ed straw. 























2 Push. 3 Fortifica- 


916 


sürdagach 


VW eee 
> gé, veni Loy D 
Ki : MZ 
wr 
v i 


m e 
C 


T 


E 


5 ^ AS 
> DE ihe 





655. Sunpis. 

sunnailt, -e, -ean, s.f. Likeness, comparison, re- 
semblance, match. S. t’ eugais, the likeness of 
thy face. 

sunnanadh.* -aidh, see sumanadh., 

sunnanaich,* v.a. see sumain, v, 

sunnara,(DO) a. Fixed, secure, as the founda- 
tion of a house. 

sunnd, s.m.ind. Joy, cheerfulness, hilarity, good 
humour. 2 Good state of health. 3 Good ap- 
petite. 'Dé 'ns. a th’ ort ? how do you do? 

ach, -aiche, a. Merry, cheerful, lively.joy- 

ous, joyful, in good spirits. 2 Good-humour- 

ed. 3 Enjoying good health. 4 Havingja 

good appetite. Gu s., qood-hwmouredly. 

achail, a. see sunndach. 

achas, -ais, $.?n. see sunnd. 

achd, s.f.ind. Alacrity, see sunnd, 

sunndaich,(MS) v.a. Exhilarate. 

sunndaichead, -aid, s.m. see sunnd. 

sunndan,** s.m. Delight, short fit of gladness, 
sudden emotion of joy. 

sunn-ghaoth,** -ghaoith,s.f.High wind. 2 Boast, 
gasconade. 

————_——-ar, a. Boastful, vain, blustering, 

sunnt, see sunud. è 

—— —aà ch, see sunndach. 

sunrach.** a. Particular, snecial, 

sunrachadh, see sonrachadh. 

sünraich, see sònraich. 

— ———te, see sònraichte. 

suntaidh, a. Quick. 

süpail,* eo see sùbailte. 

süpailte, see sübailte. 

supailteachd, see subailteachd. 

supalachd,* s.f. see sùbailteachd, 

sur,(AC) s.m. Flaw. Gun sal, gun sur, without 
smear or flaw. 

sur, a.*Gaelic form of Scots pronunciation of 
sorur. 

surabhan,** -ain, s.m. Southernwood. 

surag,§ -aig, -an, s.f. Wood-sorrel, see "i: 

süragach,** o Abounding in or like, wood- 
sorrel. 

surcain, (MMcD) s. m. Piece of skin or wood 
with sharp peg placed in it point upwards for 
attaching to a oalf's snout to prevent its suck- 
ing its mother. 

sùrd, -uird, sm. Alacrity, eager and willing ex- 
ertion. 2 Industry. 3 Speed, “ cleverness.’’ 
4 Preparation or bestirring for business. 5f 
Cheerfulness, 6* Hilarity. 7*Succes-ful train 
or mode. Cuirs. ort, bestir yourself for busi- 
Ress. 

sùrdag, -aig, -an, sf. Leap, skip, jump, spring, 
boun!, cutting, caper, bounce. wz*Stride. AT 
gearradh sh., bounding, cutiing capers ; a’ 
teachd le s., coming with a bound. 

——~—ach, -aiche, a. Bounding, leaping, bouuc- 














* 


strdagach 


ing, apt to bound, leap or bounce. 2 Striding- 
An eilid sh., the bonndimg roe. | 

sürdagaich, v. n. Leap, skip, spring, 
bounce. 2 Stride. 

I E 6.f, Leap, skip, spring. 

gurdail, -e, a. Eager, prompt, active, diligent. 2 
*Business-like. 3 Industrious, clever, push- 
ing, shifty. 4* Full of spirits. 

sürdalachd, s.f.ind. Alacrity, diligence, 2 Fer- 
your, 3 Industriousness, 4 Alertness, 5 
‘Cheerfulness. 6ttActivity. 

surrag, -aig, -an, &./. Vent ofa kiln, the oblong 
space over which the wood, straw and grain 
are placed. | 

surram. -aim, (i.e. surram suain) Sound sleep, 2 
Snoring, noise as of one sleeping. 

gürtaz, see sùrdag. 

guntaidh,** a. Quick. 

susbailteach, see susbainteach. 

gusbaint, -e, -ean, s.f. Substance, pith, strength. 
2 Efficacy. 3 Import. 

—each, -eiche, a. Substantial. 2(MS)Car- 
dinal, 3 Sane, sound in judgment. 

susbuin, see susbaint, 

gusbuinneach,** a. fAlible. 

susdal, ail, s.m. Bustliug, much ado about tri- 
fles, 2 Affectedness. 3 Shyuess, coyness. 4 
ttFuss. [tsusdal.] 

süslalach, -aiche, a. Bustling, noisy, making 
much ado about trifles. 2 Atfectedly shy, coy. 
8 Prudish. 

—d,** sf. Prudery, prudishness, coy- 


bound, 








ness, | 

süsdan,(CR) -ain, pl. susdana, s.m. Thousand— 
Caithn-ss. 

sustan, see susan. 

suspainn, see susbaint, 

sutair,** s.m. lanner. 

eachd, 8.7. Tannery. 

sùth, -ùith, -an, see sùgh, 

suth, s.m. Anything. : 

suthag, s,f. see sübhag. 2(DC) Bee-hive chair 
made of twisted straw or sea-bent. — Uist. 

suthaidh, s. see suith. 

suthainn, a. Eternal, continual, everlasting. 2 
Infinite. 3 rarely, Prosperous. Gu s. is gu 
siorruidh, eternally and for ever. 

——eachd, s.f. Eternity. A thus na s., from 
all eternity. 

güthair, see sùghmhor. 

süthan.** -ain, s.m. Booby,dunce, 2 Small beer. 

——.— ach,(DC) s.m. Quicksand — Uist. 

suthann, see suthainu. 4 

suthar,(DMK) a. Civil, affable, polite, 'gentle— 
Caithness. 

güth-bhrigh, -e, 3f. see sùgh bruich & sùgh- 
bhrigh. 

—- each, see sügh-bhrigheach. 

——eur, see sügh-bhrioghmhor. 

mhor, see sugh-Lhrioghmhor, 

suthmhor, see sùghmhor. 

achd, see sughmhorachd, 

fsuthuion, -e,@. Prosperous. 




















== FA 


Utt 


tabhachd 


T Lë 


t, teine, the 17th. letter of the Gaelie alphabet 
now in use. 

T, not aspirated has two sounds. (1)Near- 
ly like t in town,exactly like t in Italian tocco,or - 
in French towcher. (2) Like chin check, as, 
tighinn, coming ; sailte, salted. When aspir- 
ated, it sounds like hk in him, as thàinig e, Ae 
came. Th is silent in the middlefof words, in 
the end,of long syllables, in some tenses ot 
certain irregular verbs, and in (At, thusa; as 
maitheas, goodness (pron. my-yes) ; maoth, 
gentle (meu); an d’ thàinig thu P art thou 
come? T, is sometimes used before fh follow- 
ed by a vowelin the Western Isles, as, an t- 
fhardach, the household. T", is used before 
vowels instead of do, thy. 

t-, so-called euphonic,(once part of the article) is 
used (1) between the articie aud a mascu- 
line noun beginnivg with a vowel, in the nom- 
inative case singular, as, an t-each, the horse. 
(2) between the article and a masculine noun 
beginning with s followed by a vowel ord, n, 
or r in the genitive and dative cases singular, 
as, aunsan t-solus, in the light; glac cinn- 
fheadhna an t-sluaigh uile, seize ali the heada 
of the people. (3) between the article and a 
feminine noun beginning with s followed by a 
vowel, or 4, n, or r, in the nominative and 
dative cases singular, as, an t-slighe, the road; 
cha toir an t-saighead air teicheadh, the arrow 
doth not cause him tu jlee ; anus an t-sùil, in 
the eye. 

t, (for ta) v. Is, am, are. 

t’, (for do before a vowel) poss, pron. Thy. Dr. 
Stewart does not approve of t’ instead of d, 
but it is correct according ,to pronunciation 
and usage. 

Tta, s.m. Water. 

ftab, s.m. Start. 

tabaid, -ean, see sabaid. 

each, see sabaideach. 

eachd, see s&baideacüd, 

tabaidiche, see sabaidiche. 

tabailt,(CR) a. Strong, vigorous. 

taban, see tuban. 

tabar, -air, -an, s.m. Tabor. 2 Timbrel. 

ach, a. Abounding in tabors or timbrels. 

tabh, -aibh, s.m. ‘he ocean, the sea. Fuaim an 
taibh, the sound of the main. 

tàbh, -aibh, -an, s.m. Spoon-net, fishing-net. T. 
chudaigean, a hand-net for cuddis ; t.-breac 
aich, @ hand net for trout (when catchin 
trout in burns.) (DC) s.m. ét Frame net 
for fishing beside a rock for small saithe, or 
from a boat anchored in & tide-way. The fish 
are first attracted to the side by means of 
bruised shell-fish. The frame net fixed on 
a long pole is let down gently and brings up 
quite a quantity. 

tàbh, pr.pt. a’ tàbhach, v.a. Fish with band-net 
on burns, 

tabhach, -aich, s.m. Sudden eruption. 2 Forc- 
ing, puil, pressing. 

tabhach, (JM) s. Fishing with hand-net on 
burns, A’ t—, pr. pt. of tabh, 

tabhach,** a. Marine. 

tàbhach, a. "trong, lusty. 

tabhachd, s f.ind. Substantiality, solidit y,fivm- 
ness, substance, sG.utuess, 2 Good profit, 
good ettect, vevefis, etfica-y. effectivenoss, ai: 
vantage. 3 Number. 4 Valour. 5**Corneli, 
ness. Cha'n’eil t. acm Lith aun dhomasa, 
it is no piosit or benefit to me; Gen v. ak 











tàbha chi 


ann? what quantity is there of it? mu "n t. 
sin, about that quantity, taisbeinibh ur t., show 
your valour, 

tàbhachdach, -aiche, a. Efficient, effectual, ef- 
fective, valid, profitable, beneficial, advanta- 





eous, 2* Solid, substantial. 3**Stout,come- 
y. 4(MS) Great. Buaillean tabhachdach, 


efectua! blows ; ni t., a profitable thing. 
tabhachdach,(MsS) a. Personable. 
tabhailh,(AC) a. Strong. Iomachadh t.,@ strong 
band, 
fabhail, s f. Method, manner. 
tabhaill (CR) s.f. Sense, judgment, understand- 
ing, wits. Char e dheth a th., he lost his wits, 
acted stupidly ; tha e dheth a th., heis in his 
dotage ` duine gun t., a man without sense—W. 
of Ross. 
tabhailt,(DC) s.m. Table-cloth— Uist. (tubhailt) 
abhainn, pr.pt. a' tabhainnich, v.n.Bay, bark, 
asa dog. 
tabhair, v.irreg. Give, bestow, grant, see thoir. 
9 Take away. Thabhair and 'l'hoir are inter- 
changeable. See under thoir for conjugation 
and examples. | 
tabhaiream, Ist.sing.imp. of tabhair.Let me give. 
tàbhairn, s. Feast, entertainment, conviviality. 
— Rob Donn, 
tàbhairn, -ean, s.m. Gaelic form of tavern. 
^ Sea. 
tabhairt, s.f. Giving, act of giving or bestowing. 
2 Presentinent, gift, grant, bestowal. 3 Tak- 
ing. act of taking. A’ t—, pr.pt. of tabhair. 
A' t. an'geall, mort-gaging, pledging. 
tabhairteach, -eiche, a. Giving, that gives, gene- 
rous, ready to give, bounteous, charitable,lib- 
eral. 2 Dative, in grammar. Duine t., a lib- 
eral man; gu t., liberally. 
éabhairteach, Ach, s.m. Giver, one who gives o 
bestows, 2 Liberal person. 
-——d, s.f. Readiness to give or bestow, 
liberality, munificeuce, generosity. 
tabhairtear,** -ean, s.m. Giver, donor. 
tabhairteas, see tabhartas. 
tabhal, -ail, -an, s.m. Sling to cast stones, +2** 
Plank, board. 2**xarely, Chief. Crann tabh- 
ail. the shaft of a sling. 
tabhann, -ainn, s.m. Bark, yelp, as ofa dog. 2 
Barking, constant barking or baying of dogs. 
ach, -aiche, a, Parkiag. 2 Ready to bark. 
3 Noisy, as barking dogs. 
aich, pr.pt. a’ tabhannaich, po, Bark, 
yelp. 
aich, -e, s.f. Barking or baving of dogs. 
continuous barking. 2:€R) Barking at some 
object — West of Ross. (Comhailaich, is bark- 
ing at nothing.) 
——-—aiche, s.m. Barker, 
tabhar, s.m. see tàbar. 
Gabh-ard (Al) s.m. Flying beetle. 
£àbharna dh, -aidh, s. m. State of being haunt- 
ed. 2 Apparition, Bhat. air an taigh, th- 
house was haunted. 
tabhartach, -aiche, see tabhairteach. 
tabhartair,* enn, s.m. Bestower, giver. 
tabhartan,** -ain, s.m., Leader. general. 
tabhartas, -ais, $. m. Gift, offering. tribute, 2 
Dedication. 3 Remittance, 4** Boon. 5 
Present. T.-luaisgte, a wave-ofering ; t.-togta, 
a heave offering ; t.-dighe, a drink offering. 
tàbhastal, -ail, s.m. Tedious nonsense, prov. 
tabh-bhéisd,(AF) s. Large seal. 
tabhram,** 1st. sing. imp. of tabhair. Let me 
give. 
ta^hs,(AF) s. Gannet. 
tabhuan,** a, Persevering, 
—— — —,** s.m. Perseverance, 
or lamb, seal. ) 


9*x* 


2(AF)Sea-calf 


918 


| fachair 


tabhuanaehd, sr Perseverance. 

tabhuich 1* v n, Protit. 2 Exact. 

tibhuil,** æ. [n order. 

tabhuin, see ta^hain. Ze 

tabiul,** -nil, sm, Horse-fly, breeze, brize-fly. 

tabhull, -uill, -uillean, s.m. see tabhal. 

tabiun, see tabhan, 

—— ——Aich, see tabhannaich. | 

eg R) y m, Prop, support, dependance,(taic) 
— OU" . , 

tac,* s.f. Space, time, season, Mu 'n t. seo an 
niridh, about this tim» last year; ceithir 
bliadhna na taic seo. this tiine four years. 

tac. t -a & -aic, pl. -aichean, s.f. Tack, lease of 
limired duration. 

tac, see tachd. 

taca, see tac. Arran. 2(DMy) Tack of a boat. 
Gaoth nan seachd tacanan—said of the south- 
Ho wind, coming from Rona to the Butt of 
1€ WIS. 

taca, $. see taice. a 

ftaca, -n, s.m. Prop. 2 Surety. 3**Peg. 4 see 
tacaid. 

tacachath,(MS) s.m. Sustentation. 

t:cadh.** -ai th, s.m. Prosperity. : 

tacadh-froise,(DO)s.m. (lit. shower-choke) Dark- 
ness preceding a shower of rain —Uist. 

tacaich, v.d. see taicich. 

tacaid, -e, -ean, s.f. l'ack, small nail. 2 Hob- 
nail. 3 Peg. 4 Pain, stitci, 5 Stab, wound, 
6**Large-healed nail for ornament. |. 7**3tud, 
knob. Le tacailibh airgiil, with silver studs; 
bnuail t. mi, @ pain seized me. 

tacaileach, -eiche, a. Tacketed, nailed. 2 Caus- 
ing pain. 3 Agonizing. 4 Wounding. Bròg- 
an t., hob-nailed shoes or boots. 

tacaidich, v.a. Stick full of tacks, 2 Fasten with 
tacks. 

tacail,** a. Strong, solid, able, 

tacain, see tacan. 

tacan, -ain, -an, s.m. dim. of tac. Short time, 
while, Eadar seo agus ceann tacain, in a little 
time hence. 

tacar, -air, -an, 8m. Provision, plenty, heap, 
quantity. 2**Gleaning. 3**Fish. Art Produce, 


Àite gun t., a barren region ; fhuair mi t. éisg, 
I got a hean of fish; fhuair mi t, eun, J got @ 
quantity of birds. - 

tacar, -aire, œ. Good, agreeable. | 

tàcarach, -aiche, a. Well-provisioned, fertile, 
plentiful. 2 Relating to provisions, 3(MS) 
Wealthy. (tacarach—AH.) 

tacas, see tacsa. [AH.) 

tàcar-mara, see muir-thachdar. (tacar-mara— 

tach,** s.m. Value, estimation. 

tachnilleag (CR) s.f. Rlack aud white wagtail, 
pied wagtail—Suth'd, | 

tachair, vr. pt. a’ tachairt, va. dn Happen, 
come to pass, meet with meet, light upon, find. 
Tachraidh sinn fhathast, we shail meet yel; 
ta-hrailh sin fhathast, that will happen yet; 
an do th. thu air? did you light upon it * th. 
e cu math dhuit, tt hes happened well to you; 
agus thachair gu 'n deach e seachad, and it 
happend that he pass-d by ; an uair a thach- 
aireas an dà iarunn cho cruaidh, is dual 
dhaibh dealachadh, when the two irons are 
equally hard, rebound they must—applied to 
two persons equally quarrelsome and disagree- 
able ; tachraidh an droch shide ri neach a 
muigh ged nach toireadh e leis o’n taigh i, 
you will meet the bad weather outside—you 
needn't carry it from home with you—excellent 
advice to people who are inclined to wo 
themselves over troubles which are far off, 
and which, after all, may never come any 
nearer, 





- 


tachair 


tàchair, s.m. Sea-weed—alga. | 

tachairt, s.f. Happening, act of happening, com- 
ing to pass. 2 Meeting, act of meeting. 3 
Opposition, act of opposing. A't—, pr. pt. of 
tachair. 

tachais, pr.pt. a’ tachas, v. a. Scratch, scrape 
the surface of the skin, claw. 

————te, past pt. of tachais.Scratched,clawed. 

tachan, see taghan, 

tàchar, see tàcar. 

ftachar,** -air, s.m. Fight, skirmish, squabble, 

tàchar, s.m. Dense volume of smoke— A rgyll. 

tachara,* see tàcharan. 

tacharaidh, see tachraidh. 

tàcharan, -ain, -an, s.m. Sprite, ghost, 2 Weak, 
helpless being. 3 Orphan. 4 Cowardly, fee- 
ble person. 5 Yelling of ghosts, 6(WG)Child 
left by tlie fairies. 

—— ach, -aiche, o. Full of ghosts or spir- 
its. 2 Likea ghost. 8 Weak, helpless. 4 Like 
an orphan. 5 Cowardly. 6 Feeble, 

tacharan-cubhaig, s.m. (lit. page of the cuckoo. ) 
Meadow pipit, see snathadag. 

tacharas, Suth’d for tachras. 

tacharra,(MS) s. Changeling, 2 Pigmy. 

tachartach,ff -aiche, a. Eventful, contingent, 
2 Ambulatory. 

tachartas,tf -ais, -an, s.m. Event, occurrence, 
incident. 

tachas, -ais, s.m. Itching, itchiness, 2 The itch. 
3 Leprosy. 4f Scratching. T. tioram, scurvy. 

tachas, -ais, $m. Clawing, act of clawing,scrap- 
ing orjscratching. A’t—, pr.pt. of tachais. 

ach, -aiche, a. Itchy, having the itch. 2 
Clawing, scratching. 3 Itching, causing an 
itching sensation, 4 Having a longing desire. 
5 Acrimonious, Cluasan t., itching ears. 

tachas-tioram,l| -ais, s.m. Scurvy. 

tachd, pr.pt. a’ tachdadh, v.a. Choke, 
2 Choke, stop up, prevent. 

ach, -aiche, o Choking, that chokes, 
strangles or obstructs, suffocating. 

tachdadair, -ean, $m. Choker. 

tachdadh, -aidh, s. m. Choking, act of choking, 
strangling or obstructing, suffocating. 2 rare. 
ly, Promise, security. A’ t—, pr. pt. of tachd., 

tachdaidh, fut.aff.a. of tachd. 

tachdan, seo tacan,  . 

tachdar, s.m. **Chase, prize, 2  Produce—B. 
Doran. Cha bu diùbhail gin de ’n tachdar, 
*twere no loss in the provision (deer) to anyone 
—Duanaire, p. 13. [tacar—MM.] 

tachdar, fut. pass. of tachd, 

tachdar, see tacar. 

tachdmhor,(MS) a. Alimental, serviceable. 

tachdrach, see tacarach. 

tachdta, past pt. of tachd. Strangled, choked. 
2 Obstructed, asin growing. 

tachlag, s.f. Wagtail (bird.) 

pu, s.m. Weak, helpless person—J.G.C., 


tachraidh, fut.af. a. of tachair, 

tachrais, pr.pt. a’ tachras, v.a. Wind yarn. 

te, past pt. of tachrais. Wound up. 

tachran, see tacharan. 

tachras, -ais, s.m. Winding, 
AT t—, pr.pt. of tachrais. 

ach,* -aich, s.m. see tachrasan. ` 








strangle, 








act of winding yarn. 





——fachrasan, -ain, s.m. Windlass. 2 Horizontal 


yarn-reel, 
¢achuil,(MS) v.a. Pierce. 
taclach,(WC) Purse or any 
` quantity of anything. 
— facmhor, see tachdmhor, 
tacsa, $.m.ind. Support, 
Buttress. &(M8) 
Support me, 


receptacle. 2 Good 


substance, solidity, 2 


t$. Ddao t. dhomh, 


" ons wb © m * 
M 





919 taghach 7 


tacsa,(MS) a. Backed. 

tacsaich, (MS) v.a. Nourish. 

ta ’d, (for tha iad) They are. Ta 'd 'nan éire, 
they are a burden. 

ttad, s.m. Lowness of spirits. 2 Thief. 

tadaidh, see tàlaidh, 

tàdh, -a, -achan, s.m. Ledge, 

ttadhach, a. Unsavoury. 

tadhach,** -aich, -a, s. m. Ledge. Eadar na 
tadhacha, between the ledges. 

tadhail, pr.pt. a’ tadhal, v.n. Call, visit, haunt. 
Dh’ iarr a’ mhuir a bhi ’g a tadhal, the sed 
wished to be resorted to—a poetical idea sug- 
gested by the daily return of the tide, which 
seems to invite acquaintance—NGP. 

tadhal, -ail, -aichean, s.m. Calling, visiting, 2 
ttSense of feeling, touching. STT Resort. 41 
Frequenting, visiting. btt Goal or hail at 
shinty or football. Bha sibhse a’ bualadh gun 
teagamh, ach chuir sinne t. air, you were strib- 
ing no doubt, but we sent it between the posta, 
made a goal of it, 

ttadhal, -ail, -an, s.m. Flesh-hook. 

tadhalach, -aiche, a, Frequenting, 
visiting, calling for one, 
3 Abounding in resorts. 

tadhagg, -aisg, s.m. News, information. 

Tta/lhg, -aidhg, -an, s.m. Poet. 

tadhgan,(AF) s.m. Fox, see taghan. 

desde -aich, s.m. Swelling or pain in the 
wrist, 

tafach,** a. Craving. 

———,** -aich, s.m. Exhortation. 

tafaid,* e, -ean, see taifeid. a 

tlafan, -ain, see tabhann. 

tag,* sm. see tagan. 

tay,** s.m. Blow ou the cheek. 

tag,** v.a. Deliver. 

tagach, a. see tacaideach. 

tagair, A ee a’ tagairt & a’ tagradh, v.a. & n. 
Plead, prosecute, plead & cause, crave. 2 
Claim asa right, 8 Reason, argue, debate, 
dispute, 4 Accusa, Tha e ’tagairt orm, he 
pleads of m2, claims of me ; tagair mo chùis a 
Dhé ! p ead my cause O God ! 

tagaireach,” .eiche, a. Litigious. 

——, -eich, s.m. Pleader, counsel, advo- 
cate. 2 Creditor. 3 Appellant, 

tagairteachd,(MS) 8.7. Quarrel. 

tayairt, -e, s.f. Pleading, act of pleading, crav- 
ing. 2 Claiming as a right. 3 Reasoning, 
debating. 4 Plea, allegation. A’ t—, pr. pt. 
of tagair. 

tagan, -ain, s.m. Pocket, little bag, 2 Private 
or hidden purse, as of a wife, Tha t, math 
aice, she has a good purse. 

taganaeh, -aiche, a. Baggy. 

tagar,** air, s.m. Order, course, 

tagarach,** -aich, s.m. Pretender, claimer. 

-,* Litigious, fond of pleading or deba. 


layer. 


resorting to, 
2 Fond of visiting. 


4 








ting. 
——-——d, tt s.f. Pleading, 
tagaradh, see tagradh, 
tagarair,** s.m. Barrister, 


2 Pleader, dispu- 
tant, claimant. 


tagarrach, see tagaireach, 


tagartach, æ. ttClaiming, 2(MS) Controversial, 

tagartair,* «m. Pleader, agent. 

tagartas, -ais, -an, s.m.Pleading, claim, dispute, 
2* Prosecution, law-plea. 

tagh, pr.pt. a’ taghadh, v.a. Choose, elect, ge. 
lect, pick. T. & chuid a's fhèarr, choose the 
best. 

tagh,* o, see toigh. 

tagha, see taghadh, 

taghach, -aichs, og. Choosing; that chooses, @ 
Eleotive, soe toigheach., ` ` 


.— ee ee < 


__taghadair deg 


or selects. 21f One who has the care of an- 
other's cattle. 3 Elector, voter. 
taghadaireachd, s.f. The office ofan elector or 
< Chooser. 2 Electioneering. 3 The office of 
taking care of another’s cattle. 4*Electorate, 
€aghadh, -aidh, s.m. Choosing, act of choosing, 
electing or selecting. 2 Choosing, election, 3 
Anything, person or persons chosen. 4 The 
f best of anything, choice, selection, election. 
^ T.a mhèirlich, a choice thief ; t. coitchionn, a 
^ general election ; t. air leth, a by-election; rogh- 
adh ist., pick and choice ; luchd-taghaidh, e- 
lectors; 2 the bodyguard of a Highland regiment 
—12 band of chosen men of the same clan, who 
fared at the same table with the chieftain, 
and each enjoyed his hospitality according 
to his deserts ; dà ni ro dhuilich ri "n t.,bean 
is claidheamh,two things very difficult to choose, 
6 wife and a sword. 
taghadraidh ,** s.f. Electorate. 
taghadroinn,** s. Electorate. 
taghaich, (for rathaich) Gheibht’ an taghaich gu 
lionmhor, do mhaithean na rioghachd, there 
would be found numerous callers of the nobles 
of the land—Donn. Bàn, p. 85. —— -— 
taghaidh, fut.af.a. oftagh. . - | 
taghail, v. see tadhail. | ( 
i taghaire, An, s.m. Augur. 
itaghaireachd, s.f. Augury. RIRA | 
taghairm, -e, -ean, s.f. Echo. 2 Gathering sum- 
- mons. 3 Ancient mode of divination, said to 
be one of the most effectual means of raising 
the devil, and getting unlawful wishes grati- 
fied. The performance consisted in roasting 
cats alive, one after another, for some days, 
without tasting food; which if duly persisted 
in, summoned a legion of devils, in the guise 
of black cats,with their master at their head, 
| all screeching in a way terrifving to any per- 
. Bon of ordinary nerves.—NGP, ** The div- 
: ination by the t. was once a noted supersti- 
' tion among the Gael, and in the northern 
arts of the Lowlands of Scotland. When any 
portant question concerning futurity arose, 
&nd of which à solution was, by all means, 
; desirable, some shrewder person than his 
neighbours was pitched upon, to perform the 
rt of a prophet. This person was wrapped 
: ei the warm smoking hide of a newly-slain ox 
> or cow, commonly an ox, and laid at full 
] length in the wildest recess of some lonely wa- 
. teríall. The question was then put to him, 
; and the oracle was left in solitude to consider 
` it. Here he lay for some hours with his cloak 
- of knowledge around him, and over his head, 
` no doubt, to see the better into futurity 5 
` deafened by the incessant roaring of the tor- 
' rent ; every sense assailed ; his body steam- 
` ing; bis fancy in a ferment ; and whatever 
» motion had found its way into his mind from 
' so many sources of prophecy, it was firmly be- 
lieved to have been communicated by invisible 
beings who were supposed to haunt such soli- 
tudes.’’—** 
taghairmeach, -aiche, a. Echoing, responsive, 
oracular. 
taghal, see tadhal. 
taghald, Suth’d for tadhal. 
taghall, see tadhal. 
taghan, -ain, -an,s.m. Marten, pole-cat, stink- 
ard. 2(MS) Foumart. 3(AF) Badger. 4(WC) 
Quarrelsome person, 
taghanach, -aiche, a. Abounding in martens, 2 
Cross, cankered. t 3 
taghan-tartaidh,(AF) s. Foumart. 
(aghan-tutaidh, see taghan-tartaidh. 


wn gt Mën We a e 


- — 


- ~ o» 


~<a S 


Si 920 


taghadair, -ean, s.m. Chooser, one who chooses | taghar, att, s.m. Distant noise. , 
tagh-ghairm, see taghairm. 

tagh-ghuth,** s, Vote, voice at an election. 

taghta, a. & past pt. of 


tagluinneachd, e. f. ind. 






| taibhsearachd ] 


tagh. Chosen, elected, 
-2 Excellent, choice. 
chosen men ; or t., choice 


elect, select, selected. 
Daoine t., the elect, 
gold. |taghte.] 

tagluinn, e, s.f. Opposition. 2 Contest, squab- ` 
ble. 3**Animosity. Luchd t., quarrelsome 
persons. 


tagluinneach, -eiche, a. Contestable. 2 Contu- 


macious, quarrelsome, squabbling. 

inni Contumacy. 

tagluinnich,** v. Chaffer. 

tagluinniche,** s, Barrator. 

tagrach, -aiche, a. Argumentative, 
ments. 2 Pleading, that pleads. 3 Fond of 
pleading. 4 Craving,soliciting. 5 Apt to crave. 
importunate, assertive. 6 Claiming. 

tagrachd,** et see tagradh. 

tagradair,** s.m. Alleger. 2 Pleader, disputant. 
Lm Claimant. 3* Agent. also tagair- 
eac 

tagradaireachd,** s.f. Business of a pleader or 
advocate. 

tagradh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Pleading, act of 
pleading, plea, craving, act of craving or 2 
Claiming as a right. 3 Reasoning, act of rea- 
soning. 4 Advocating. 5 Apology. A’ i—, 
pr.pt. of tagair. 

tagraidh, fut.af.a. of tagair. 

tagrair, see tagradair. 

taibean, -ein, s.m. Tabby. 

taibh,* see taibhean & tabh. Fada mach 's 
an-taibh, far out on the ocean—lorram, MacD. 

taibhean,* -ein, s.m. Substance, 

taibheanach,* .aiche, a. Substantial. 

taibheart,** ¢,f. Disparagement. 

tàibhearn, see tabharn. 

taibheid, see taifeid. 

taibheirt,** s.f. see taibheart, 

ttaibhle, s.pl. Tables. 

taibhleach,*!s.f. Smart blow, box, box sideway 

taibhleas, -eis,s.m.Backgammon table. 2 Game 
of backgammon. 

taibbleas beag, s.m. Game of draughts. 

taibhleis, s.f. see taibhleas. 

ttaibhliosg, -isg, see taileasg. 

taibhreadh, -idh, s.m. Dream, 

taibhreal,** -eil, em. Laurel, see laibhreas, $ 

ach, a. Abounding in, of, or belonging 
to, laurel. 

taibhs, see taibhse. 

taibhsə, -an s./. The shade of a departed per- 
son. 2 Vision, apparition, ghost, spirit. @ 
Vision of the second-sight. 4(AF) Guillemot. 

taibhseach, -eiche, o Shadowy, ghost-like, 
spectral. 2 Superstitious, silly, +3 Proud. 
Is t. iad adhbarca nam bo thar lear, showy or 
visionary are the horns of the cows beyond the 


using argu. 


— , 











Sea. 

ftaibhseachan,** -ain, s. m. Proud person. 3 

Coquette. j 

ttaibhseachd,** s. f, Pride. 2 Coquetry, $ 
Ztt Eloquence. 

taibhsean, n.p/. of taibhse. | x1 

taibhsdear, see taibhsear. » 

-—achd, see taibhsearachd. 

taibhsear, -eir, -an, $.m. Visionary, one who poe 
sesges the faculty of second-sight. 

" achd, s./.ind. Second-sight. 2*Bewild- 
ered conduct, 

(The foll wing is from Armstrong.) 

At the sight of a vision of this kind, Dr. 
Martin observes, the eyelids of the gifted per- 
sons were erected, and the eyes continued 
staring till the vigiou disappeared. If an ob- 


p" Tto ~ re ms e 


taibhsearachd 


ject is seen in the morning, it will be accom- 
plished in the afternoon ; if at noon, on that 
very day ;if in the evening, that very night ; 
and if after candles are lit, on that night for 
certain. Ifa shroud is seen about a person, 
it foretells approaching death; and the time 
of it ismore or less distant, according to the 
height at which the shroud is observed on the 
body. If it be seen about the middle, death 
is not expected within a twelvemonth ; if as 
high as the head,it is not many hours distant. 
To see a spark of fire falling on one’s arm, 
foretells that a dead child shall be seen in the 
arms of that person. To see a chair empty at 
at the time a person sits in it, is a sure sign 
of approaching death to that person. Seers 
did not observe supernatural appearances at 
the same time, though they might happen to 
be in the same apartment ; but when one of 
them who saw a vision, touched any number 
of his brethren, they all saw it as well as the 
rst. 

The following are three instances recorded 
by an English nobleman in the 17th. century, 
who, previous to his going to the Highlands, 
was one of the sturdiest unbelievers in the 
second-sight. 

1, “‘In the year 1652 I was travelling in the 
Highlands, and a good number of servants 
with me, as is usual there. One of them go- 
ing a little before me, entering into a house 
where I was to stay all night, and going hast- 
ily to the door, he suddenly stepped back with 
a screech, and did fall by a stone which hit 
A "e I asked what was the matter, for 
he seemed to be very much frighted. He told 
me very seriously that I should not lodge in 
that house, because shortly a dead body in 
a coffin would be carried out of it, for many 
were carrying it when he was heard to cry. 
I neglecting his words, and staying there, he 
said to the other servants he was sorry for it, 
and that what he saw would surely come to 
pass. Though no sick person was then there, 
yet the landlord died of an apoplectic fit be- 
fore I left the house.” 

2 “In Jannary, 1652, Lieut.-Col. Alexander 
Munro, and I, were in the house of one Wm. 
MacLeod, of Ferinlea, in the county of Ross. 
He, the landlord, and I, were sitting on three 
chairs near the fire ; and in the corner of the 
great chimney were two islanders, who were 
that very night come to the house, and were 
related to the landlord. While one of them 
was talking to Munro, I noticed the other 
looking oddly towards me. From his look, 
and his being an islander, I supposed him to 

be a seer, and asked him what he stared at. 
. He answered me by desiriug me to rise from 
the chair, for it was anunlucky one. Iasked 
bim why. He answered me, because there 
was dead man in the chair next to me. 
Well, said I, if he be in the chair next to me, 
I may keep my own. But what is the likeness 
of the man? He said he was a tall man with 
along grey coat, booted, and one of his legs 
hanging over the arm of the chair, and his 
head hanging dead on the other side, and his 
arm baekward, as if it were broken. There 
were some English troops then quartered 
near that place, and there being at that time 
a great frost after a thaw, the country was 
covered all over with ice. Four or five of the 
English riding by this house some two hours 
after the vision, while we were sitting by the 
fire, we heard a great noise, which proved to 
be those troopers, with the help of other ser- 





























Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


921 


taic 


vants, carrying inone of their number, wha 
had had a very bad fall, and had his arm 
broken ; and falling frequently into fits, they 
brought him into the hall, and set him on the 
very chair, and in the very posture that the 
seer prophesied. The man did not die, though 
he recovered with great difficulty.'' 

3 “ Among the accounts given me by Sir 
Norman MacLeod, there was one worthy of 
special notice—There was a gentleman in the 
Isle of Harris, who was always seen by the 
seers with an arrow in his thigh. Such in the 
isle who thought these prognostications infall- 
ible, did not doubt but he would be shot in 
the thigh before he died. Sir Norman told 
me that he heard it the subject of their dis- 
coursefor many years. At lasthe died with- 
out any such accident. Sir Norman was at 
his burial at St. Clement's Church in Harris. 
At the same time the corpse of another gen- 
tleman was brought to be buried in the very 
same church. 'The friends on either side came 
to debate who should first enter the church, 
and in a trice from words they came to blows. 
One of the number, who was armed with a bow 
and arrows, let one fly among them. (Now 
every family in that isle have their burial 
place in the church in stone chests, and the 
bodies are carried in open biers to the burial- 
place.) Sir Norman having appeased the tu- 
mult, one of the arrows was found shot in the 
dead man'sthigh. To this Sir Norman was a 
witness.” —Succinct accompt of my Lord Tar- 
bolt’s Relations, in a Letter to the Hon. Robert 
Boyle, Esquire, of the Predictions made by 
seers, whereof himself was Ear and Eye-witness, 

By pretension to second sight, no profit was 
ever sought or gained. It is an involuntary 
affection, in which neither hope nor fear are 
known to have any part. Those who profess 
to feel it do not boast of it asa privilege, 
nor are considered by others to be advantage- 
ously distinguished, They have no tempta- 
tion to feign and their hearers have no mo- 
tives to encourage an imposture. 

Armstrong concludes his account with a 
lengthy description of the theories of Dr, 
Beattie of Aberdeen and the celebrated Dr, 
Samuel Johnson, but as they are only theories 
they bave been omitted here, 

taibhseil, see taibhseach. 

Ttaibhsich, v.n. Reveal. 

taibid, see teabaid. 

each, see teabaideach. 

taib’-ionnsachadh, -aidh, s.m. Grammar. Zi 

taibreadh,(DC) s.m. Snatching. : 

taibse, s.f.ind. Propriety of speech. Leabhare 
taibse, & grammar. 

ach, -eiche, œ~. Accurate in speech, grame 
matical. 

taic, -e, s.f. Prop, support. 2 Strength,vigour. 
3 Dependance, leaning. 4* Preparation. 6 
*Fulerum, 7* Contact, collision. 

Cuir t. ri seo, prop this; cuir t. ris ai 
gheamhlaig, put a fulerum to the lever ; thain- 
ig ean t. na cartach, he came in contact with 
the cart ; t. ri bliadhna, near a year ; cum t. 
rium, support me; patronize me; an b., leans 
ing; shuidh iad ri t., they sat leaning back- 
wards; an t, an Domhnuich, in preparation 
for the Sabbath; na leig do th. ris a sin, do not 
depend too much to that ; an t- a’ bhalla, lean- 
ing on the wall ; cha ruig mi leas mo th. a leig- 
eil riut-sa, I need not depend much on your 
patronage or support ; laoich ri sleaghan an 
t., heroes leaning on their spears ; a bhith an 
taice Lochaidh nam bradan, CH tm. the 


2 Appear, seem, 








Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF 


E3 m f A pF j A RAIF 
U [i E A M A I L = H H i IN = = | 


EIFE Uke 
IL LII IO! er - 


GN 


AT 
el 


) taic 922 


proximity of Lochy of the salmon—Filidh, p. 
' 21; an taic a chéile, in collusion with each oth- 
er [—* says in collision with each other.] 
taic, pr.pt. a’ taiceadh, v.a. Support, patronize. 
2* Buttress, sustain, bolster. 
taiceachd, s.f.ind. One's utmost exertions, 2** 
Reliance. 
taiceadh, -idh, s.m. Supporting, act of support- 
ing. 2 Recommending, patronizing. 3 De- 
pending. 4 Dependence, A’ t—, pr.pt. of taic. 
taicealachd, s.f.ind. Strength, solidity,firmness. 
2 Portliness. 3 Alimentariness. 
taicear, s.m. Auxiliary. 
taiceil, -e, a. Substantial, solid, firm, strong, |. 
stout. 2 Auxiliary. 3(MS) Athletic. 
taicich,* v.g. Buttress. 2 Help. see taic. 
taid, e, s.m. see taididh. 
*taid, cont. for ataid (tà iad or tha iad.) 
taidhe, s.f.ind. Attention, heed, watchfulness, 
care, [Thoir taidhe (thoir do aidhe), take thy 
. heed—a phrase to which the word is practi- 
| cally restricted, and which accounts for the 
|. Short vowel of the Scottish Gaelic and Irish, 
the sentence accent being on the verb—f.] 
taidheach, -eiche, æ. see toigheach. 
taidheam, -eim, s.f. Meaning, import. Chad’ 
thug mi t. as a chainnt, I did not comprehend 
his meaning. 
taidhean,** -ein, s. m. Troop. 2 Multitude, 
cavalcade. 3**Mill-pond. 
taidhleach,*? -liche, a. Splendid, delightful, 
pleasant. 
—d,** s.f.ind. Complacency. 2 Pleasant- 
ness. 3 Splendidness. 
taididh, s.m. & int. Father. 
* Daddy." Welsh word. 
ytaif,** s.m. Sea, see tabh. An t. fo bhruail- 
ean, the sea (in agitation) ina storm. 
taifean, see tabhuan. 
taifeid, -ean, s.m. Bow-string. 2 Taffety. T. 
"aan osaig a fuaim, @ bowstring sounding in the 
wind. 
each, -eiche, a. Well-strung (of bows.) 
ttaifnichte, past pt. Driven away by force. 
taig, -e, s.f. Attachment or devotion to a person 
or place. +2 Habit, custom. 
tàigeanach,(CR) s.m. Squat person—W.of Ross. 
taigeis, -e, -ean, s.f. Haggis, kind of meat-pud- 
ding. 2 Big-bellied person. 3 The scrotum. 
each, -eiche,@. Haggis-like. 2 Big-bellied. 
taigh,-e, -ean, s.m. House. 'S'e'ainm aoibhneach 
taigh na féile, its joyful name is the house of 
hospitality ; aig an taigh, at home ; o'n taigh, 
from home, abroad ; mullach an taighe, the top 
of the house ; ceann taighe, the head of a house 
or family ; head of the branch of a family ; sith 
ann ad chriadh-thaigh eaol, peace in thy cold 
man sion of clay ; as an t., out of the house; 
ann am thaigh, im my house; ann ad th., in 
thy house ; ’na th. maile féin, in his own hired 
house ; an t, a’ chomhagail, [an taigh comha 
= eadar-dha-chomhairle—Argyll@—AH.] in a 
state of uncertainty ; t. is aodach, a tent. [The 
gen.sing. in old Gaelic was tige. ] 


NAMES OF PARTS OF A “BLACK” HOUSE:— 


1 Na Ceangail, [na Ceangail Ghàidhealach— 
(WC.) Lànan, pl. lànain & lànanan. 
i Saidheachan—AH. Cas-choirbeiltt.] cou- 

ples. Fastened to the corner-poles with 

wooden pins. The couples are connected 

immediately below the ridge-pole by a 

piece of wood (an ad), and lower down by 

a cross-beam (an sparr—No. 5.) Cas- 

cheangal, is one of the legs of a couple— 

Lewis —(D My.) 

2 Am bun-cheangal. [a Chrip, Bun baca.] 
The lower end of couple sunk in the wall 





Children's form of 








Digitized by 


NTERNET ARCHIV 


gr 


656, Roinnean taighe, 





and reaching the groin. [Oc CAD (pl. 
erüpan, Upright beam built into wall and 
intended to support the coupies. | 

8 Pieces of timber laid across, and binding 
the couples together,called ‘‘na cléithean’’ 
in Skye, and ‘‘ na taobhain ” in Lewis. In 
Lewis, ‘‘an taobhan ard " is placed about 
half-way between the ridge and wall, and 
“an taobhan ìosal” is about 14 inches be- 
low it and 18 in. from the top of the wall, 
—DMy. ‘Na clèithean ” is the name 
applied in Lewis to the pieces of wood laid 
across the ‘‘ taobhain " (No. 3) and rune — 
ning from wall to ridge to prevent the ` 
straw going through roof—DMy. 1 

4 Na Cabair, the side-rafters, are placed over — 
the cléithean (No. 3 in Skye), running 
from wall to ridge. : 

5 An spàrr, Small cross stick near the angle 
of couple to strengthen them. Sparr- 
ghaoithe—(DO) 

6 Am maide-droma, [Cabar-droma, Sgaith, 
trLaom-chrann. Taobhan-mullaich—A HI 
ridge-pole or roof-tree, The beam along the 
ridge of the roof. 

7 A’ Chorr,—so pronounced in Skye & Argyll 
at least,but dictionaries mark córr as mas- 
euline. A thick stick like a couple, reach- 
ing from the middle of end wall (there ` 
are no gables of course) to top of nearest | 
couple. Corr-thulchann are generally bent ` ` 
and meet at end of ridge-pole, where they — — 
are fastened to one another by a wooden ` 
pin called crann-tarruing. UM 

8 An Roinn-oisinn [or -oisne,] Cabar-oisinn — 
[or -oisne, (pl. na cabair-oisinn) [or -oisne} —— 
corner-stick. Strong sticks placed from — 
each corner of wall tomearest couple. ns 


9 Am Maide feannaig,[Maide starraig] stick ` 
running up through the thatch from the 
sparr at either end, and used as a peg  -— 
round which to pass the Siomain fraoicb, 
“ach,” continued my informant, ‘ tha 
daoine a nis a’ fas cho Gallda nach fogh- ` 
ainn daibh ach an nett-wire (sic) no na — 
ròpan fediras a’ bhüthaidh !” (people are 


becoining so anti-Gaelic now that nothing — 


l 


: 
3» 















» 
d 


al from 

i| from | 

FPE FASET HI DR I A es 7 

ERSITY OF ILLINOIS AE 
A 


UNIVER 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


Origit 


taigh Cae 


less than wire-netling or coir yarn ropes 
from the shop can satisfy them.) [Sparr- 
ealaig—Utst—DC] 





20 An Similear crochaidh, made of thin wood | 


or canvas to confine the smoke, generally, 


but not always, exists when the fire is at 


the end of the house. 


11 An Luidhear, the vent to allow the smoke 

to escape through the thatch. 

Acair, (pl. acraichean), Stones fixed in loops of 
heather-ropes, used as weights to keep the 
thatch in its plaee— Lewis. 

Anainn, top of wall inside. [The correspond- 
ing position outside—AH. | 

Baircean, see dictionary. 

Balla tarsuinn, see talan.] 

Bonn, found. 

Bonnacha-bae, position above eaves where the 
weights are set, 

Bràigh, summit. 

BuabhaMH-an-eich, horse-stall— Lewis, 

Buabhall-na-bà, cow-staii — Lewis. 

Buuntair, foundation. 

Cabar-droma, ridge-beard. 

Cabar-fraighe,ft eave-beam. 

Calpa, walls, as distinct from roof—AH, 

Casan-ceangail, joists. 

Cas an teannachaidh, see dictionary. 

Geann-an-taighe, vpper end— Lewis. 

Ceann-shuas-an-taighe, see Ceann-an-taighe. 

oer o a ai or ** but " of a Highland house 


Clàidhean, wooden door-lateh, **sneck." [Glaidh- 
eamhan,(MMcL.) Clóidhean,(DU.)] 

Cléithean-buinn, strips of wood running up- 
wards from top[of wall, and resting on 
the taobhain iosal— Lewis—(D My. ) 

Cléithean mullaich, strips of wood fixed tothe 
ridge at top and resting on top rafters (or 
taobhain àrda—(DM y. ) 

Cotan-nan-uan, kind of pen or enclosure to 
confine the lambs by themselves in the house 
in winter— Lewis. 

Crann-tairngnean, pins or wooden nails used 
in fastening the various sets of beams. 
Cuaille, rafter. | [house—DMK, 
Cail, private room or ** ben " of a Highland 
Ciulaisd, store, store-room. Tha c. math aige, 
was said when the c. was full of pota- 
toes, meal, &c. to tide over winter and 
spring— Lewis. 
of the house and which had access only 
‘through the common room. Itis the room 
assigned to the use of the girls of a family 
—DC.] ‘ Ben’—WC. 

Dragh, straw-rope laid round the thatch 3 ft. 


from the top of wall and round which the 


loops of heather are bound before the 
weights (acraichean) are put in. 

Dromanaich, ridge-ropes, ropes for fastening 
on thatch. 2 (WC) Bifurcated twigs for 
holding /athus in place on thatch. 

Dronn, ridge. 

Druim an taighe, ridge. 

Duibheid, turf for top of house. divot. 

Eadar-dha-bhith, space between the outer 
door and the kitchen-door. 

Faradh, loft made of sticks covered with divots. 

Foid-buinn, door-step. 

Foid Ph sods of turf laid along the top of the 
wall, 

Fraigh, wall. 

Frioghan, see dictionary. 

Gath-droma, ridge-pole— Lewis. 

Glularan, glutaranadh, packing between out- 
er and inner walls—M McL. 


dathus, (WC) pieces of wood laid lengthwise 


Vinitized E LI 
Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


995 


[In Uist, the inner room. 





< taigh Lc 


- -aap $ 


on thatch. 

Maide-aide, (lit. hat-stick) cross-piece joining 
the two door-pusts at the top. So called 
from its coming into contact with hats of 
people who were not accustomed to bow 
down on entering a house. The common 
saying when anyone struck his hat in this 
way was, ''cromaidlh an coileach circa 
"cheann fo ’n ard-dorus.”—Lewis.—(DMy) 

Maide-slabhruidh, cross-stick laid on two up- 
per rafters (taobhain) from which to hang 
chain and hook over fire.— Lewis. 

Mas an taighe, lower end— Lewis. 

Mathair-shiomain, heather-rope laid say three 
feet above eaves (outside,) and round which 
the loops are bound before weights are put 
on. 2 Stretch of heather-rope extended hori- 
zontally below the row of weights. (AH) 

Sgolb, pin or wattle for fixing thatch. 

Sgonn, balk. 

Sgrathan, divots for covering roof. 

Siomain-fraoich, heather-ropes used for keep- 
ing thatch on house—(WO.) 

Sparr-ealaig, see dictionary, | 

Sparr-gaoithe, see dictionary. | 

Spiris, hen-roost. 

Stach, stay. [houses. 

Stall, space between door and fire in black 

Talan, partition wall of stall, about 3 ft. or 
4 ft. high. 

Tràigh, basement. 

Trannsa, lobby. 

Tughadh, thatch. Frequently made of bun 
dubh—the black stem of a certain species 
of fern, which is very lasting. Bun dubh, 
stem of barley plucked by the roots—MMcL, 


VARIOUS KINDS OF HOUSES :— 


t.-aifrinn, mass-house. 
t.-aire, or t--air, lykewake, a watch-house, 
house where vigils are held over a corpse. 
[Pronounced t.-àir in E. of Ross, and t-áir 
in W. of Ross -—WC.] 

t.-àisdigheachd, play-house. 4 

t.-aisig, ferry-house. ? 

t. an àir, slaughter-house. 

t.-aolaich, necessary. , 

t.-aolaidh (fhoghluidh), college. 

t-arm, armoury, depót. 

t.-bainne, dairy, milk-house. 

t.-bainnse, house of a wedding. 

t.-bata, boathouse. 

t.-beag, privy, convenience, 

t.-buaile, fold-hut. 

t.-cadail, sleeping-house, 

t.-càine, toll-house. 

t.-canach, toll-house, custom-house, 

t.-caol, narrow house, grave, 

t.-carbaid, coach-house. 

t.-céaird, factory. 

t.-chalman, dove-cot, ducket. hs 

t.-chaorach, sheep-cot. E: 

t.-chearc, hen-house, 

t.-chon, dog-kennel, 

t.-cise, custum-house. 

t.-cluiche, theatre, amphitheatre, ` * 

t--cluig, belíry. 

t.-cuspainn, custom-house. 

t.-comhnuidh, dwelling-house. 

t.-cuil, back-house. ; 

t.-cuinnidh, mint. 

t.-cuirt, court-house, 

t.-cuthaich, madhouse, lunatic-asylum. ' 

t.-déirce, almshouse. 

t.-deiridh, ship’s cabin, stern-room, 

t.-diomhaireachd, jakes, privy. |  . — 

t. dubh, thatched Ee EN are drye 

UNIVERSITY ILLINO 


URBANA-CHAMP 


EE LI 


ILLINOJ 


PAIG 


C AT 
3 AI 


taigh 

built without cement and double, the inter- 
vening space being filled with earth, The 
fire in such houses is generally situated in 
the middle of the floor. 

t. dubh,(DMK) illicit distillery concealed a- 
mong the hills—W. coast of Ross. 

t.-elghe, ice-house. 

t.-éiginn, privy. 

t.-eiridinn, infirmary,hospital ; **poorhouse. | 

t.-fail, turf-house—Suth’d. 

t.-failcidh, bagnio. 2 Baths. 

t.-faire, a watch-house. 

t.-fairir, Suth’d for t.-air. 

t.-fasdaidh, house where people are hired. 

t.-feachd, barrack. 

t.-fiodha, wood-house. 

t.-foghluim, academy. 

t.-fuinidh, bakehouse. 

t.-fuirich, dwelling-house. 


t.-zeal,thatched house whose walls have their 
In many parts 


stones cemented together. 
such houses are now slated. 
t.-ghéadh, goose-house. 


. t.-gléidhidh, museum. 


-~ = 


t.-gruide, brewery. 

t.-guail, coal-house. 

t.-iaruinn, iron house, 
t.-iongantais, museum. Zeg 
t.-ionnsaiche, academy. 
t.-itheannaich, ordinary. 

t.-lagha, justice, court-house, 
t.-leabhraichean, library. 

t.-leanna, beerhouse, alehouse, inn, 
t.-lionn, alehouse. 


^ t.-litrichean, post-office, 


t.-màile, hired house. 
t.-malairt,exchange, bank, 

t.-mach, see t.-muigh, 

t.-marbhaidh, slaughter-house. 
t.-marsautachd, shop, ware-room. 
t.-mhanach, abbey, monastery, convent. 
t.-moid, court-house, court of justice. 
t.-mór, mansion-house. 


XO t.muigh, out-house. 


t.-mullaich, garret. 
t.-münaidh, an academy. 


. t.-nam-fleadh, house of feasting. 


t.-nam-bhochd, poorhouse, almshouse. 


. t.-nighe, wash-house. 


' t.-oibre, workhouse. 


t.-nigheachain, laundry. 
t.-nigheadaireachd, wash-house, 


t.-oighreachd, mansion-house, 
$.-dil, inn, tavern. 

t.-oilein, academy. 

t.-oircheis, bede-house. 

t.-osda, inn, alehouse. 
t.-poitearachd, alehouse. 
t.-réidh, bank ; rented house, ' 
t.-righ, royal palace, 
t.-rioghail, palace. 

t.-saillidh, house in which fish is cured. 
t.-salainn, salt-store. 

t.-samhraidh, villa, summer-house, | 
t-scinnse, inn, (changehouse) see t.-osda. 
t.-sgoile, schoolhouse. 

t.-sheillean, bee-hive. 

t.-siursachd, bagnio. 

t.-siursaich, bagnio. 

t. -slachdaidh, slaughter-house. 


t.-smachdachaidh, house of correction; asylum. 


t.-soiuis, lighthouse. 
t.-staoige, chop-house, 


t.-stór, pantry; depot, warehouse,store ; gran- 


ary. |. GEN 
t,-stórals, a magazine. 


D Jit EA 


NTERNET ARCHIVE 


924 


t. na h-üige, inn, dram-shop—W. coast of Ross. 


[house. 
the  laird's 


tàileasgan 


t.-striop, bawdy-house, 
t.-striopachais, bagnio, bawdy-house, — 
t.-suidhe, a privy. à 
t.-tàimh, inn. 
t.-tainn,* inn. 
t.-tàirn (tabhairn,) beer-house, 
t.-taisg, bin ; pantry, store-room ; treasury. 
t,-tasgaidh, storehouse, | 
t.-teas, hothouse. 
t.-teine, dwelling-house, 
t.-teth, hothouse. 
t.-tobhta, house built of turfs. 
t.-togalach, brewery, brewing-house. 
t.-toisich, forecastle of a ship, 
taighdireachd, see taoitearachd. 
taigheach,** @. Domestic. ` 
taigheadas, -ais, s.m. Household. 2 Housekeep- 
ing. 3**Residence. 4**Husbandry. 6(DC} 
Economy. Air a thaigh ’s air a th., he hav 
ing a house and household. 
ach, a. Diligent, careful, busy about 
housekeeping. 2 Hospitable. 





taigheasach, a. Domestic. 92 Fond of, or belong» - 


ing to, housekeeping. 

taigheil,** æ. Domestic. 

taighlich,tt s.f. Chattels, paraphernalia. 

taigh-spüinneadair,** s,m. Robber, burglar. 

——--————eachd,8.f. Robbery burglary, 

taightirich, see taoitirieh. 

tail, -e, -ean, s.f. Substance, product. 2 Lump, 
prov. 8 Solidity. 4**Wages.] 6 Matter,meang, 
6 see taileadh. 

tail,** a. Solid, substantial, 

tailbeart, see ailebeart. 

— ———ach, see ailebeartach. 

tailbhein, see tairbhein. 

tailce,** s.f. Strength, force, vigour. 2 Courage. 
8 (tttailc) Firmness, substantiality. 

ach, -eiche, æ. Firm, sturdy, solid, welle- 

formed, stately, 2**Prancing. 

anach, -aiche, see tailceach. ?flStout. 

anach, -aich, s. m. Firm, strongly-built 
man. 2tfStout man. j 

tailcearra, a. Dogged, see tailceach. Gu foirm- 
eil, tailcearra, purpose-like and dogged.—Oran 
an t-Samhraidh. 

tailceas, -eis, sm. Contempt, scorn, re 
disdain. 2 Fastidiousness. 3** Spite. 411 
Provocation. © uim’ an dean iad t. ort P why 
do they reproach thee ? 

ach, -aiche, œ. Scorning, disdaining, dis- 
dainful, despising,reproachful, contemptuous, 
2 Contemptible,mean. 3**Spiteful. 4 Dainty, 
fastidious, as of kinds of food. Gu t., con- 
temptuously. 

tailceasachd,** s.f. Contemptuousness, 2 Be- 
proachfulness. 3 Spitefulness, 

tailceil, see tailceach. 

tailcionta, inte, a. see tailceach. 

taile,** s.f. see tail. 

taileabart, -airt, -an, s.m. Halbert, [ftailebart.] 

—ach, a. Armed with halberts. 

taileadh,(AC) s.m. Cause, sake of, on account 
of. Fhuair mise trod an t. do ghnothaich, I 
got a scolding on account of your business ; tha 
mi air t. mo ghnothaich fhéin, Jam after my 
own business. 

tailealachd, s.f.ind. Solidity, substance. 

taileas, -eis, s.m Wages, hire. 

taileasg, -eisg, -an, s.m. Backgammon. 2 Chess. 
S**Draughts. 4ffSport, game, mirth. 5 (DU) 
Ghost. Gun t, gun cheól, without mirth or 
music ; a’ cluich aig t., playing at chess ; gun 
t., without solidity. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Fond of backgammon or 
chess. 

—— ———aàn,** $m. The game of draughts. 























d 


-Je Ss 3 


Lë? 
e e 


taileil 


taileil, -e, a. Solid, substantial. 

taileileachd, see tailealachd. TIN 

ttailgean, -ein, s.m. Holy offspring. 2 Religious 
soldier of God. 

tailgneachd, see targradh. 

tailisv,** s.f. War instrument. 

ftaille, s.f. Wages. 2 Tax, tribute. 3 Appren- 
tice fee, 

taile, see taileadh. 

tailleabh,*s.m. Apprentice fee, premium, 2 Con- 
sequence, result, An do phaigh thu do th., P 
have you paid your premium ? air t. a’ 
ghnothaich sin, in consequence of that affair ; 
gheibh no meallaidh mi nis t£. mo shaoithreach, 

will now enjoy the fruits of my labour. 

m Ch, -aiche, a. Consequent,as the result. 

———QAch,* -aich, s.m. Apprentice. 

UN achd,* s.f. Apprenticeship. 2 Substan- 

iality. 

tàillear, -eir, -an, 8.72. Tailor. 

——achd, S.f. Tailors trade, sewing. 

taillse, s.m. Spectre, apparition. 

tailm, -e, -ean, s.f. Tool, utensil, instrument. 2 
Gin, snare. 3 Stroke. 4 Catapult. 5ffSling, 
noose. 

tailmrich, s.f.ind. Noise, bustle, confusion,noise 
of footsteps. 

tailmsich,** for tailmrich, 
ilp, -e, -ean, s.f, Bundle, bunch, parcel, piece. 

tailpeach, -eiche, v. Bunchy, lumpish. 

taim, poetical for ataim (tha mi,) I am. 

ftaim, s.f. Town. 

tàimh, e, st Death. 2 Mortality, 3 Silence. 
4 Fainting. 

, gen.sing. of tàmh. 

, eich, s.m. Residence. 
tàimhidh,(CR) a. Gentle, still —Skye. 
taimh-leac, -lic, s.f. Tombstone. 2** Heap of 

stones collected on a spotiwhere a person has 
been killed or buried. 

taimhleasg,** see tàileasg. 

ftiaimhhosg, s.m. see tàileasg. 

taimhlisg,(AC) v.». Traduce, contemn. Istu ’n 
t., might mean, a traducing person, or one 
werthy of being traduced. 

¢aimh-neul,** v.n. Slumber, fall into a sleep or 
swoon, 

"æm, -neoil, -an, s.m. Slumber. 2 Swoon. 
3 Trance, ecstasy. Thuit e an t., he fell into 
0 swoon. 

gees AED, -aiche, #. Slumbering, like a 
slumber, trance or swoon. 

taimhslich,(WC)s.7. Sounds heard before a party 
eomes to oecupy a house. Bha iad a’ cluinn- 
tinn t. an seo, they heard mysterious sounds 
here—said of a haunted house. 

tàimhteachd, s.f. ind. Home, abode, dwelling— 
Rob Donn. 

ftaimne, s. Torpor. 

ftaimthiu, s. Bed-death. 

tain, e, -tean, s.f. Cattle, herd or drove of cat- 
tle. 2 Spoil, plunder. 3 Mental endowments. 
4ttGoods. 6* Wealth in flocks. 

ftain, e, &.f. Water.  Folach-tain, water-par- 


snip. 
ftàin, s.m. Land, country. [s.f. gen. -e.—11] 
tainceil,( MS) a. see taingeil. 
taine, s.f.ind. Thimness, slenderness, leanness. 
tame, comp. of tana, More or most thin. 
tàineach, a. Abounding in cattle or goods. 
tainead, -eid, s.m. Thinness, degree of thinness. 
2**Tenacity. A’ dol an t., growing thinner 
and thinner. 
taineamh, s. Thaw—Arran. 
ftaineantach, a. Darting a double ray, corrusca- 


ting, 
taing, -0,8.f. Thanks, gratitude, obligation, 2 








Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


925 


tairbhealach 


Acknowledgement. Gun t. dhuit, in defiance 
of you; ni mi sin gun t. dhuit, f will do that 
in spite of you; a’ nochdadh do th., showing 
your sense of gratitud» ; t. is baidheachas 
dbuit, many thanks to you ; chuireadh e ann- 
aian gu’nt. gun, he would insist that (it was 
so) ; neo-ar-thaing dhuit, no thanks to you. 

taingealachd, s.f.ind. Thankfulness, gratitude. 

taingealas, -ais, s.m. see taingealachd. 

taingeil, -e, a. Thankful, grateful, acknowledg- 
ing. Is t. is cóir dhuit a bhi, you ought to 
be very thankful; bi €. nach ’eil seo na’s miosa, 
be thankful this is not worse ; gut., thankfidly. 

taingich, v.a. Thank, give thanks. 

Ttàinig, see thainig. 

tàinisteach, -ich, s.m. see tànaiste. 

tainistear, see tànaiste. 

-— ————Aáchd, see tànaistearachd, 

tàinisteas,** s.m. Domination. 

tàinistre, see tànaistre. 

tainneachadh,(MS) s.m. Stain. 

tainneadh, Arran for tainneamh. 

taiuneamh,f v.n. Thaw. 

tainnleag,(CR) Helmsdale & Kildonan for seill- 
ean. 

tainntean,** ein, sam. Thread. 

—ach,** a. Threacdy, filmy, viscous. 

tainte,(AF) s.f. Cattle taken as booty or spoil, 
booty. 

tàintean, 3.2. of tain. 

—,* s.pl. Talents, faculties, accomplish- 

ments. Is mór na t. à bhuilich Dia ort, great 

are the talents God has bestowed on you ; bith- 

idb do sgoil 'na t. Gbhuit ri d’ bheò, your edu- 

cation will prove an accomplishment to you 








for life. 
taip, -e, -ean, 8.7. Lump, mass. 2 Clumsy per- 
son. 3**Rock. 4*Great wealth without any 


of the refined manners of genteel society. 

taipeach, a. Lumpy. 

tàir, (CR) Aire, a. Bad, mean, base, ill. Cha'n 
"eil mi cho t. ri sin, Tom not so bad or base as 
that ; cha’n el mi na’s tàire, L Gm not worse 
(in health)--W. coast of Ross; cha robh am 
beannachadh na bu tàire na bha e roimhe aig 
an dithis ri chéile, their salutation to each 
other was no worse than formeriy—W.H. 1.13; 
cha bu tàir e, he was not bad—i.e. he was very 
good. 

ttair, see thar. 

tàir, -e, -ean, &.f, Contempt, reproach,disgrace, 
Fo th., despised ; gun taise gun t., without ef- 
feminacy or reproach. — [s.m.**] 

tàir, -e, æ. see tàireil. 

tàir, pr.pt. a’ tàireadh [& a’ tàir,*] v.a. £& n. 
Get, obtain,aequire, 2 Come. 3ftBeable. 4 
Move off, go. T. as, flee, escape; chat mi dol 
ann, I cannot go; a’'tair orm, despising me, 
looking down on me. 

tairbealach, see tairbhealach. 

tairbeart, -eirt,-an, s.f. Isthmus.  2* Supera- 
bundance. 8(McL & D) Peninsula. 

ach, a. Having isthmuses, peninsular. 

——ach,(MS)@. Open-handed. 2* Supera- 
bundant, very abundant, almost superfluous, 
for tairbheartach. 

tairbeartas, see tairbheartas. 

tairbh, gen.sing. & n.pl. of tarbh. 

tairbhe, s.f.ind. Profit, advantage, usefulness, 
avail, benefit. 2ffTEfficiency. Nithe gun t., 
things without profit ; t. eucorach, unjust gain; 
t. cha dean t ór-chul réidh, thy well-ordered 
golden hair cannot avail ; an t-ainm gun an t., 
the name or credit of anyihing without the pro- 
fit or benefit of it—W. coast of Ross. 

-— ——ach, a. see tarbhach. 

tairbhealach, Sich, -aichean, 8$. f. Defile, pass, 


UNIV! 





B. 


| 


LLINOIS 


«BANA-CHAMPAIG 


Fi 
La 
II 


tairbhealach 


narrow mountain valley. 2 Ferry, passage, 

tairbhealachd,(MS) s.f. Availment. 

tairbhean,(AF) s.m. Colic. 2 Bull-calf. 

tairbheann,(AF) s. Parasite, insect, cattle-insect. 

tairbheart, -bheirt, pl. -an & -bheirt, see tair- 
bheartas. 2**Liberal action. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Profitable, beneficial, 

abundant, bountiful. 2 Gracious. 3**Fruit- 

ful. 4**Liberal. Cho tairbheartach 's a tha 

iad, so abundant are they. 

—achd, s.f. Ampleness. 

tairbheartas, -ais, s.m. Bounty, free gift, benefit. 
2 Usefulness, profit, advantage. 3*Superabund- 
ance. 4* Overflowing goodness Tairbheartas 
a làimhe, the superabundance of his goodness. 

tairbhein,(AC) Surfeit. 2 Bloody flux in cattle, 

tairbheirt,** s.f. Turpentine. 

tairbhich, (MS) v.a. Accrue. 

tàir-chainnt, -e, s.f. Reproachful speech, vitu- 
peration. 








each, -eiche, &. Reproachful, vitu- 
perative, using contemptuous expressions. 2 
iiLibellous. Gu t., reproachfully. 

taircheadal,** -ail, s.m. Prophecy. 

taircheall,** AU, s.m. Act, action. 

tair-chomharradh, s. Brand. 

tair-chreich,** s.f. Desert, merit. 

taire, comp. of tair. 

tàireach,** a. see tàireil. 

— — ——, s.f. see tàirealachd. 

tàiread,** -eid, s.m. Degree of vileness or con- 
tempt. A'dolant., growing more and more 
contemptible. 

taireag,** -eig, 8.f. Provision. 2 Preparation. 

tàirealachd, gf ad, Contemptibility, baseness, 
vileness, reproachfulness,abjectness, disgrace- 
fulness, contemptuousness.  2**Long life. 

tàiream,** -eim, s.m. Dispraise, disparagement 

ach,** o Disparaging. 

thirean,** -ein, a. Descent. 

taireasg, see tuireasg & toirsgian. 

— -luaithre, s. Sawdust, see tuireasg-l—. 

tàireil, -e, a. Mean, base, contemptible, low, 
despised, disgraced, vile, disgraceful. 2 De- 
grading. 3 Reproachful, insulting, disdain- 
ful, contemptuous. A chainnt t,, his contempt- 
ible speech ;gach ni bha b., everything that was 
vile. 

taireis,** adv. After, afterwards, afterhand. T. 
mo chur ’san uaigh, after I amin the grave, 

tairg, pr.pt. a’ tairge, a’ tairgseadh & a’ tairg- 
sinn, v.n. Offer, propose, proffer, bid. %* see 
tairng. Th. e airgiod dhomh, he offered me 
money ; t. air seo, bid for this—as at a sale by 
auction. 

tairg,(CR) s.f. Cionnas a tha thu ? tha tairg ag- 
am, how do you do? I am fairly well. Tha 
mi an tairg mhath, and tha tairg orm, which 
are heard in some parts are eonsidered bad 
idiom in others—Suth’d. 

ftairgeadh, -idh, s.m. Collecting. 2 Collection. 
3** Endeavour. 4** Going, passing. 6 see 
tairngneadh. Cha b’ ole an tairge dha sin,that 
was a most courageous attempt—( WC.) 

tairgeam,**(for tairgidh mi) I shall or will offer. 

pe Ist. per.sing.imp.of tairg. Let me offer, 

tairgear, fut.pass. of tairg. T. uan geal dhuit-se 
a ghrian ! a white lamb shall be offered to thee, 
O sun ! 

—,** s.m. Bidder, 

tairgeil, soe tairgheal. 

tairgeug,**!-geuga, s.m. Graft. 

tairgheag,** -eig, s.f. Imp, brat. 

tairgheal, -eil, s.m. Offering, oblation. 

Ttairgineach, -eiche, a. Prophesying. 

tairgir,* v. see targair, v. ` 

tairgir(e),* s.m. Offerer, bidder, 














Digitized by 
INTERNET ARCHIVE 


926 


tàirng 

tairgire, see targradh. | 

tairgireadh, -idh, s.m. & pr.pt. Prophesying. 2 

Prophecy. 

an, pl. of tarrang. 

tairgne, pl. of tarrang. 

tairgneach, -eiche, a. Full of nails, 

———— —d, s.f.ind. see targradh. 

tairgre,** s.f. Prophecy. 

tairgreach,** a, Prophetic,soothsaying. ? Rhym- 
ing. 








— —d, s.f. Prophesying. 2 Proverb. 
ttairgreadh, -idh, s.m. & pr.pt. Prophesying. 2 
^ ok iaa. ^ 
airgse, -achan, s.f. & pr.ot. of tairg, see tairg- 
seadh. Thoir t., pag + ate. o * 
tairgse, a. Able. 2(WC) Attempting. Tha mi 
tairgse bhi ag gluasad, I am able to move 
about—W. of Ross. 
ach," s, see tairgseadh. 
ach,* a. Inviting, offering, 
adh, -idh, s. m. Offering, act of offering. 
2 Inviting. 3 Offer, proposal. A't—, pr. pt. 
of tairg. 
tairgsear,** s.m, Bidder, 
tairgsinn, s.f. & pr.pi. of tairg, see tairgseadh. 
tairiosg, -isg, -an, see tuireasg. 
tairirich, see dairirich. 
tairis ! int. The dairymaid's cry to calm an un- 
ruly cow at milking. 
tairis, -e, œ. Kind, sincere, loving. 2 Compas- 
sionate, tender-hearted, soft, tender, kindly, 
urbane. 3 Confidential. 4**Trusty, faithful, 
loyal. 5**Acceptable. Cha t. leam ur failte, 
your invitation is not acceptable to me ; guth t. 
nam bard, the mild voice of the bards. 
tairis,** v.a. & n. Love. 2 Come. 3 Stay, re- 
main. 
tairise, see tairiseachd. 
tairiseach, -eiche, œ. Loyal, faithful. 
Earnest. 3 (DU) Loving, kind. 
-————-d, s.f.ind. Lovingness, affection, friend- 
ship, attachment. 2 Faithfulness. 3 Com- 
assion, tender-heartedness. 4 Fidelity. 6 
Truth. 6tfFealty. 
tairisean,** ein, -an, s.m. Cross band, tie. 
tairisgein, s.f. see toirsgian. 
tairisgil, s.f. see toirsgian. 
tairisiomh,**a.Dear,intimate,friendly. 2 Trusty. 
tairisneach, -eiche, a. see tairiseach, 
-——d, s.f. see tairiseachd. 
tairiste, see tairis. 
ach, -eiche, see tairiseach. 
achd, see tairiseachd. 
tairleach,** s.m. Moisture. 
tair-learach, -aiche, a. Transmarine. 
tairleas,(CR) s.m. Cupboard—Perthshire, 
tairm, -e, $.f. see taghairm. 
tairmcheall,** -ill, s.m. Circuit. 
tàirmeas,* s.m. Disdain, contempt. 
ail,* a. Disdainful. 
tairn,* s.f. see taghairm. — 
tairn, v. see tarruing &tàirng. 
tairne, gen.sing.of tarrunn. 
tàirneach,** o Thundering. Mar thannasg air 
slèibhte t., like @ ghost on thundering mount- 
ains. 
tairneach, -aiche, 
Pulling, drawivg, extractive. 
raibh t., with enticing words. 
tàirneach, -eich, s.m. see tàirneanach. 
taireag,** s.f. Drawer (in chest of drawers.) 
tàirneanach, -aich, s.m. Thunder. 2 Thunder- 
ing noise. Peilear tàirneanaich, a thunderbolt. 
tàirneanachd, s.f. Fulmination, 
tàirneanaich, v.a. Detonize. 
tairnea aniche,* s.m. Thunderer. 
tàr g, -e, -ean, Sr Nail, pin.peg. Bior-thairng, 











2 Ready. 





a. Attractive, enticing. 2 
Le briath- 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


tairng 





a cofin-nail, 
tàirng, pr. pt. a’ tairngeadh, [a’ tàirngich & a’ 
tàirngeachadh,] v.a. Nail, fasten with nails. 
Tha H fhardach air a thàirngeadh, thy dwell- 
ing (cofin) is nailed, 
tairnge, s.pl. Nails, pegs. 
. tàirngeach, che, a. Drawing, pulling. 
Abounding in nails. 
tairngeachadh,(a’), pr.pt. of tàirngich. 
tairngeadh, -idh, sm. Fixing, nailing, act of fix- 
ing with nails. 
tàirngich, pr.pt. a’ tairngeachadh,v.q@. see tairng. 
tàirngidh, fut.af.a. of tarruing. 
tairngire,** s.f. Promise. 
tairn-na-ceusda, s.f. Pile-nail, passion- 
nail in heraldry. {Generally used in 
threes. ] 
tairngnean-barraidh, s. pl. Rivet-nails 
in a boat—Skye. di 
tairngnean-calpa, s.pl. Nails for join- 
ing planks together in a boat, see p. 
77 657. Tairng- 
na-ceusda. 


2tT 


tàirngnean-daraich, s.pl. Boat-nails, | 
see p. 77. 

tàirngnean-fruillichd, s.pl. Roves. 

tàirngnean-fuaigheil, s.pl. Nails for sewing to- 
gether planks in a boat. 

tairngnean-rang, see tairnean-daraich. 

tàirngnean-sgair, s.p/. Small nails, see süidhean, 
under bata. 

tairngte, past pt. of tàirng. Nailed, fixed with 
nails. 2 see tarruingte. 

tàirnich,** v. n. Thunder, make a thundering 


noise. 

tàirnnich,* (for tairngich) v.d. see tairng. 

tàirnsinn,* see tairsinn. 

tàirn-thoirm, -e, s.f. Thundering noise. 

tairp,** s.m. Clod, (see tarp.) 

-——each, a. Strong. 2 Grand, pompous. 3 

-  Cloddy. 

REES, heh, s.m. Hinge of a door. 2 Thresh- 
old. 

tairsgian, see toirsgian. 

tair-shliabhach,** æ. Transmontane. 

tairsinn, -e, s.f. Obtaining, act of obtaining or 
acquiring. A’ t—, pr.pt. of bàir. Tàirsinn 
as, flying, aet of flying, escaping, or running 
away. 

tairsnean, see tarsannan. 

tais, -e, a. Moist, damp, dank. 2 Soft, not tem- 
pered, as metal. 3 Faint-hearted, timid, 
not hardy. 4 Cold, spiritless. 5**Pitiful. 6 
Remiss. 7 Relaxed. 8tfbiunt. T. agus fiamh, 
softness and fear. 

taisbean, v. a. Reveal, show, make manifest, 
table, present. 2 Bespeak. T. an t-airgiod, 
table the money ; t. do throcair dhuinn, reveal 
thy loving-kindness to us. ` 

—, -ein, véi s.m. Mag" revelation. 2 

A rition, 3 Appearance, figure. 

sk ach, os? Revealing, that reveals, 
discovering. 2 Manifest. 3 Of, or belonging 
to a vision or apparition, apocalyptical. 4 
Indicative, in grammar. 

——-adh, -aidh, s.m. Revealing,act of reveal- 
ing,revelation,showing or disclosing. 2 Show, 
pageant. 3 Epiphany, Twelfth day. 4ftAd- 
vertisement. 5 Manifesto. 6 Demonstration, 
demonstrating, celebration. 7 Apparition. 8 
Appearance, appearing, see taisbean. Leabh- 
haran taisbeanaidh, the Book of Revelation. 
A’ t—, pr.pt. of taisbean. ` 

taisbeanar,** fut.pass. of taisbean, 

taisbeanta, a. & past pt. of taisbean. Reveal. 
ed, discovered, shown, made evident, present- 
ed. Aran t., shewbread. 

taisbein, see taisbean, 








Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


927 ' 


taisg 1 


taisheinte, see taisbeanta. 

taisbim,(AC) for taisbeam, Ist. per. sing. imp. of 
taisbean. 2 Irish 1st.sing.indic. of taisbean. 

taisc, see taisg. 

-——ealach, see taisgealach. 

-——ealaiih, see taisvealadh, 

tais-chridheach, -eiche, æ. Tender-hearted. 2 
Faint-hearted, soft-hearted. 8 Irresolute. 

Ss i, s, f.ind. Tender-heartedness. 2 
Faint-heartedness. 3 Irresolution. 

taisdeal, -eil,-an, s.m. Journey, voyage, jour- 
neying, voyagiog, pilgrimage, travel, march. 
Gu t. nan tonn gaireach, to travelling of tha 
foamy waves—Oran nam fineachan, G 3, 4. 

taisdealach, -aich, s m Pilgrim, passenger, 
traveller, 2 Wanderer, saunterer. 3 Person 
that scuds or vanishes by. 4 Ghost. 6 Vaga- 
bond, itinerant. 6 Contemptible person. 

, &. Itinerant, journeying, travelling, 
of, or belonging to a journey or traveller. 2 
“hae a traveller. 3 Like a wanderer or vaga- 

ond. 

taisdealachd, s.f.ind, Pilgrimage, journey. 2 
Wantdering, sauntering, lounging. 3**Pedes- 
trianism, travelling. 

taisdealaiche,** s.m. "Traveller, pedestrian. 3 
Pilgrim. 3 Saunterer, lounger. 

m eR comp. of tais.] More or most soft or spirit- 

ess, 

taise, see taisg. 

,** s.pl. Dead bodies. 

———, s.f. see taiseachd. 

taiseach, o. see taoiseach. 

— — —aàüh, -aidh, s.m. Softening. 2 State of be- 
coming soft, moist or damp. 3 Growing effem- 
inate, act of seftening or moistening. 4 Mak- 
ing effeminate. 5 Kffeminacy. 6 Softness. 
A’ t—, pr.pt. of taisich. 
ail, -e, a. Lenient, lenitive. 

—d, s.f.ind. Moistness,softness,dampness. 
2 Effeminacy. 3 Timidity. 4 Weakness. 5* 
Extreme cowardice. 

taisead, -eid, s.m. Degree of softness. 2 Weak- 
ness. 3 Cowardice, or 4 Moisture. 5 Effem- 
inacy. 6 Timidity. 7* Extreme degree of 
cowardice or moistness. A’ dol an t., getting 
softer or more timid. 

ach," -aich, s.m. Shroud, winding sheet. 
Ciste is t., cofin and winding-sheet. 

taiseag,** -eig, s.f. Restitution. 

tàiseal, (AH) s.m. Ghost. 2 Any mysterious ob- 
Jos with a noiseless, irresistible motion—Ar- 
gyll. 

taisealach,(DMy) s.m. Any quantity in a heap 
or vessel of more bulk than was expected. 

taisealachd, s.f. see taiseachd. 

taisealadh, -aidh, s.m. Bulk, quantity, product, 








2 Relics of saints. 





prov. 

oman -e, $.f. Coming unperceived, like a 

ost. 

taisealan,TÍ -ain, s.m. Reliquary, keepsake. 

taisealbh,tt v.e. Personate, represent. 

-—aàdh, -aidh, s.m. Act of personating. 4 
Likeness, 3**Exhibition. 4**Representation. 
A’ t—, pr. pt. of taisealbh. 

taiseallach, see taisgealach. 

taisealladh, see taisgealadh, 

taisear, see taibhsear. 

achd,( WC) s.f. Capers, fun. 

taiseil,** e, a. Dampish, see tais. 

taisg, pr. pt. a’ taisgeadh & a’ tasgadh, v. o 
Deposit, lay up, hoard, treasure. 2 Bury. 
Taisgeargach claidheamh 'na thruailh every 
sword shall be put up into its sheath ; t. m’ 
àitheantan, lay up my commandments ; ’ga 
thasgadh, seachad, hoarding it up. 

taisg, -e, -ean, S.f. Pledge, stake 2 Lee eg d 

Original "rom 


UNIVERSITY OF Il 








URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


LINOIS A 


taisg 


ttAnything laid by,deposit. 4**Reconnoitring, 
spying. 5* Saving. Nisam bith a tha ’n 
taisg, anything treasured up. 

taisg-airm, -ean-airm, s.f. Armoury. 

taisg-aodach, -aich, -ean. s.m. Winding-sheet. 

taisg-aodaich, s.m. Wardrobe. 

taisgeach, -eiche, o That hoards or lays up,sav- 
ing, frugal, hoarding. 2 Inclined to hoard or 
ay up. 

taisgeach,* eich, s.m. Store, store-house. 2 
Saving, pose. 3 Thing given in charge, trea- 
sure, hoard. 4**Budget. An t. math sin, that 
good thing. 

taisgeachan,** -ain, s.m. Store-keeper. 2(WC) 
Keepsake. 

taisgeadach,* see taisg-aodaich. 

, aiche, see taisgeach. 

taisgeadan, -ain,-an, s.m. & f. Storehouse,trea- 
sury. 2 Store accumulated for future supply. 

taisgeadh,** -idh, s.m. Store, wealth. 

taisgeal, -eil, -an, s.m. Finding of anything that 
was lost. 2* Reward for returning it. 3 
(MMcL) Enchantment. 4*News. ’S ann air 
a thàinig na taisgealan 'nuair a rinn e sin! 
what enchantment came over him when he did 
that ! 

taisgealach, -aich, s. m. Spy, betrayer. 2 Re- 
porter, discoverer. 3 Traveller, pilgrim, 4 
Passenger. 

-—d,** s.f. Pilgrimage. 

taisgealadh, -aidh, s.m. Report, news. 
covery. 3 Prognostication. 

taisg-eide, see taisg-aodach. 

taisg-eudach, see taisg-aodach. 

taisg-eudaich, see taisg-aodaich. 

taisgear, fut.pass. of taisg. 

taisg-ghuthachd,ft s.f.ind. Mellowness of voice. 

taisgidh,** s.f. Trunk. 2 Hoarding, laying up. 

taisg-inntinn,** s.f. Reservedness. 2 Equivoca- 
tion, mental reservation. 

taisg-ionad, -aid, -an, s.m. Storehouse,treasury. | 

taisgie, past pt. of taisg. Hoarded, laid up. 2 
Buried. 

taisg-thaigh, see taigh-stoir. 

taisich, pr.pt. a’ taiseachadh, v.a. & n, Moist- 
en, soften. 2 Dabble. 3 Bedrench. 4 Daunt. 
5 Make effeminate. 6**Shrink with fear. 7 
Blandish. 'Nuair thaisicheas bron iad, when 
grief softens them ; cridhe nach t. roimh 
fhuathas, a heart that will not shrink before 
anything fearful. 

te, past pt. of taisich. Softened, made 

2 Made effeminate. 3 Become soft or 











2 Dis- 





soft. 
moist. 

taisill,** s.f. Trespass. 
Injustice. 

taisleachadh, -aidh, s. m. Softening, wetting, 
making damp. 2** Bathing. 3** Making ef- 
feminate. 

taisicachd, see taiseachd. 

taislear, -ir, -an, s.m. see taibhsear. 

taislich,(DMy) s. Soft, ghostly sound or moye- 
ment in the dark. 

taislich, ** v.a. Bathe. 2 see taisich. 

—————te, past pt. Bathed. 2 see taisichte. 

taist,** s.f. Tache, button. 2 Loop. 3 Catch. 

taisteag, -eig, s.f. Moment. 

taisteal, see taisdeal. 

—ach, see taisdealach. 

taistearachd, see taibhsearachd. 

Ttait,** s.m. Pleasure. 2**Mereury. 

taite, -an, s.f. **Beginning, commencement, 2 
tt Glimpse, peep. 

taiterch,** Ach, s.m. Abuse, reproach. 

taiteadh, -idh, s.m. Pleasure, delight. 

taiteadh,** v.a. Domify, tame, reconcile to a 
new home-—JPerthshire & Argyll. 


2 Damage, injury. 3 





Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


928 


taitnidh 





à 658. Taithean. 

taiteag, -eig, -an, s.f. Moment. 

taithean,$ s.m. Lyme grass—elymus arenarius. 

caitheasg, -eisg, s.m. Repartee. 

taithigh, -e, s.f. see tathaich. 

— ——each, -eiche, a. Usual, frequenting, com- 
ing often. 

taithireach, a. Fond of. Chionn i bhi taithir- 
each air fir, because she is fond of men—Rob 
Donn. 

taithleach,** s.m. Peace, quietness. 

taithleach,** o Quiet, peaceable. 
Pleasant, handsome. 

taithleach,** -ich, s.m. Excuse. 

taithleachas, -ais, s.m. Excusation. 

taith-léigh,** s.m. Surgeon. 

taithneadh,** -idh, s.m. Splendour, brightness. 

taithris, see tairis. 

taitinn,** 8.f. Pleasure, satisfaction. 

taitinn, pr. pt. a’ taitneadh, tta’ taitneachdainn 
& a’ taitinn, v.a.dn. Please, satisfy, give de- 
light to. 2(MS) Approve. 3**Be acceptable. 
Ciamar a th. e riut P how did it please you ? 

taitneach, -eiche, a. Pleasant, delightful, fas- 
cinating, agreeable, acceptable. 2**Grateful. 
3**Satisfactory. 4**Becoming. Ist. an nie, 
it is a pleasant thing ; t. do 'n t-sealladh, plea- 
sant to the sight ; is t. leam t’ fbaicinn, J am 
happy to see you; seud t., a precious jewel ; 
toil th. Dhé, the acceptable will of God ; ma s' 
e 's taitniche leat, if it be more agreeable (seem 
better) to thee. 

taitneachadh, s.m. Approving, approval. 

taitneachail,(MS) a. Acceptable. 

taitiieachas, -ais, see taitneas. 

taitneachd, s.f.ind. Amenity. 2 *Taste. 3 Plea- 
santness,agreeableness,attractiveness, delight, 
Satisfaction, delightfulness. 4 Approval, ap- 
probation, acceptability. Ann ad th., in 
thy delights. 

taitneachduinn, -e, s.f. & pr.pl. see taitneadh. 

taitneadh, -idh, s.m. Pleasing, act of pleasing, 
delighting, pleasure. 2** Approval, satisfac- 
tion, approbation. A’ t—, pr.pt. of taitinn. 
Tionndaidh ejgu do th., it will turn to your 
satisfaction. 

taitneas, -eis -an, s.m. Quality of exciting plea- 
sure or delight, 2 Pleasure, delight, satisfac- 
tion. 3* Pleasing tothe taste. 

taitnich, v. see taitinn. 2(MS)A«ddulce. 

taitniche, comp. of taitneach. 

taitnidh, gen.sing. of taitneadh. 2 fut. a.a. of 
taitinn. 





2 Bright. 3 


Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


ae E 28 


- 
| 


we 


tal 


tal,** eg, Dropping. 

tal, -ail, -an, s.m. EH adze, addice. 
nM, 8.m. Cooper's plane used for the right 

side. 

tal-cuil, s.m. Cooper's plane forthe left side. 
tàl-fuinn, s.m. Hoe. 

talach,t+ a. Having adzes. 

talach, -aich, s.m. Complaint, murmur. 2 Dis- 
praise. 3 Cause of reproach, Cha’n 'eil reus- 
an talaidh agam, 1 haveno reason to complain. 
4 (DMy) Discontent, dissatisfaction. 

talach,**-aiche, a. Complaining, murmuring, 
2 Prone to reproach. 3 Apt to grudge. 

talach, -aich, s.m. £ pr. pt. of talaich, see tal- 
achadh. 

talachadh, -aidh, s.m. Complaining, murmur- 
ing, act of complaining or murmuring. 2 Mur- 
mur, complaint. 3 Cause of complaint. 4 
Repining. 6 Disparagement. A’ t—, pr. pt 
of talaich, Cha’n ion dhuit a bhith talachadh, 
you have no reason to complain or grumble, 

talachair,tf -ean, s.m. Complainer. 

talachar, -aire, a. Complaining, murmuring, 2 
Apt to complain. 

taladair,(MS) s.m. Attracter. 

tàladh, -aidb, s.m. Enticing, act of enticing or 

alluring. 2 Act of taming, caressing or sooth- 

ing, domesticating. 3 Hushing, act of hush- 

ing or rocking to rest, caressing. 4 Lullaby, 

cradle-song. 5* Getting attached to a person 

or house, as animals. 6**Making attached. 

7**Elegy. <A’ t—, pr.pt. of tàlaidh. 

taladhach,** a, Attractive. 

talag,(AF) -aig, s.f. Roach, 

talag,tt -aig, -an, s.f. Little edge. 

talaich, pr.pt. a’ talach & a’ talachadh, v.a.dén. 
Complain, murmur. 2 Be dissatisfied. 

tàlaideach,(MS) a. Amusing, attractive, 

talaideachd, (MS) s.f. Attraction. 

tàlaidh, pr.pt. a’ taladh, v.a. Entice, allure. 2 
Tame, caress, soothe, cajole, domesticate. 3 

. Hush torest, as a cradled infant. 4 Get at- 
tached to a person or house, as an animal, 
Ma thalaidheas peacaich thu, if sinners entice 


thee. 

talaidhdair,(MS) s.m. Amuser. 

tàlaidheach, -eiche, a. Abstractive, 

talaidhte, past pt. of talaidh. 

talainte,” s. m. Partition, division wall. [In 
Gairlech, nom. talaint, gen. -e, n.pl. -ean. Par- 
tition, generally made of wood—DU. 

talamh, gen. sing. -aimh E talmhainn, pl. -an, 
-nan & -anta,tt m. in the nom.sing. & f. in the 
gen. he earth. 2 Earth, land, soil. 3** 
Country. T. glas, unploughed land ; t. dubh, 
black land ; 2 figuratively, open weather, i. e. 
absence of snow in winter ; t. dearg, plough- 
ed land ; t. fliuch, moist or wet land ; t. tior- 
am dru land ; t. treabhaidh, arable land; t. 
tilgte, soil removed from one place to another ; 
aghaidh na talmhainn, the face of the earth ; 
na talmhannan, the lands or cultivated lotsiof 
a crofting township ; thugadh mi d' an t., I 
was taken to their country. [pl. also talmh- 
ainnean.] 

talamhaidh, -e, a. see talmhaidh, 

talamh-edlaiche, s.m. Geologist. 

talamh-edlas, s.m. Geology. 

talamh-eólasach, æ. Geological. 

talamh gaothaidh, Lismore for purrag. (appx.) 

talamh-toll,tt s.m. Cave. 2(CR) Opening over 
a burn running underground—Skye & Argyll. 
3 (WC) Quagmire, uusafe ground. An old 
Gaelic prayer ran" Gun gléidheadh tu sinn o 
tbalamh-toll, o mhointichean 's o shaighdear- 
an dearga ’n righ,” save us from quaymires, 
Jrom peat-mosses and from the king’s red sol- 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


929 


tamach 


diers. 

talan, see talainte. 2 (MMcL) Partition in black 
houses about 3ft. high, for separating the por- 
tion occupied by the cattle. 

tàlan, -ain, pl--an & -tan, s.m. Chivalry, feats of 
arms. 

tàlann, -ainn, pi. -an, -aiun, **-tan & -ainnean, 
s.m. Talent of money or mind, 

talban,** -ain, s.m. Partition. 

talca, -ailce, see tailce. 

talcais,** s.f. Contempt. 

talcanta, -ainte, a. see tailceach. 

talcantas,** -ais, $.m. Sturdiness. 

talcarra, og see tailceach. 

talchar, -air, s.m. Obstinacy. 

taleharach,** a. Obstinate. 

talcuis, s.f. see tarcuis. 

each, d. see tarcuiseach. 

- eachd, see tarcuiseachd. 

tal-fhradharc,** -airc, s. Caution, 
wariness. 

-—— —- ——Aàách;,** a, Cautious, wary. 

tàl-fuinn, -ean, s.m. Hoe. 

talgadh,** -aidh, s.m. Quieting, pacifying, paci- 
fication. 

talganta, see talcanta. 

ttall, see t hall. 

tall, v. Cut. 

Ttall, -a, s.m. Theft. 

talla, -chan, s.m, Hall. 2 **House. 3**Court. 
4**Rock. 5**Cleft of a rock. 6**Tower. T. 
nan sian, the hall of storms ; mac talla, or mac 
talla nan creag, the echo ; t. a’ chiùil, the mu- 
sic-hall. |** gen. -ai.] 

tallach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to, halls, 
courts, de 2 Having halis, courts, &c. 

talladh,** -aidh, s.m. Cutting off, lopping. 

tallaid, s.f. see callaid. 2 Partition— Badenoch. 

ftallair,** s.m. Thief, robber. 

tallan,(AF) s. Hind. 

talm,(AC) v.a. Obey, honour, 

talmag,(CR) s.f.'* Long-nosed mouse-like animal 
frequenting old walls," apparently the shrew 
—Suth'd. 

talmaich,(AC) s. Honour, obeisance. 

talmhaidh, -e, œ. Earthly, terrestrial. 2 Tem- 
poral, worldly. 3 Irreligious 4 Powerful, 
strong, robust. 5 Weighty, substantial. 6 Sal- 
low-complexioned, death-like.  7** Earthy. 
Nithean t., earthly things ; inntina th., o 
worldly mind ; miu th., substantial meal ; an 
cruinne t., the terrestrial globe. 

talmhaidheachd, s.f.ind. Worldliness, earthli- 
ness, devotedness to worldly objects. 2 Pale- 
ness of look, sallowness. 3* Weightiness, sub- 
stantiality. 

talmhainn, gen.sing. of talamh. 

talmhanach, a. Agrarian. 

talmhanta, -ainte, -an, s.m. Mineral. 

—-ch,** œ. Mineralogical. 

-—chadh,* -aidh, s.m. Growing or stick- 
ing together, as sods of earth. A’ t—, pr. pt. 
of talmhantaich. 

———-—chd,** s.f. Mineralogy. 

talmhantaich,* v.n. Grow, as earth. 
together, as sods. 

talmhionach, -aich, s.m. Minerals, 

talmhuidh, see talmhaidh. 

—eachd, s.f. Earthliness. 

talmhuinn, see talmhainn, 

talmraich, see tailmrich. 

talog, see talag. 

Ttàl-radhare, see tàl-fhradharc. 

—ach, see tàl-fhradharcach. 
ta ’m, (for ta mi) I am. 

ttám,l s. Rest, repose. 2 Plague. 3 Death, 
Ttamach,** o, Dull, slow. 








foresight, 


2 Stick 





Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


_ tàmadh 


Dain I. Ghobha. Thug an cù t. air, the dog 
tried to bite him, or tried to catch it. —W. of 
Ross-shire, 

tamaidh,"* s.m. Slothful person. 

tamail,(CR) s.f. Sense, judgment, wits. Chaill 
eath., he has lost his senses, he has lost his 
wits—W. of Ross. 

tàmailt, e, -ean, s. f. Disparagement. 2 Dis- 
grace, reproach, insult, scandal, shame, degra- 
dation. 3 Offence, indignity, affront, feeling 
of insult, 4(MMcL) Chagrin. Thoir tb., dis- 
grace; dean t., disparage; osunn thamailte 
nan laoch, the heroes’ sigh at their disgrace ; 
ball tamailte, an object of disgrace. 

tàmailteach, -eiche, a. Humiliating, disparag- 
ing. 2 Reproachful, disgraceful, degrading, 
3 Taunting,“insulting. 4 Indignant, inflamed 
with resentment at an insult, indignant. 5 
Ready to take offence, impatient of insult, 
[comp. -tiche,] Gnath-fhacal t., a taunting 
proverb, 

tamailteachadh, s.m. Degradation, debasement, 
disgrace. 2 Disdain. 3 (MS) Aspersion. 4 
Disgraeing, degrading. 

tàmailtear,* -eir, -an, s.m. Taunter, vilifier. 

tamailtich,** v.a. Degrade, disgrace. 2 Affront, 
reproach, 

tamall,tt see tamull. 

tamaluidh, s.m. Process of softening wool by 
putting butter on it. 

taman,** -ain, s.m, Trunk or body of anything. 

tamh, pr.pt. a’ tàmh, v.n. Rest, stay, remain, 
repose. 2 Settie. 3 Dwell, inhabit. 4 Cease, 
desist, give over. T. ded’ sgeig, give over your 
jeering ; tàmh ! tamh ! mo leanaibh, sleep / 
sleep ! my child ; ag obair gun t., working in- 
cessantiy ; ’san am bu choir dhomh tamh, 
when I ought to repose. 

tàmh, -àimn, s.m, Rest, quiet, ease, quietness. 
2 Delay. 3Sleep. 4 Dwelling, abode, act or 
state of dwelling. 5* Idleness, inactivity. 6 
Staying, act of staying or remaining. 7 ** 
Ocean. 8**plague. 9**Ecstasy. 

Aite-taimh, ace of rest, refuge ; œ ait’ an t. 

dhuit ? where is your place of abode? a’ t. ’san 
àite seo, dwelling here ; tha i "na t., she is idle; 
tha e’nath., he is idle ; chat. dhuit-sa, you 
do not pass your time in idleness; leig t. dhomh, 
iet me alone ; nach leig thu t. dhomh ? wili 
you notlet me alone ; am fear a bhios ’na th. 
cuiridh e 'n cat 'san teine, an idle man will 
put the cat on the fire—the English equiva- 
lent is, the devil always finds something for idle 
hands to do; am bheil thu 'nad th. Pare you at 
leisure ? is olc a’ mhuir a ghluaiseas 4 tàmh, 
it's à bad sea that rises suddenly ; na féidh 
'nan t. air Sgur-eild, the deer at vest on their 
rocks. 

tamh, -aimh, see tabh. 

tamhach, -aich, s.m. see tamhaiche & tambach- 
adh. 

tàmbach, -aiche, a. Dull, heavy, drowsy. 2 Caus- 
ing ease or rest. 3 Fond of rest, supine, in- 
dolent, sluggish. 4ttDwelling. 

tàmhachadh, -aidh, s.m. State of resting, repos- 
ing or becoming tranquil, quieting, settling. 
2**Acquiescence. A’ t—, pr.pt. of tàmhaich. 

tàmhachd, s.f.ind. Dulness, heaviness, siuggish- 
ness. 2** Rest, repose, tranquility, settled 
state. 3 Abode. Bhi t. am bunait, dwelling 
in security —B.Doran, l. 97. 

tàmha air, -ean, sce tàmhaicho. 

tàmhadn, -aidh, s.m. & pr.pt. seo tàmh. 

tamhaich, pr.pt. a’ tàmhachadh, v.n. Rest, re- 
pose, become tranquil. 2 Tranquillize, set- 
tle. 3**Acquiesce. 4fftDwell. 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


930 
tàmaidh,(CR) s.m. Onset, attack. 2 Grasping— | tàmhaiche, 


tanaiehear 


! -an, s.m. Dweller, inhabitant, res- 
ident, lodger. 2 Indolent, procrastinating 
person. 3**Dolt. 4ttLethargic person. Tàmh- 
aiche baile mòir, a citizen. 

tàmhaiche, s.f.ind. see tàmhachd. 

tàmna dh,( AF) s.f. Cow that stands gentle. 

tàmbaim, (for tamhaidh mi) I will rest. 

tàmh-airneis,** et Fixtures, furniture that is 
immoveable. 

tàmh-àite, -an, s. m. Habitation, abode. 
Place of rest. 3 see tàbh. 

ttamhan, -ain, -an, s.m. Trunk, body, block, 
stock. 2 Dolt. 

tamhan,** -ain, s.m. The spleen. 

tamhanach, -aiche, æ. Vapourish, doltish, slug- 
gish, splenetic. 

tamhanach, -aich, s.m. Dolt, blockhead. 2 In- 
active fellow. 

tamhanachd,** s.f, Stupidity, doltishness. 2 
Inactivity. 3 Sluggishness. 4ttIdleness. 

tamhanta, -ainte, a. Doltish, sluggish, slow. 

;àmhantachd, s.f.ind. Doltishness, sluggishness, 
slowness, 

ttàmhantas -ais, s.m. see tàmhantachd. 

càmharach, see tànihanach. 

tamuü-ard, see tabh-arc. 

tamhasg, -aisg, -an, $.m. Blockhead,fool,sense- 
less person. 2 Dwarf, pigmy. 3* Ghost,spec- 
tre, apparition. 4 Shade or double of a living 
person.—J.C.G.,W.,123. 65(DC) Snipe. fT 
Brownie. B’ edo th, a bh’ ann, it was your 
double. 

tamhasgach, -aiche, a. Foolish, doltish, stupid, 
senseless. 2 Dwarfish. 3 Ghostly, spectre- 
like. 4 Abounding in brownies. 

tamhasgail,* -e, a. see tamhasgach, : 

tàmh-leac, -lic, s,f. see taimh-leac. 

tamhsan, see amhsan. 

EEN -e, s.7. Trance, ecstasy. 2 Profound 
sleep. 

tamull, -uill, -an, s.m. Space of time, length of 
time, 2 Space, distance, T. dhi 'na tosd, she 
being a short while silent ; an ceann tamuill, 
in a short while ; ré tamuill, for a little while; 
car tamuill bhig, for a short while ; t. as, isa 
thaic ri 'shleagh, @ short distance away, lean- 
iny on his spear. 

flan, -ain, s.m. Country, region, territory. 2 
Ground, land, earth. 

ftàn, -àin, sm. Time, season. 
the time. [tan.1] 

tàn,* -din, s.m, see tain, 

tan,** a. Shelvy. 

tana, taine, a, Thin, not thick. 2 Thin, not close 
together, not numerous. 3 Thin, as liquid. 4 
Thin, slender, slim, lean, attenuated. 5 Shal- 
low, as water. 6**Liquid. T. o la gu la, thin 
Jrom day to day ; ni t.,a thin thing ; duine t., 
a lean person; àite t., a shallow place (in water), 
a shoal ; brochan tana, gruel ; a’ teachd le 
'lainn th., coming with his thin sword. 

tana, gen. of tan. 

tanach, gen. of tan. 

tanachadh, -aidh, s.m. Thinning, act of mak- 
ing thin, slender or liquid. 2 Rarifying, dilut- 
ing, dilution. 3 Stateof becoming thin. A’ 
t—, pr.pt. of tanaich. 

tanachail,** a. Attenuant. 

tanachd, s.f.ind. Thinness. 

tanad, -aid, s.m. see tainead. 

tanadh, o see tana. 

tanaich, pr.pt. a’ tanachadh, v.a. & n. Become 
thin. 2 Make thin, shallow, slender or lean, 
rarify, attenuate, grow thin, slender or lean, 
grow rarified. 3t Get shallow, shoal. 4(DU) 
Thin out turnips. e 

tanaichear, fut.pass, of tanaich. 


Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


Oe 


An tan, when, at ! 


2 D 


















governing, act 
rd. 2 Survey- 












| 


Is present, 


ted, made thin. 2 Diluted, rarified. 
to another. 2 Next heir to an estate. 3 Lord, 
. donians. 6 The ring-finger. 7**Second son. 
or heir presumptive, 
lo 
ing. 3 Dynastic. 
allel, state of being parallel. 6 Thanistry. 
embraced certain main features, one of which 
grees of relationship to the main line. Broth- 
while the succession was always obliged to 
Form of government under which the eldest 
ling prince orlord, during whose lifetime the 
—achd, see tànaisteachd. 
| tanalach, -aich, s. m. Shallow, shoal, shallow 
from[deep water to a shoal ; t. na seiche, the 
. tanasg, see tannasg. 
tangamar, past of thig, see tàinig, 
. tangnachd, s.f. Fraud, malic grudge, 
| © ann, (for ta ann) Exists, Appears, 
ann, he is the highest that 
| exists. 
| or sheep—Suth’d. 


| tanaichte 
tanaichte, past pt. of tanaich. Thinned, attenua- 
ftanais,** s.f. Parable. 
tànaiste, -an, s.m. Anything parallel or second 
peer, governor. 4 Regent, tainist. 5** The 
third name of dignity among the ancient Cale- 
8**Thane, prince. 9 **Trustee.  10**Tutor. 
Au t-oighre agus an t., the heir and next son 
tànaisteach, -eiche, a. Swayin 
of governing as a thane or 
- tanaisteachd,s.f.in’.Office of a governor or lord. 
$ 2 Dominion. 3 Regency. 4 Dynasty. b5ffPar- 
7* Trusteeship. ; 

The regulative law of Celtic succession. Tt 
was that the succession was always continued 
in the family of the chief within three de- 
ers succeeded preferably to sons to provide 
the tribe with a leader in all enterprises, 

be carried on with the approval of the clan— 
Cian Donald, iii. 
of the family wasentitled to succeed to the 
sovereignty or lordship on the death of the ru- 
|— - t. was commander-in-chief, —** 
| tànaistear, -an, s.m. see tànaiste. 
tanaisteas, eis, s.m. see tànaisteachd., 
|. tanaistre,** s.pl. Ancient laws or regulations. 
water. 2* Thin part ofa hide. Thàinig am 
bata o 'n'doimhneachd gus an t., the boat came 
= thin part of the hid». 
p —,** a. Short-winded. 
. tanas, see tannasg. 
| tanas, ais, s.m. Dominion, lordship. 
| 
` tanasgach, see tannasgach. 
K tancard, Gaelic spelling of tankard. 
| $tangabhair, past of thig, see thàinig, 
. ttangadar, past of thig, see thàinig. 
= fangaidich( MS) v.n, Restrain. 
. fàngnach,** a. Malicious, treacherous. 
e 
. tàngnadh,** s.m. Treachery, deceit. 
Fann, s.m. Prince. 
'S e a's àirde a t’ 
| fannaidh, (DMK) sf. Inside fat of a bullock 
tannalach,** a. Bellowing. 2 Extremely pain- 





——, &.m. See tanalach. 
| fannaladh,** -aidh, s.m. Bellowin 
| tannas, -ais, s.m. see tannasg., Tannais fhuar’ 
a’ sgreadail, grizzly spectres shrieking ; feuch 
~~ tannas dorch air creig, lo, a dark Spectre on 
(— the rock. 
| _tannasach, -aiche, a. see tannasgash. 
tannasg, -aisg, s.m. Apparition, spectre, ghost, 
spectre of a dead person. Is toilinnuinn leam 
t. g' alangan achluinntinn, and delightful to 
me io hear her clear delicate lowing—Beinn 
Doran, l. 61. 
———ach, -aiche, a, Aboundin 
ghosts. 2 Like a ghost, ghost] 


g. 2 Agony. 





g in spectres or 
y. 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


931 


taobhaidheachd 
taobhail,ff -e, a. Lateral. 

taobhair,** sm. Partisan. 2 Apostate. 
taobhaisd, -ean, s. Hole in the side of a creel, 
taobhalachd, tf s.f.ind. Laterality. 

taobh a mach, s.m. The outside. 

taobh a muigh,** s.n. The outside. 2 Without. 


taobhan, ain, -an, &.m. Rafter. 
+ beam, laid on the rafters in bu 


joinery. 





in deciding. 


taobh-cheum, -chéim, 


taobh-cheum 


taobh, -aoibh, -an, s.m. Side, flank. 2 Course, 
way, direction. 2 Liking, kindness,friendship. 
4 Partiality, favour, injustice. 6 Patronage, 
support, countenance, ail. 6 Cause, account. 
7 Place, quarter. 8 Nide-board ofa cart. An 
t. a muign, the outside exterior: an t. à staigh, 
the inside, interior; an t. ciil,or an b. air chùil, 
the hinder part ; an t. beòil, the front side ; dé 
'n t. a chaidh e? in what direction has he 
gone ? ; có "n t. P which side ? ri m’ thaobh, be- 
side me ; a thaobh, aside, astray ; 2 by reason 
of; cha’n "eil fhios agam’dé is t. dha, Z do 
not know what has become of him, in which 
direction he went: thug ea thaobh i, he se- 
duced her,; a thaobh sin, about that, because of 
that, on that account ;a th. sin dheth, on that 
very account ; do mi th.-sa, as for me, for my 
part ; cuir gu t., cuir a th., put aside ; t. ri t., 
side by side ; t. na mara, the sea-side ; t. tir, a- 
shore, the water's edge ; as an t. thall, from the 
other side ; th. "ur cùil is 'ur beòil. behind and 
before you— Mort na Ceapach ; cum t. ris, fa- 
vour or] countenance him. 

taobh, pr. pt. a’ taobhadh, v.n. Side with any- 
one, favour, be partial. 2 Come nigh to, ap- 
proach. Cha do th. e’m baile, he did not come 
near the town; cha th. e sinne, he will not 
come near us; na t. mise, do not come near 
me, keep at arm’s length. 

taobhach, -aiche, a. Lateral, having sides, 2 
Partial, favouring one party. 3 Inclined to 
be partial. 4 Frieadly, kind. 

--——d, s.f.ind. Partiality, 

Faction. 3**Presumption. 

adh, -aidii,s.m.Act of drawing another’s 
kindness to oneself. 2 Leaning to a side or 
party, partiality. 3 Countenancing. A’ t—, 
pr. pt. of taobhaich. 

taobhadh, -aidh, s.m. Siding, act of siding with 
anyone. 2 Act of approaching. 3 Commission, 
4**Trusting, relying. A’ t—, pr.pt. of taobh. 

taobhag, -aig, -an, s.f. Patch, clout. 





Injustice. 2** 


— 





taobhaich, pr.pt. a’ taobhachadh, v.a. & n.Draw 


or secure another's kindness. 2 see taobh. 
—eé,-an,s.m. £ f. Partisan. 
—te, past pt. of taobhaich. 

(MS) s.f. Adjacency. 


3 Outward. 

2 Rib or small 
ildings. 3** 
4 Stringer ofa 
),.P. 73. 53(MM) Puriin in 


——ach, -aiche, a. Havin 
2 Like a beam or rafter. 
aichte,** a. Raftered. 


Patch on the side of a shoe. 
boat, see bata, F5 


g beams or rafters. 


taobh-an-fhasgaidh, Lee-side. 
taobh an fhuaraidh, Windward 


-side, weather- 


Side (of a boat, dei 


taobh a steach,** s.m. The inner-side. 
taobh a staigh,** s.m. The inner side. 2 With- 


in. 3 Inward. 


taobh-bhreith, -ean, s.m. Partiality. 2 Partial 


or unjust decision. | Given by ** asa contract- 
ion of taobh-bhreitheamh.] 
—-each, -eiche, a. Partial. 





2 Unjust 





" eamh, -cimh, 
[** gives taobh-bhreith.] 
“aN, 6m. Digression, 2f 


sm. Unjust judge. 


Side-step. 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


taobb-cheumach 


gressing. 

—— — ——-nach,** a. see taobh-cheumach. 

taobh-duilleig, -an, s.m. Page of a book. 

taobh-ghabhail,** s.f. Secret fondness, hanker- 
ing attachment, partiality. 

taobh-gheal,** a. White-sid-d. 

taobh-ghlas,** o Grey-sided. O charraig 
thaoibh-ghlais, from a grey-sided rock. 

taobh-ghorm,** a. Green-sided. 2 Blue-sided. 
Coire t., a green-sided del. 

taobh-ghreim, -e, pl. -ean & -eannan, s.m.Stiteh 
in the side. 2 Pleuritic affection. 

—— ——- ——eaàch, a. Pleuritic. 

taobb-leis, s.m. Lee-side. 

taobh-leisg, (DC) s.m. (dit. a lazy side) Applied 
to the side of a boat when it bulges more than 
the opposite side. 

taobh ri taobh, a. Accosted in heraldry. 

taobh-shlat, s. Gunwale, see bata, E7, p. 73. 2 
Inside wale under the gunwale— A rgyil. 

taobh-shlatan, $ m. Stringers, on which ends of 
rowers' benches rest in a boat. 

taobh-shlighe, -an & -achan, s.f. By-way, foot- 
path leading parallel to & highway. 

ach, -eiche, a. Haviug by-ways. 2 
Fond of going in by-ways. 

taobh-shruth,* s.m. Eddy-tide, 2 Back-water. 

ach, -aiche, a, Abounding in eddy- 


Creditor. 














ing tides. 

taobh-thoir, -ean, s. 9n. 
sary. 

taobh-throm, -uime, a. Pregnant. 

achd, s.f.ind. Pregnancy. 

taobh-thruime, s.f.ind. Pregnancy, 

taobh-tire, -an-tire, s.m. District. 2 The shore. 
3 Edge of the shore. 

taod, -aoid, s.m. Halter, head-rope. 2 Hair-rope. 
3 Chain, binding. 4 Cable. 5(CR) Rope for 
leading or tying. 6* Reins. Ar crainn ’s ar 
taodan, our masts and our cables ; bo air t., a 
cow being lead. 

taodach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to, halters, 
ropes or cables, haltered. .2 Furnished with 
ropes, do, 3**Stubborn. 

taodachan,** -ain, s.m. Stubborn creature. 

taodan, -ain, -an, s.m., dim. of taod. Little hal- 
ter, rope or cable. 

ach, d. Having, or pertaining to, little 
halters, ropes or cables. 

taod-aoire, -an, s.m. Sheet (rope.) 

taod-frithir, (AH) s.m. Halyard. 

taodh,** s.m. Woollen yarn. 

al, see tadhal. 

taodhair, -ean, s.m. Apostate. 

——  ———each, -eiche, a. Apostatical, that has 
apostatized, 

eachd, s.f.ind. Apostacy. 

taog, -oig, see taoig. 

taoghail, see tadhail, 

taoghal, see tadhal. 

—— ———-ach, see tadhalach. 

taoghall, see tadhal. 

taozhan, see taghan. 

-—— — ——aàch, see taghanach. 

taoghanta,** a Shy. 

taoghar,(MS) s.m. Occursion. 

taoghas, -als, -an, s.m. Grave. 

taoghlaim, (for taodhlaidh mi,) I shall frequent. 

it&oi, a. Ready. 2 Silent, 3 Mild. 

itaol, s.f. Birth. 2 Trope. 3 Turning. 

taolbheumach, æ. see toibheumach. 

taoibhleach,ft-ich, s.f. Rough shove to a side. 

taoig, -e, -ean, s.f. Fit of passion, frenzy. 

each, -eiche, a. Passionate. 2 Impassioned, 
angry, enraged, frantic, 

ftaoighin, s.f. Mill-pond. / 


2**Commis- 




















Digitized by 
INTERNET ARCHIVE . 


932 
taobh-cheumach, -aiche, a. Apt to digress, di- | 


taoman 


taoim, -e, s.f. Bilge-water in a ship or boat. 2 
**Dash of water. 

taoimeach, -eiche, a. Having bilge-water. 32 
Leaky, as a ship or boat. 

taoinneadh,** -idh, s.m. Crispation, 

taois, -e & taosa, s.f. Dough, leaven. T. ghoirt, 
leaven. 

taois-cailc,* s.f. Putty. 

taoiseach, -eiche, a. Of, or belonging to, dough, 
leaven or paste. 2 Abounding in dough. 3 
Like dough, doughy. 4 Raw, ill-baked. 

ttaoiseach, -eich, s.m. Hero, chieftain, general, 
leader, commander, see toiseach. Bu lìon- 
mhor t. ’na luighe, many a hero was laid low. 

taoiseadair, -ean, s.m. Baker. 

— ———-—eachd, s.f. Baking, bakery, business 
of a baker. 

taoiseil,** a. Doughy. 

taoisg,* v.n. see taosg. 

taois-ghlaodh, -aidh, s.f. Paste. 

taoisinn, pr.pt. a’ taoisneadh, a’ taoisnich & a’ 
taoisneachadh, v.g. Knead, 2 Leaven. T. tri 
miosairean, knead three measures. 

taoismhor,** a. Doughy. 

taoisneach,** æ. Like leaven or dough. 2 Of lea- 
ven. 

taoisneachadh, -aidh, s. m. Kneading, act of 
kneading. 2 Leavening. A’ t—, pr. pt. of 
taoisnich. | 

bmp -idh, Same meanings as taoisneach- 
adh. 

taoisnich, pr.pt. a’ taoisneachadh, v.a. Knead, 
2 Leaven. see taoisinn. 

—-—te, past pt. of taoisnich. Kneaded. 
Leavened. 

taoisnidh, jfut.aff.a. of taoisinn. 

taoitear, -ir, -ean, s.m. Tutor, oversman, cura- 


tor. 3:Trustee—Suth’d. 
achd, s.f.ind. Office of tutor, or curator, 
tutorage. 2 Tuition. 


taois-tathaidh, s.f. Putty. 

taoitirich, v.a. Tutor. 

taolamach,** -aich, s.m. Parricide. 

taom, -a, pl. -an & -annan, s.m. Plash of water 
or any fluid. 2 Jet,torrent. 3 Overflow. 4 
Sudden illness. 5 Fit of anger or passion, 
frenzy. 6**Water that leaks through a ves- 
sel, Thàinig uisge "pa thaomaibh, rain came 
in torrents. 

taom, s.m. Luff of a sail. 

taom, v.a. & n. Pour out, bale, as water from a 
vessel. 2 Empty. 3 Overflow. 4 Shed. 6 
Throw water out of any vessel. T. am bata, 
bale the boat ; t.tair e, pour it on it; t. a’ 
chairt, empty the cart (by tipping it) ; tràth 
thaom na filidhean an :cedl, when the bards 
poured forth their strains. 


taomach, -aiche, a. That empties or pours out, 
emptying. 2 Overflowing, apt to overflow. 3 
By fits and starts. 4 Subject to fits. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. & pr. pt. of taomaich, 
Same meanings as taomadh. 

taomadh, -aidh, s.m. Pouring, act of pouring. 
2 Emptying, act of emptying. 3 Overflowing, 
act or state of overflowing, flood. 4 Effusion. 
5 Fit of sickness. A’ t—, pr.pt. of taom. 6 
(DMy) Turning the borders of ridges on the 
top, the {practice of making *'lazy-beds,"— 
Lewis. Fo th. dheòir, under a fit of tears. 

taomaich, v.d. see taom, v. 

taomaichte, past pt. of taomaich, see taomta. 

taomair,-ean, $S. m. Pump. 2 One who works 
with a pump. 

eachd, s f.ind. Pumping. 

taoman, -ain, -an, s. m. Vessel by which bilge- 
water is thrown out ofa boat, baler. 2 Ves- 
sel to lave with. 3 Purlin, in joinery. Gabh 


Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 





we 


De ide 17 
ee a num 





taoman 933 tarbhach 


an ladar no 'n t., take the ladle or baler. 


tapagail,* ee Blunder. 


taom-boile, -ean, s.m. Fit of madness or frenzy, | tapaidh, -e, a. Clever, quick, active. 2 Man- 


raging passion. i 

—ach, -eiche, æ. Frantic, furious, raging 
with anger or passion. 2 Uncertain. Is t. 
an t-iasg, is teugmhaileach an t-sealg, fishing 
ts uncertain and hunting risky (as means of 
livelihood compared with agriculture.) 

taom-fheachd, Full muster band. 2 (MMcL) 
Down-pouring host; on-settling host. Togaibh 
leibh gun airc, gun eusbhuidh, taow-fheacid 
seasmhach cunnbhalach, ra'se a full-muster 
band, lacking nothing, without stint, trusty, 
competently arranged— Filidh, p. 68. 

taomta, past pt. Poured out, overflowed, emp- 
tied. [taomte.] — 

taosa, gen. of taois. 

taosainn, v.a. see taoisinn. 

t20sdadh,(W C) -aidh, s.m. Cuddling or squeezing 
a girl. Dé an t. a th’ ort ? why do you cuddle 
80 ! 

taosg, -a, -an, s.m. Precise full of a liquid men: 
sure, 2 Pour, jet, rush of any fluid. 3 Fit. 
4ttGood quantity of water in a vessel.  5* 
Near the full of a dish,cask, pitcher, carl, &c. 

taosg, pr.pt.a’ taosgadh, v.a. Pour out. 2 Pump. 
3 Drain, empty. 4 Circumfuse, effnse. 

taosgach, -aiche, a. Full to the brim. 2 Pour- 
ing, rushing. 3 Irregular, ia fits, fickle, un- 
certain. 4 Apt to overflow. 5 Overflowing. 
pume t., a fickle mon; ni t., @ precarious 

ing. 

tao h, -aidh, s. m. Pouring, act of pouring. 
2 Pumping, act of pumping. 3 Draining, act 
of draining. 4 Overflowing, overflow, A’ t—, 
pr.pt. of taosg. A’ t. à duibh-neoil air na 
pos pouring her dark clouds on the væl- 


8. 
taosgaiche,** s.m. One who works at à pump. 
&aosgaid,* e, -ean, s.f. Fickle female. 
teosgair, -ean, s.m. One that pumps. 2 One who 
acts unsteadily or by fits and starts, fickle 
n. 
eachd, s. €. od. Pumping, labouring a a 
mp. 2 Draining. 3 Unsteadiness. 4 Pro- 

usion. 5 Folly. 

taosgan, -ain, s.m. Pump. 

taosgta, past pt. of taosg. Poured out, empti- 

t ed. 2 Pumped. 3 Drained. [taosgte. ] 

taosnadh, see tacisneachadh. 

taosnadh, s.m. Horse-play, playing rantipole— 
Rob Donn. 

taothal, -ail, -an, see tadhal. 

tap, -aip & -a, pl. -an & -achan, s. m. Tuft of 
wool or flax wreathed on a distaff. 2 Fore- 
lock, forelocks. 

tap, pr. pt. a’ tapadh, v.a. Hood or thread a fish- 
ing hook—Isiay. [stalcadh elsewhere. ] 

tapach, -aiche, a. Bushy, having thick forelocks. 

tapachd, s.f. Quickness, activity, alacrity, clev- 

. erness, 2 Manliness, boldness, heroism. 
tapadh, -aidh, s.m. Clever feat or action. 2 Ac- 
tivity, alertness, cleverness. 3}{{Good luck, 
lucky event, success. 3 Activity, manliness, 
manhood. 4(DC) The process of thrashing 
with the froisean. 5* Heroic feat, achieve- 
ment. 6* Thanks. Cuimhnicheadh gach aon 
a th., let each remember his manhood ; leahhar 
dearg Iain, 'gan tiopadh 'S gan tapadh, Mit- 
chell’s ** Red Book " snapping and checking 
them (the witches)—Duanaire, p. 41; t. leat, 
thank you. 

tapag, -aig, -an, s.f. Accident, casualty. 2 
Blunder in speech, slip of the tongue. 3 Fall. 
4(DC) Exclamation. 

tapa gach, -aiche, a. Accidental, casual. 2 Blun- 
dering In speech. 3 Apt to blunder in speech. 








Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


ly, bold, heroic, brave. 3 Successful in busi- 
ness. Bi t., be brave; 2 be smart, be quick ; 
clann t. feardha, a manly, active clan. 
eachd, see tapachd. 

tapais,** Gaelic form of French tapis, carpet. 

tapan,* -aiu, s.m. Little lock of wool or flax on 
a distaff. 2 Tuft of flax added toa larger 
quantity to make up a deficiency in weight. 

tapanach,tf a. Like tow or tax on a dista. 

tapanta, -ainte, a. Quick, see tapaidh. Gu be 
quickly. 

— — —chd, s.f. see tapachd. 

S, -ais, 8m. see tapachd. 

tapar,** air, s.m. Gaelic form of taper. 

tapas, -ais, -an, s.m. liit. 

tap-bheist, see tar-bheisd. 

taplach, -aich, -aichean, s.m. Wallet, repository 
for small things. 

taplaich,** s. f. Wallet, repository for small 
things. 

Laponta, see tavanta. 

tar,* s.m. see tàrr. 

tar, pr.pt. a’ tàrsainn, v.a. Evoke. 2**Go. 8** 
Send. 4**Come. 5**Descend. 6**Befall. 7 
**Prepare. 8 Get time. 9 (DU) Be able. T. 
as, evade’; 2 '* bolt" ; th. e mach, he escap^d 
out, he went out ; gus an t. dhomh bas is 
uaigh, til death and the grave be my lot ; cha 
do th. mi, L was not able ; an b. thu P wiil you 
be able? 

tar, prep. see thar. 

tar, pr.pt. a’ taradh, v. see tair. 

tar, -àire, €, see tàir, @. 

tar,** a. Achse, quick, elever. 

tarabal, (a’ t—,) pr.pt. Undulating. 

taracadair,* -ean, sm. Necromancer. 

——eachd, s.f, Necromancy. Dé ant. a 
th’ ort à what necromancy are you practising ? 

taracantachd,*s.f, ind. Necromancy. Bha sin 
air a chur 'san t. dha, (bu dàn dha sin), that 
was put in his lot —2WC. 

tarachair,t v.n. Gimiet, auger. 2 Seer. [for tora- 
chair. ] 

tarachd,** s.f. Activity. 

tarachd,** s.f. Gong, 2 Coming. 

tara-dalag,(MMeD) s.m. see tarbh-dallaig. 

taradh, s.m. Noise at night (premonitury.) 

tarag," -aig, -an, $.f. Stud. 

taragachd,( MS) ag, Bodement. 

taragaich, v.g. Presage. 

taragair,** v. Bode. 

taragaraich,(MS) v.n. Vaticinate. 2 Reason, 

taragarachd, see taragachd. 

taraghail,** e, see targradh. 

taragrach, -aiche, a. Portentous. 

taragradh,** sm. Bodement, portentation. 

taraid, s.f. Truncheon, stat? of authority—Dain 
I. Ghobha. 

tàraidh, fut off o, of tar. 

tarail,** s.f. Visit. 

taran,lt -ain, pl. -an & -ain, s.m. Ghost of an un- 
baptized child. 

taranach,** a. Spectral. 

tarang, pl. -aingean, see tarrang. 

tarar, see tora. 

tarbh, -airbh, s.m. Bull. 2 The sign Tauru#¥ &) 
in the zodiac. An tarbh, a surfeit; móran 
tharbh, many bvlis ; craicionn tairbh, @ bwl?’ s 
hide. 

tarbhach, æ. Infinitive in grammar. 

andy oA -aiche, œ. Abounding in bulls. 2 Like 
a bull. 

-—, -aiche, d. Profitable, beneficial, gain- 

ful. 2Substantial. 3Important, of consequ- 

ence, 4**iiifectual. 65 Fertile, productive. 











Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS A 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


tarbh ach 





t. an effectual (decisive) blow, or pull in row- 
ing ; cainnt th., pithy language ; t. do dhuine, 
profitable to man. 

tarbhachadh, -aidh, s.m. State of increasing in 
wealth or substance. 2 Act of gaining or of 
profiting. A’ t—, pr.pt. of tarbhaich. 

tar bhachas, -ais, s.m. see tarbhachd. 

tarbhachd, s.f.ind. Gain, profit, advantage. 2 
Substantiality. 8 Importance, consequence. 
4 Fertility, productiveness, fruitfulness. 5 
A vailableness. 

tarbhaich, pr. pt. a’ tarbhachadh, v.a. & n. In- 
crease in wealth or substance. 2 Gain, profit, 
grow gainful, grow fruitful. 3** Reap gain, 
profit, or advantago. 

tarbhaichead, ed, s.m. Degree of profitable- 
ness, 2 Degree of importance or substantial- 
ity. 3 Degree of fertility or fruitfulness. .A' 
dol an t., growing more and more fruitful. 

ftarbhaidh,** ¢.f. Hinderance, impediment. 2 
Misfortune. 

tarbhail, -e, a. Bull-like, brutish. 2 Bull-faeed. 

tarbh-alluidh,* s.m. Buffalo. 

tarbhan, -ain, -an, S.M., dim. of tarbh. Little 
bull. 2 Young bull. 

tarbhanach,ft a. Abounding in little bulls. 2 
Like a little bull. 

tarbhanta, -ainte, a. Grim, stern, bull-faced. 2 
Boorish. 3 Like a bull, fierce. 

—— —— —chd,if s.f.imd. Grimeess, sternness, 
buli-facedness. 

tarbh-aoidhre, KDMK) Northern counties for 
tarbh-boidhre. 

tarbharnach, a, Noisy, garrulous—Sà»-Obair, 

tarbhas,** -ais, s. m, Surfeit. 

tarbh-boidhre,(AC) s.m. Monster, demon. 2 
God capable ef changing himself into many 
forr. —a man, a horse, a bull, &c., with super- 
natural powers. 

tarbh-chü,* s.m. Bull-dog. 

tarbh-coille, s.an. Dark cloud which when seen 
on New Year's Day portends a stormy season. 
2 (AF) Fabulous monster. 

tarbh-dallaig, s.m. Blue shark. It is the shap: 
of a dog-fish, but of great size. I saw one of 
them in my own boat and its liver filled a bar- 
rel. Its head was hanging over the gunwale 

|, on one side and its tail over the gunwale on 

| the other side, the total length being about 14 

| feet. When we took out its liver it never 
moved—(DMy.) The oil taken from the liver 
of this fish is greatly prized for medicinal pur- 
poses in the Western Isles. 

tar-bheir,** v.a. Transfer, carry over. 

tarbh-mhadacth, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Bull-dog. 

tarbh-nathraen, pl. -airbh-nathraichean, 8. m. 
Dragon-fiy—libella—Arran. 2 (AF) Moth. 

tarbh-réidh,* s.m. Farm-bull. 

tarbh-ruagadh, -aidh, s.m. Bull-baiting. 

tarbh-shiolag,((AF) s.m. Weever or viper fish. 

tarbh-tàna, -airbh-thana, s.m. Parish-, district-, 
or herd-bull, bull which is the property of a 
district. [*tarbh-taine.] 

tarbh-truid, $.àm. Furious bull. [truid is the 
gen. of trod (fight), in modern Gael.scolding.] 

tar-bhuileachadh,** -aidh, s.m., Consignment, 
conveyance, conveyaneing. 

tar-bhuilichte,** past pt. Consigned. 

tarbh-uisge, -airbh-uisge, 8.m. Water-bull, sea- 
bull or -cow, (fabulous.) 

Ttarchean, adv. (i.e. thar cheann) Moreover, 
then, also, notwithstanding, although. 

ttar-chonair,** s.f. Ferry. 

tarcuis, -e, -ean, s.f.Contempt,despite,reproach, 
scorn. 2 Dispute. Dean t., reproach, despise ; 
luchd t., spiteful people. 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


934 
Barr t., a substantial crop ; bualadh (or buille) | - 


tàrmachadh 


each, -eiche, a. Cont-mptuous, despiteful. 

2 Contemptible, contuimelious, despicable, re- 

proachful, scornful. 3( MS) Deplorable. 4(M3) 

Poor. Gu t., reproachfully. 

—-eachadh, -aidh, s.m.Despising, act of des- 

pising, reviling, showing contempt. A’ t—, 

pr.pt. of tarcuisich. : 

-eachd, s.f. Despite, reproach. 2 Aptness 
to scold, contumeliousness. 

tarcuisich, pr.pt. a’ tarcuiseachadh, v.q. 
pise, revile, contemn, scorn, affront. 

—te, past pt.of tarcuisich. Despised ,con- 
temned, reviled. 

tarcuisneach, see tarcuiseach. 

tar-dearg, s.m. see tàrr 4. 

tar éis, prep. After. 

tar-fhradhare,ff{ -airc,-an,s.m, Squint, squinting 
look, leer, ogle. 

———-——ach, -aiche, a. Squinting, having a 
squint. 2Goggle-eyed. 3 Looking askance, 
leering, ogling. 

targach, s.m. Char (fish.) 

targadh, -aidh, s,m. Governing, ruling. 2 Gov. 
ernment, rule. 3 Assembly. 

targaid, -e, -ean, s.f. Target, shield. 2 Rooker. 
8 Skate (fish)—Lewis. The target of the Gael 
was orbed and made of light wood with a sin- 
gle covering of tough leather, or if thin, of 
several folds, studded with brass, iron or sile 
ver, according to the means of the owner. 

—each, -eiche, a. Shielded, armed with a 
shield, 2 Like, or of a shield. 

targair, pr.pt. a’ targradh, v.a. Foretell, proe 
phesy, divine. 

targairich,(M3) v.a. Foreshow. 

targanach, s.m. Prognostication, prophesying— 
Sàr-Obair. 

targhail,** v. Forebode. 

targhan,** -ain, s.m. Noise. 

targrach,** a. Foretelling, prophetic. 

targradh, -aidh, s.m. Foretelling,'act of foretell- 
ing, prophecy, divination, predicting, predict- 
ion. A’ t—, pr.pt. of targair. 

targraich, see targair. 

targraiche, -an, s.m. Foreboder. 

targraidh, fut.af.a. of targair. 

tàrladh, 3rd. pers. sing. & pl. imp. of def. v. tàr- 
ladh & tarlaidh. Happen, befall, meet. 2 
past subj. of tàrlaidh. T. e,i, iad, let him (it), 
her (it), them happen ; 'nuaivr a th. sibh cuid- 
eachd, when you met together. 

tarladh,* -aidh, s.m. Great demand or tearing 
from each other, as a scarce commodity. 2** 
Draught. 3**Leading in of corn or hay. 

tarlaid, -e (7.), -ean, s.m. & f. Slave, thrall. 2 
Contemptible person. 3 Hackney. 4 Hulk of 
a ship. 5**Feinale drudge or slave. 

Gr -eiche, a. Slavish, drudging, drudge- 

ike. 

———,(AF) -eich, s.m. Working horse. 

: d, s.f.ind. Drudgery. 

tàrlaidh, fut. of def. v. tàrladh and tarlaidh. Will 
havpen, befall or meet. 

tarlaidh,* v.a. Tear or drag away. 

tarlaid-luinge, s.f. Hulk. 

tàrlas, fut. of def.v. tàrladh, see tàrlaidh. 

tarm,(AF) see torm. 

tarmach,(AF’) see tarmachan-dé, 

tarmach,* -aich, s.m. Source of disease. 2 see 
tarmachan. J 

tàrmachadh, -aidh, s.m. Sourco, origin. 2 Act 
of originating or beginning. 3 Gathering, act 
of gathering or collecting, as a tumour, 4 
Dwelling, circumstance of dwelling. 5 Pro- 
ducing, act of producing. 6 Extract. 1" 
Congregating. Sr Settling. A’t—, pr. pt. of 
tàrmaich. 











Des. 








- —— 





Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT3 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


tarmacha 


tàrmachag,(DO) s.f. see tàrmachan. _ 

tarmachail, -e, a @riginary, constitutive. 

tarmachair, -ean, sm. Propagator, incubator, 
breeder. 





659. Tarmachan. 


tàrmachan, -ain, -an, s. m. Ptarmigan (bird)— 
lagopus vulgaris.T. breac na beinne, the spotted 
ptarmigan of the mountain. This is a rare 
species of moorfowl, seen on the tops of the 
highest Highland hills. The size of the ptar- 
migan is nearly that of the grouse, and its 
colour light grey, but in winter it is perfectly 
white. It is a very shy and timid bird ; but 
when the sportsman comes upon it by sur- 
prise, it is daunted even to stupidity, and has 
not alwaysjthe courage even to fly from dan- 
er.— 
D. -beinne,(AF) s.m. Mountain ptarmi- 


n. 

RE, -dé, (AC) s.m. The white butterfly. 2 
rarely, The black and white butterfly, see 
dearbadan-dé. 

æ -traghad,(AF) s.m. 
ptarmigan. 

` tàrmach-dé, see tàrmachan-dé, 

tarmadh,** -aidh, s.m. Dwelling, 

tarmagan, see tarmachan. 

tàrmaich, v.a. & n. Originate, be the source of. 
2 Derive. 3 Gather, collect, 4 Settle. 5 Re- 
side, dwell,lodge. 6 Produce, beget. 7 Be. 
gin—Duanatre. Ceann anns an do th. gliocas, 
a head where wisdom dwelt ; ann am àirnibh 
th. mo neasgaid, in my reins my ulcer resides. 

te, past pt. of tarmaich, Gathered, col. 
lected. 2 Produced, begotten. 8{{Fermented. 

tarman, see torman, 

Lërmanach d s.m. see tàrmachan. 

tarman-dé, W. of Ross for dearbadan-dé. 

tarmas,(MS) -ais, s.m. Affront. 

a- aich, (MS) v.a. Villainize. 

tarmun,** -uin, s.m. Sanctuary, asylum. 
munn.) 

tarmunach,** æ. Affording sanctuary or asylum. 
(téarmunnach.) 

tàrmus, -uis, s. m. Dislike of food, loathing of 
meat. (*tarmas.) 

ach, -aiche, a. Disliked or loathed, as 
one’s food. 

tarnach,* s.f.Thunder-clap. 211Any loud sound. 
3iiBlow, 

tàrnadair, -ean," e bm. Inn-keeper, (Jit. one who 
draws.) 1 

eachd, s.f.ind. Office of an inn-keeper. 

tarnaid,** s.f. Tavern. 

tàrnaidh, fut.af.a. of tarruing. 

tarnochd,** s.f. Nakedness. 2 The secret parts. 

———,** a, Naked. 

tarp, -a,-an, s.m. Clod, lump of earth or clay. 

-——ach, -aiche,a. Full of clumps or clods, clod- 
dy. 2**Bulky. 3**Weighty. 

tarpachd,** sg.f.ind. Bulkiness. 

tarpan,* -ain, s.m. Cluster. 2 Crab, see partan. 
$ dim, of tarp. Little ciod.. 


Dunlin, shore- 








(téar- 








Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


935 


tarruing 


tarpanach,** æ. Cloddy. 

tàrr, -a, -an, s.m. Lower part of the belly. 2 
Tail. 3 Breast. 4**Extremity. 5 (AF) Ghar 
(fish.) 6(DC) Ability, capability. Jul cinn 
(druim—WC) an sgadain is tarr a’ bhradain, 
the back of a herring’s head and a sal- 
mon’s breast—the best parts ; breac tàrr- 
gheal, a white-bellied trout. 

tàrr, for tarruing— Dàin I. Ghobha. 2 for tar or 
tàir. Cha tàrr (tàir) mi an seinn—Duanaire, 
p. 102. 


.|tàrr as, v. Betake. 


Làrr,(MS) v.a. Befall. 
thrrach, -aich, s.f. Girth of a pack-saddle. 2 
Belly-thong. 3**Crupper. 
tarrach,** a. Fearful, timid. 2 Horrible. 
tarrach,(AF) s.m. Kittiwake. 
tarrachan,** -ain, -an, s.m. Glutton. 
tarradh, -aidh, s$. see tarragh. 
tarradh, Gach fear ag obair mar a tharradh, 
everyone doing his best——Duanaire p, 131, 
tarradh,(CR) s.m. see tarragh. 
tar-radhare, see tar-fhradharc. 
—— ——-—Ach, see tar-fhradharcach. 
tarrag,** s.f. see tarrang. 
tarrag(for tarranz)-a'-chroinn-sparraidh, see un- 
der crann-nan-gad. 
tarrag (for tarrang)-maide-a' -chroinn-sparraidh, 
see under cranu-nan-gad. 
tarragach, see tairgneach. 
tarragan, -ain, 8.m. Char (fish.) 
tarragh,** -aigh, $.m.see tarradh. Conveying of 
corn to the barn or yard. 2 Drawing, lead- 
ing. 3 Frequent going to and from a place. 
Féisd an tarraigh, feast of the in-gathering. 
tarragh,** v.g. Convey corn from the field to 
the yard. 
tarraghail,** s. Auspice. 
tarra-gheal, -ghile, v. see tarr-gheal. 
tarragheal, s.m. Alpine char—salmo alpinus. 
tarraid, see earraid, 
tarraigheal, see tàrr-gheal, 
tarrail, s. Subsidy. 
tarraire,(MS) s.m. Pavilion. 
tarraiszein, s.f. see toirsgian. 
tarranach, -aiche, a. Loud. 
tarraig, gen.sing. of tarrag (for tarrang.) 
tarran,(DC) s.m. Frame of network to hold 
grain over a slow fire for drying. 2(DMy) The 
straw; which was below the grain on the kiln, 
and of no use. When it was put on the kiln 
it was called strveaghaig and after the ~“ tior- 
adh " is finished it is tarran. 
tarrang, -aing, & -airnge pl. -àirnge -àirnnean, 
-airngean & **tarraingean,s.f. Nail, boss,stud. 
T. "na lethcheann, a nail in his temple ; t.- 
chuidhle, or t.-aisil, (ynch-pin of a cari. [also 
tairng. ] 
tarrannach, see tairngeach. 
tarrangaich, v.a. Nail, peg. 
tarrung-aisil, s.f. Lynch-pin of a cart. 
tarrang-art, -airt, s.f. Loadstone. 2 Magnet. 
3 Compass-needle. 
tarrann, see tarrang. 
tarr-fhionn, -à, œ. Having white buttocks. 2 
White-bellied. 3 White-tailed. 
tarr-gheal, -ghile, o White-bellied. 2 White- 
tailed. 
—— ——— —;* s.f. White-bellied cow. 
tarroch, see tarrach. 
tarruigeadh, a. Abluent. 
tarr-pheang, -aing, -an, s.m. Mortice in joinery. 
tarrsanan, see tarsanan., 
tarrguinn, 8ee tarsuinn. 
-— — ——eachd, see tarsuinneachd. 
tarruing, pr.pt. a’ tarruing, v.a. & n.Draw,pull. 
2 Draw, attract, allure, lead. 3 Take the li- 


Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS A 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


tarruing’ 


quor from a cask. 
Draw near, approach, advance, 
distil, as strong drink. 7 Aim. 8**Teaze, 


Bi t. !ofiwith you, away !—Perthshire ; an 
t. thu mach lebhiathan le dubhan ? cans't thou 
draw leviathan with a hook ? th. e ’n t-iongar, 


it extracted the matter from the tumour ; tn. 


mi air, Z assaulted him; le d? chlarsaich diuth, 
draw near with thy harp; tha ’n laoch a 
tarruing a Lhuille, the hero aims his blow ; 


tairnzidh mi e, I will draw it. 

t. air t’ ais, draw back. 

t. a mach, protract, lengthen. 

t. am fagus, draw near. 

t. as a chéile, pull asunder. 

t. claidheamh, draw a sword. 

t. fealbb, draw a picture. 

t. fodar, draw straw for thatching. 
of threshed straw are drawn asunder and 
placed in one hand, and the process is re- 
peated until all the broken straw is dropped 
and what remains is long, smooth and even, 
Drawn straw in some districts was used only 
for placing under the corn on the kiln when 
the grain was hardened at home,and in con- 
sequence, some of the terms for it are de- 
fined as though they applied only when it 
was used for this purpose. Other materials, 
as rushes, a species of grass, &c., were used 

' Tor thatch—CR. 

i €. fuil, draw blood, let blood. 

; t. gu crìch, draw to a conclusion. 

! t. suas, draw up. 

| t. suas ris, address, speak' to him, cultivate 

his acquaintance. 
t. t' anail, draw your breath. 

tarruing, -e & tàirgne pl. -ean & tairgnean, s.f. 
Drawing, act of drawing or pulling, act of 
dragging or hauling along. 2**Draught, pull, 
drag. 3 Act of attracting. 4 Alluring or enti- 
cing. 6 Distilling, act of distilling. 6 Act of 

. drawing liquor from a cask. 7 Act of draw- 
ing, painting or delineating. 8 Taking a pho- 

:ı tograph. 9 Drawing near. 10 Any weight or 

_ bulk that is drawn. 11 Extracting plaster. 12 

 Siiemand 13 Halyard. 14(MMcN) Peak-hal- 
yard-sheets, No. 2, p. 75. 15 Carriage-trace. 

. —W. of Ross. 16¢{Season of time, while,:turn. 
17 (DU) Low, distant thunder (pl. tarruing- 
ean. [ttpl. tàirngean.] 

Cuir t. air, put an extracting plaster on it; 
a dh’ aon t., at once, at one time ; t. chailleach, 
drawing ina slovenly manner (t. chailleach is 
to take load No. 1 say, a quarter-of-a-mile, 
turn back for load No. 2 and drop it with No. 
1 ; then take up the latter and advance with 
it another quarter-of-a-mile ; then go back for 
No. 2, and so on till both are at destination; 
thusa person may fetch two loads simulta- 

. neously, (although there is no saving in time 

‘ or labour, with the additional disadvantage 

, of one load being left unguarded by the road- 
side most of the time ); air a’ cheud t., at the 
first time, at once ; t. éisg, a draught of fishes ; 
t. dùbailt, dowble-distilled liquor; ’s e seo mo 
th.-sa, this is my turn. <A’ t—, pr.pt. of tarr- 
uing. 

tarruing-air-éiginn, s. f. Heath-rush—Colonsay. 

tarruing-an-uisge-bheatha,(DM K) s.f. Distilling 
of low wines, the product being whisky—W. 
of Ross. 

tarruing-art, see tarrang-art. 

tarruing as, v.a. Chaff. Bha e 'tarruing asda, 
he was chafing them. 

tarruing-dhealain, s. Electro-magnetism. 

tarruingeach, -eiche, a. Drawing, that draws. 2 
Alluring, attractive. 


- 


Moa iiie dro di qi Beien. e me S 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE . 


936 


4 Haul, pull along. 5 
6. Extract, 






The ends 





tarthail 


tarruingeachd, s.f. Tractability. 

tarruingeach-dealain, a. Electro-magnetic. 

tarruingeadair, -ean, s.m. Artist. 

tarruing-gun-taing, s.f. Heath-rush—Colonsay. 

tarruing mhor,(MMeN) Main halyard, see bata, 
H4, p. 73. 

tarruingte, past pt. of tarruing. Drawn. 2 Pull- 
ed. 3 Huticed, 4 Extracted. 5 Distilled. ` 

tarruinz-uisge,(AH) s. Draw water (on an oar.) 
2 (DC) Draught of a boat or ship. 3(DC), Act 
of micturition. 

tarrunaich, see tarrangaich, 

tarrunn, see tarrang, 

taursainn,tf -e, a. see tarsuinn. | 

tarsananachd, see tarsuiuneachd, [& G2, p. 73. 

tarsann, s. Breast-hook of a boat, see bata, ES 

tarsannain, s.pl. Cross-bars of a plough. 

tarsannan, -ain,-an, s.m. Any beam extending 
across, cross-beam. 2 Transom of a boat. 3 
Cross-bar. 4**Diameter. 5 Spoke of a wheel. 
6 (MMcL) Rung of a ladder. 

tar-sgriobh,** v. Post. 

tarsnain, gen.sing. d' n.pl. of tarsnan. 

tar-snoilleir,** a. Transparent. 

tir--hoillseach, ** a. Transparent. 

tar-shoillsean,** em, Transparency. 

tar-sholus,** -uis, s.m. Trausparentness, 

Larsnan, -ain, see tarsannan, 

tarsnan-iomall, s.m. Tangent-spoke. 

tarspurlanaiche, (tarspullach) Fear-tarspurlan- 
aiche, a witling. 

tarsuing, -e, @ see tarsuinn. 

tarsuinn, -e, a. Transverse, that crosses. 2 O- 
blique, lateral. 3 Cross, perverse,ill-humoured. 

tarsuinn, adv. & prep. Across, transversely, o- 
bliquely. 2 Over, from side to side. Cuir t 
e, put it obliquely ; dhirich sinn am bruthach 
air ath., we ascended the hill obliquely. In 
some parts bruthach is fem. which would eive 
** dhìrich sinn a’ bhruaich air a t., or “air a 
fiaradh.'' 

tarsuinneach, s.f.ind.Transverseness, obliquity. 
2 Crossness, peevishness. 

d, s. f. Crossness, peevishness, {2 
Transverseness, obliquity. 

tarsuinnich, v.a. Cut. 2tfCross. 

tarsunnanachd, ‘s.f.ind. Species of poetry, lam- 
pooning, sarcastic language, satirizing.,  2* 
Bickering. 

Ttart prep.pron. (tar--thu) see tharta. 

tart, -airt, s.m. Thirst. 2 Drought, parchedness, 
want of rain. 3 (AH) Costiveness in cattle. 
Trid fearainn tairt, through. thirsty land; 
tha t. orm, 4 am thirsty. 

tartach, -aiche, a. Thirsty. 2 Causing thirst. 3 
Droughty, dry. 

ttartan,** -ain, s.m. Tartan. 2 Hillock. 3 Clod. 

t- ach,** a. Hilly. 2 Cloddy. 3 Of tartan. 

tartar, see tartmhor. 

tartar, -air, -an, s.m. Noise, any great swelling 
sound. 2 Clamour. 3 Hurry, bustie, confu- 
sion. 4* Noise of tramping. A th. mar thuinn 
a’ slachdadh sgeire, his noise like waves bufet- 
ing à rock. ] 

ach, -aiche,a. Noisy, making a great noise. 

2 Clamorous, voeiferous, loud, having a swell- 

ing sound. 3 Hurried, bustling, creating con- 

fusion, 4 Magnanimous, forward, 5* Noisy 

in stamping. Da 'm bu t. pìob, whose pipe 

sounded loudly. 

achd, see tartaraich. 

aich, s.f.ind. Nvisiness. 2 Noise of foot- 
steps, tramping. 3 Bustle, confusion. 4 For- 
wardness. 5 Magnanimity. 

tar-thabhairt,** s. Conveyancing. 

tar-thabhairtear,** s.m. Conveyancer. 

tarthail,** s.f. Help, assistance. 




















Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN* 


| 


L 


tar-thoir 
tar-thoir,** v. Alienate. 2 Convey. 
tar-thoirt,** s. Alienation, 2*Conveyance. 


tar-tholl,** s, & v. Countermine, conveyance. 

tartmhor, -oire, a. Thirsty. 2 Droughty, dry, 
parched. Ma bhios e t., if he be thirsty. 

achd, s.f.ind. Thirst. 2 Drought, parch- 
edness, droughtiness.  $*Great drought. 4* 
Dry or drouchty weather. 

itar-uinneag, An. see far-uinneag. 

tarung, see tarrang. 

tarunn, see tarrang. 

tas,** s.m. Cat-o'-nine tails, taws. 

tàsan,-ain,-an, s.m. Slow, tedious, plaintive 
discourse, plaintive harangue, whining ser- 
mon. 2 Person who speaks in a drawling man- 
ner. 3* Bickering, scolding, fretting, discon- 
tented person. 4ttWrangling, grumbling, dis- 
content. 5 Sloven, 6** Plaintive or tedious 
haranguer. 

-——ach, -aiche, a. Slow, tedious, 2 Plaintive. 
querulous, grumbling, discontented,] bicker- 
ing. 3 Slow or tedious in speaking, mono- 
tonous, 

———2achd, 3.f.ind. Habit of slow wrangliag, 
bickering, fretfulness, fretful disposition, 
fault-finding. 2 Slowness or tediousness in 
discourse, monotony. 3**Presbyterian cant. 

tàsanaich, see tasanachd. 

mec" s.f. Tedious wbiningtorator, tn ri- 

ule. 

tasart,** -airt, $.m. Reproach, rebuke, calum- 
ny. Foth., under reproach. 

tasd,(AF) s. Reindeer. 

tasdail,** s.f. Trial. 

tasdan, -ain, -an, s.m. Shilling. 2**Groat. 

ach, -aiche, a. Having many shillings. 

ftasg, -aisg, -an, s.m. Report, rumour, news, 
knowledge. 2 Character. 3 Gaelic spelling of 
task. Annantaisg, in store. 

tasg, -aisg, -an, s.m. Ghost, apparition—W. of 
Ross, Inverness-shire & Argyll.  [pl. tàisg in 
Gairloch.—DU.] 

tasg, -aisg, -an, s.m. Larva of insects. 

tàsgadh, (a’) pr pt. of taisg. 

tasgaidh,-e, -ean,s.f. Depository,thing laid by or 
pere store, treasure,hoard. 2 Treasurer. 

Laying y M of laying up. 4łtDarling. 5 
Hoarding eau. Tha, a thasgaidh ! yes, 
darling! A’ t—, pr.pt. of taisg. 

¢tasgail,** a. Renowned. 

tasgair,** s.m. One who assigns a job or task, 
taskmaster. 2**Slave. ) 

tasgal, -ail,s.m. Money offered for the discovery 
of cattle lifted by Highland freebooters. 
There have often been instances of vassals, 
and even clans, taking an oath on the dirk 
meyer to receive such money and to put to 
death every person that should receive it. 
They took this oath ina solemn manner over 
& drawn dirk which they kissed, saying, sel 
we break this our oath, may we perish by this 
weapon or any other.” 

tasgal,** -ail, s m. Great’ wave. 

tasgalachd,** s.f.ind. Rolling of the sea. 

tasgar,** -air, s.m. Cavalcade. 

| -thaigh,{t s.m. Storehouse. 

taslach, s.m. Supernatural premonition and 
ghost of living person—J GC., W. 

tasp,* s.m. Severe sarcasm. 

taspair(e),* -ean, 8.m. Satirist. 

taspannach,* -aiche, 8ee taspullach. 

taspullach, -aiche, a. Witty. 2 Sarcastic. 3 
Petulant. 

—d,** s.f. Wit, witticism. 2 Sarcasm. 

taspurladh,(MS) s.m. Invective, retort. 

#tast,** s.m. see tasd. 

tastar, for tartar—Reb Donn. 


- 











ee m ms vs ; rp 
3 | p = i l L 
UTERNET ARCHIVE 


937 


tathlan 


tatadh, (MS) s.m. Caress. 

tatag, -aig, -an, s.f. Clash. 

tàtag,(MMeL) s.f. Stab. Also used metaphori- 
cally, as, thug e t. dha, he gave him a stab 
(in speech.) 

tataidh,* v.a. see tàlaidh. 2(MS) Account. 

tatar, W. of Ross for tartar. 

tàth, s.m. Rebate in joinery. 2 Pitch. 3 Ce. 
ment. 4 Strength. Leann tàth, pith ; duine 
gun t., a man devoid of energy and spirit. 

tàth, pr.pt. a’ tàthadh,v.a. Cement, join togeth- 
er, glue, solder, weld. 

Ttath, s.m. Lord. 2 Ruler. 3 Anger. 

tath,(AF) s.m. Unpressed cheese made of sour 
milk curds. 

tath,** s,m. Slaughter. 2 Bail, security. 

tathabal,(AH) a. In possession of one’s fAcul- 
ties, of sound mind. Am bheil e t. ? is he all 
there ? tha e t. gu leòir, he is sane enough. 

tathach,°-aiche, a. Cementing, that cements or 
solders, having the quality of soldering. 

tathach, -aich, s. m. Guest, Visitor, stranger. 
Bu tric tathaich o Thuath, visitors from the 
North were frequent ; m' aoidheachd ag iarr- 
aidh tathaich, my hospitality in quest of o 


guest. 

ttathad, for tha iad, (they are.) 

tàthadair,** s.m. Cementer. 2ttAdjunctéve. 

tàthadh, -aidh, s.m. Joining, cementing, act of 
joining or soldering. 2 Welding. 3 Leading. 
4 Splicing, in joinery. 5* Joint, seam. A’ t—, 
pr.pt. of tàth. 

tathag, s.f. Small in-field —Gairloch. 

tathaich, -e, $./, Frequenting, act of frequent- 
ing or often visiting. 2 Resort. 3 Craving. 4 
**Claim. 5 Investing. 6 Tendency to vomit 
or come back again. 7 Inclination to nausea 
which follows en intoxication, 8 (MMcL) s.f. 
& s.m. Ghost, apparition. 9 see tighich. A’ 
t—, pr.pt. of tathaich. T. na daoraich, cravers 
of intoxication—Dain I. Ghobha. 

tathaich,(DC) s.m. Supernatural knowledge of 
the absent. 

—— ——, gen.sing. & n.pl. of tathach. 

, pr.pt. a’ tathaich,v.a. Visit often,resort 
to. 2**Claim. 3 Dun. 4 Invest. 5 Crave, 
exact. 6 Profit, Istricath.thu i, often did 
you resort to her ; a’ t. bhailtean, visiting cities. 

e, -an, s.m. One who visits often, 2 Ac- 
quaintance. 3 Guest. 

—— ——each, -eiche, a. Conversant, acquainted 
with, frequently visiting. 

——— —eadh, -eidh, s.m. Frequently visiting. 
2 Craving. 

—  ———ear,** s.m. Craver. 2 Dun. 

tataidh,f pr.pt. a’ tatadh, v.a. Attract, attach 
to one’s self. 

tàthaidh, fut.af.a. of tàth. 

SES? s.m.Cementer, joiner. 2 Sluggish fel- 
ow. 

tathan, -ain, s.m. Hyphen (-). 

tatbasg,(MS) s.f. Shade, spirit. Is dlùth t. na 
màthar d' a dìlleachdain, near is the mother’s 
spirit to her orphans. There was a beautiful 
idea among the Gael that orphan children are 
specially protected by the spirit of their de- 
parted mother, and many of the most pathetic 
Gaelic lullabies are said to haye been compo- 
sed by such spirits while watching over some 
little cot or cradle. 2(MS) Demon. 

tath-bheum, -bhéim, -annan, s.m. Mortal blow. 
2 Casting of darts or stones from the crann- 
tabhuill. 

tath-bhuille, s.m. Mortal blow. 

ttathfann, -ainn, s, m. see tabhunn, » 

tathlach, see talach. : 

tathlan,** -ain, $.0m. Reproach, 3 ^ 


tathta 


938 


teagamhachd " 


ee 
tàthta, past pt. of tàth. Soldered, cemented,join- | teachdaireach, -eiche, a. Of, or belonging to, & 


ed. [tàthte.] 

tàth-thaois, s.f. Putty. 

tathuich, see tathaich. 

tathuinn, see tathainn. 

tathunn, see tabhann. 

———ach, -aiche, a. Latrant. 

———aich, see tabhannaich. 

————aiche, see tabhannaiche, 

té, s.f.ind. Woman, female one. 2 Used of any 
object or thing of the feminine gender. An 
té seo, this one—said of any object of the fem- 
inine gender ; an té a b’ òige, the youngest wo- 


ma 

tte, sA teth. 

tè, a. Insipid, slightly fermented. When fish, 
milk, preserves, &c. take the bitter or sharp 

, taste caused by fermentation, they are said 
to be té. 

tè, (CR) a. Thick, as soup, gruel, &c—Arran. 

ttea, see teth. 

‘teab, s. Flippant person’s mouth. 

‘teabad, ad. s.m. Stammerer. 2ffAccident. 3 
*Stammer. 

teabadach, -aiche, a. Stammering. 2 Accidental. 

teabadaich, a. Lisping, faltering. 2 j[Hesita- 
tion, delay. 

-—, $.f. Demur. 

teabaid,t s.f. Taunt, repartee. 

teabais,* s.f. Flippancy of speech. 

»— ——-each,* -eiche, a. Flippant. 

teabanta,* -ainte, a. Carping, captious, 

chd,* s.f. Captiousness, flippancy of 
speech, captious notice, 21IHabit of carping. 

teabarsnaich, -e, see teabadaich. 

teabh,** s. Quid of tobacco. 

teabhach,** -aiche, o Renowned, brave. Gu 
t., bravely. 

d,** s,f. Fame, glory, exploit. 2 Brav- 
ery. Can anns an dan ant, sing their bravery 
ín song. 

teabhachd, see tàbhachd. 

teacair, see teachdair. 

teach,s.m.ind.House, dwelling-place, also taigh. 
'Nat. diamhair, in her lonely dwelling. 

teach, pr.pt. see teachd. 2(CR) s.m. Pass,event, 
issue, oceurence. Cha d' thàinig e teach, it 
did not come to pass; tighinn gu teach, happen- 
ing ; thainig e fo theach,it came to pass—Lewis 
& W. of Ross, but, thàinig e mun teach, in 
Arran & Perthshire. 

teachd, s.m.ind. Accession. 2 Arrival, coming, 
act of coming, approach, approaching. A’ t—, 
pr.pt. of thig. Air dha t., he having arrived ; 
t. mu’n cuairt na bliadhna, expiration of the 
year; air t., come; a’ t., coming ; tha ’n rain- 
each uaine air t. thairis oirre, the green fern 
has grown over her. 

teachd,(DU) v.a. Dry up. Th. mileis a phath- 
adh, I dried up with thirst. 

teachd, v.n. Fit in to, have space or room for. 
Cha t. e ’n seo, it has not suficient room here; 
an t. mi ann ? can it contain me? an t. e 'san 
leapa P has he room inthe bed? an t. e anng 
an t-scómar seo P can this room contain it ? 

teach |, a. Legal, lawful, right, just. 2 Belong- 
ing to. StTliiting. 

téachd,tt s.f. Silly boasting. 

beachdadh,** -aidh, s.m. Closing. 

teachdaiche,** s.m. Customer. 

teachdail, -e, a. Future, in grammar. 

teachdair(e), -ean, s.m. Messenger, courier, am- 
bassador, anyone bearing, or that is sent, or 
that comes with a message, envoy, delegate, 
missionary. 2 Despatch, intelligence, news. 
Bhuail t. a’ bhais thu, death’s messenger has 
struck you ; t,-coise, foot messenger. 











Di 


L ege: fe eh H. fe rege kx m s F 
à BEIL d LA kj 
dIERNET ARCHIV 


messenger, courier, or ambassador. 
a messenger, courier, or ambassador. 

-— ———eachd, s.f.ind. Message, embassy, lega- 
tion. 2 Tidings, news, intelligence. 3 Com- 
mission, errand, deputation, Air th., on an 
embassy ; t. à chuir móran gu truaighe, infor- 
mation that caused, sorrow to many. 

-litrichean, s.m. Letter-carrier, | 

teachd-a-mach,s.m.ind. Product,increase. 2 Ex- 
penditure. 3 Coming out, egress. 

teachd-a-staigh, see teachd-a-steach. 

teachd-a-steach,** s. m. Income, revenue. 2 
Coming in. 

teachd-an-tìr, s.m.ind. Subsistence,livelihood a 
Diet. 3 Food. Gun t. gun bhiadh, without 
diet or food ; a theachd-an-tir, Ais food. ; 

teachd-fodha,(DM K) s.m. Water oozing through 
the wall of a house at the foundation in web 
weather—W. coast of Ross. [tighinn-fodha in 
Argyll.) 

teachmhail,** ert Affliction, sickness. 

tead, see teud. 

teadalach, -aiche, a. Slow, inactive, dilatory. 2 
Sickly. SE 

--————-d, s.f.ind. Slowness, inactivity, dila- 
toriness. 2 Sickliness. 

teadaltas, -ais, s.m. see teadalachd. 

teadarnach,** o, Revengeful. 

teadh, a. High-tasted. 

teadhair, -dhrach, -dhraichean, s.f. Tether. 2 
trRope. 3(DMK) Rope stretched across the 
kitchen having the ends attached to the cou- 
ple, and used for hanging articles of clothing 
on to dry, also asa repository for such articles 
—Caithness & Suth'd. 4**Cart-rope, Dhean- 
adh e t. de roinnean, he would make a tether 
with a hair. | 

teadhair, v.c see teadhraich. 

teadh-bhais,** œ. Phantasm, see taibhs. 

teadharadh, s. m. Drawing out, spinning out. 
A’ t—, pr.pt. of teadhair. Tha e a’ t. na side, 
he is spinming out the time. 

teadhrachadh, -aidh, s.m. Tethering,act of teth- 
ering or confining by a tether. A’ t—, pr, pt. 
of teadhraich. 

teadhraich, pr.pt. 2’ teadhrachadh, v.a-Tether, 
confine by atether,, tie. 

teadhraichean, m.pl. of teadhair.. 

teadhraichte, past pt. of teadhraich. Tethered. 

teadhran,(DC) s.m. Royal stag. This word was 
used by a forester who had spent his life in 
the Blackmount. 

teagail,** s.f. House, habitation. 

teagair, pr. pt. a’ teagar, [a’ teagaradh — W. of 
Ross,] v.a. Collect, provide, furnish, supply. 2 
Thatch, cover. 3 Shelter, protect. 4 Econo- 
mise, gather milk for butter by stiuting the 
aliowance of the family.. 

teagaisg, pr.pt. a’ teagasg, v.a. Teach, instruct, 
educate by lecturing, teach by precepts. 

, gen.sing. of teagasg. 

each,** a. Didactic, instructive, 

ear, fut.pass. of teagaisg. 

——te, past pt. of teagaisg. Taught, lec. 
tured. 

teagaisgteach, -eiche, a. Docile, teachable. 

teagamh, -aimh, -an, s.m. Doubt, uncertainty, 
hesitation. 2 Suspense, perplexity. 3 Doubt- 
ful case. 4 Difficulty. Fear-réitich gach 
teagaimh, the solver of al! difficulties ; th., per- 
haps ; gua t., without doubt ; au t., in doubt. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Doubtful.. 2 Doubting, 
3 Uncertain. 4 Causing a doubt.  5.In sus- 

ense. 6 Suspicious, distrustful, sceptical. 7 

* Perplexed. 

— — —achd, $.f. Contingentness, doubtfulnesa, 


2 Like 











Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS-AT 


ry E NM A Ted AAT P LESA 
LI CA Lj H, i d | D KÉ H 3 i K Fr EI | k a 








teagamhachd 939 teanachdadh 
doubt, uncertainty. 2 Scepticism. ing—W. of Ross. Tha’n crodh air an t., the 
teagamhaich, v.a. Mistrust. cows go out before being milked ; sguir iad de 
teagamhaiche,** s.m. Doubter, sceptic. 'n t., they have ceased to go out before being 
—, comp. of teagamhach. milked. 2 (DMK) Morning milking-time, [also 
teagar, Air, s.m. Provision. 2**Purchase. 3**| tràth teairt.] Tha tim teairt ann, it is time 


Warmth. A’ t—, pr.pt. of teagair. 
teayarach, -aich, s.m. Purchase. 
—, -aiche, a. Warm, snug. : 
teagasg, -aisg, s.m. Teaching, instruction, act 
of teaching, instructing. 2 Doctrine.  8* 
Teaching by lectures, lecturing. 5 Preaching, 
text. 4** Druidism, sorcery. A’ t—, pr. pt. 
of teagaisg. Le gach uile ghaoth teagaisg, 
with every wind of doctrine ; fear-teagaisg (pl. 
luchd-teagaisg), @ lecturer. 
tea ach,** o Admonitory, instructive, 
teagasgachd, $.f. Instructiveness. f 
teagasgail,** a, Admonitory. 2 Doctrinal, 
teagasgair, -ean, s. m. Teacher, admonisher, 


preacher. 
| ** $,find. Employment of a 
teacher. TR 
fteagasg-drüidbeachd, e.m. Sorcery, druidism, 
(teagh, see taigh, 
———as,** -aas, gan. Small room, closet, 
teaghlach, -aich, -aichean, s.m. Family, bouse- 
hold, house in g . 2tf House, dwell- 
ing. 3** Clan, tribe, race, progeny. Uile 
theaghlaichean na talmhainn, all the Jamilies 
of the earth. ) ^ 
teaghlachail, e, a. Of, or belonging to a family, 
domestic. i 
teap hiachan,** -ain, s.m. Domestic. 
teaglach,* -aiche, a. see teagamhach, 
d,* s.f. see vi mmi 
teagmhach, -aiche, a. Conditional in grammar. 
g** al. 3**Ambiguous. 
—— ——— d, **s f. Ambiguity, 2 Apocryphalness, 
teagmhaiche, s.m. Boggler. 2 Sceptic. 
teagmhail, -e, -can, s.f. Occurrence, recounter, 
contingency. 2 Meddling, interference, ex- 
pao». 8 Strife, battle. 4 Revenge, re- 
thution. 5 Pall, 0**Mecting. 
fteaoxrhaileaoh, a. Contentious, striving, con- 
tending. 
haileachd,** s.f. Stale of being liable to 
nee'or aceident. 
is, -e, -ean, s.f. Accident, guess, ven- 
ture, anything done at venture or random. 2 
i , $'*Fall. 

,** a. Adventurous, accidental, 
at a venture, at random, liable to chance or 
accident. 

dh, s.m. Meddling. Air chumha gun 

ghné th., without any kind of meddling—R.21, 

teagmhas, see teagmhais. 

———air, s.m. Adventurer. 

teagmhuil, see teagmhail. 

teagmhus, see teagmhais. d 

teagnach,** -aiche, a. Using force or violence. 
2 Making an exertion. 3 Difficult. 

teagnadh, -aidh, -ean, s.m. Squeezing of any- 
thing through another. 2**Acquest.  3** 
Striving. ¢**Forcing. 5 Violent exertion. 6 
Tene-mus, applied particularly toa hen, and 
sometimes to persons. [* says properly teag- 
mhail 








KE -aidh, s,m. Providing, act of provid- 
ing, colleeting. 2 Acquisition. 3 Defending, 
aet of defendiug. 4 Gathering of milk econo- 
mically. 6 Milk or butter so gathered, A’ 
t., pr.pt. of teagair. i 

teagradh, 8rd. p. sing. & pl. imp. of teagair. 

teagraidh, fut.aff.a. of teagair. 

teazgram, lst.sing.imp. of teagair. 

teaguisg, see teagaisg. e 

teairt,(CB) et Grazing before morning milk. 


rr Brno OO ore 
i ee) in L4 KEE 
ITERNET ARCHIVE 


d 


to take the cows in to wt/k them—about 11 Am 
in summer— Northern Counties. 

tealbh,(AC) s.m. Corn. Gach tàn is tealbh, all 
flocks and corn. 

teall,t s.m. Sudden attack. 

ttealla, s.m. The earth. 

teallach, -aich, -aichean, 8.1n.Hearth, fire-place, 
2 Smith's forge. 3**Anvil. 4**Furnace. Leac 
an teallaich, the hearth-stone ; clach ceann an 
teallaich, is the large flag which stands be- 
hind a fire in Highland cottages ; de Maith 
theallaich,of the ashes of a furnace;air cruaidh 
th., on a hærl anvil. |s.f. in Poolewe—WC, ] 

teallachag, -aig, -an, $.f. Concubine, 2**Mas- 
ter’s favourite servant maid. 

EL e 5 2f. Dude e: bunc 

, -8, -ean, 8f. or bunchy woman, 

2** Drab. d 

teallaideach,** a. Drabbish, sluttish. 


‘teallrach,** a. Profuse. 


teallsan,** -ain, s.m. Philosophy, erudition, 2 
Philosopher, learned man. 

tealisanzch,* -aich, ssm., Sceptic. 2 Philosopher, 
sage, learned man. 3 Astronomer—Séàr-Obaár. 
Ch&'n 'eil cràbhach, t., no sagart ann, there i$ 
neither hypocrite, philosopher nor priest (in it) 

e. 

—— —— -—àil,** a. Philosophical, erudite. 

—— ——-—4d,* s. f. Seepticism. 2 Philosophy, 
erudition, 

ee -ean, 8. m. Learned man, philoso- 
pher. 

tealrachd,** s.f.ind. Profusion, extravagance. 

tealtachd,** s.f.ind. Simplicity. 

tealtaidh, a. Silly, cowardly. 

téamhaehd, s,f. Pleasantness, delightfulness, 
quietness. 

teamlaidh, -e,@ Pleasant, agreeable, delight- 
ful, quiet, 

teamhair, -e, a. see téamhaidh. 

—— ———, s.f. Time, season, in season— Suth'd d 
N. Coast. 2**Covered or shaded walk on à 
hill, Teamhair fhuar, cold weather. 

eachd, see teamhachd. 

teamhall,* -aill, s.m. Slight swoon or stun. 

teamharra,* æ. Pertly eloquent, eloquent and 
flippant, as a young person. 

teamhra,(MS) s.m. Hall. 

teamhrachail,(MS) a. Palatial. 

teamhrachd,* s.f. Flippancy, impertinent prat- 
tle of a young person. 

teampull, -uill, s.m. Temple, church. 

-— — ——ach, -aich, s.m. Church-officer, church- 
man, templar. 

——— ———-Ach, -aiche, à. Of, or belonging to, a 
temple or church. 2 Like a temple or church. 

teanacadh, s.m. Deliverance, succour. 

beanacaiste, see teanacas. 

teanacas,* s. Healing, remedy, mercy, deliver- ` 
ance, salvation, saying power, coming to one’s 
assistance— W. Isles—Dain I. Ghobha. 2 De- 
fence. Cd is urrainn t. ? who can be a defence 2 

teamachair, see teanchair. 'S gu'm faigh iad gu 
bunailteach ri t. gharg an leomhainn—Filidh. 
p. 68 ; t. a’ ghobhainn, smith’s tongs. 

teanachd,* v. a. Save, avert, ward away. T. 
gorta, avert famine; t. dosgainn, ward away 
misfortune from cattle, protect from danger, 
distress or difficulty. 

teanachdadh, -aidh, s.m. Saving, act of saving, 
protecting or recovering from instant peril. 
A’ t—, pr.pt. of teanachd, 





DS 


3N 2 


"WEE, Aë, mm ép e 


Léen eet hg 


—— e 


teanachdas 


940 


teannaich TOES 


eet 


teanachdas, see teanacas. 
teanachdsa,* -ais, see teanacag, 
teanacsa,(AC) see teanacas. 
teanacsadh, see teannacag. 
teanail, v. see tionail. 
teanal, s. see tional. 
teanalach, see tionalach. 
teanaladh,** s.m. Treasuring. 
teanalaiche, see tionalaiche. 
teancas, see teanacas. 
teanchair, -ean, s.m. Pincers, tongs. 
vice or tongs. 


2 Smith’s 


teanga, gen. & dat. teangaidh, pl. -n & -nnan, 


s.f. Tongue, 2 Speech, dialect. 3* Hold of a 
buckle. 4(AC)Oratory. T. Chaluim Chille, the 
oratory of St. Columba ; bun na teangaidh, the 
voot of the tongue; barr na teangaidh, the 
tip or the tongue. A 

teangach, -aiehe, a. Loquacious. 2 Speaking 
many languages. 3 Langued, in heraldry. 4 
“H arug many tongues. Gu t., loguacteusly. 

teangachd, see teangaireachd. 

teang’-a’ ehoin,f s.f. Hound’s tongue (plant)— 


cynoglossum officinae. 


L 


661. Teænga-mkàn. 





660. Teang’-a’-chotn. 
teangadh, -aidh, pl. -aidh, -aidhean & teangan, 
nan, s.f. see teanga. 
teangaiche, -an, s.m. Linguist. 
teangaidh, -e, -ean, s.f. see teanga. 
teangair, -ean, s.m. Linguist. 2 Interpreter. 3 
Orator. 4 Philologist. 5(WC) Smith’s tongs. 
—eachd, s.f.ind. Office of a linguist. 2 
Interpreting,iaterpretation,skill in languages. 
8 Philology. 4 Oratory. 5 Loquaciousness. 


- 








teanga-mhin,$ s.f. White dead-nettle,archangel. 
—iamium album. 2$ White goose-foob, see 


Di gitizea E 


L e fen Eh H. U UE A m s 1- 

T | 5 1 i e Li 
, -H (lk ru ES KI Ka 
A = EU - NK 


praiseach fhiadhain. 

teangan,** s.m. Tongue. 2 Language. 

teanga-na-nathrach,§ s.f.Adder’s tongue fern— 
ophiglossum vulgatum. 

teang’-an-fhéidh, s.f. Hart’s-tongue fern, burnt 
weed, Christa hair—scolopendrium vulgare, 
[illust. under creamh-na-muice-fiathaich.] 

teangas,** -ais, s.m. Pair of pincers. 

teann, teinne, a. Strait, tense, tight. 2 Rigid, ` 
stiff, firm. 3 Fixed, firmly fixed. 4 Closely 
packed. 5(t. air) Near to. 6 Narrow,miserly, 
7 Eager, keen. 8 In straitened circumstan- 
ces. 9 Pumped tight, 10**Strict.  11**Be. 
sieged. 12* Severe. Tha ’n t-sreang t., the 
string is tight ;t. air mios, meariy a month ; 
duine t., @ severe person ; sheas ainnir teann 
air, & virgin stood near him; gu t., tightly, 
straitiy, closely, stifly, miserly, SRI: 

teann, pr.pt. a’ nadh, v.a, & n. Move, stir, 
proceed, go, approach, come. 2 Fall to, begin. 
3 Approximate. 4**Tighten, straiten. 5**Pross 
together. 6 see teannaich, T. asa sin,away 
with you; th. iad ri falbh, they began to move 
of ; t. as mo rathad, get out of my way ; t. a 
nies, come hither ; teannaibh r’ a chéile, sit 
close ; th. iad ri treabhadh, they commenced 
ploughing ; th. i ri lasadh a’ i v ie she 
proceeded to light the lamp ; th. i an lomradb, 
she pressed the fleece together. 7 
t. a bhos, come near. 
t. a mach, turn out. 
t. a nall, come bither. 
t. a nunn, get away from me, go over hither, 
t. ris, begin it. 
t. suas, go up, proceed westward. 
t. uam, get from me. 

teann ! teann ! int, Held ! hold ! 

teanna,** s.m. Enougn, sufficiency. 2 Abound- 
ing. 8 Surfeit. Tha mo th. agam, J have 
enough ; is mairg a raehadh air bhannaig is & 
th. aige fhéin, it is pitiful to ask when one has 
enough of his own. [ieannan in Poolewe—Ol 
do theannan, drink your All—WC.] 

teann-abaich, ’S e 'm fadar tioram teann-ab- 
aich air chül an asgairt ghreannaich, it is the 
hard, dry powder belew ihe rough tow— Beinn 
Doran. 

teannacas, see teannachadh. 


‘teannach,** -aieh, s.m. Guiltless persen. 


teannachadh, -aidh, 6. m. Straitening, act of 
Straitening. 2 Squeezing, act of squeezing or 
crushing. 3 Oppressing, act of oppressing. 4 
Clasp nz, aet of clasping or embracing. 5 Be- 
sieging, act of besieging, siege. 6 Strait, diffi- 
culty. 7 Energy, force. 8 Serewing. 9 Con- 
stipation. 10 Tightening by pumping into. 11 
Crowding, act of crowding.  12ff Rescuing. 
13**pinding. 14**Tightening. A’ t—,pr. pt. 
of teaunaich, [tt gives teannachdadh. | 

teannachail,ff -e, a. Constringent, 


teannachair,** -ean, s. m. Binder. 2 Pair of 
pincers. 3 Tongs, 4 Vice. 

teannachan,** ain, s.m. Press, 2 Pair of pin- 
cers. 3 Vice. 


teannachdadh,fl see teannachadh. 

teanna:ach, -aiche, œ. Ricketty. 

teannadair,( MS) s.m. Girder. 

teannadan, -ain, s.m. Bracer, brace. 

teannadh, -aidh, s.m. Moving, act of moving, 
stiiring, going or coming. 2 lightening, strait- 
ening, pressing. 3 Stifness, rigidity, 4 
Proceeding towards anything. 5 Sufficiency, 
Es see teannachadh. A’ t—, pr.pi. of 

eanu. 


662, Teanga-na nathrach. | teannaich, pr.pt. a’ teannachadh, v.a. Straiten, 


tighten, 


2 Squeeze, crush. 8 Crowd, crowd 
together. 


4 Oppress, besiege, 6 Tighten by 


Original from 


UNIVERS 
ne ew I | 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


(CITY! FXE UT IRSA AT 
all Ul ILLINOIS Al 


mg 


] 
EL. 
+ 


teannaich 
umping, 6 Clasp, embrace. 7 Bind, clench. 
**Afflict. 9**Grasp. 10**Confine. Th. iad 


e, 
cheumanna, thy steps shall not be straitenzd. 
= te, past pt. of teannaich. Straitened. 
tightened. 2 Squeezed. 3 Crowded together. 

4 Oppressed. 5 Besieged. 
Adacted. 
teannaidh,** æ. Astringent. 


, teannair, -ean, s.m. S yueezer, any instrument 
to squeeze with. 2 Air-pump. 3 The noise of 


the sea in a cave. 


4**']'ightener, oppressor. 
teannal,(AC) s.m. Keeping, protection. 


Biodh 


a shìth air do th. féin, be its peace in thine 


own keeping. 

teanuan, Poolewe for teanna. 

teannas, -ais, s.m, Austerity. 

teannasach, -aiche, a. Austere, severo, 2 Alu- 
minous, 

teannath, see teanna & teann-shath, 

teann-bhreitheach, -eiche, a. Critical. 

teannchair, see teanchair. 

teanndach, -aiche, a. Pressing, that presses. 2 
Oppressive. 3 Afflictive. 4 (MS) Astrictive. 

teanndachadh, see teannachadh. 

teanndachan, -ain, s.m. Woman's stays. 

teanndachd, see teanntachd. 

teanndaich, see teannaich. 

—te, see teannaichte. 

teann-dheoch,ff er Fill-draught, large drink. 





teann-dhruid,** v.n, Grasp, clench, hold fast. 2 


Confine closely. 3 Besiege. 

teann-fhàisg,"* v.a, Squeeze hard, wring. 

teann-fhàsgadh, -aidh, -ean, s.m. Hard squeeze, 
hard wringing. 

teann-ghlac, v.a. Clench, grasp, hold fast, 

teann-ghlacach,** a. Grasping firmly. 

teann-ghlacadh,** -aidh, s.m. Grasping firmly. 
2 Powerfu! grasp. 

teann-ghlacta, past pt. of teann-ghlac. 

teann-ghreim, s.m. Grasp. 

teann-làmh,** -laimh, em, Tinder-box. 2 (MM) 
Hard fist, 3 Fire, 

teann-làmhach, -aiche, o Hard-fisted, 

teannradh,"* -aidh,s.m.Showing,manifestation, 
2 Discovery. 

teann-ri-teann, (AH) At close quarters, engaged 
in'hand-to-hand struggle. An uair a thainig 
a’ chuis teann-ri-teann,when the affair assum- 
ed a serious aspect. 

teann-shàih, -àith, s.m. Full meal, great abun- 


dance. 2 Impregnation. 3**Sufficiency. Òl- 
aidh mi mo th., J wiil drink my fill ; tha a th. 
aige, he has "ue enough. also teanna-shath. 

teann-shuil,(AF’) s. Insect. 

teannta, a. & past pt. Joined together, close, 
compact, tight, pressed together, 

teauntach, see teanndach. 

teanntach, see teannasach. 

teanntachail, a. see teanntach. 

teanntachd, s.f.ind. Strait, difficulty. 2 Adver- 
sity, trouble, distress. 31i Oppression, hard- 
ship. 4{fFrost. 5{tConsttpation. 6 Scanti- 
ness. An àm t., in time of trouble. 

teanataich, see teannaich. 

teanntaichte, see teannaichte. 

teanntalachd, s.f.ind. Stickiness. 

teanntan, -ain, -ain, sm, Press, squeezer, wine- 
pres». 2]fBruising. 

tearaith,** -aidh, s.m. Contention. 

tearainn, see teiriun. 

tearb,pr.pt. a’ tearbadh,v.a. 
part, divide. 2 Wean. 

tearb,** s.m. see tearbadh. 

tearbach,** @. Divisible, separable. 
divide or separate. 

d,** s,7. Divisibleness. 


Separate,as cattle, 





941 


they Rbesieged it ; cha teannaichear do 


6 Clasped. 7 


9 Apt to 


teàrradh 


tearbadh, -aidh, s.m. Separating, act of separa 
ting, dividing or parting. 2 Division, separa, 
tion. 3 Weaning. A’ t—, pr. pt. of tearb. 
Ghabh mi t. o 'n treud sin, I separated from 
that flock. 

tearbaidh, see tearb. Thearbaidh e na h-uain, 
he separated the lambs. 

tearbaidhte,(MS) æ. Loose, separate. 

tearbain, see tearb. 

tearbhadh, see tearbadh. 

tearbta, past pt. of tearb. Separated. 2 Weaned. 

ttearc,** 8.m. Cow. see earc. 

tearc, teirce, a. Rare, unusual, scarce, few. 21f 
Bare. Bu th, a ràite, few were his words E 
cha t. sinn mar laoich na Féinne, we are not 
few like the heroes of the Fiann. 

tearcachd, s.f. Rareness, scarceness, fewness, 

tearcad -aid, 8. m. see teircead. 

tearcadh,** -aidh, em Fewness, scarceness. 

tearc-eun, -edin, &.m. Phoenix (lit. a rare bird. — 
rara avis.) 

tearm, s.m. Noise made by trampling. 

tearmad, see téarmann. 

tearmadair, see tearnadair. 

tearmaid,(MS) v.a. Bescreen. 

tèarmainn, v.g. Protect, defend, bescreen. 

téarmainnte,tt a. Protecting. 

téarmann,-ainn, s.m.Protection,refuge,defence, 
safety. 2 Sanctuary. 3 Patron. Mo th, thu, 
thou art my refuge ; thoir t., defend, protect $ 
a’ chion t., for want of protection. 

ftearmann, -ainn, s.m. Limit, boundary. 

téarmannach, -aiche, a. Protecting, defendable, 
2 Belonging to a sanctuary. 

téarmannachd, see téarmann. 

téarmannaich, v.a. Protect, defend, 

téarmannaichte, past pt. of téarmannaich. 

téarmannair, ean, s.m. Protector, defender. 9 
Defendant. 3 Patron, 

———— eachd,** ert Protection. ' 

tearmasg, see tiormasg. 

tearinuid, -ean, $.f. see tèarmann, 

tèarmuinn, see téarmunnaich. 

téarmunn, see téarmann. 

tèarn, v.d. see téaruinn, 

téarnach,*" a. Condescending. 2 Descending, 
apt to descend. 3 see téaruinteach. 

tearnachd,** see tearuinteachd. 

tearnadair, s.m. Fender. 

tearnadair-o-theine, s.m. Fire-escape. 

tèarnadh, -aidh, s. m. Escaping, act of escaping 
or evading. 2 Rescuing, saving. 3 Descent, 
descending, coming or going down, sinking. 
4 Declension in gram. 5 Deliverance, protect- 
ion, safety. 6*Preserving. 7* After-birth. A’ 
t—, pr.pt. of téaruinn & teirinn. Cha b’ urr- 
ainn dhuit $., you could not escape ; Dia "ear 
t. ! may God protect us ! isionghnadh doth., 
thy deliverance is wonderful ; an curach a’ 
direadh ’s a’ t., the bark rising and sinking; bu 
t. dhuinn toiseach an t-sluaigh,our safety was 
at the head of the host—Filiah, p. 16. 

téarnar, fut.pass. of téaruinn. Shall be saved. 

téarnta, past pt. of téarn, 

tearr, -a, s.f. Tar, pitch. 

teàrr, pr.pt. a’ tearradh, oo Tar, run over, 
smear or mark with tar, as sheep, 

tearrach,** -aich, s.m. Crupper. 

tearrachd,"s.f.ind.Keen sarcasm, bitter remark. 

—aich,** v. Animadvert. j 
—ail, -e, a. Censorious, satirical, sarcas- 





tic. 

——air,** sm. Animadverter. 

tearradh, -aidh, s.m. Daubing, aet of daubing 
or marking with tar. 2 Tar. 3 Tar-mark on 
wool or sheep. 3 Pitching. A’ t—, pr. pt. of 
teàrr. [** gives tearradh, also gath-tearradh, 





tearradh 


awhitlow or felon.] 
tearraid, see earraid. 
each, see earraideach. 
eachd, see earraideachd (appx.) 
tearrain, v.n. Return. 
ftearran,** -ain, s.m. Anger, vexation. 
teart,(WC) see teairt. 
téaruinn, pr.pt. a’ téarnadh,v.a. & n, Escape, e- 
vade. 2 Rescue, save. 8 Protect, defend. 4 
Descend. 5**Preserve. 
ean, see tearuinn. 
téaruinte, a. & past pt. of téaruinn. Safe, say- 
ed, rescued. 2 Preserved, protected, secure, 
guarded. 3* Cautious, 
ach, -eiche, a. Secure. 2 Confident of 
security. 3 Saving. 4 Protecting, preserv- 


ing. 
—— achd, &.f.ind. Security, safety, sal- 
2* Precaution, caution. An t., in 











vation. 
security. 

téaruntachd, see tèaruinteachd. 

teas, s.m.ind. [ f. in Badenoch.] Heat, warmth. 
2 Superabundance, too much of the good 
things of life. T. an là, the heat of the day ; 
ruith air th., running to and fro, as cattle on 
a hot day ; bha teas an teine 'na luirgnean, 
the heat of the fire was in his shanks—said of 
one well off and who does not appreciate it. 
Mothers often use this phrase to their young- 
sters on à wet day or night when they don't 
value their home comforts, but go abroad to 
their own discomfort, 

fteas, s.m. Sound. 2 Message. 

teasach, -aich, -aichean, s.f. Fever, restlessness 
on account of heat, cattle running from ex- 
cessive heat. 2 Moult. 3 Warm water in milk. 


4 Early stage of fever—Arran. Àirde teas- 

aich, the height of a fever ; an t. bhuidhe, the 

yellow fever. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Heating, act of heating, 

2 State of becoming hot. A’ t—, pr. pt. of 

teasaich. 

-sgàrlaid,s.f. Scarlet fever.(With art.an.) 

teasaich, pr.pt. a’ teasachadh, v.a. & n. Heat, 
warm. 2 Become hot or warm. 3 Bake. [** 
says ‘‘ this verb is not much in use.’’] 

te, past pt. of teasaich, Heated,warmed, 

teasaizheachd,** $.f. Heat. 

teasair,** s.m. Messenger. 

teasairg, pr.pt. a’ teasairginn, v.a. Save, rescue, 
deliver, defend, protect, relieve, interpose for 
the purpose of rescuing. 

—each,** a. Saving, protecting, rescuing. 

-— — —inn, $. f. ind. Rescuing, act of rescuing, 
saving from danger, deliveranee, rescue relief, 
preservation, salyation, A’ t—, pr. pt. of teas- 
airg. Chum art, for our deliverance. 

teasairgte, past pt. of teasairg. Saved, rescued, 
delivered, safe. 

teasbhach, -aiche, a. Sultry, warm. 

—— — — —, -aich, s.m. Sultriness, warmth. 

teas-bhat,** s.m. Hot bath. 

-.— — ——ach, a. Abounding in, of, or belonging 

to, hot baths. 

teas-bhuala, s.f. Hot baths. 

teasd, t pr.pt. a’ teasd, v.n. Die, fail, expire, de- 
part. Th. e, he died. 

+teasd,** s.m. Report. 2 Witness, 

ail,** s.f. Want, defect. 

teasdaim, v. I help, assist. 

teasdam,(AC) v. I preserve, secure, keep. 

teas-ihailce,** s.f. Hot bath. 

teas-fheallsanach,** s.m. Chemist, 

d,** s.f. Chemistry. 

Tteasg,t v.a. Cut, wound. 2 Prune, lop off. Is 
iomadh ceann a theasgadh leis, many a head 
was cut of by him. 























D 


=== H. VU fe rege x m s rm 
ITERNET ARCHIVE 
= 1 L— i VS P Ll 


942 


teididh} 

tteasgach, -aiche, a. Piercing, cutting. 

teasgadh,** -aidh, s.m. Cutting down, 

Tteasgair, v, Cut. 2 Mangle, tear. 

teasgal, -ail, -an,s.m. Boisterous wind, storm. $ 
**Scorching blasting wind. 3 Wave. 

teas-ghaoth, -ghaoithe, -an, s.f. Parching wind 

teas-ghràdh, -ghràidh, s.m. Ardour. 2 Feryen 
love, ardeut atfection, i 

: --—ach, -aiche, o Ardent. 2 Cherish 

ing a fervent love,loving ardently or affection 


ately. 

teas-ghràdhaich,**v.a.Love ardently or tenderly 

te, past pt. Ardently loved. 

teas-ghuirean,** ein, s.m. Pimple. 

Tteasgon,** s, Moon. 

teas-is-f s.f. ** Hot and cold shivers.” 

teas-loisgeach, s.m. Fervid or burning heat. 

teas-mheidh,** s, Thermometer. 

teasraig, v.d. seo teasairg. 

————-inn, see teasairginn. 

————te, see teasairgte. 

teastail, see teasdail. 

teastas,** .ais, s.m. Report. 

teas-thoimhsear,(DM) s.m. Thermometer, ther- 
moscope. 

teas-thumait,** s.f. Hot bath. 

teasuidheachd, s.f. Heat, warmth,moderate heat, 

teath, see teth. 

teathair, see teadhair. 

teathar,** -air, s.m. Guiltless person. 

teathra,(AF) Raven, royston crow. 

Tteib, see theab. 

teibeid, s.f. Taunt, cut—Badenoch. see teabaid. 

teibid, -ean, s.m. Physician. 

teibideach, -eiche, a. Irresolute, halting,falling. 

téibh(MMcL) enn, s.m. Root of bent-grass, 
used in making cisein, &c. 

Tteibidh', pi. of teibid. 

Tteibidh,1I-e, a. Smart, cutting, pedantic. 

teic,* a. Due, lawful, legal. Cha t. na th’ ann, 
all there are, are too much ; cha t. dhuit, that 
is mere than is due or lawful ; an t. a h-aon, 
i$ not one more than enough ? bheir mise dhuit 
gus an abair thu '' cha teic,” I will give you 
tell you say “it is more than enough” ; cha 
teic fhad 's 'thug mim ùine cho stormt’, the 
lime I continued so dull was not iriting. A 
common Argyllshire phrase in the face of an 
evil is, *' cha teic olcas,” its ill is mot trifling 











N 
«4 


teic, s.m. Flier of spinning-wheel, see seic. 

teich, pr.pt. a’ teicheadh, v. n. Flee, scamper, 
run away. 2 Desert, as a soldier. 3**Retreat. 
4**Keep off or aside. O ghuth a’ bhuaireis 
theich na sluaigh,at the noise of the tumult tha 
peopl-s fled ; th. e, he fled ; deserted the army. 

teicheach,* o Fleeing, fleeting, 

teicheachd,** s.f. Running away, flight. 2 Re- 
treating. 3**Desertion, 4 Overthrow. 

teicheadh,-idh, s.m.Fleeing, act of fleeing flight, 
scampering, running away, taking to one’s 
heels. 2 Desertion. 3 Retreating, retreat, 
A’ t—, pr. pl. of teich. Cuir air t, put to 
flight. } 

teichmheach, -eiche, dg. Fleeting. T 

téid, fut. int.& neg. of irr.v. Rach or theirig. An 
téid thu maille rium ? wilt you go with me } 
nach téid thu mach ? will you not qo out ? 

teidheadh,(AC) v. (téideadh) Would go. Nach 
t. a’ bhliadhna liom (leam),that the year would 
not go well with me. [Lewis & lreland for 
rachadh.—M M] 

teidhm, -e, -ean, s.f. Death. : 

teidhian, (CR) Would go —SutA'd, Lewis & Ire- 
land for subj. of rach. 

teididh, -e, a. Wild, fierce, 

,* s.f. Wild fire. 





- 
Original from 


L| L| 
N LIe GEITA nf | a MF a AT 
i a = = y - i = | 
UNIVERS OF ILLINOIS d 


URBANA-CHAMPA|GhN 


| 


teidm 


teidm, 8. Pestilence. 

tteidm leanamnachu,l| s. Contagious or infect- 
ious disease. 

teigeil,(MS) a. Oozy. 

teighiollas, (AF) s.m. Salamander, 

+teil,** ert Fertile ground. 

teilbhein, see tairbhein. 

teile, s.f. Lime or linden-tree. 

teileach,** s.m. Lime or linden-tree, 
where lime-trees grow. 

,-eiche, a. Abounding in limes or lin- 


2 Place 





dens. 

teileag, -eig, -an, &.f. Little lime-tree. 2 Young 
lime-tree. 

.— ——Ach,** a. Abounding in little limes, 

teilg, e, -ean, s.f. Fishing-line, cast. 2 (AC) 
String of a lyre, harp or other string-instru- 
ment. 

teilg, see tilg. i 

teilgeach,-eiche,a.Furnished with a fishing-line. 

teilich,** v.a. Refuse, deny, conceal. 

teilig, see teilg. 

teiltin,(AC) s. Musical instrument, stringed in- 
strument.Gaehe form of Welsh,telyn,(a harp.) 

tein, see teillin, 
ilis,** of. House. 

teilleach, -aich, s.m. Blub-cheeked fellow, prov. 

E ,** .eiche, 2 Blub-cheeked. 

teilleag, s.f. see seillean, 

Mie Zi v. I will harp. 

teibean, E. Perthsh. & Lewis for seillean, 

teihn,** ¢.7. Dart, arrow. 

fteilm, s.f. Great terror. 

teim, -ean, see teum. 

eal,** s. Dross. 

teimh,** s. Death, curtain, cover, 

teimhe,** s. see teim. 

teimhealachd,**s.f. Darkness, gloom,obscurity, 

teimheil,** a, Dark, gloomy, obscure. 

tein’ -aighiz, s.m. Bonfire. 

$ein'-aorbhneis, s.m. Bonfire. 

&ein'-athair, sm. Lightning. t2**Thunderbolt, 
3™Fire-baH. 4**Any luminous meteor, 

fteind,} s. Sore. ie 

teindear,* s.m. Fire-grate. [*teindire.] 

teindreach,** eich, €, €. Watch-chain. 

teine, pl. teintean, e.m. [ f. in Colonsay.) Fire, 
flame. 2 Conflagration., Chunnacas t. a’ 
bhàis, the fame of death was seen ; taobh an 
teine, the fire-side ; cuir ri theine, set on fire ; 
teine math, a good fire.  [dat. teinidh.] i 

teine,§ s. m. Furze, see conasg. 2 Old Gaelic 
name of the letter T. Ms ; 

teineachan, -ain, -an, s.m.,dim. of teine, Small 


fire. 
hot. 


teineasach,** a. 
hasty. Y 
——d, &.f. Fieriness, impetuousness, has- 
tiness. 
terne-bhuth,** s, Fire-office. 
teine-braight,* see teine-drealisach. 
teine-braightseal,* see teine-creallsach. 
teino-chiarag,(AF) s.f. Cricket (insect.) 
teine-chrios,** s.m. Iron for striking fire from a 
ftint. [acfhuinn-theine— A rgyll.] 
teine-ereasadh,(AF) s. Ferret. ` 
. teine-dé, sm Erysipelas. 2 Ring-worm. 8 St. 
Anthony’s fire. 4* Herpes. 5 Tetter—JGC. 
W. 95. 6* see dearbadan-dé. 
teine-dealan,(AF) s.m. Salamander. 
teine-dhealan, see teine-ghealan. 
teine-dreallsach,* s. m. Wild fire, 
light from decayed wood or fish. 
teine-éibhinn, see tein'-aoibhneis. 
teine-óibhneis, see tein'-aoibhneis. 
tein’-éigin, s.m. Fire by friction, forced fire or 
fire of necessity. 





Fiery, 2 Impetuous, 





phosphoric 


Digitized by 


NTERNET ARCHIV 


[TI 
\ 


943 





teinne 


The tein'-éigin was considered an antidote 
against the plague and murrain and all infect- 
lous diseases among cattle. Dr. Martin says 
all the fires in the parish were extinguished 
and 81 married men, being deemed the pro- 
per number for effecting this purpose,took two 
planks of wood ani nine of them were employ- 
ed by turns, who by their repeated efforts, 
rubbed the planks against each other, till the 
heat thereof produced fire, and from this fore- 
ed fire each family was ned with a new 
fire, No sooner was the fire kindled than a 
pot filled with water was put thereon, which 
was afterwards sprinkled on people who had 
the plague,or on cattle that had the murrain, 
and this process was said to be followed inva- 
riably by success, —** 

A term applied to fire produced by friction— 
in olden times a means employed to check 
evils arising from being bewitched. If a 
household suffered loss sucht as indicated 
being under evil influence, all ftres in the 
district between two running streams were 
extinguished on a set day. Then a spinning- 
wheel was put in motion, and kept going fur- 
iously until the spindle became heated. Tin- 
der or tow was applied to the hot spindle, fire 
was thus procured and distributed to all 
households affected by evil influences. With- 
in the memory of persons still living, fire was 
thus procured to eheek witehcraft in a town- 
ship in Uist where some sickness, supposed to 
be evil eye, carried off some eows and sheep. 
It is odd that neither cow nor sheep died af- 
ter, possibly the epidemic had exhausted it- 
self.—DC. 

Last made in N. Uist about 1829, in Arran 
about 1820, in Helmsdale about 1818, and in 
Reay about 1830—AC. 

teine-zhealan, s. Phosphoric light emitted from 
putrid fish or decayed wood in the dark, 

teineil.** a. Fiery, hob. 2 Ardent, passionate. 
Ro th. an stri, very fierce in battle, 

teine-rabhaidh. s.m. Beacon. 

teine-sgeitheach,tf -eiche, a. Ignivomous. 

teine-shruthach,ff{ -aiche, a. Ignifluous. ` 

teine-sionnachain, s. m. Ignis-fatuus. 2 Phos- 
phorescence, luminous appearance on the sea, 
3 Will-o’-the-wisp, Jack-o’-lantern. 4 The 
rainbow-like brightness seen in spindrift on a 
clear sunny day. 5fiWhirlwind. 

teine-sithe,ff s.m. Wild fire. 

teine-thar, s.m. Cross-fire. 

teine-thionnachain, see teine-sionnachain. 

teinghidh, -ean, s.m. Meteor. 

teinidh, -e, «a. see teinntidh. 

, dat. of teine. 'Cur ri theinidh, setting 

on five—Arran, Mull, de, 

teinidh-dé, see teine-dealan & dearbadan-dé. 

teinis,** s.f. Gaelic form of tennis. 53 

-chuirt,** s.f. Gaelic form of tennis-court. 

teinn, -e, à. see tinn. 

teinn, -e, sf. Sickness. 2 Distress, misery, cal- 
amity, predicament, strait. 3 Perplexity, jeo- 
pardy. 4 Haste, hurry. 5** Tronble, difficul- 
ty, hardship. Nache bha 'na th. ! what a pre- 
dicament he was in ! an aimsir carraid agus 
teinne, in time of strife and disiress; t. mo 
chridhe, my heart’s grief ; ghlaodh iad 'nan 
t., they cried in their trouble. 

teinnbhealach,** a, Perverse, obstinate, contu. 
macious. 





teinn-chradh, s.m. Agony. 
teinndeachd,* s.f. see teinnteachd. 
teinne, s.f. Tension, rigidity, severity. 2 sea 


tinne. 
, comp, of teann. 


teinnead 


teinnead, -eid, s.f. Degree of lightness. 

teinnsineach,(MS) a. Hot. 

teinnteach, Ach, s.m. Lightning. 2 see teann- 
tachd. 

-—, a. Hot, fiery, fierce. 2**Inflamma- 

tory, combustible. 2**Impetuousness of tem- 

per. Mar àmhuinn theinntich, like a fiery 

Jurnace. 

—d, s,f. Fieriness, fierceness. 2**In- 
flammatoriness, combustibleness. 
tringency. 

teinntean, ein, s.m. Hearth, fire-place.  2** 
Forge. 3**Furnace. 4łłPeats laid out on the 
moss to dry. 5(CR) Fire-back, a stone plac- 
ed as à back to the fire on the hearth in the 
middle of the floor—W. of Ross. Leac; an 
teinntein, the hearth-/lag. [tt gives teintein 
as nom.] 

teinnteanach,** æ. Having a fireplace, forge or 
furnace. 2 Of, or belonging to a fireplace, 
forge, furnace or hearth. 

teinnteanach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to, a 
fireplace or hearth. 2 Having a fireplace or 
hearth, 

teinntein, see teinntean, 

teinntidh, a. Fiery, hot. 2 Inflammatory. 3 
Combustible. 4 Keen. 5 Hot-tempered, im- 
petuous. Mar chaoiribh t. o ’n chladach, like 
fiery gleams from the beach. 

.——— ———eachd, see teinnteachd. 

teinntineach,(MS) a. Hot. 

teinntreach, Ach, s.f. & coll. Flashesfof light- 
ning. 2 Sparks of fire. 

teinntreach,** o, Fiery, combustible, 2 Hot- 
tempered. 

tein’-oidhche, see tein’-athair, 

tein’-thara, s.m. Will-o’-the-wisp—Dain Iain 
Ghobha. 

teintidh,(AF) s. Dragon. 

teir, fut. of v. abair, see their. 

teirbeadh, see tearbadh. 

teirbeirt,** s.f. Bestowing, distributing. 2 Send- 
ing forth. 3 Scattering—W. of Ross. 4 In- 
erease, growth. Air th. teine nan neul, when 
clouds send forth their lightning. 

teirbheartaich,* v.a. Harass, weary. 2 Distri- 
bute.—Islay. 

wee te, past pt. Wearied, fatigued. 

teirbhein, see tairbhean. 

teirbheirt, pr.pt. a’ teirbheart, po. Harass, stir 
on, cause to move. Cha bhi coin ’gan teir- 
bheart ann, there shall be no dogs to stir them 
on— Dain I. Ghobha. 

teirbheirt,{f -e, -ean, s.f. Fatigue. 

——each, a. Fatigued. 2 Causing fatigue. 

teirbheirteachadh, -aidh, s.m. Fatiguing, act of 
fatiguing. A’ t—, pr.pt. of teirbheartaich. À 

teirc, Cha teirciad-san nach dearc air sin, not 
few are they who will not gaze on that. 

teirc, a. see tearc. 

teirce, s.f.ind. Fewness, rareness, Scarcenegs. 2 
Poverty. 

teirce, comp. of tearc. Scarcer, scarcest. 

teirceachd,* s.f. Fewness, rareness. 

teirceas,** -eis, s.m. Fewness, scarceness. 

tteirc-fhedlach, -aiche, œ. Lean, meagre. 

teircead, -eid, s.m. Degree of scarcity, rareness, 
fewness or poverty. A réir teircead nam bliadh- 
na, according to the fewness of the years ; a’ 
dol an t., getting scarcer and scarcer, 

teireachduinn, s.m. Decaying, state of decaying 
or wasting. A’ t—, pr.pt. of teirig. 

teireadh,** -idh, s,m. Recommendation. 

teiric,(AC) s. Hake,herring-hake, herring eke or 
eek, (triangular frame with spikes on which 
herrings are hung up todry. 

teiridneach, a. Medicinal, having the power to 














Digitized E 


Ae ee HAC 
i. Ss WE AR H UE 
i Y ti i We w E 


944 


3(MS) As" 


ted 


cure—Sa@r-Obair. [eiridneach.] 

teirig, pr.pt. a’ teireachduinn, v.a. & n. Fail, be 
spent, be exhausted. 2 Weir out, spend, ex- 
baust. 3 Go, repair to. ‘th. orm, all mine is 
run out TRURIF E theiriveas gual teirigidh 
Obair,when coals run out (smith-\work is at an 
end ; th. iad, they are done, consumed ; t. ris, 
fiaht him, try him; cha’n e am bord a th. 
dhuit, ach am beagan fearainn, it was not the 
mould-board of the plough that would not work 
enough, but you had not enowsh land to plonuh ; 
th. an sgeul, the tale was jinished—an idioma- 
tic way of finishing a tale; t. a steach d'a 
h-ionnsuidh, go in to her; t. mun cuairt, oo 
round about ; theirigear air a ghlùinean aig 
bonn na crannaige, he knelt at the foot of the 
pulpit; na t. a mach 'san oidhche, do not walk 
out at night ; gus an t. an là, till the day comes 
to an end. 

teirigidh, rt of o, of teirig, 

teirigsinn,(MS) s. End. 

teirgte, past pt. of teirig. 

teirinn, pr.pt.a’ téarnadh,v.a. Come or go down, 
descend. 2 Alight, dixmount. 3(MS)Pitch. 

teiris,** v.a. & n. Tams, quiet, as unruly cattle, 
2 Stop. 3 Be at peace. 

teiris ! int. see tairis! [teiris ! in Poolewe.) 

teirisd ! ind. see tairis ! 

teirisi ! f see tairis ! 

teirm,* -ean, s./. Thumb. 2**Term. 3 Condition. 
4 Season, while. Air na teirmean sin, on 
those terms ; teirmean a’ chùirt, law-terms. 

teirmeasg, -isg, $.m. Mistake, mishap, misfor- 
tune. T. ort! a plague on thee ! 

teirmeasg,** v. Disappoint. 

———--ach, -aiche, a. Unfortunate, 

teirm-ghéill,** s. Capitulation. 

teirm-striochd,** s. Capitulation. 

teirt,** s.f. Sunrise. 

téis, -e, -ean, s.f. Musical air, air to which any 
song or poem is sung. 2 Sound. 3 Diligence. 
Bu ghrinn thu 'thogail na téise, you were good 
at raising a strain. 

teisbeirt,** (suppt.) see teirbeirt. 

teisdeas, see tetsteas. 

teismeid, -e, -ean, s.f. see tiomnadh. 
th., make your wil. 

teis-meadhon, -oin, s.m. Exact middle. 

——&ch, -aiche, a. Central, centrical, 
2 Of, or belonging to, a centre. 

teisreadh,(AC) s.m. Protecting. T. taighe, house 
protecting —aàn invocation. 

teist, -e, -ean, s.f. Testimony, proof. 2 Charace 
ter, reputation, esteem, respectability. Nach 
leig a th. air chall,who will not suffer his fama 
to be bandied with. 

tteist,** s.m. Witness, 2 Drop. 

-——eachadh,(MS) s. m. Approbation, attesta- 
tion, recommendation. 

-——eadh,**-idh, s.m. Defection. 2 Falling off. 

——ealachd, s.f. State of holding a good repu. 
tation. 2 Fame, reputation, esteem. 3 Au- 
thority. 4* Respectability. 

—eanas, -ais, -an, s.m. Certificate, witness, 
report, attestation, testimonial,evidence, repu- 
tation, testimony. i 

———eas, -eis, s.m. Testimony. T. Dhé, the testi- 
mony of God. 

teisteil, -e, a. Respectable, esteemed. 2 Reput- 
able, unblemished. 3 Chaste, pure, having & 
good character. Gu t., chastely. 

teistich,(MS) v.a. Attest. 

teith, see teth. 

tteith, v.n. see teieh. 

teithneas,** -ais, s.m. Haste. 

-— — ——Ach, a. Hasty, in haste. 

ted, mr mt. a’ teòdhadh & a’ teosainn,9.a, Warm, 


Déan do 





Original from 


E D a TY i F 


UNIV 


Li 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


ILLI N ðgls AT 


= 


f 


t 
} 


teo 


make warm. 2Simmer. 3 Air. 4 Glow with 
delight or affection. Cha do th. mi riamh ri- 
the, [ never had any affection for her. 

teò-chridheach. -eiche, a. Warm-hearted, affec- 
tionate, compassionate. 

d, s.f. Affectionateness. 2 Kind- 
ness, clemency. | 

teddh, v. see teo. 

teddhadh, -aidh, s.m. Warming, act of making 
warm. 2* Simmering. 3*Glowing with love, 
feeling affection for. 4 Chafing. A’ t—, pr. 
pt. of ted. 

teodhaich, v.a. see ted. 

teódhaiehte, past pt. & a. Warmed. 

tedghadh, see teòdhadh, 

ted-ghradhach, -aiche, a. see teò-chridheach. 

tedidh, v. see teò. 

te, past pt. of ted. Warmed, 2*Simmered. 

teòigh (M3) v.a. Bake. 

tedilteach,** a. Warm-hearted, 

teoiteachan,** s.m. Chafiug-dish, warming-pan. 

teoithe, comp. of teth, see teotha. 

ad, Ad. s.m. Degree of heat, see teothad, 

Tediridh, s. Trinity. 














fteol, s.m. Plenty. 2 Substance. 3 Thief, 
teoliachd, sf. Cowardice—Sur-Obeir. 


teom,(AC) & Dole. T. eigir, a small dole ; t.éisg, 
a dole of fish ; t. an t-sionnaich, bribe of the fox ; 
cho toinnée ri t. an t-sionnaich, as twisted as 
the fox's gift. 

teom, v. see teum. 

teòma, a. Skilful, expert, adept, active, dexter- 
ous. 2 Apt, ready, quick. 3 ct, rm- 
ing anything correctly. 4 Shrewd. 5**Clever. 
T. an cogadh, expert in war. 

teomach,** a. see teòma. 

————— d, s.f. Expertuess, skilfulness, activity, 
dexterity or proficiemcy in anything. 2 Apt- 
ness, readiness. 3 Shrewdness, 4 Manhood. 
6 Address. 6**Cteverness. An gaisge is an 
t., in valour and in manhood. 

tedmadh, -aidh, -aidhvan, see teumadh, 2(DC) 
s.m, Splice of a rope, stick, &c. 

tedm-chridheach,** a, Tender-hearted, ‘compass- 
ionate, affectionate. 

-——d,** s.f. Tender-heartednegs, 
compassionateness. 2 Affeetionateness. 

tedr, -edir, s.m. Mark, limit. 2 Sign, token. 
see tiur. 

tedra,(MS) a. Coarse. 2s.m. Bourn. 3(MMcL) 
Three. An Tedra Bheannaichte, the Blessed 
Frinity ; t. pog, three kisses. 

tedradh,** s.m. Stint. 

teoran,** s.m. Mark. 

teorchan,** -ain, s.m. The space of three hours. 

teoranta,** a. Definite. 

teorr, see tiur. 

teosainn, Sr. & pr.pt. of teòdh, Same meanings 
as teòdhadh. 

teoth, see teo. 

teotha, comp. of teth. Hotter, hottest. 

teothachadh, see tedthadh. 

teothachan, -ain, -an, s.m. Warming-pan, chaf- 
ing-dish. 

teothad, -aid, s.m. Degree of heat. 

tedthadh, -aidh, see teòdhadh. 

tedthaich, see ted. 

-—te, past,pt. of teòthaich. Same mean- 
ings as tedidhte. 

teothaid, 2nd. comp. of teth, 

teothair, v. see teadhraich. 

—— ———, 8. see teadhair. 

teoth-chridheach, see teò-chridheach. 

iteth, a. Fine, smooth, soft. 

, @. Ist. comp. teotha [& teoithe,**] 2nd. 
teothaid, $rd. teothad. Hot, warm, sultry. 2 
Keen. 3 Sealding. 4* Impetuous, agog. 5” 











Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


915 


teum 





Rancil,insipid, tasteless, 6** rarely Smooth 
fiae. Gu tinn, b, feverishly hot. ý 
teth-loisgeach,** a. Burniug-hot, scalding-hot. 
teuchd, v.n. Congeal, be congealed. 2 Be parch- 
ed,. as with drought or thirst. 8łtWither, 
dry up. 

Tteuchd,** ap, s.m. Feat, exploit, heroism. 2 
(CR) s.f. Brag, boast H. of Ross. Duine 
a dheanadh t., @ man who could perform an 
exploit ; tha e a’ deanamh t., he ts bragging ; 
tha e a’ deanamh t. dheth, he makes out what 
he has done to be a feat. see euchd. 

——-—, v. see teachd. 

—-—àch,** a. Supremely valiant, heroic. 

—-—adh, -aidh, s m. Congealing, act of being 
congealed. 2 State of being parched. 3tf 
Parching, withering. A’ t—, pr.pt. of teuchd. 

teud, v.a.Supply with strings, as an instrument 
of music. 


teud, -a & -éid, pl. an e m. [f.in Badenoch.) 
String, cord, rope. 2 String of a musical in- 
strument. 3łt Music in general. 4**Harp. 6 
** Any stringed instrument. Feadh thorman 
gach teuda, through the music of every string ; 
mairidh e ’m fonn nan teud, he will live in the 
music of the harp ; clàrsach gun t., a string- 
less hav p ; inneal binu nan teudan deich, o 
melodious ten-stringed instrument. [tts.f.] 

teudach, -aiche, a. Stringed. 2 Having many 
strings. 

teudach, -aich, s.f. Strings of any musical in- 
strument, especially of a harp. 2 Assortment 
of musical strings. 3 Quantity of strings. 

teutag, ff -aig, an, s. f. dim. ofteud. Little 
string, cord or rope, 2 Small withe. 

ach, -aiche, a. Strong. 

teudaiche,** an. fe ao. Harper. 

teudan, -ain, 8. m. dim. of teud. Little music- 
al string. 2 n.pl. of teud. 

teud-aoire, -an-aoire, s.m. sea taod-aoire. 

teud-bhràehad,** s. Collar. 

teud-cheól, -chiüil, s.m. Musicof a stringed in- 
strument. Bu bhinne nat. a guth, her voice 
was sweeter than harp-music. 

teud-chleas,** s.m. Feat in rope-dancing. 

—— —— -.—Aáchd,** s.f. Rope-dancing, 

--——aiche,** An, s.m. Rope-dancer. 

feud-gharadh,(WC) s.m. Wire-fence. 

teud-shiubhlaidh, -e, -ean, s.m. & f. Rope-danc- 
er. 

teugair, see teagair. 

teug-bhoil, -e, -ean, 8.7, see teugmhail. 

———-—-each, -eiche, à. see teuemhaileach. 

teugmhail, -mhala, -ean, s.f. Battle, contest. 2 
Disease. 3 Danger. 4 Agony. 5**Severe af- 
fliction. 6* Agonies of death. Is minig à 
thàinig eagal gu teugmhail, fear often begets 
danger ; tus na teugmhala [teug-bhoil**], the 
front of battle, 

teugmhaileach, -eiche, a. Warlike, keen for bat- 
tle. 2 Of, or belonging to, a battle. 3 Very 
dangerous, 4 Causing disease. 5 Diseased. 
6 In torment or agony. 7 Agonizing, causing 
agony, afflictive. 8**Contentious. 

teugmhais, -e, -ean, s.f. Hap, accident. 

teugradh,* -aidh, see teagradh. 

tteul,** s.m. Subterranean passage. 

Tteum, o. see teoma. 

teum, pr.pt. a’ toumadh, v.a. Bite, wound, sting. 
2 Snatch suddenly at anything. 3 Tempt, be- 
guile, draw aside—Aroyll. 4 Cut, taunt. Th. 
nathair mi, œ serpent bit me, [in Argyll, it 
would signify @ serpent beguiled, or enticed me, 
and lot nathair mi, @ serpent bit me.] 5(CR) 
Join, unite, splice. 6 (CR) Repair by bights 
or loops, as in wire-fencing. (Nos 5 &6— 








Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


ILLINOIS AT 


teum 


when fishing with a hand-line, by a sharp pull | thall, prep. 


on the line. Th. e iasg, he hooked a fish 
adh do bho, your co» is bitten or stung —Mac- 
Lagan’s Evil Eye, 17. 

teum, -a, -an, s.m. [s,f. in Badenach.] Sudden 
snatch at anything. 2 Temp:ation, whim,cap- 
rice—47rgyU. är Bite, morsel, mouthful, 4 
5** Taunt, sarcasm, 6 Fit. T. arain, æ morsel 
of bread. 

teuinach,tf -aiche, a. Snatching. 2 Biting, prone 
to bite. 3.CR) Attentive, careful, diligent, 
anxious to de well— W. of Ross. 

teumadh, -aidh, s. m. Biting, act of biting, 
wonn:iing or stinging, 2 Snatching, act of 
snatching at anything. 3* Tempting, beguil- 
ing. 4 Bite. A t—, pr.pt. of teum. 

teumaidh, fut.af.a. of teum. 

teum éisz.(CR) s.m. One fish. 
aize, he has one fish ; bha dà theum éisg aige, 
he had two fish—W. of Ross. [Not used of 
greater numbers.] 


teumnach,* -aiche, a, Whimsical, capricious, 2 
Enticing, inviting, tempting. 3 Tart. Cha/n 
‘oil ana ach duine t., he is but a whtinsical 
min; cha'n eil e 'na ni tb., it is not an en- 
ticing affair. 

—d,* s.f. Capriciousness. 

nature or quality. 

teurmnasg,* -aisg, s.m. Bandage on the thumbs 
and great toes of a dead person,to preveut his 
gnost hurting foes. 

teumta, past pt. of teum. Bitten, wounded, 
stung. 2 Snatched suddenly. 

teurnadh, see téarnadh. 

teurnaidh, fut.af.a. of teirian. 

teuthachd,*s.f, Rancidness. 

th For words commencing with th, and not 

) given below, see under t. 

tha, pres.ind. of irr, v. bi. Am, art, is, are. 

thabhair, sce thoir. | 

thabhairt, (a) inf. of tabhair. 

thaim, (for taim) poetic form of tha mi, 

thàin, for thàinig —Perths. & Skye. 

thàine, for thainig — Perths. 

thàineas, past part. of thig. Was come. 

thàini, for thàinig— A rran, Kintyre. de, 

thàiniz, past ind. of thig. Came. 

thair, sce thar. 

thairis, adv. Over, across, abroad. 9* Beyond, 
exceeding the bounds, 3 Remaining, as à sur- 
pius. 4 Ath wart, to the farther side. 5 At an 
end. Chaidh e thairis, he went abroad (left 
the kingilom); a’ dol th., going to another 
couwniry, or over the channel, strait or Jerry; 
cupan a’ cur th., & cup running over; chaidh 
e th. air sin, he went beyond that; or, it is be- 
yon 1 that ; th. air moran, beyond many ; thug 
e th., he over/atigued himself ; thoir th., give 
over, be done with it ; chuir iad th. i, they cap- 
sized her (the boat); cha mhisd iad (na sgeul- 
achdan) mise a thoirt sgrìob th. orra, they 
wili be none the worse of my relating them; 
thug e th. e air seachd beanntan, he took him 
over seven hilis—W.H., 1.39. ; cha do chuir a 
għualaian nach do chuir tuar thairis, none did 
his best but turned (the obstacle) clean over ; 
gach ni a bhios th., everything that remains; 
chaidh mi th. orra, J went beyond, or excelled 
them. 

thairte, prep.pron. (thar+i) Over or beyond her 
or it. An abhainn a’ cur th., the river over- 
flowing. 

tha!l,** æ. Adjacent. 

thail, adv. On the other side, yonder, beyond. 
2 Abroad, 3*Over against.  Thall'sa bhos, 
dither aud thihter, here and there, on all 


Tha teum éisg 





2 Tempting 


sides; | 


946 


D theab 
W. of Ross-shire.) 7 (DU) Hook a fish, as 


; teum-|thal.a, v.def. Come 


am bail' ud thall, yonder town. 

Beyond. 

(thou) along. Th. leamsa, 

come along with me, Nye only in the 2nd.p. 
sinj. & pl, (thallaibh) imp.] 

thallal, (thall+ud) adv. Yon, yonder, see thall. 

thallaibh, v.def. Come (ye) alone. 

thalla ! thalla !* int. Well! well! ay!ay! 

th’ ann, (tha ann) That is,isin that place,exists. 
Cia meud a th’ ann P how many are ther’? 
ciod ath’ ann ? what is it? what is in that 
place ? guth Dheirg is e 'th' ann, it is the voice 
of Dargo. 

thanna, Jura for chunnaic, 

thaobh, (a) prep. Concerning, touching. 2 By 
reason of, on account of, as for. 3 Aside. 4 
Astray. Ath. tuairmeis, at a venture ; dol à 
th., going aside or astray, apostatizing. 

thar, prep. Over, across. 2* More than. 
yond. Thus combined with the p pro- 
nouns—tharum, over me ; tharad, over thee ; 
thairis air, over him ; thairis oirre, (**thairte,) 
over her ;tharaiun, over us ; tharaibh, over 
you; tharta, over them, Deich thar fhichead, 
thirty (lit.ten beyond a score ; chuir thu th. a 
chéil’ iad, you set them by the ears; th. na 
corach, beyond what is proper; reubadh an 
luingeas th. (for bhàrr) an acraichean, the fleet 
was torn from its anchors ; tha "n teagasg th. 
cheann chum math an t-sluaigh, the teaching 
taken altogether is for the people's good ; thar- 
cheann, average. In Arran, tha 'n t-am 
agaian falbh thar a chéile, means, it is time 
for us both (or all) to go. 

thar, Suth’d prov.torm of tàir. Get, obtain,come. 
After conj. nach, fhar & fhàr. 

thar a chéile, At variance. 2 In disorder, in 
confusion, 3 Stirred about, agitated. 4**De- 
ranged, crazed. ^ Ri'n gabhail thar-a-chéile, 
to be taken together ; cuir thar-a-chéile, disar- 
range, confuse, drive mad. 

thar-a-chòir, Superfluous, too much. 

tharad prep.pron. (thar+thu) Over thee, across 
thee, beyond thee. 

tharadh, see thar. 

tharaibh, prep. pron. (thar+sibh) Across you, 
over you. 

tharainn, prep.pron. (thar+sinn) Across us,over 
us. 

tharam, prep. pron. (thar+mi) Across me, over 
me, beyond me. Chaidh i th., she capsized 
over me ; seachd gealaich chaidh th., I passed 
seven months (lit. seven moons went over me.) 

tharas, see thar. 

tharladh, past of def. v. tharlaidh. It happened, 
had happened, might happen, might have 
happened, 

thàrlas, fut. of def. v.tharlaidh. May happen, 
Shall happen, shall have happened, or met. 
[Used only in the past & future. ] 

thar leam, see ar leam. 

thar leis, for ar leis, Thar leis gun do ghabb 
an gruagach boch, he thought the wizard was 
delighted —W.H.1.13. 

tharta, prep.pron. (thar+iad) Across them, over 
them, beyond them, Chaidh am bata th., the 
boat capsized over them ; cuir th. e, put it over 
them. 

tharuibh, see tharaibh. 

tharuinn, see tharainn. 1 

theab, def.v. Miss. Th. mi tuiteani, Z missed 

faliing. The only parts used are—Theab 

mi, I had almost, (impersonally) theabadh, 

theabas ; INTERR. an do theab mi? had I- 

almost? (impersonally) an do theabadh ? 

theabas ? ; NEGATIVE, cha do theab mi, I had 

not almost, (impersonally, cha do theabadh 


8 Be- 


Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS A 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


A M DA 





theab 
theabas.) These forms are used in all the 
persons. Th. thu mo mbarbhadh, you had 


aimost killed me ; chaidh ''theab "' le creig ’s 
theab nach deachaidh, 's bhàthadh rr shaoil 
leam "7 ged nach do shaoil cuid e, ach nam 
biodh ‘‘b’ fhearr leam ” beò cha bhiodh ceann 

Bir coluinn, ‘‘ almost” fell over a rock, but 

tt almost didn't, ** I thought " was drowned 

though some thought not, but if **1 had rather" 
were still alive no one else could then survive ; 

theab iad, they had almost, , 
theabadh, see theab. 
theag, see theagamb. 

amh, adv. Perhaps. mayhap. 
bheil, perhaps, perhaps it is so. 

théid, fut.af.a. of rach. Will go. Th. mis’ an 

urras gure do bheatha, I will warrant you 

that you are welcome—W. H. 1.39. 
theidheadh, Suth’d. form of past subj. of rach. 

An taigh gus an téidheadh tu, the house to 

which you would go. [Lewis also—MM.] 
their, fut.af.a. of abair. Will say. Th. cuid, 

some will say ; their thu, thou wilt say. Th. 
leam, see ar leam. 
theireadh, 2nd. & 3rd. pers. sing. & pl, of abair. 
Would say. A dh’ aindeoin có theireadh el 
tn spite of whoever would say it; a Ab’ ain- 
deoin na th, e, in spite of what he would say. 
theiream, (for their mi)jl will say, see abair. 
theireamaid, ist. per.pl. past subj, of abair. We 
would say. 
theirear, fut.subj. pass. of abair. Math. e, if it 
be seid. 
theirig, another form of rach, which'see. Go. 
, asp. form ot teirig. 
theirinn, 1$s/.per.sing.past.subj. of abair. 
theirteadh, past swbj.pass. of abair. Would be 
said. (Rinn e obaira bhitheas "na carragh- 
cuimhneachain air,)an uair nach bi iomradh 
air feadhainn a bu luaithe theirteadh na e, 
when those more likely todo it are not to be 
heard of. 
thìbh, Arran for chì. 
thibhear, Arran for chìthear, 
thibhinn, Arran for chìthinn. 
thig, irr. v. Come. 2 (with prep. do) Become, 
suit, fit, befit. 3 (with prep. ris) Agree with, 
ease, be acceptable to. 4 (with preps. o, or 
e) Recover, escape, get the better of. 5 (with 
prep. air) Speak of, reflect upon, speculate 
about. 6 (with prep. eadar) Disagree, quarrel. 
Conjugated thus :— 
ACTIVE VOICE. 

IND. past, thàinig mi, ée, I, &c. came. 

» fut. thig mi, &c., 1, de, shall come. 

INTERROG. & NEG. past. (an ? nach ? cha) d' 

thàinig mi, &c., did I &c., (not) come? I, 

&c. did not come. 

» X fut. (an ? nach ? cha) tig mi, &c.shall I, 
de, (not) come ? I, &c. shall not come. 
SUBJ. past, (ged) thiginn, (though) I would 

come. (ged) .thigeadh tu, e, i, sibh, iad, 

(though) thou wouldst, he, she, you, they 

would come. (ged) thigeamaid, (though) we 

would come. 

» fut. (ma) thig mi,&e,(if) I, &c. shall come. 
IMP. 1st.pers.sing. thigeam, let me come. 

» 2nd. , ,, thig, come thou. 
INFIN, à thighinn, to come. 
PRES. PT. a’ tighinn, coming. 

PASSIVE VOICE— None. 

Thig thusa leamsa, you come with me ; thig 
ginn leibh, we will come with you ; cha tig sinn 
leibh, we will not come with you; cha d’ thain- 
ig iad, they did not come ;is math a thig an 
cota dhuit, the coat becomes you well ; ciamar 
thae ’tighinn dhomh ? how does it become me? 


Th. gu’m 





Digitized b V 


| NTE D R, ET A D e 4 i d 
EEN EIDA) | Ak | Wi 


947. 


thoir 


ciamar a thig sin riut-sa ? how will that p’ease 
you ? cha tig sin gu math ris, that will not 
please him well ; thig e uaith, he will recover ; 
thig iad ort gu farsuing, fial, they shall speak 
of you far and wide, everywhere and liberally; 
bithidh iad a’ tighinn oirnn, they will speak of 
us, our conduct will bea matter of reflection ; 

thig air, talk about it ; b' ann air gaol bha i 

'tighinn, it was love she was speaking of —R.1h. 

17 ; cha’n ’eil stath tighinn air sin, there is no 

use in speaking of that; thainig againn air labh- 

airt uime, we chanced to speak about him: 

thainig iad am briathran seanachais air a’ 

chéile, they spoke concerning old times to each 

other (lit.they came into the words of old-time 
talk on each other); dé tha tighinn ris? what 
aus him ? dé thigeadh ra nàdur, what would 
suit his nature ?—W.H.1. 12.;thainig eadar iad, 
they have quarrelled ; thàinig orm falbh, I was 
obliged to go ; cha tig snàth do mhnà-sa ri 
snàth mo mbna-sa, your wife's spinning will 

not compare with my wife's ; cha tigear o 'n 

ghabhadh thrie, one would not come safely out 

of frequent danger ; thig orm, I must; thig 
ort, you must. e, ; thig orm falbh, I must go. 
In Arran, thig means go, not come. Thalla 

a steach, (pl. thallaibh à steach) come in; 

thig a steach, go in ; thig air falbh, go away ; 

thig a dh’ Irt, go to St. Kilda—the equivalent 
of ‘‘ go to Jericho.” 

thig. fut.aff.a. of thig. Shall or will come, 

thigeadh, past subj. of thig (except 1st. pers. 
ging.& pl.) Th. e n’am faodadh e,he would come 
if allowed ; th dhuit a dheanamh, you ought toi 
do it—it would become you to do it. 

-———,, 8rd. sing. & pl. imp. of thig. Let.... 
come, 

thigeam, Ist. sing.imp. of thig., Let me come, 

thigeamaid,Jst.p.pl.past subj. of thig. We would 
come. 

thiginn, 1st. p. sing. past subj. of thig. I would 
come, 

thimchioll, see timchioll. 

thirim,** for tioram. 

thirr ! "t Cry to incite a dog when it is 

thirr thad ! driving away cattle. 

thisd ! int. Hush ! 

thoir, irr. v. Give, grant, deliver, bestow on. 2 
Take. 3 (with prep. air) Persuade, compel. 
4 (with prep. as) Take away. 5 (with prep. 
air and noun intervening governed by the 
verb) Betake thyself to. 

Active Voice— 
IND. past, thug mi, &c., I, dc. gave. 
vw Jut. bheir mi, &e., Ze, shall give. 
INTERR. & NEG. past. (an? nach ? cha) di 
thug mi, &c., did 1 &c. (not) give ? 1 did not 
ive. 
d fut. (an ? nach ? cha) tabhair or toir 

mi, &c., shall I, &c. (not) give ? I, &c. shall 
mot give. 

SUBJ. past, (ged) 'bheirinn, though I would 
give ; (ged) bheireadh tu, e, i, sibh, iad, 
(though) thow wouldst, he, she, you, they, 
would give ; (ged) bheireamaid, (though) we 
would give. i 
» fut. (ma) bheir mi, &c., (if) I,cc.shall 

ive. 

IMPER. 1st.per.sing. thugam, let me give. 

d 2nd. ,, thoirorthabhair, give thou. 
INFIN. a thabhairt, a thoirt, to give. 
PRES.PART. a’ tabhairt, a’ toirt, giving. 

Passive Voice— 

IND, past thugadh mi, &c., Z, £c. was given. 
» Jut. bheirear mi, &e., I deshali be given. 

INTE«R. & NEG. past, (an? nach? cha) di 
thugadh mi, &c., was I, £c. (not) given? I, 


UNIVERSITY OF ILL 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


al from 


YE [I NỌ = A 


thoir 918 


was (not) given. . 

» fut. (an P nach? cha) toirear mi, &c.shall 

I, e (not) be given ? 1, de. shall not be 

given. 

SUBJ. past, (ged) bheirteadh mi, &c., (though) 

4, dc. should be given. 

» fut. (ma) bheirear mi, &c., (if) I, &c. 

should be given. 

Pasr PART. tugta, given. 

This verb has two other forms for the 
pa-t subjunctive, which are used after inter- 
rogitive and negative particles. ‘They are, 
(an ? nach ?) toirinn, would I (not) give; cha 
toirinn, Z would mot give; and (na’n) tug- 
ainn, (if) J would give. These two forms are 
conjugated as bheirinn, in the various persons 
—(sing. 1st. -inn, 2nd. -eadh, 3rd. -eadh ; pl. 
Ist. -eamaid, 2nd. -eadh, 3rd. -eadh.) 

The past subj. passive, bheirteadh, is im- 
personal,and requires a prepositional pronoun 
after it to distinguish itfrom the same tense 
of beir. Bheirteadh'mi, Z was born; bheirteadh 
dhomh, (it) was given to me. The passive 
Voice has parallel impersonal forms, as an 
toirteadh, would (tt) be given, and an tug- 
£adh, ma theirteadh, 4f it would be said, but, 
na'n abairteadh ; o ’n chiteadh, since it would 
be seen ; but, nach faicteadh, wowd it not 
be seen ; ged gheibhteadh, though it should be 
got; but, mur faighteadh e, if it should not be 

0f, 

The word thabhair may be substituted for 
thoir in the following, or any similar senten- 
ces. 

''ha^hair (or thoir) air falbh,take away,carry 
of; thabhair (or thoir) leat e,carry it with you; 
tabhair a mach, win ; thugadh a mach a’ 
cheud duais leis, he won the first prize; bheir 
iad à mach nithean àrda, they will do (win) 


siorradh 
great things ; thug mi d sgiutadh } asam, J 
saighde 
made adart (or bound) ; thug e mo char agus 
mo leth-char asam, he cheated me all round ; 
th. sco d’ a ionnsuidh, take this to him; th. 
d’ an ionnsuidh, take to them; thugaibh am 
monadh oirbh, belake yourselves to the mount- 
ain. 
th. a bhos, reach, fetch me here, 
th. aichmheil, avenge. 
th. air, compel, force, persuade (him.) 
th. air ais, withdraw, 
th. aire, attend, observe. 
th. air falbh, take away. 


thu 


th. dhomh, give me ; bring. 

th. do chasan leat, take yourself off; clear 
out !—W. of Ross-shire. 

th. do leabaidh ort, go to bed. 

th. dùbhlan, challenge. 

th. duibh-leum, bound. 

th. éighe, cry. 

th. éisdeachd, listen. 

th. fainear, attend, consider. 

th. feum as, use it, apply it to use. 

th. fianuis, witness. 

th. Dos (dot, acquaint, inform ; warn ; invite. 

th. fo ghéill, subdue, 

th. freagradh (do), answer. 

th. géill, yield, submit, obey, surrender, ad- 
mit, concede. Na toir géill dha, pay no 
attention to anything he says. 

th. gu buil, bring to à successful termination, 

th. ionnsuidh (air) attempt, make an at- 
tempt (to do it) ; make an attack (on him.) 

th. leat, carry, carry away, bring or take. 4 

th. leum, jump. 

th. luadh (air), (or déan luadh), mention, 
make mention. 

th. luizheachd (do), pardon. 

th. mathanas (do), pardon,'forgive. 

th. mionnan, swear. 

th. muidhe, churn, make butter—W, of Rose. 

th. na buinn as, take to your heels. 

th. na buinn asad, take to your heels. 

th. na casan asad, take to your heels. 

th. oidhirp, attempt, make an attack. 

th. orm, prevail with me. 

th. orra, compel them. 

V. En asad, make a dart or dash at any- 

ing. 

th. seachad, relinquish, deliver, give up. 

th. szal, scream, shriek. 

th. sgoil (do), educate. 

th. seiutadh, dart, bolt. 

th. sgread, scream, shriek. 

th. siorradh, dart, bolt. 

th. sios, lower, take down. 

th. smachd, chastise, rebuke. 

th. suas (e), yield, cede, surrender, abdicate, 
give up, resign (it.) 

th. tamailt (do), offend, insult. 

th. thairis (do), cease, give over; give over 
from fatigue ; resign, abdicate, surrender. 

th. thairis e, bring him over; overfatigue him. 
Thug e thairis, he knocked himself up, 

th. thu-féin as! begone ! 

th. tuairmeas, guess. 

th. urram, pay respect, reverence. 


«. diate, 





thoir as! int. Begone 

thonnai, Knapdale for chunnaic. 

thu, pers.pron. Yad. pers. sing. Thou. 2**Thee. 
EE thusa, thyself ; thu-féin, thine own 
self. 

Tu, when nominative to a verb is always as- 
pirated (thu), except with is, and in the fu- 
ture indicative, and the two tenses of the 
subjunctive active. The unaspirated form is 
never used with the passive forms of the 
verb. The accusative form isalways thu. A 
tendency to use tu instead of thu after verbs 
ending in s must be carefully guarded against, 
'S e chrinas tu le coron gràidh, given in some 
editions of the Scriptures (some are correct) as 
the equivalent of it is he who will crown thee,in 
Ps. ciii, really means ‘“‘ it is he whom thou 
wilt crown." In the same manner tu 1s er- 
roneously used in, an Tigbearn a slànuich- 
thu, ma ta e ann a fhreagaireas thu, co a 
bhrathas thu? &c. **'Thusa " ach sibh-se 
dar bhios sibh ann ‘ur taigh féin, ‘‘thou,’’ but 
“you” when you have & house of your own— 


th. a mach, take out ; descry, spy. 

th. an aghaidh, advance. 

Ur. An aire, take care, beware. 

th, aii dorus ort, go to the door. 

th. an péall, bet, pawn, pledge, mortgage. 

th. as, tanc away, flee, escape. 

tn. asa chéine> disjoin, tear asunder, 

th. ase, swig 15 Off, gulp it up ; take it out 
of it. ^e. 3 

th. as thu-féin, fleo», deliver thyself. 


3 


th. a staigh, bring in $ tame ; cultivate as new 
ground, : A 

th. astaigh ort, get in With you, get into the 
house. . 

h. breith, judge, decide ;,,8ive the sense. 
th. bhuaidh, bring from, dejPrive(him) of ic. 
th. buidheachas, give thanks». 
th. car as, cheat him. 
th. ceum, step, make a step. '. 

"hs era (do), enable, give, affor H An oppor: 

uni y. ve 
th. comhairle (do), advise. A 
th, cuideachd, briug together, 


Üriginal from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS A 
bs URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


"ec 
thu 
example of the peculiar idiomatic use of thu 
and sibh — Badenoch. É 
thubhairt, past ind, of abair. Said. 
theca, see chuca. | 1 
thud ! thud ! int. Expression of disparagement 


or coutempt. 2tBrought 


thug, past ind. of tabhair. Gave. 


949 


tighe 


tiachdaidh,(DU) a. Dried up, tough and dry. 2 
(DMK) Glutinous, viscous, Sraibh-dhriucain 
dhonna th.,— Alli an t-siùcair. 

tiadhan, -ain, pl. -an & -ain, s. m. Little hill, 
mound, 2 Small stone. 3**Testicle. 4**Otter. 

— ——ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in little hills, 

mounds or 2 in small stones. 


Th, e dhomh e,Àe gave it to me; thug e 'm mon- | tiadhlann,** s, Fence. 
adh air, he went to the hill —W.H. 1.42; thug | tiag,** s.in. Wallet. 2 Vessel. 
mac an righ an ra&had air,the prince took to the | tiagh,(AF)s. Thickened milk. 2 Milk-dish. 


road —W.H.1.40; thug Iain a sheòmar féiu ‘ir | 


Joan went to his own room; a mach th. am, 


thug coinneamh dha ? who met him ? —W.H.1, 
39 ; thug mac an righ a chùl air an oganach, 
the prince turned his back on the youth ; ciod 
@ thug ort a’ chlach a chuir mar sin ? what 

WE pe you io put m ston like that 3 
ugad, prep.pron. see chugad. 

| int. Out of the way! Often said to 

those whom we wish to warn of immediate 
personal danger (lit. let te yourself, look to 
yourself.) 

thugaibh, :2nd.pers.pl.imp. ot tabhair. Give ye. 
see chugaibh, 

! int, Leave (ye) that ! 

thugainn, see chugainn. 

thugam, Ist. per. sing. imp, of tabbair. Let me 
give. 

thugar, used impersonally. Was brought. 

&hugam, see chugam. 

thugas, for thugadh. 

thugtar, imp. pass. of thoir. 

thuige, see chuige. Thainig i th., she came to 
(as a ship) ; improved (as anything else.) 

thuigeadh, $rd.p.sing. & pl. imp. of tuig. 

thuiginn, 18t. p. sing. past snb). of tbuig. 

thuillead,** o Accessory. 

thuilleadh, see tuilleadh. 

thàirleas, past subj. of tüirl. Traj th. m’ anam 
an ceo, when my spirit shall descend in mist, 

thuirle thàirle, (MS) s. Chaos, hurly burly. 

thuirt, for thubhairt, see aba 





ir. 
ae past ind. a. of abair, 


said. 

thuiteadh, past subj. of tuit. 

thuiteas, /ut.subj. of tuit. 

thun, see chan. 

thunn, Suth’dfor chunaaic. ` 

thunua, Arran for chumnaic. 

thunnai, Arran for ehunnaic. 

thunnaic, Suth’d for chunnaic. 

thun sin, see chun au, ` 

thus’, thusa, emphat. form of thu. 

thusan, Swth’d form of thusa, 

thut ! int. Expression of impatience. 

ti, s.m.ind. Any rational being. 2 He, him, 3 
She, her. An Ti a’s àirde, the supreme Being; 
oir mar seo deir an Ti ard agus uasal, for thus 
saith the high and lofty One. 

ti, s.m.ind. Design, intention, purpose, 2 Pur- 
suit. Tha e air ti mis’ a mharbhadh, he is 
bent on my destruction; tha e air ti cur as 
domh, keis determined to finish my days ; bha 
a thi air mis’ a sgrios, his determination was 
to ruin me ; fear-ti, a pursuer, 

tiachag,** s.f. Purse, small bag. 

tiachair, -e, a. Perverse, ill-disposed. 2 Sickly, 
3 Weary under à burden. 

-——— —— .-eàn, sm. Ill-lisposed person. 2 In- 
significant person. 3t{{Dwarf. [siachair(e)] 
——— ——eachd, s.f. Perversity. 2 Sickness, weari- 

ness, 3 Insignificant appearance. 
tiachd, see teachd, s. 
tiachdaidh,** s. m. Customer, 
sorter. 3 Guest, 


Th. e, it was 


2 Haunter, re- 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


tiayhas,** -ais, sm. Mansion. 


| Ttiamh, -a, s.m. Darkness. 
molt, off went the wether ; thug e amhadh air | 
a cheann, he turned his head —W.H.1, 15; CO 


tiamhachd, s.f. see tiamhaidheachd. 

tiamhaidh, -e, a. Melancholy, affecting, dismal, 
gloomy. 2 Solitary, dark, quiet. 3 Sound- 
ing with a melancholy noise, sonorous, 4** 
Dead ,death-like. 5 Wearisome, lonesome. 6 
**Heart-melting, as music. Nach t. tosd 
an oidhche ! how gloomy and quiet the night is! 
cho t. ri gair a’ Chuain-a-Siar, as plaintive as 
the sound of the Western Ocean; àitet., a 
dreary place ; port t., œ heart-melting strain 
or tune. 

——eachd, s.f. Melaneholy, gloom. gloom- 

iness. 2 Solitariness, state of desertion. 3 
Dismal or melanchely sound, sonorousness. 4 
Dismalness, 5 Pathetiealness. 6 Wearinoss, 
7ttPlaintiveness. 

tianail,(AH) s,m, Wink of sleep, ‘‘ forty winks” 
nap, snooze, siesta. 2 Swoon, coma, dreain. 
Rinn mi t, cadail, I dezed for a few moments ; 
chaidh e an t., he fainted. 

tiaraineach, s.f. Gimmer, see under caora,p.165. 

tiarmail, e, a, Prudent, sagacious, careful. 2 
Thoughtful, sedate. Gu b., sagactously. 

tiarmalachd, s.f. Prudence, sagacity, caroful- 
ness. 2 Sedateness, thoughtfulness. 

tiarmann, see téarmann. 

ttiarna, -n, 8.m. see tighearn, 

tiarpan, see tiadhan. 

tiarrach,** -aich, s.m. Paunch. 2 Tripe. 

tiarrail, -e, see tiorrai. 

tiarralachd, see tiorralachd. 

tias, -ais, s.m. Rheum. t2** Fide. 

tiasgadal,** -ail, s.m. Industry. 

tiathaidh, a. Glutinous. 

tibearsan,** -ain, s.m. Sprisging, sprouting. 2 
Overflowing. 

tibearsan,** -ain, s.m. Still, 

tibeart, tibirt,s.m. Fountain. Tibirt na doimhne, 
the fountains of the deep ; gruagach na tibirt, 
the lady of the fountain. 

tibhe,** st Gibe. 

tibhe,* see tighe. 

tihheach,** -ich, s.m. Giber, 

tibhead, see tighead. 

tibheadh,** -idh, s.m. Laughter, 
Shunning, 4 Quickness. 

tibhearsan,** see tibearsan. 

tibh-fhiacal,** -ail, s.m. Fore-tooth. 

tibirt, s.m. Well— Dàin I. Ghobha. 

tibhre,** sm. Fool. 2 One who laughs or gig: 
eles much, 

tibhreach,** a. Foolish. 2 Giggling. 

tibhreadh,** -idh, s.m. Springing, flowing. 

tid, for sid. 

tide, s.m. Time. 2 Tide. 

tididh, see stidean. 

tig, fut.neg. d interr. of thig. Cha tig e, he will 
not come. 

tig, Suth’d & Easter Ross form of thig, Tig nuas, 
come down; tig as an rathad, come out of the 
way. 

tigear, -eir, s.m. see tiogair. 

tigb, -e, -ean, s.m. see taigh. 

tighe, gen.sing. of tigb. | 

tighe," comp. of tiugh, Thicker, thickest, 





2 Contrivance, 


2 Joking, 3 


es = ——w mm o ND 9 07 — 


- A tigheach ` 


tigheach, -eiche, see titheach. 2 see taigheach. 

tigheachd, s.f. Thickness, fatness. 2 Coming, 
arriving, arrival, approach. O’ ait’ a’ bheil e 
tigheachd as P where is he coming from ?—Ar- 
ran, de, 

tighead, -eid, s.m. Degree of thickness, fatness 
or solidity. 

tigheadas, -ais, see taigheadas. 

tizheadasach, see taigheadasach. 

tighealt,* see teoghai. 

lighean,** ein, s.m. Bag, satchel. 

, n.pl. of tigh. i 

tighearn, (or -a,) -an, s.m. Lord, chief ruler. 2 
Baronet. 3 Master, superior title of respect. 
4 Proprietor of an estate. **Name given to 
any proprietor, however insignificant. An 
Tighearna, the Lord. 

achd,** ert Lordship. 

ail, -e, a. Lordly. 2 **Haughty, domin- 











eering. 
-— — lachd, s.f.iad. Lordliness. 
. as, -ais, 8.5. Lordship, estate, sway, su- 
periority, mastery, dominion, supremacy, 
wer, jurisdiction, proprietorship, rule. 
each th., geod rule ; droch th., misrule ; cha 
'n eil t. aig bàs oirbh, death;has no dominion 
Over YOU, 
tizheas, see taigheadas. 
tigheasach, see taigheasach. 
tighicu,* s.f. State of being subject to callers. 
tighica (MS) v.n. Clotter. 
“tighil,* see taog hail. 
tighinn, s.m. Coming, acb of coming, arrival. 2 
Approaching. 3 Speaking. 4 Slandering, back- 
biting, specalating on the faults of others. 
A’ t—, pr.pt. of thig. 
tighinn a steach,"* s.m. Coming in, eatranee. 2 
{ncome, revenue. 
tighinn fodha, s.m. Water Frising in the floor 
of a house, see teachd fodha. 
tighinn thilgte,(WC)s.m.Water coming through 
the walls of a house. 
tileadh,** -idh, s.m. Ship's poop. 
tile, pr. pt. a’ tilgeil & a’ tilgeadh, v. a. Cast, 
throw. 2 Shed, let fall, moult. 3 Shoot, fire, 
asa gun. 4 Vemit—Perthsh. dc. 5 Fling, 
throw off. 6* Repreach, cast up to.  7** 
Produce, yield, bring forth. 8 Cast as molt- 
en metal. 9*Shoet with an elf-shot. Th. e, 
he vomited; th. an t.each mi, the horse threw 
me of; tilg t aran, cast thy bread; thilg 
i searrach, she east a foal ; Sth. e a dheoch, 
he vomited his drink ; th. e orm e, he cast it up 
to mz; thilg e an duime, he shot the man; 
duine tilgte,a man shot by the fairies—one who 
does not care what he does; gach craobh a 
thilgeas meas, every tree that yields fruit. 
tiigeachan,1T-ain, -an, s.m. Jibe, sneer. 
tilgeadh, -idn, s.m. Casting, act of casting or 
throwing. 2 Act of shedding, casting or 
moulting. 3 Shooting, act of shooting or fir- 
ing. 4 Vomiting, act of vomiting, 5 Flinging, 
act of flinging or throwing off. 6 Casting, as 
melten metal. 7* Reproaching, reproach. A’ 
t—, pr.pt. of tilg. 
tilgear,** fut.pass. of tilg. 
ge i s, f. & pr.pt.of tilg.Same meanings as tilg- 
eadh. 
tilgte, a. & past pt. of tilg. Thrown, cast. 2 
Shot. 3 Mad. 4 Artificial — W. of Ross, Tha 
ceann t. air a’ bhat, the stiek has an artificial 
head ; talamh t., soil removed from one place to 
another, as for a garden ; tobhta-t., movable 
thwart or seat in a boat ; t, air an t-slighe,cast 
upon the highway. 
tilig, see tilg. 
tilip, see tiolp. 


A IUTTEPRIEUT Anm; n 

"i = ii E i f 

, = d AB | e V 
LEM ka LE NX 


950 


till, Same meanings as pill, 

tilleach, (MS) a. Coercive. 

tilleadh, see pilleadh. 2 (M3) Bridle, 
tilteag, -eig, -an, s.f. Bee—Suth’d. 2 
tilii lh, see pillidh. 

tim, -e, pl. -ean -eanuan & *tiomana, s.f. Time, 


tim-buail,** s.f. Cymbal. 
timchioll, v.a. Surround, sacompass. 





d -——— cA 


tinneasach 

ke 
Ke e 1 
e 


season. 2 Tense in grammar. Am bliadhaa 
thim (an ceanu bliadhna), in @ year’s time ; 
t. an earraich, the spring season ; is t. teich- 
eadh, it is time to be off. ES 


LS 





, ill, -an, ëm, Circuit, compass, cir. 
cumference. 2{{Piank, oae row of planks in 
beat- or ship-building. 
, prep. & adv. About, around. 2 Of, 
concerning. 3**In a cireuit, Mu th., about, 
concerning ; mu "om bh., about me ; mu th. tri, 
about three; mu 'n t., abovt them ; t. fichead, 
about twenty ; chaidh e t., he went round; 
chaidh e t. orra, he surrounded them ; a’ cheud 
th. a rinn tad, the first eireuit they made. 
aeh, -Aiche, a. Circmitous, encompass 
ing. ** Circular. 3 ÍIBuilt in rows. 
—achvth (MS) s.m. Turn. 








-—— ——achd,(MS) s.m. Ambit. 





- —2dh,** .aidh, s.m. Circuitousness, cir. 
cularity. 2 Teuding towards circularity. 3 
Surrounding, l 
--—aich, «ws. Surround, environ, en coms 
pass, enclose. 

--—aichte, past pt. of timchtollaich. Sure 
rounded, encompassed,environed, gone round. 








timchioll-gheàrr, v.a. Circumcise. ; 
timchtell-ghearradh, -aidh, s. m. Circumeisiag, 


act of circumcising, circumcision, cutting 
round, A’ t—, pr. pt. of timehioll-ghearr. 
—ta, past pt. of timehiol-ghear. 
Circumcised. ‘ 
timehioll-sgriobh,** v.a. Write around. 
timchiolita, a. & pasi pt. Surreunded. 





ttime, s.f.ind. Fear, timorousness. 2 Heat, s, 


Pride, dignity. 
ftimeach, a. Timid. 2 Hot. 3 Proud. * 
Umealachd, s.f.ind. Timeliness, timeousness,) 
ime | 


timeil, -e, a. Timely. 2 see tiomail. 

timheal,**{-eil,%.m, Darkness. 2 Glimmering or, 
shady light. | 

— ———aàch,** a, Dark, glimmering. 2 Gloomy.) 

timpire,(AH) s.m. Messenger, courier. 2 Fac- 
totum. A 

timpireachd, (MS) at Tuol. ; 

tin, see beine $. 

tineach,** -ieh, 8.m, Kindred. m 

tingeal,(MMcL) v. Till, plough. Treabh is b., 
plough and, re-plough. 

tingealach,** -ich, s.m. House-leek. 

tinn, -e, a. Sick, unwell. 2 Aehing. 3 Caus- 
ing sickness. Feuch, tha t' athair tinn, be- 
hold thy father is sick ; gu-t. teth, sick and 
feverish ; bha fonn an òrain tiamhaidh t., the. 
strain of their song was plaintive an! sad ; tha. 
coslas `t. air an là, the day looks sickly— 
Arran. 

tinne, -an & -achan, s.f Chain. 2 Link of & 
chain. 2 Piece of a column. f44Disease. / 

tinne,** s.f. Tightness, rigiduess. 2 Severity. 

, comp. of teann. Tighter, tightest. ` 

ttinne, s. The letter T, see teine. A 





tinneachan, pl. of teinne, 

tinnead,1i$id, s.m. Degree of sickliness. 
tinneanach,** œ. Liable or subject to fits, 
tinneanas, s.pl. Fits, 7 
tinneas, -eis, -an, s.m. Sickness, disease. : 
ach, -eiche, &. Sickly, evil, distumpered, 


~~ = . am LA ek ee mm — 





frail. 


ri IT il t ü rey 


PE.: bg SZ "A yg mp 
m Je " [I 


UNIV ILLINOIS A 


Li 
VEN 
— " am "^ TAA ës 
| E) D if Fi r ^n a 1 fi = A. 
E kat a T | LX pd ee E) i 
b ikar en d 3 uut d FAN FLEX 


tinneas-airgiod, (an), »,m Silver quinsy 

t.-a-muigh,(an), epilepsy—JGC W. 97, 

t.-an-righ, scrofula (king’s evil.) 

t.-braghaid, (an), heartburn ( also an losgadh- 
brag haid. ) 

t.-buidhe, (an), jaundice, 

t,:builg, (an), hysterics, 

t.-busach, (an), mumps. 

t.-caitheimh,** (an), consumption. 

t.-caithte, (an), consumption — Arran, 

t.-cléibh, (an), consumption, 

t.-cloinne, (an), parturition, 2**Distempers of 
children. 

t.-cridhe, (an) heart-disease, 

t.-critheanach, (an), ague, 

t.-cuim, (an), hysterics. 

t.-cuirp, (an), constipation, 

t.-fairge, (an), sea-sickness, 

$.-fallsa, playing the truant, ` 

t.-feachd, (an), sickness on the day of battle 
—i.e, cowardice. 

t.-fuail, (an), gravel. stranguary, 

t. gabhaltach, a contagious disease, 

t.-goile, (an), stomach-disease, 

t.-gruthain, (an), liver-complaint. 

t.-maothain, (an), chest-complaint, 

$.-mara, (an), sea-sickness. 

t..mnathan, (an), hysterics. 

t.-mór, (an), epilepsy, morbus major. 

t.-na-gealaich, lunacy. 211Eclipse. 

t..na-h-urchaid, French-pox. 

t.-nan-airnean, kidney-disease, 

$.-nan-alt, gout, arthrites. 

bd.-nan- Domhnullach, a kind of pulmonary af. 
fection called glacach, It is said that the 
family of the Lords of the Isles received a 
charm from a shipwrecked foreigner to 


whom they showed kindness, by which they | - 


could heal this complaint. A duan was re- 
peated over the patient, who was then 
touched with the right hand —NGP- 
t -nàrach, (an), morbus obscognis vel Gallicus. 
cen pene (an), asthma. 
t..Phoil, epilepsy. 
t.-sgoile, (an), truantship. 
t.-tuiteamach, (an), epilepsy, palsy. 
t.-uaine, (an), chlorosis. 
tinneasach,** a. Stout, strong. (lit. Strongly: 
ribbed.) 2 Swift, nimble, 3 Sickly, distem- 
pered. 4 Frail. 6 Evil. Gu t., quickly, ex- 
peditiously. 
=d, £. f. Sickness, sickliness. 
being subject to fits, 
tinneasnach,** a. Stout, strong, 2 Having stout 
ribs, 
tinneas-na-gealaich,§ em. House-leek, see lus- 
nan-cluas. 
tinnseamh,** s.m. Service. 
tinnsgeadail,* sm. Bad omen—North.* 2.(MS) 
Forerunner. 
tinnsgeadalach, -aiche, @, Ominous of evil, por- 
tentous. 
ftinnsegil, v.g. Begin. 
ftinnsgleadh, -eidh, s.m, Commencement. A’ 
t—, pr.pt. of tinnsgil. 
tinnteagal, -ail, s.m. Corruption. 
tinntean, see teinntein. 
e -as,** -ais, s.m Great haste. 
tioba,ft chan, s.f. Heap. 
tiobair,** -braichean, s.f. see tobar. 
tiobairt, -ean, s. Well, fountain, cistern, draw- 
well, see tobar. 
pm  —each,** a, Abounding in springs. 2 Of, 
or belonging to, springs. 
tiobar, -air, -an, s.m. see tobar, 
ach, a, see tobarach. - 
——— sau,** ain, 8.m. Springing. 


2 State of 








2 Streaming. 


D cz f 


&ITTTPARITTT ARS iE 
4 L IAIME FT d M LE 


tinneas 951 


tioma 





3 Dropping. 
ftiobairrt,. 5 Well. 
tiobraen see tobarach, 
tiocaid, e -ean, 8.f. Ticket. Cléireach tiocaide, 
booking-clerk . oifig-tiocaide. booking-office 
tiochaidh, A thiochaidh fhéin: we. Exclama: 
tion of surprise— Badenoch 
tiochd, v.n. see teachd. Chat an sluagh ‘sap 
taigh, the people cannot be contained by the 
house ` tiochdaidh iad ‘san eaglais, they can be 
contained by the church 
tiodal, -ail, -an, s.m, Title — Nach eil coir aic’ 
an ciste air t. na rioghachd,®that it haa not a 
charter in its chest to the title of the kingdom— 
Beinn Doran. 
ach, -aiche, a. Appellative. 
aich, v.n. Confer a title. 2 Entitle. 
——aichte, past pt of Liodalaich, 
tiodhlac, -aic, -aicean, s.m. Gift, present, offer, 
ing, benefit, donation. 2 Interment, funeral, 
ach, -aiche, æ. Mercenary. 
adh, -aidh, s.m. Giving, act of giving, 
bestowing, presenting. 2 Burial, funeral. 8 
Burying, act of burying or interring. A’ t—, 
pr.pt. of tiodhlaic. T. an diombaireachd, à 
gift in secret, 
ail, -e, a. Mercenary. 
air, -e, -ean, s.m. Bestower, 
as, (MS) s.m. Gratification. 
tiodhlaic, pr. pt. a’ tiodhlacadh, v.a, 
give, bestow a gift. 2 Inter, bury. 
each, -eiche, a. Bountiful, beneficenó. 
each, -eich, s.m. Bountiful person. 
te, past pt. of tiodhlaic. Presented, offer- 
ed asa gift, 2 Interred, buried, 
ich, v see tiodhlaic. 
tiogair, s.m. Tiger. 
each, a. Fierce, like a tiger. 
tiogh,** a. Late. 
tioghlach,(MS) s.m. Blood, 
tiolaice, see tiodhlac. 
tiolam, -aim, -an, s.m. Short space. 2 Snatch. 
3 Sudden attempt to bite. 4* Clever opportu- 




















Present, 





nity 

tiolap,( AH) s.f. Very brief space of time. 2 Op- 
portunity. 

tiolm,(CR) s.m. Bite, mouthful— Perthshire. 

tiolp, pr.pt. a' tiolpadh, v.a. Snatch, grasp sud- 
denly. 2 Nibble. 3 Pilfer. 4 Cavil, carp. 5 
"Steal one's property and be almost looking ab 
you, steal by snatching. 

——ach, -aiche, a. That snatches or grasps sud- 
denly, prone to snatch or bite, 2 Cavilling. 3 
Captious. 

tiolpachd, s,f.ind. Captiousness. 

tiolpadair, -ean, s.m. Snatcher. 2 Cut-purse. 8 
Superficial critie, censor, caviller, carper. 4 
Pilferer. 6 Check in a boat. 

——adaireachd,** s. f. Criticizing, carping. 

tiolpadan,** -ain, s.m. Cut-purse. 

tiolpadh, -aidh, s.m. Snatching, act of snatching 
or grasping suddenly. 2 Cavilling, act of 
cavilling or oarping. 3 Captiousness. 4 Check- 
ing in a boat,” A’t—, pr.pt. of tiolp. Luchd- 
tiolpaidh, cavillers. 

tiolpaidh, fut.aff.a. of tiolp. 

tiolpair,-ean, s.m. Bite. 2 Biter. 8 Sharper. 

tiom, s.m. Sorrow. Ga&bhaidh e t., he will be 
Sorry. 

tiom,** s.f. Time. 2 Thyme. 

tiom,** v.a. Soften, assuage. 

tiom, -a, @. Soft, tender, delicate. 2 Fearful, 
timid, tenderhearted, sensitive,easily abashed 
or daunted, 3 Compassionate, warm-hearted. 
Crithidh feachd nach t., hosts that are valiant 
(not timid] shall tremble— Fingal. 

tioma,* s.f. Delicateness of feeling, 2 Daunt. 


tioma 


8 Softening with grief melting into tears 4 
Softness of disposition, emotion > Delicate- 
ness sensitiveness 6** Timidity 7 Warm- 
heartedness 8 Dejection Thàinig t.air,he was 
daunted, melted inte tears , thainig t. ait sùil- 
ean Fhinn Fionn melted into tears, 10madh 
ceud fo th., many a hundred quite unmanned 
quite daunted. 

tiomach,** a Soft, delicate, timid 
warm-hearted. 

tiomachadh, s.m. Softening, act of melting into 
tears. 2**Becoming timid. 38**Softness, tım- 
disi a Mercifulness. A’ t—, pr.pt. of tiom- 
aich. 

tiomachail, -e, a. Affecting, affective. 

tiomachd, s.f.ind.!Softness, tenderness, delicacy 
of feeling and sentiment. 2 *Daunt or damp 
on the spirits. 

tiomadh, see tioma. 

tiomaich, pr.pt. à' tiomachadh, v.a. & n. Soften 

. into tears, 2 Become softened, become exor- 

| able. 3 Become terrified or fearful, 4 Intimi- 
date. 6 Makeeffemiuate. Laoch nach b., a 
hero that goes forward dauntlessly ; thiomaich 
a chridhe, his heart softened. 

tiormaidireachd,(MS) s.f. Mealy-mouthedness. 

tiomail, -e,a. Timely. Is t. dhuinn bhi 'sgaoil- 
eadh, it is time for us to disperse. 

tiomail, -e, æ. Impressive. Searmonaiche?t., an 
impressive preacher. 

tiomain, pr.pt. a’ tiomnadh, v. a. Bequeathe, 
bestow, leave, as by a will. 2 Pledge. 3 Re- 
sign, commit for security. 4 Ascribe. 5**Swear 
by heaven. Th. e a spiorad suas, he com- 
mitied his spirit to God. 

tiomain,** s.f. Driving. 2 Proceeding. 

te, past pt. of tiomain. Bequeathed. 2 
Pledged. 3 Committed to another’s care. 4* 
Religiously determined. 

tiomairg,"* v.a. Collect, gather. 

+tiomairn,** pr.pt. a’ tiomarnadh, v. Command. 

tiomal,** -ail, s.?n. Ambit. 

tiomalachd,(MS) s.f. Apprebensiveness. 

tiomalachd,f{ s.f. Seasonableness. 

tiomalair,** s.m. Glutton. 

tiomaltas,** as, s.m. Victuals. 

tioman,** v.g. Give, bestow. 2 Drive, push. 2 
'Turn off, thrust off. 

tiomana,* irreg. pl. of tiom. 

tiomanta, past pt. Given, bequeathed. 

tiomantair,** $.7n. see tiomnadair. 

tiomargadh,** -aidh, s.m. Collection. 
lation. 

tiomarnadh,** -aidh, 
pr.pt. tiomairn. 

tiombhaigh,** s.f. False fellowship. 

tiombuail, s.f. Cymbal. 

tiom chainnt,** s.f. Circumlocution, 

tiomchair,** a. Tender-hearted. 

tiom-cheannachd,tf s.f. Insensibility. 

tiom-cbridhe, s.m.ind. Pity, mercy, tenderness, 
compassion. 2 Warm heart. 

ach, -aiche, a. Tender-hearted,kind, 

compassionate, merciful. 2 Courteous. 

achd,** s.f. Affectionateness. 

tiom-chuairt,** s. Ambitude. 2t{Friendly visit. 
8tiPeriodical visit or visitation. — Af Period 
of time, cycle. 5** Circle. 6**Bishop's visit. 
7**Justiciary visit. 

tiom-chuairteach, -eiche, @ Periodical, chronic. 
2 Circular. 

tiomghair,** v. Ask, request. 

—— e, $.f. Request, petition. 

tiomhaidh, see tiamhaidh. 

—eachd, see tiamhaidheachd. 

tiomna. see tiomnadh. 

tiomnaca, @ 'lestatory, of, or bel nging to, a 


2 Merciful. 





2 Trans- 


s.m. Command. A’ t—, 


—— 








e 








L ege: fen fe, H. fe rege o 8. m s LJ 
JTERNET ARCHIV 
LN L— IAE NL Li 


95? 


tional 


will. 

tiomnach, -aich s.m. & f. Testator. bequeather. 

air see tiomnach 

tiotnnadair -ean s.m Testator bequeather, 

tiomnadh,** va Commend, 2 Deliver up. 8 
Bequeathe. 4 Surrender 

tiomnadh, .aidh. -aidhean. sm Will, testament, 
2 Bequeathing, act of bequeathing. 3 Com- 
mitting to another's care. 4 Covenant 5 Pledg- 
ing, act of pledging A’ t—. pr pt. of tiomain. 
An Seann T., the Old Testament, an T. Nuadh, 
the New Testament , oir tha t. daingean an 
déidh bàis'dhaoine, for a testament is in force 
after men's death 

tiomnaich,** v.a. Bequeathe. 

tiomnaidh, fut.af.a of tiomain. 

tiomnaidhear, see tiomnadair. 

tiomnaim, (for tiomnaidh mi). I shall bequeathe, 

tiomnair, -ean, see tiomnadair 

tiompan,-ain, pl.-an,& -ain, s.m. Any musical in- 
strument. 2 Timbrel, cymbal, tabor, drum. 3 
Harp. 4**Drum of the ear, 5**Kitchen-jack. 
6 One-sided knoll. 7 Narrow gully. 8 Nozzle 
of a bellows. T.’na làimh, a timbrel in his 
hand ; tha a’ ghaoth cho fuar ’s ged a bhiodh 
i tighinn á t., the wind is as cold as if it were 
blowing out of a bellows’ mouth ; is mairg a 
losgadh a th. dhuit ! pity him who would burn 
his harp for you !—alluding to the story of a 
Hebridean harper, who having nothing else to 
make a fire with to warm his wife, broke his 
harp in pieces and burned it. His wife's heart, 
it seems, was colder than her body, as she ran 
away with another man before morning ! 

tiompanach,1t -aiche, a. Relating to, or like 
pne instruments, especially timbrels or 

arps. 

tiompanach,** -aich, s.m. Performer on the tim- 
brel. 2 Harper. 3 Minstrel. 4 Drummer. 

————— d,** s.f. Beatingonatimbrel 2 
Noise of a timbrel. 

tiompanaiche, -an, 8.m. Harper. 2 Musician, 
minstrel. 3 Performer on the timbrel. [McL 
& D gives -aich, for nom.sing.] 

tiomsach, -aiche,@.Collecting, bringing together, 

-————-adh, -aidh, s.m. Second milking of a 
cow. 2 Collecting, act of collecting. A’ t—, 
pr.pt. of tiomsaich. 

tiomsaich, pr.pt. a’ tiomsachadh, v. a. Collect, 
bring together. 

e ——te, past pt. Collected, brought toge- 

er. 

tiomsgail, see tionnsgail. 

tiomsgnadh, see tionnsgnadh. 

tiomuin,** s.f. Dedication. 2 Giving up. á 

tion,** a. Soft. : 

tion,** v.n, Melt, dissolve, 

ttion, s.m. Beginning. t 

tionac, see teanachd. 

tionacair, (MS) s.m. Tongs. 

tionachds', see teanacas. 

tionadh,** -aidh, s.m. Melting, dissolving. 

tionail, pr.pt. a’ tioual, a’ tionaladh & a’ tion- 
ailt, GO. & n. Gather, assemble. 2Glean. 3 
Come together, as an assembly, collect, com- 
pile, scrape. 

tionaileach,** o Causing to collect or assemble. 
2 Prone to collect or gather. 3 Fond of gath- 


- 











A 


e 


ering, 

tionailt,( AC) s.f. see tional. 

tionailte, past pt. of tionail. 
ous. 

tional, -ail, -an, s.m. Gathering, act of gather- 
ing, collecting. 2 Anything gathered, aceumu- 
lation. 3 Gleaning, act of gleaning. 4 As- 
sembling or coming together. 5 Assembiy, 
multitude, convocation. 6 Contribution, 7 


2** o Collectane- 


SI 


tional 


i Resort. A't—, p* pt. of tionail. T. nan neul, 

a gathering of the clouds ; a thaobh an tionail, 
concerimn the collection. 

'tjonalach. see tionaileach, 

tionalachadh,(MS) s.m. Compilation. 

adh, -aidh, m. d pr.pt. of tionail, Same 

meanings as tional 

tionalaiche,ff -an, s.m. Culler, \ 

tionas,** -ais, 8.m. Tanyard, 

tionc, see tiorc. 

tioncach, see tiorcach. 

tioncadh, see tiorc & tiorcadh, 





' tioncaiche,** see tiorcaiche. 


tionchair,"* s.f. Attendance, 

tionchds’, see teanacas, 

tionchosg,** s.m. Instruction. E at te 
tiong,** s. Tinkle, as of a bell. [** says tingle.) 

,** v.a. Tinkle. 

tiongail,** s.f. Tinkle, frequent tinkling. 

tionnachair,** s.m. Legator. 

tionnail, -e, -ean, s.f. Likeness or image of any 
person or thing. 

ttionnar,** air, s.m. Sleep, slumber, 

tionndadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Turning, act of 
turning round or back. 2 Returning, 3 Turn. 
A’ t—, pr. pt. of tionndaidh. 

tionndaidh, pr.pt. a’ tionndadh, v.a. & n. Turn 
by altering the position. 2 Turn,cause to turn. 
3 Turn inside out, or upside down. 4 Alter, 
change. 5 Become changed. 6 Turn hay. 7 
Convert. 8 Be converted, 9 Translate. 10 
ttReturn. 11 Fetch. T, a leth-taobb, turn 
aside. 

tionndain, W. of Ross for tionndaidh, 

ttionnriomh,** s. Conclusion, 

tionnsgail, pr.pt. a’ tionnsgal, v.a. Invent, con- 
ziv 2 Devise, plot, project. 3(MS) Medi- 

te. 

tionnsgainear,(MS) s.m. Beginner, 

tronnsgainn, -e, -ean, s.f Beginning, element, 
2 Devising. 3 Contrivance. ["*tionnsegain] 

———-, pr.pt. a’ tionnsgnadh, v.a. Devise, 
invent, contrive, plot. 2 Begin, commence, 
ground. 3 Turn, reburn. 4 Attack or fall to 
of a sudden without any cause—Islay.  6** 
Breed. [**tionnsgain. 

tionnsgal, -ail, -an, s.m. Ingenuity, invention,in- 
ventiveness, 2 Industry. 3 Dexterity, art, 
eleverness. 4 Machination.  5(MS) Reach. 
6 Conduct, management, A’ t—, pr. pt. of 
tionnsgail, 

-——— — Ach, -aiche, @. Ingenious, inventive. 2 
Industrious, diligent. 3 Contrivant, managing 
well. 4 Adventurous. 5 (MS) Artificial. 

tionnsgalachd, s.f. see tiounsgal, 

tionnsgan, see tionnsgal. 

tionnsgantach, see tionnsgalach. 

tionnsgantachd, s.f. see tionnsgal. 

tionnsgantair,*® s.m. Deviser, contriver. 
ginner. 

tionn:glach, see tionnsgalach, 

tionnsgladh, sm see tionnsgal, 

tionnsglair, see tionnsgnair. 

tionnsglair,(MS) s.m. Inventor 

tionnsgnach, -aiche, à Speculative. 
tiounsgalach. 

——acth, -aidh, sm. Devising, act of de- 
vising or inventing. 2 Beginning, act of be- 
ginning. 3 Turniug, act of turning or return- 
ing. 4 Design, device, project. 5 Element, 
6*Sudden attack, A’ t—,pr pt. of tionnsgainn. 

——d, $.f see tionnsgal, 
tionnsgnachd,** 3.f. Ingeniousness. 2 Advent- 
urousness. 3 Industry. 

tionnsgnadair, see tionnsgnair. 

tior neznadh, tt -aidh, s.m. & pr pt. Devising, iv- 





Tow 





2 Be- 


2** see 








—— 


venting. 2 Beginning, act of beginning, eom | tiorma.chail, e, a. 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


958 


 tormachail ` 


mencement. 3 Ground, element. 
act of turning or returning, 6 Design,device, 
project, projection, inven'ion. 6*Attacking or 
falling to of à sniden. 7 Sudden attack or 
commencement. 

tionnsgnaichs, an, s.m. Speculator. 

tionnsgnair,** sm. Beginner, broacher. 
triver, deviser, schemer. 

tionnsgnath, see tionnsgnadh. 

tionnsgradh,** -aidh, s.m, Dowry, portion, 2 
Reward. : 

tionramh,** -aimh, s.m. Attendance, 

tionsan,** -ain, s.m. Drop. 

tionsgadail,** s.f. Managing, 

tionsgnadh, see tionnsgnadh. [dowry. 

tionsgra, see tionnsgradh. 3 Wages, reward, 

tiontanas,** ais, s.m. Haste, speed, expedition. 

t10nur,** -uir, s.m. Tenon, 

tiop; v.a. & n. Steal little by little, pilfer. 2 

bread a fishing-hook— Ross-shire. 

tiopal,( AFP) -ail, sm. Water-spider, 

tioparsan,** -ain, s.m. Flowing, streaming, 

tior, pr.pt. a’ tìoradh, v.a. Dry, as corn or hay 
for the barn. 2 [tirin festen, cròch in Perth- 
shire—*] Kiln-dry. 

tìoradh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Drying, act of dry- 
ing, as corn or hay. 2 Kiln-drying, act of 
kiln-drying. 3**Seorching. A’ t—, pr. pt. of 
tior. 4 (DMK) Asmuch grain as is dried on 
a kiln at a time, Scots, '' drying.” Tha t. air 
an ath,there is æ '* drying ” on the kiln—Caith- 
ness, 

tìorail, -e, o Drying, that dries. 2 Warm,genial, 
as a mild sun. 3 Cosy, snug, homely, comfort. 
able. 4 Sheltered. 5 Commodious, 6f{Mild, 

“modest, 7**Convenient. Gath t. na gréine, 
the warm sunbeam. 

tioraime, comp. of tioram. 

tìoralachd, s.f.ind. Warmth. 2 State of being 
sheltered. 3 Mildness, meekness. 

tioram, -a, @ Dry, without moisture, parched, 
not wetted, not wet, arid. 2 Dry, barren, un- 
interesting, unembellished, jejune. 3 Fair, as 
weather. 4 Thirsty. 5* Flippant in speech, 
pert. 6 Not seasoned, having no seasoning, 
as food of an indifferent kind, 7*Seasoned, ag 
hay.  Uair th., fair weather ; feur t., hay. 
(ff gives comp. tirme tioraime & tirime.] 

——— — —adh, see tiormachadh, 

tioramach,** a. Dry, thirsty. 

— — —,** -aich, s.m. Drought, thirst. 


^ ` "og 


4 Turning, 


2 Con: 


—adh, see tiormachadh, _ 
tioramadair, see tiormadair. ` -+ 
tioramaich, see tiormaich. 
tioramalach,** o Dessicative, 
tioraman, see tiorman. 
tioranach,** æ. Tyrannical, 
**-aich, s.m. Tyrant, osi 
tioranta,** a. Tyrannical, oppressive, ~ 
tiorc, pr.pt. a’ tiorcadh. v.a. Save, rescue from 
danger, deliver, free. 

tiorcach, -aiche, a. That saves or rescues; 
Working or bringing about deliverance. * 

tiorcadh, -aidh, s.m. Saving, act of saving or 
rescuing, from danger, 29 Delivering, liberat. 
ing. A’ t—, pr.pt. of tiorc. 

tiorcaiche, an, s. m. & f. One who saves or 
delivers from danger. 

tiorcta, past pt. of tiore, 
cued from danger. 

tiorma,* comp. of tioram,” Drier, driest, 

tiormach,** a. Dessieative. 

tiormachadh, aidh, s.m. Drying, acb of drying 
or parching. 2 Seasoning, as hay, fish, &c, 3* 
Fair weather 4*Absorption. A’ t—, pr.pt. of 
tiormaich. 





; Qa 


Saved, delivered, res- 


Dessicatiye, absorbent, 
~ 3 0 


eee ee 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINO 


| E Fi 
| 


el f 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


tiormachd — ~. 


Dryness, state of being dry. 
2 Continuance of dry weather, drought, 3f{f 
Thirst. 4 Disease in cattle. 5*Flippancy. 
tiormadair,(MS) s.m. Drier. 2 Flippant pala- 
verer, spouter—Dain I. Ghobha. 
tiormaich, pr.pt. a tiormachadh, v.a. Dry,make 
dry, parch, dry up. 2 Season, 3 Absorb. 
pænt, past pt, of tiormaich. Dried. 2 
Absorbed. 
tiormalachd, s. f. ind. Drought, 2 Thirst. 3** 
Aridity. 
tiorman, -ain, -an, s.m, Meal made into a ball, 
steeped in water, and then toasted, the in- 
side being dry. 2 Drier 3 Anything that 
dries, or serves to evaporate moisture, 4** 
Water thickened with oatmeal. 
tiormanach, a. Dessicative. 
,tiormasg, -aisg, -an, s,m. Mischance, mischief, 2 
Destruction, 
tiorraid,** s.f. Robe, mantle. 
-taorrail, see tìorail. 
rétorralachd, see tìoralachd. 
"Giort, -a, -an, s.m. Accident, mischance. 2 Risk, 
chanee. 
tiortach, -aiche, a. Accidental. 2 Unfortunate. 
3 Liable to accidents. 4**Causing, or leading 
to, aceidents. 
tiortachd,* s.f. Liability to accident. 
tioruirse,** ef Remnant. 
tios, v. n. Go, come. 
ftiosan,-ain, -an, s.m. Water gruel, 
Hot, see tiota. 
"tiot,1l v.d. & n. Despatch quickly. 2 Go quick- 


tiormachd, s.f.ind. 


tiota, -idhean, s.m. Moment, little while, second 

of time, trice, breath. Ann ant, in æa mo- 

* ment ; thig an seo car b., come here a little 

` while, 

iotach,** a. Momentary. 

&iotadh, -aidh, -aidbean, s.m. see tioba. 

'tiotag,** -aig, s.f. Very short;while,minute,trice. 

tiotal, -ail, see tiodal. 

dietalach,** a, Appellative. i 

tiotalaich, see tiodalaich. | 

‘tiotamh,* see tiota. 

tiotan, -ain, s.m. see tiota. +2 The sun. i 

tiothlam, see tiolam, 

tir, -e, -ean, s.m. [J. in the North.] Land. 9 The 

land, in contradistinction to water. 3 Coun- 

try, region. 4 Shore, beach, coast. O'n a 

thàinig e do 'n tir, since he came to the coun- 

try, to this region ; tir mòr, a continent; eadar 

thir-mór agus eileanan, beth continent and is- 

lands ; t. aineoil, a strange land ; air b., on dry 

ground, on land, ashore ; rach air t., go ashore’ 

mói-thir, see note under mór. [**s.f.] 

tir, v.a. see tior. [15/ay] 

ftircean, -ein, s.m., Meaning, signification, expo- 
sition, 

tirceanas, see tircean, 

tireach,** œ. Territorial, of or belonging to a 
country, of the same country. 

, "ich, -ichean,s.m. Countryman. 2 Patriot. 

tire .chadh, -aidh, s.m, Colonizing, act of colon- 
izing. 2 Colony. 3 Disembarkation. A’ t—, 
or. pt. of tirich, 

tireachas,* -ais, s.m. Patriotism. 
3 Colonizing, colonization. 

tireadh," -idh, $.m..£ pr.pt. of tir, see tìoradh. 

tirealachd,** st Homeliness. 

tireanach, -aich, s.m. Landsman. 

rent, e, a. Rural, agrarian. 2**Homely,snug, 
comfortable. A 

tìr-eòlach, a. Geographical. 

tir-colaiche, s.m. Geographer, 

tir-colas, s.m, Geography. 

tir-ghradh, -ghràidh, s.m. Patriotism, 


«crum wu Raye aay 





2**, Colony, 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


954 








tiughachd | 


tir-ghradhaiche, -an, s.m, Patriot. 

tirich,11 s.m. & f. see tireach. 2(AF) s.m. The 
horse that walks op, or next to, the unplough- 
ed land. 

tirich, pr.pt. a' tireachadh, v.a. Colonize, settle. 
2 Disembark, 3** Bring to land. 

tiridh, s, Drying corn—A rran. 

tirim, see tioram. | 

tirleach,** -ich, s.m. Demesne, mansion-house: 

tirmein,tt s.m. Pert fellow, 2 Would-be wag. 


tirmeineach,tt a. Flippant. 





—————ÀÓ 


d,fr s.f. Flippancy. 


tirpean,** -ein, s.f. House-leek. 


tirr h-eodha'! int, Ory to incite a dog when 
driving cattle. 

tir, o Earthed. T. an caol-chist’ liobhta 
bhòrd, earthed in @ coffin of polished boards 
W. Ross, p. 18, 

tirteag,** s, Domain, seat. 


-tir-unga, s. Ounce-land, see p. 719. 
tiseadh,* -idh, s.m. Coming. 


isean,** -ein, s.m. Grudge, 

ttit, s.f. The earth. 

tit !* int. Expression used on wet being percei» 
ved suddenly, 

titeag, soe tif. 

ai lh, see tib. 

Titan, see tiotan. 

tith,ff-e, er Inclination, desire, eagerness, 
keenness, forwardness. 2 Design, intention, 
3 Pursuit. Air mo th., pursuing me. 

titheach,* -eiche, a Bent or determined on. 2 
ttDesigning. 3jfPursuing keenly. 4 Eager, 
keen for, eagerly desirous, inclining, earnest, 
willing. 6 Sharp,forward. T. air mo mharbh- 
adh, keen on my destruction. 

Ttithinn,s. The sun. 

tiu,** see tiugh. 

tiubhachd,** s.f. Sloth. 

tiubhair,** v.a, Give, grant, present, bestow. 9 
Deliver, give up. Th. ia gràdh, she gave her 
love ; gu’n tiubhradh e dh’ i, that he weuld 
give her ; t. dhomh, give me. 

tiubhir, see tiubhair, 2 see biur. 

tiubhrach,** œ. Prone to give, generous. 

—adh,*? -aidh, s.m. Giving, granting, 
grant. 2 Presenting. 3 Delivery, giving up. 

tiubhradh,** -aidh, s.m. Gift, grant. 2 Giving, 
granting. 

tiubhraich, ** va. Give, grant, present. De- 
liver, give up. Ochian thiubhraich Righ 
Calum Lochabar fo chis da, King Malcolm be- 
stowed the rental of Lochaber on him long ago— 
Duanaire, 89 ; th. dhomh aon de d' dha 
shleagh, géve me one of your two spears. 

triubhtrachd,** s.f. Sloth. 

tiubruid,** s.f. Well, cistern. 

tiucainn, see tiugainn. 

tiuchag,** -aig, s.f. Pore. 

tiuchan,** s.m. Pore. : 

tiugainn, Come, let us go. [From deaspirated 
thugainu, to us, for chugainu—f{] 

tiugh, tighe, v. Thick, not slender. 2 Of great 
thickness. 3 Thick, dense, set close together. 
4 Frequent, in quick succession, as drops of 
rain. 5 Coarse not thin. 6ffThick, as a liquid 
approaching to solidity. 7 Foggy, hazy. 8 
Ciumsy. 9 Dull, 10 Corpulent, 11 Indistinct- 
ly uttered. 12 Gross. [*comp, tibhe & tiuighe.] 

Ttiugh, s.m. The end. 

t , œ. Latter, last. 4 

tiughachadh, -aidh, s.m. Thickening, act of 
thickening. 2 Condensing, condensation, 3 
Coagulating, coagulation. A’ t—, pr, pt. of 
tine haich, : d 

tiughachail, -e, a. Inerassative. 

tiughachd, s find. Corpulency,. 








wd 





Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS ATS 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


tiuighe, comp. of tiugh, 


i ——--—mhoireachd, $.f. ind. 


tiughad 


fughod, -aid, s.m. Degree of corpulency or 
thi kness. see tighead. 

tiughalas,** -ais, s. Thickness, closeness, 
denseness, solidity, consistence. 2 Grossness. 

tiughaich, pr. pt. a’ tiughachadh, v.a. & nm. 
Thicken. 2 Become thick. 3*Crowd. 4En- 
gross. 5** Condense. 6**Coagulate. 7** Be- 
come gross or denge, 

tiughaichte, past pt. of tiughaich. 

E a ae, -aich, s. f. Thickest part of liquids, 

regs. 

E —d, see tiughalach. 

fttiugh-bhagh,** e am, Late drinking. 

ftiugh là,** s.m. The last day. 

see tighe & tighead, 

ad,* ed, see tighead. 

adas,* -ais, $m. see tighead, 

tiuir, see tiurr. 

tiunnal,** ail, s.m. Match, likeness, compari- 
son. T. t’ aogais is tearc ri fhaotaimn, the 
match of thy face is seldom found, 

tiumpan, (MS) s.m. Hinder. 

tiur, see tiurr. 

titrr,t s.m. Beach out of reach of the sea. 2 
(DMK) Seaware cast up by the sea at high- 
water mark— W. comst of Ress. 3(AC) Mark, 
stamp, impress. 4 Mark of the sea on the 
shore. 5(AC) Refuse left by the tide on the 
beach. . na mara, high-water mark ; is 
truagh nach mi bha laimh riut, ged ab’ ann 
an t. an lain e, would that I were near thee, 
even though it were in the impress of the tide. 

tiuth ! int. Call to silence or drive away a dog 
—Arran. 

tla. see tlàth, 

tlà-chainnt,11 -e, ean, st Blandishment. 

tlachd, s.f.ind, Pleasure, satisfaction, delight. 
2 Inclination, liking. 3 Beauty. 4 Love, at. 











tachment, affection. SAF) Fat hog. 6 Geom- 
fort. 7 Honour.  8** rarely, Colour, 9 
**Burial, 10 Market, fair. 11 Garment. 19 


Liberality. 15 Earth. 

Tha t. aige dhith, he is attwehed to her ; cha 
"pn fhaigh thu e le t., yeu will mot get it with 
any degree of satisfaction; is beag mo th. dhith 
no dheth, I have no great affection for her or 
kim ; gabhaidh mi t., Z wit take pleasure; tog- 
aibh cuimhne Orla le t., extol with honour the 
memory of Orta. 

,** po, Colour, polish. 

- ach,** o Geographical. 

-————àdh,** s.m. Burial. 

— —-àaich,** v.a. Inter. 

aireachd, see tlachdmhoireachd. 
-airm,** s.m. Market-place. 

en ar, a. see tlachdmhor. 

t- bhaile,** s.n. Market-town. 

——-.— -bheirt,'s.f. Geography. 

Tf--——— -bhog,** s.m. Quagmire, quicksand. 

t-- -bhuth, s.m. Booth or tent at a fair. 

ze -eolas,** -ais, s.m. Geography, geograph- 
ical knowledge. 

-—— -grabhachd,** $.f. Geography. 

-——. -grabhaiche,** s.m. Geographer, 

mhoire, comp. of tlachdmhor. 

Pleasantness. 2 
Blandness. 2 Handsomeness, comeliness. 4 
(MS)Acceptance. 

—--——mibhor, -oire, d. Pleasant, delightful, 2 
Handsome, comely, lovely. 3 Becoming, fit- 
ting. 4*Liberal. Leanabh t., a comely child; 
-t. do dhuine, becoming in a man. 

—--— -mhuchd, see tlath-mhuc. 

-sgriobhadh, e, am. Cosmography. 2 Geo- 

graphy. . L 

-sgriobhair,** e, m. Cosmographer. 2 

Geographer. 

sheisd,§ &. Wood-strawberry, see subh- 






































linitized hu 
PIRSSI LETU 2 
= 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


955 


tlus 


thalmhainn. 
tlachd-shubh,§ $. Wood-strawberry, see subh- 
thalmhainn. 


4 


——--— -thomhaiseach,** a. Geometrical, of or 


belonging to, geometry. 
-thomhas,** -ais, s.m," Geometry. 
——— —Aàájir,** s.m. Geometrician, 

tlà-ghuthachd,Tf s.f./nd. Mellowness of voice. 

tlaim, see tlàm. 

tlaiteachd, s.f. Mild rain, smurring— A rran. 

tlàithe, comp. of tlàth. 

tlaitheachd, s.f.ind. Mildness, softness, tender- 
ness, smoothness. 

tlaithead, -eid, ann. Degree of mildness, soft- 
ness, tenderness or smoothness. 

tlàm, -àim, -àimeannan, s.f. Handful of wool or 
flax. 2 Flake. 3 Lock of woel or flax on the 
distaff, 4*Awkward handling.  [tftj/. tlàm- 
anman.] T. de chleimh nan caorach, a hand- 
ful of woot. 

tlàm, pr.pt. a’ tlàmadh, oa Feaze or pluck, as 
wool. 2* Mix wool. 3**Handle. 

tlàmaeh,** a. Teazing, plucking. 

thamadh, -aidh, s.m. Teazing, aet of teazing or 
plucking, as wool, handling,mixing, fumbling, 
A’t—, pipt. of tlàm. Co-thlamadh, mixing. 

tlamaiea,(MS) v.e. Blend. 

blàs, Aug, sm. see tlàths. 

ttlas,** s.m. Cattle. 2 Fair. 

tlasach,** -aich, s.m. Fair. 

ttath, -àithe, o Mild, kiad, tender, indulgent, 
mereiful, meek. 2 Tranquil, gentle. 3 Mel, 
low, sweet, sounding mellow. 4 Smooth to the 
teuch. 5 Smooth, delicate. 6*Moist, humid, 
7**Feeble. 8**Balmy. Bu t. à gorm-shuil, 
soft was her blue eye ; ceilte fo 'tlàth-chiabh- 
an concealed under her soft locks; tha seo t.,this 
is somewhat moist ; uisge t., balmy or gentle 
rain; bu bhuige a chainnt na oladh th., his 
speech was softer than smooth oil; 'Buair a 
thuiteas an t-sian gu t., when the shewer falls 


gently. 
tlàth, Skye for tlàths, Thàinig t. air mo chridhe, 
my heart warmed or melted. fa. used as a 





= —————— 


noun, 

Deeg ER -aidh, s.m. Moistening, 2 Getting 
into perspiration. A’ t—, pr. pt. of tlàthaich. 
T. falluis, gentle perspiration. 

tlathaich,* v.g. du. Moisten gently. 2 Become 
balmy or gentle. 3 Abate, as weather. 4/Get 
into a gentle perspiration. 

thithas, see tlàths. 


| tlàth-ghaoth, s.f. Breeze. 


tlàth-mhuc,(AF) s, Fat hog. 

tlàths, -àiths, s.m. Mildness, kindness, warmth, 
meHowness, balminess. 2 Tranquility. 3 Gen- 
tleness, tenderness. 4 Smoothness. 65 Soft- 
ness. 6**Merry trick. 7**Mellowness, balmi- 
ness. A’ tionndadh aseaoin na sine gu t., 
changing the inclemency of the weather to mild- 


ness. 

tlàth-thaislich,** v.a. Bedew. 2 Moisten. 

tli,** s.m. Colour. 2 Feature. 

tligheachd, s.f.ind. Nausea,inclination to vomit, 
2 Liquid, discharge, spume— Dàin I. Ghobha. 
Tha t. air, he is inclined to vomit, 

tliochd,* s.m. Beginning. 

an,** -ain, s.m. Hoarseness. 

anach,** o, Causing hoarseness. 2 Hoarse, 

tlu, see tlugh. 

tlugaig (MMcD) s. Small pole about 4 ft. long 
and 1i in. in diameter, the lower end sharp- 
ened round to a blunt point, with a foot-resb 
called the sgonnan, placed about 12 in. from 
the point, used for planting potatoes— Lewis. 

tlugh,* s.m. Pair of tongs. 

Ttlus, (AF) s.m. Cattle, 1 

tlus, -uis, 8a. Pity, ruth, kx Aca E 2 Ten- 


— 








Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


NTERNET ARCHIV 


tlus 


derness, affection. 3 Mildness, genial warmth. 
balminess. 4 Comfort, comfortable sensation, 
as clothes next the skin. 5 Lie. 6 Gentle- 
ness. 7 Balminess or mildness, as weather. 
8 see tlas. 
Labhair le t., speak with some affection ; chan 
'eil t. ’sam bith ’san aodach,there is no comfort 
in the clothes ; fheara bu mhòr t. is bàigh, ye 
heroes noted for natural affection and clanship, 
[**for compassion and mercy]; thig t. is blaths, 
balmy weather and genial warmth will come ; 
t. nan speur, the balminess of the air. 
tlusach,** -aich, s.m, Dissembler, liar. 
tlusail, -e, a. Tender, pitying, compassionate. 2 
Warm, mild, balmy, genial. 3 Affectionate, 
kind. 4 Agreeable to the touch, comfortable. 
5 False. Nighean t., an affectionate daughter; 
aodach t., comfortable clothing ; uairt., mild 
or genial weather ; gu t., kindly. 
tlusaileachd, see tlusalachd. 
tlusair, s.m. Kind, compassionate man. 
eachd,* see tlusalachd. 
‘tlusalachd,s.f.ind. Tenderness, compassion, Kid. 
ness. 2*Balminess, genial warmth. $ *Oom- 
fortable feeling or sensation. 
tlusar, see tlusmhor. 
tlusmhoire, comp. of tlusmhor., 
klusmhoireachd,* see tlusalachd. 
tlusmhor, see tlusail. 
tnachair, -ean, s.m. Spanner. 
tau, see tnüth. : 
Dnüth,-a, s. m. Envy, jealousy. 2 Zeal, fire, 
.Jonging. 3 Anger, indignation, grudge. 4 
‘Malice, 5 Bigotry. 6 Avarice. Am fianuis 





tnütha, before envy ; do mhór-chridhe gun t., 


thy great heart without matice. 

——-àch, -aiche, œ. see tnùthail. 

——-ach,-aich, -aichean, 3. m. Rival, envious 
person, jealous persen. 

*——&dh, -aidh, s.m. Confliet. 

tnùthail, -e, c. Envious, jealous. 
Malignanb, raneorous, malicious. 

tnithair,** s.m. Bigot. 

tnithar, -aire, @. see tnüthmhor. 

tunüthmhor, -oire, a.Envious, malicious, jealous. 
Gu t., enviousty, 

to-, verbal prefix. To. ` 

ttob,* s.f. [**m.] Surprise. 

tobac,** em. Tobacco. [tombaca.] 

tóbairt,l| s./, Flux, spasms attendant on diarr- 
hoea. 

toban,t -ain, s.m. Wreath of wool or flax on & 
distaff. 2 Flake. 3 Cowl, hood, [** says;t.] 

tobar, -air & toibre, pl. tobraiche, tobraichean 
& toibrichean, s.m. Well, fountain, spring. 
2 Source, origin. Tobraichean na beatha, the 
Fountains [issues] of life; an t. bho 'm bheil 
gach buaireadh a’ sruthadh, the source 
whence all temptations flow ; beul an tobair, 
the mouth of the well. 
t.-baistidh, baptismal-font. ` 
£.-fior-uisg', spring-well, living spring, peren- 

nial spring. 

t.-tàirne, draw-well, 

ach, -aiche, &. Springy, abounding in 
springs. 

tobh,** s.m. see tobha: 

——,** v.d. Hoe. 

tobhainn, ** v.a. Hoe. 

tobha, -chan & -ichean, s.m. Rope, cable, 2** 
Hoe. 3 Tow. T. na croiche, the gallows’ rope ; 
bitheadh gach fear a deanamh t. dha fhéin, 
let every man make a rope for (hanging) him- 
self ; t. cartach, a cart-rope; t. corcaich, a 
hempen rope. 

tobha, v.a. Tow. 

tobhach, -aiche, a. Having ropes. 


2 Angry. 3 





Digitized by 


= 1 = Lj 


956 





tochair 


Ttobhach,** -aich, s.m. Wrestling. 2 i 
3 Inducing. deeg 

t —,** æ. Sudden, surprising. 

tobhaig,v.a, Put earth to potatoes with a hoe— 
W. of Ross-shire. 

tobhair, see tabhair. 

(MS) s.m. see todhar. 

t, see tabhairt. 

tach, see tabhairteach. 

tobhar, see todhar. 

tas, see tabhartas. 

tobhlair, -ean, see tólair, ; 

tobhta, (DC) s.f. Walls ofa house. So called 
even though built of stone, a survival of the 
times w houses were built of divots— Uist. 
[In Argyl a wall built of divots is called 
balla-tobhta.] 2 Buin with walls standing and 


roof fallen in. 

















j tobhta, -chan & tobhtan, s.m. Rower’s bench in 


a boat. 2**Purf, clod. T.-annainn E t.-fhail, 
see under taigh. 3 Litile knoll. 
t.-braghaid, bow-thwart. 
6.-chamus,t.-chroiun,t.-dheiridh,t.-Chogalaich, 
t,-thoisich, see under bata, p. 77. 
t.-shilidh,(AC) see appx. under bàta. - 
t.-üigte,(DMK) Movable thwart in a boat— — 
tobhts erg d ve F 
obhtaeh,1[ -aiehe, a. Furnished with r 
spes ower’s 


tobhtag,(DU) -ain, s.f. Small yard containing 8 ` 
stack or two of corn. The walls are general- ` 
ly of turf. 

tobrach, gen.sing. of tobar. 

tobraiche, n.pl. of tobar. 

- an, n.pl. of tobar. 

toc, v.a. Puff, rise gradually, as a loaf. 2 Swell, 
as wiih rage. 3 Bag, swell with good eating. 
Th. a h-aodann, her face swelled. 


| toc, s. Disease of the eyes, mostiy peculiar to 


sheep—ob Donn, ?(DC) s.m. rr pink-eye ” in 
horses. 

tócadh,* s.m. Pufüng, swelling. 2**Prosperity. 
A’ t—, pr.pt. of toc. 


| Téocair, -ean, am. Causeway. 


Loch Is, Bad smell. 

toch, -a, -an, s.m, Thigh, hough of an animal, 
2** Fit of crying. S**Love. 

toch, v.a. Hamstring,cut off the limbs of cattle, 
TG Th. iad an cro&dh, they houghed the cat- 

e. 

tocha, comp. of toigh, see docha. 

tocha,** s. Choice. 

tochach, -aiche, a. Of or belonging to the 
hough, houghed. 

tochadh, -aidh, s.m. Hamstringing. A’ t—. pr. 
pt. of tech. 

tochail, pr.pt. a’ tochladh, oo De, 
bore. 2 Love. 

tochail,** s.f. sce tochailt. 

——iche, s.m. Fessilist. 

tochaHi,(Ms) s. Gutter. 

tochailleach, see tochailteach. 

tochailliche,** s.m.. Miner. 2: Pioneer (in army.) 

tochailt, -e, -ean, $.f. Mine, quarry. 2 Digging. 
3 Fossil. 

—— ————e, a. d past pt. of tochail. Digged, dug, 

—— —— —each, -aiche, a. That roots out or ex- 
tirpates. 2** Mineral. 3 Fossilized. 

each, Ach, s.m. One who roots or digs 


quarry mine, 


2 Miner, 3 Pioneer. 


out. 
tochailtear,** er, s.m. Miner, quarrier. 
tochal, -ail, s.m. Mine, quarry. 2 Digging. 
tochal, see tochladh. 
tochalaiche, see tochailliche. 
tochalta, see tochailte. 
tochair,** v.a. Invite. 2 Wind up, as yarn. 
tochair,**v.a@.Give a dowry or marriage portioB - 


Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 4 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


tóchsr 


957 


toram 





tochar, s.m. Dense volume of smoke—A rgyll. 
tochar.* see tochradh 
ttochar,** s.m. Causeway, pavement, 2 Crowd 
T éisg, acauseway of dead fish. 
tochar, v see tochair, 
tocharach, -aiche, æ. see tochrach, 
tocharaich, v. see tochraich 
tocharais, see tacharais 
tocharaiste, see tacharaiste. 
tocharas, see tacharas. 
tochas, see tachas. 
tòchd, sam out, see toc & toch. Deagh th., a'good 
smell. [tick. 
tochd,** s.m. Fit, 2 Trance. 3Silence 4 Bed 
tochd, a. see tochdail. 
tochdach,** a. see tochdail. 
tochdail,** o Still. 92 Silent. 
toch-fhearg,"* -fheirge, s.f. Silent rage, smoth- 
ered wrath. 
—ach, a. Raging in silence, 
tochladh, -aidh,s.m. Digging, act of digging, 2 
Mining, quarrying. 8 Pit, mine, quarry. 4 
Grave. A’ t—, pr.pt. of tochail. 
tochlaidh, fut o o. of tochail. 
tochmhaire,** $,f. Marriage-treaty, 
ftochmharc, € Wooing. 
tochra,(AF) s.m. Small pig. 
toehrach, -aiche, a, Of, or belonging to,’a dowry. 
2 Having a large dowry. | 
tochradh, -aidh, -aidhean, s. m, Marriage-por- 
tion,dowry. 2 Endowment. A réir tochraidh 
| nam maighdean, according to the dowry of the 
| virgins. 
| tochraich, v.a. Endow. 
tochraichte,** a. & past pt. Endowed, 
| fochrais,* see tachrais. 
| te, see tachraiste. 
|^. tochras, see tachras. 
tochuil, see tochail. 
tochus,** s.m. Possessions, property. 
tocsaid, see togsaid. (heads. 
-> each, -eiche, a. Of, or belonging to, hogs- 
tod,** s.m. Clod, sod. 
todan,** -ain, s.m. Small clod. 
todh, see todha. 
todha,(AC) s.m. see tobha, 
tedhachd,** ert Silence. 
tódhadh, -aidh, s.m. Core,frot, disease in sheep. 
todhail, sr Destruction. 
todhair, pr.pt. a’ todhar, v.a. Manure, 2 Bleach. 
todhas, -ais, ¢.m. Silence. 
todhar, -air, ap, s.m., Manure, dung. 2 Field 
manured by folding cattle upon it. 3 Bleach- 
ing, process of bleaching, a bleach. 4(MS)Com. 
post. A’t—, pr. pt. of todhair. 
todhlair, -ean, see tolair. 
tofas,** -ais, s.m. Gaelic form of topaz. 
tog, pr pt. a’ togail, v. a. Lift, raise, rear. 2 
Build. 3 Brew, distil. 4 Carry. 5 Take away. 
6 Excite, stir, cheer up, rouse. 7 Exact, as 
tribute, 8 Rear, educate, bring'up. 9 Hoist, 
weigh. 10 Extol. 11 Make sheaves of corn. 
Th. iad taigh, they built a house ; le gliocas 
togar taigh, with wisdom a house is built ; am 
fear ath. thu, the man that reared you ; tog- 
aidh fear fiar aimhreit, œ perverse man stir- 
reth up strife ; th, tuinn an cinn, waves rear- 
their heads ; t. do throm dhiom, remove thy 
burden from me ; do not goad me too much ; th. 
jad cis, they exacted tribute ; cha tog pìob mo 
Chridhe, the pipes will not cheer my spirits ; 
togaidh an là, the day will clear up ; tog ri, 
ascend ; t. air, report ill of ; t. cuis, appeal ; th 
? e à chùis do 'n righ, he appealed to the king ; t. 
| ort chun a’ mhonaidh, betake yourself to the 
mountains ; a’ togail a’ bhruaich, ascending 
the acclivity ; th, iad air gu'a robh e déidheil 














| 

| 

n 

n 

Job 

| 4 

|» 

Ih | 
r 

i 





air an Ol, they raised a report that he was ad- 
dicted to liquor ; a thogadh mo chridhe 'nuair 
a bhitheadh e trom, that would cheer my heart 
when sad ; t. na siùil, hoist the sails ; th. iad 
an acair, they weighed the anchor ; th. iad ai 
bhraich, they brewed (or distilled) the malt ; t. 
do shùil, raise your eye, look; th. mi o 'n a 
thubhairt e, I understood from what he said; 
t. dheth, cease, desist ; X. orb, prepare thyself, 
rouse thyself ; t. tonn, sing a song; th. iad 
orra, they started ; th. e air as déidh na mna, 
he started after the woman —W.5S.2.102 ; th. e 
droch alladh orm, he raised a bad report about 
me ; tog orm mo phiob is théid mi dhachaidh, 
give me my pipes and I will go home—Cumha 
Ruairidh mhóir. 

togaid, see togsaid. 

togail, gen. -e & togalach, pl. toglaichean, s.f. 
Lifting, act of lifting. 2 Building, acb of 
building. 3 Carrying. 4 Taking away. 5 
Rearing. act of rearing. 6 Anything to be 
lifted. 7 Building, structure, superstructure. 
8 Levy, exacting, as of tribute. 9* Hoisting, 
weighing. 10 Ascending. 11 Exciting, rous- 
ing, stirring up. 12 Brewing, distilling. 13 
Carriage of a boat. 14 Feud. 15*Starvation. 
A' t—, pr. pt. of tog. 

A’ moladh na togalach, praising the build- 
ing ; innleachd-togalach, « still ; t. spréidhe, 
a rearing of cattle, a carrying-of of cattle ; tha 
e air togail, he is ravenously hungry—said of 
one who has fasted long—(DU); tha a’ bhó 
air a t.,—said of a cow when after passing 
through a severe winter and spring, it is so 
reduced by semi-starvation that,it has to be 
assisted to its feet; t. a’ bhuntata, digging 
potatoes ; t. an oir, digging gold ; t. nan Don, 
hauling the lines ; tha thu air do thogail, you 
are very much excited ; ceann na togail, the 
head of the levy ; taigh-togalach, o brewing- 
house. [ttp]. togalaichean. ] 


TERMS CONNECTED WITH BREWING AND 
MALTING :—(DMy) 

Bogadh an t-sìl, malting, Soaking or steepiug 
the grain for 24 hours, after which it is taken 
home and spread on the floor, being gather- 
ed into a heap at night to prevent sprouting, 
It is again spread to prevent heating, and so 
on alternately till all sprouting ceases. 

Braich, malted grain. 

Dabhach, cask or vat, in which the malted 
erain is placed to brew. d 
Sguab, brush of heather which is inserted in 

hole in bottom of dabhach. 

Fionnstoth, stick inserted in centre of sguab, 
PANE dripping of the brew to be regula- 
ted. 

Breilleis, the brew before the yeast is added. 

Leann, beer. 

Deasgainnean, yeast. 


togail-barrachaol, st. Pyramid. 

togair,pr. pt. a’ togairt & a’ togradh, v. a. & n, 
Desire, wish eagerly. 2 Covet. 3 Please. 4. 
Arrogate. 5 Challenge.  6trOffer, make an 
attempt. 7 Wish, be inclined, 8ftSeek. Ma 
thogras mi-féin, i£ I please; ma thogair, i£ 
does not matter, it is a matter of the utmost 
indifference. 

togair, gen.sing. of togar. 

togairt, sf. Desiring, act of desiring or eagerly 
wishing. A’t—, pr.pt. of togair. A’ t. dol 
dhachaidh, keenly desirous of going home. 

togalach, gen.sing. of togail. 

togalaiche, sm. *Builder, 2{{ Lifter. 

toglaichean, pl. of togail. Buildings, Ae, 

togam, Ist.sing.vmp. of tog. Let me raise. 


INTERNET ARCHIV 


togam 


togam,** (for togaidh mi) I will raise. 
togar, fut. pass. of tog. 
togar,** air, s.m. Gout. 
pleasure, inclination. / 
togarraeh, -aiche, a. Keen, desirous. 2 Will- 
. ing. 3 Agog, animated. 4 Cheerful. 5* In- 
| viting, enticing. 6**Covetous. 7 Having bias 
i or propensity. Chan 'eil an là seo t., this day 
ig not inviting ; tha e t. a dh’ fhalbh, he i$ de- 
desirous of gong. Gu t., wishfully | 
togarrachd,** s,f. Animation. 2 Forwardness, 
wishfulness, willingness,propensity. 3**Covet- 
! ousness, T. bhur n-inntinn, the willingness of 
your minds. 
togbhail, see togail. s 
togh, see tobh & tagh. 
togha, see todha. 
toghadh, see taghadh, 
toghaidh,* et Guard, care. 9 Liking. 3 At- 
Thoir t. ort, take care of 


2 Desire, will, wish, 


tention, respect. 
yourself. 

ftoghar, -air, see todhar. 

toghbhail, see togail. 

itoghlainn,* s.f. Exhalation, fume, disagreeable 

' heat. Tha t.ag éirigh, there is an exhalation 

` disi. 

toghmall,(AF) s.m. Squirrel. 

togladh,** -aidh, s.m. Sacking, destroying. 

togra, see togradh. 

tograch, see togarrach. 

togradh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Desire, passion, 

s propensity, wish. 2 Desiring, coveting. A’ 

' t—, pr.pt. of togair. 

tograim, (for tograidh mi) I shall or will, desire. 

togsaid, -e, -ean, s.f. Hogshead. 

togta, past pt. of tog. Lifted, raised. T[togte.] 

o Tha speura à chinn togta, he is quite in a 

= frenzy. 

+toi, a. Silent, mute. 2 Gentle. 

toibheimeach, -eiche, o. see toibheumach. 

toibheum, -eim, -an, s.m. Reproach, aspersion. 
2 Blemish, stain. 3 Blasphemy. 4 Scandal, 
slander. [gen.sing. also toibheuma.] 

e———ach, -aiche, a. Reproachful, reproach- 
ing. 2 Blaspbeming, blasphemous. 8 *Offen- 
sive, profane. 4 Slanderous, scandalous, rail- 
ing. Casaid th., æ railing accusation ; duine 
t., a blusphemous man ; gu b., blasphemously. 

toibhre,** s.f. Fancy, illusion. 

tòic, -e, -ean, s.f. Swelling of the face or body 
from good living. 

toic, -e, s.f. Wealth, riches, fortune. 2**Sub- 
stance. 3 Support, prop. 4fftGluttony, lux- 
ury. 5* Wealth that puffs up. 

toice,** s. f. Opprobious name for a worthless 
female. 

toiceach, -eiche, a. Rich, wealthy. 2 Substan- 
tial, propping. 3liISwelled up wich arrogance 
or conceit. 

toicealachd,* s.f.ind. Purse-pride, 2t{Wealth, 
good circumstances. 

toicean, s. Little swelling. Gun mheiliche gun 
toicean, without sound or motion—Beinn 
Doran. 

toice:nn, s.m. Disease. 

toicear,* er, -an, s.m. Purse-proud man, 

achd,* s.f. see toicealachd. 

toiceil, -e, a. Purse-proud. 2 Wealthy, substan- 

. tial. 3 Swelled up with pride of riches. T. 

d chrodh’s de chaoraich,wealthy in cattle and 
sheep. 

tdiceil,* s,f. Disdain. 

toichd, s.f. Bed-tick, ticken. 

toiche, s.f. Fate, destiny. 

ftoiciic, a. Wall-eyed. 

1toichead,** eil, s.m. Arrest. 

ttoicheall, -ill, sm. Journey, departure. 


t 





Digitized by 


958 


toilt 





toicheasdal, see toichiosdal. 

toicheum,** s.f. Slow pace. 

-————-ach,** a. Gradual, pace by pace 

toichiosdal, -ail, s.m. Arrogance presumption, 
2 Opinionativeness. 3 Party, faction, cause. 4 
Army. 

— — — Ach. -aiche, a. Arrogant. presuming, 
self-sufficient, arrogant, opinionated, 

ftoichneadh, -idh, s.m. Fast, vigil. 

ftoid, a Whole, entire, enough. 

ttoid, &,f. The whole. 

ttoideadh,** a. Thankful, 

toidhchd, see toichd 

toidhearnadh, -aidh, s.m. Punishment, 

toigh, comp. -e & docha, a. Agreeable, pleas- 
ant. 2 Dear, loved. Is t. leam, J like. 1 am 
fond of ; ist. leam thu, I like you ; ma 's t. 
leat mise, is t. leam thu, is mur t. nx taobh 
mi, ùf you love me, I love you, otherwise do not 
come near me ‘is t. leam thusa, ach is annsa 
leam ise, Z like you, yet she «s dearer to me ; 
an ni nach t. leat earb ri fear eile, entrust the 
work you don't like to another—a man who 
dislikes his work will not do 16 so well as one 
who likes it. 

toighe, s./.ind. Notice, attention, care.  2** 
(toigh**) Love, fondness. Thoir t., take care, 
take heed. 

toigheach, -eiche, og Loving, that loves, fond 
of, cherishing a fondness, susceptible of fond- 
ness, 2 Attentive, watchful 3 Careful. At 
Beloved. Cha’n "el mi t. air (or uime), 1 am 
not fond of it. 

toigheachd,** s.f. Concession, yielding 2 Not- 
ing. 3 Illustrating. 4 Coming. 5 Mindful. 
ness. 

toil, -e, -ean,.s.f. Will, the will, inclination, de- 
sire, wish. 2 Pieasure, delight. 3 Love. An 
ti a ni t. Dhé, he that does God's will ; tha t. 
again sin a dheanamh, J wish to do that ; ma 
'Se loth e, 1f you please; deagh th., good- 
will ; tha mo th. agam, I have enough ; bith- 
idh do th. ri dheanamh, you will have enough 
to do; a thoil ! it does not matter—DU. 

toileach, -eiche, a, Willing, voluntary. 2 De- 
sirous, 3**Glad. Cridhe t., a willing heart ; 
tha mi t., Z am willing, I;agree, 1 assent; gach 
ni is t. le Dia, everything God pleases. 

toileachadh, -aidh, s.m. Pleasure, satisfaction, 
2 Pleasing, gratification, act ofjpleasing, or 
giving pleasure. S31[Assent, [agreemeut. A’ 
t—, pr.pt. of toilich. ; 

toileachas, -ais, s.m. Contentment. 2**Alacrity. 
3**Gladness, willingness, T.-inntinn, mental 
pleasure or satisfaction, peace of mund, con- 
tentment. 

toileachas-inntinn,** s,f Comfort, mental pleas- 
ure, satisfaction, peace of mind,contentment, 

toileachd,* s.f.ind. Willingness, 

toilealaehd, s,f.ind. Wilfulness. obstinacy.  2* 
Eagerness, extreme willingness or readiness, 

toileas,** -eis, s.m. The will. 2 Willingness. 

toileil, -e, a. Wilful, obstinate. 2 Vain,proud, 
3 Willing, voluntary. Le irioslachd th., with 
voluntary humility. Gu t., wilfully. 

toilich, pr.pt. a’ toileachadh, v.a. & n. Please, 
satisfy, be willing, will, wish. 2 Indulge,grati- 
fy. 3 Agree, assent to, content. Ma thetlich- 
eas tu, if you will or wish ; th. mi e, I satisf- 
ed hun. 

te, a. & past pt. of toilich. Pleasel. 2 
Satisfied, contented, gratified. Tha mit., T 
am contented. 

toil-inntinn, s.f. Satisfaction, gratification, Con- 
tentment, inward pleasure, mental enjoyment. 

toill, pr.pt. a’ toilitinn, v.a. Deserve, merit. 2 
Habilitate. Th. thu sin, you deserved that ; 





Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS. A 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


toill 


Sun seachnadh e am bas a th.e, that he 
might avert the death he merited. 

toill, see teachd. 

toillidh, fut.af.a. of toill, ? 

toillteach,** -eiche, a. Meritorious,deserving. 2 

. Voluntary, willing. 

toillteannach, -aiche, a. Deserving, meriting. 
Duine t. air bas, a man meriting death, 

toillteannachd, see toillteannas. 

toillteannas, -ais, -an, s.m. Desert, merit, wheth- 
er good or ill. A réir ur toillteanais, accord- 
ing to your merit or desert. 

toilltinn, s.m. Meriting, deserving, demerit. 
A’ t—, pr.pt.of toill. 'Dé ’tha thu a’ toilltinn? 
what do you deserve ? 

each,* see toillteannaeh, | 

toilteach, see toillteach. 

toiltealachd,** s.f. Willingness. 

toilteil,** a. Willing. 2 Obstinate, 

ftoimhil, s.f. Eating. 

Ttoimhneamh, -nimh, s.f. Womb. 

toimhseach,** -aich, 3.m. Farm. 

-—an, -ain, -an, s.m. Riddle, enigma, 

puzzle. "2 Parable. 3{f see toimhsean, 

-—anach, -aiche, a. Of, or pertaining to, 
riddles, enigmatical. 2 Skilled in riddles. 8 
Fond of riddles, 

toimhseagan, see toimhseachan. 

toimhsean,* pl. of tomhas. Weights, scales, 
balanees, measures. 2 Faculties of the mind, 
judgment, understanding, discretion. Chaill 
e 'thoimhsean, he lost his judgment ; t. firinn- 
each, just weights, — ` 

"roe ual -e, a. Sensible, judicious, prudent, 
rugal. 

¢toin, s./. Tone, accent. 

toin, see tón. 

toin-chlodhach,**,-aich, s.m. Turn-coat, 

tóin-chruaidh,** s.f. Method of inflicting pun- 
ishment, by which a person was raised a lit- 
tle from the grouud, and suffered to fall on 
his breech. 

&oineadh, -idh, s.m. Thaw, thawing. 

toiveag, s.f. Little drop of spirits— Arran. 

toineal, ** eil, s.m., Trance, astonishment. 

&oineambh,"* -imh, s.m. Salmon. 2 Monument, 

toinisg, -e, s.f. Sense, understanding, capacity, 
discretion, comprehension, judgment, conceit, 
common sense, Fear gun t.,a man without 
judgment. 

each, -eiche, @. see toinisgeil. 

eachd,(MS) s.f. Sense. 

toinisgeil, -e, a. Sensible, understanding, judi- 
cious, bright, intelligent, 2 (MS)Mental, 3** 
Having a sound judgment. 

toinleagain, see toinleaganaich. 

toinleagan, -ain,s.m. Moving on the hams, as in. 
fants, sliding on the breech.  A' t—, pr. pt. 
of toinleaganaich. 

tóinleagranachadh, -aidh, s.m.” & pr.pt. of tòin- 
leaganaich, 

tdinleaganaich, pr. pt. a’ toinleagan & a’ toin- 
leaganachadh, v, a, Slide or move on the 
breech or hams. 

toinn, pr.pt. a’ toinneamh & a’ toinneadh, v. a, 
Twist, twine, spin, wreathe, plait. 2 Writhe. 
8 Wrench. 

toinneadh, -eidh, s. m, d pr. pt. of toinn, see 
toinneamh. 

toinneamh, -eimh, s.m. Twisting, act of twist. 
ing, twining or spinning. 2 Twine, twist. 3 
Arrangement, train, 4**rarely, Death. A’ 
t—, pr.pt. of toinn. Chuir thu as mo th. mi, 
vou disappointed me, disarranged my plans, 

toinneamh, -eimh, s.m, Multure, miller’s share 
of meal for grinding the corn,—S.Argyll.t 2 
(A F)Salmon. 

















Digitized by 


INTERMET ARCHIVE 


$59 


toireannaich 


toinneamh, a. see toinn, 

toinneamhaiche,** s.m. Twister. 
that twists or twines. 

toinnear, ir, -an, s.m. Spanner, wrench. 

toinneolaiche,** e a Prosodian. 

toinneolas,** s.m. Prosody. 

toinnte, æ. & past pt. of toinn.:Twisted,twined, 
spun. 2 (CR) metaphorically, Wreathed, 
plaited. 

ftoinnte, see toinn, 

toinnte,** s.f. Thread of yarn. 

toinnte, 8.f. Single thread in spinning. 

toinnte, a. In possession of one's faculties, Cha 
'n 'eil e t. gu leòir, he is half-witted, ‘‘not all 
there ''—Skye; also, cha'n 'eil e teann gu leòir, 
—DMy. 


2 Instrument 


.| toinntean, -ein, -an, 8. m. Long thread in spiun- 


ning. 2 Filament.’ T. snàth-fhuaigheil, a sew- 

ing-thread ; t. cloimhe, æ tuft of wool—DMy, 

~—ach,a. Abounding in, or pertaining to, 
long threads, filaceous. 

toinnte-lin, s. Spindle. 

toipean, see toban. 

toir, see their. [Unaspirated in Suth'd, but as- 

Seni everywhere else. Toir dha e, give it to 
im. : 

tòir, -e, tótach & each, pl, -ean & -ichean, s.f, 
Pursuit, chase. 2 Pursuers, 3 Diligent search. 
4** Persecution. 65ttInquiry. 6**Help.  7* 
Enough, An t. air, in pursuit of him ; air 
feachd, air th.,'s an tuasaid, in the ranks, in 
the pursuit and in battle; teichidh sibh 
'nuair nach bian t. oirbh, you shall flee when 
you are not pursued ; tha e air t., he is making 
a search for ; tha 'n t. 'nad dhéigh, you ave 
pursued ; is t. e féin air sin, he ts quite enough 
for that himself, 





ttoir, s.f. Churchyard. . 


Ttoirb, s.f, Fuel. 

toirbeart, see tairbheart. 

toirbheairtich,(MS) oe Minister. 

toirbheart, see tairbheart. 

—ach, see tairbheartach. 

—achd, see tairbheartachd, 

—as, see tairbheartas, 

toirbheir,** oo see tabhair. 

toirbhir, see tabhair. 

toirbheirt, see tabhairt. 

———— —-each, see tabhairteach. 

toirbhleasgadh,** -aidh, s.m. Rurmbling. 

toirbhreith, see tairbheart. 

toircheas, -iS, -an, s.m. Increase, plenty, see 
torrachas. 

toirchim,** s.f. Numbness, deadness. T. suain, 
a dead sleep. 

—each,** o, Stupid. 2 Benumbed, 

—eaehd,** s.f. Stupidity. 2 Numbness, 8 
Confinement in a tower, 

toirchios,** s. Conception, foetus. 
3 Plenty. 

toirdeas,** eis, s.m. Dotege. 

toireach, See torrach. 

toireach,** o, Prone to pursue or persecute. 2 
Of, like, or belonging to, pursuit or persecu- 














2 Increase. 


ion. 

tóireach,** -eich, o, m. Pursuit. 2 Diligent 
search. 3 Persecutor. 

——— —, gen. sing. of tòir. 

toireachd, see tòrachd. 

tóireadair,(MS) s.m. Pursuer. 

toireamh,"* -eimh, sm, Elegy. 2 Ploughman. 

toireann, -inn, -an, 8.m. Thunder. 

toireannach ,** o, Inrpetuous, boisterous. 

———— — adh, s,m. Detonation. 

aa d,** s.f.ind. Impetuosity, precipitas 
ion, 

toireannaich, og. Detonize, 





LLINOIS A 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


Ao 


Li 
1i 


= o —toireas 

toireas, -eis, s.m. see tabhartas. 

toireasg,* s.m. see tuireasg. 

toireim,** s.f. Stately gait. 

toireis,** s.f. Keen enquiry. 

———each,** q. Anxious, 

toirghill,** s.f. Sufficient pledge. 

toirich,** v.a. Pursue, chase. 2 Persecute. 3 
Search after. 

———e,** -an, s.m. Pursuer. 

te,** past pt. of tòirich. 

toirinn, subj.past of trreg.v. tabhair, 

toiriosg, -isg, -an, s.m, see tuireasg. 

tòirleum, -a, -annan & -an, s.m. Mighty leap. 
2 Somersault. 

toir-leum, pr. pt. a’ toirleumadh, v. og, Make a 
mighty;leap or jump. 2 Turn a somersault. 

toirlinn,* v. see tùirling. 

toirm, -e, -ean, $.f. Noise,sound,loud murmuring 
sound. 2 Storm.  3**Thunder, 4*Rustling 
noise, as of people going through à wood. T. 
chogaidh, the noise of battle ; t. seillean an 
aonaich,the humming of the mountain bee, 

toirmeach, -eiche, a. Noisy, sounding. 

toirmeachan-dé, (for tarmachan-dé) s. White 
butterfly—.A rran. 

toirmeasg, -isg, s.m. Forbidding, prohibition, 
hinderance. 2 Act of forbidding. 8 Impedi- 
ment. A’ t—, pr.pt. of toirmisg. 

toirmeasgach,** o, Apt to hinder or forbid, inter- 
dictive, 

——d,** s.f. Habit or practice of forbid- 


ad) ER 


2 Anxiety. 


2 Persecutor, 








ding. 

toirmeasgadh, see toirmeasg. 

toirmeil, see toirmeach. 

toirmisg, pr.pt. a' toirmeasg, v. a. Forbid, pro- 
hibit. 2 Hinder, obstruct. 

—te, past pt. of toirmisg. Forbidden, pro- 
hibited. 2 Obstructed. 

toirmrich, -e, s.f. Noise of thunder, of water, or 
of the march of an army. 2 Murmuring sound. 
3 Clangour. T. gharbh nan cuairteagan, the 
brawling noise of the eddying streams. 

toirm-shlige, -an, s.f. Bomb, bomb-shell. 

toirn,** s, Fiery oven, fiery furnace. 2 see 
toirm. l 

toirne, see toirn. 

tòirneach, see tairneach. 

toirneadh,** -idh, s.m. Respect, deference, 2 
Raising, constructing. 

toirneamh,** -neimh, s.m. Punishment. 

toirnich,tt v.a. see tàrmaich. 

toirnich,** v.g. Season, as a cask. 2 Rumble, 
makea noise. Y 

toirnichte,tt a. Fermented. 

toirp,* -e, s.f. Sod, divot. 2 Thick person. 

toirpeanta,* -ainte, a. Squat, thick. 

toirp-sgian, s.f, see toirsgian, 

toirrcheas, -eis, s.m. see torraicheas. 

toirrichead, see torraichead. 

toirricheas, see torraicheas. 

toirrs;,** $.f. Lump. 2 Torch. 

toirsgian, -sgéin, s.f. Peat-spade, peat-cutter or 

peai-knife. 
PARTS OF A PEAT-SPADE :— (DMy) 

1 Cas, handle. 

2 Smeachan, step for the foot. 

3 A’ chro, the heel. 

4 Sean, knize or blade, 

Parr na sgéine, point of the blade. 

Na h-ailean, socket in blade-iron, in which 

» 





v———— ee x 


e hindle and step are inserted. 


b 
6 
7 Faobhar, edge of blade. 


toirt, -e, s. f. Respect, value, importance. 2 
Buik, quantity. 3*Taste in matters. 4 De- 
ce'cv, decorum, ObfrEsteem. 6**Strength. 7 
**ijarm. S**Reluctance, 9**Sadness. 10** 
Ca e. 11 Due regard, attention, Duine gun 


Digitized by 
A Ti 


NTERNET ARCHIV 


960 


toisg 


t., & person destitute of taste, or regardless. of 
decorum ; is beag t. a bhitheas air do ghnoth- 
ach, your business must be done very awk- 
wardly ; dh’ imich e mu 'n ordugh le t., he 
obeyed the summons reluctantly, or with due 
du to decorum ;is beagan t., it matters 
not. 

toirt, s.£ Giving, granting, bestowing, grant. 
A't—, pr. pt. of irr v. tabhair. Fhuair i 
rioghachd nam beann gorma 'thoirt a mach, 
she managed to reach the kingdom of the blue 
mountains—W.S.2.154. ; cha b’ urrainn da e- 
féin a thoirt as air cho luath 's a bha 'n gille 
a’ coiseachd, he could not get out of his way on 
account of the speed with which the lad was 
walking. 

toirtealach, see toirteil. 

toirtealachd,* s.ftnd, Decency, tastefulness, 
excellent order or arrangement. ?21IRespect- 
fulness. ` OUT Stoutness, strength. 4{{Fruit- 
fulness. 5tfBulkiness,largeness, considerable- 
ness. Mór-churaidh an t., æ hero in strength. 

toirtean,** em, s.m, Thin cake. 

ftoirtean,** a. Useful, serviceable. 

toirteil, -e, o Respectful. 2 Stout, strong. 3 
Generous, 4 Fruitful. 5 Bulky, large, con- 
siderable. 6 Decent, tasteful. 7 Destructive. 
8 (MS) Essential. Gu’m a làn a bhitheas an 
lành th., may the giving hand be full ; am 
meadhon a’ chath th. thruim, in the midst of 
the destructive heavy strife. 

toirtheach,** œ. Fruitful. 

toirthealachd,** sf Fruitfulness. 

toirtheann, see toireann. 

toirtheannach, (MS) see toireannach. 

toirtis,(AF) s. Gaelic spelling of tortoise. 2 
Turtle. 

toirt-muidhe,(DMK) s.f. Act of churning or but- 
ter-making. 

toirt-thairis,** s.f. Surrender, giving up;through 
despair or fatigue. 2 Despair, extreme fati- 

ue. 

teg, s.f, Goodwill. 

ttoiscidh, s.f. Will, desire. 

toiseach, -sich, -sichean, s. m. Beginning, the 
beginning, origin, source. 2 Front, van. 3 
Precedence, precedency. 4Advantage. 6 
Bow or prow of à ship. 6 Front of a cart. 
[Note tóisich v. (accent), but toiseach s. (no 
duration mark although accented in speech.)] 

Anns an t. bha 'm Facal, in the beginning 

was the Word ; t. a’ ghnothaich, the origin of 
the thing ; t. au airm, the van of thearmy ; a’ 
dol an t. a’ bhatailt, going in the van—Mcl. ` 
62, 14 ; fhuair e air th. orra (or an t. orra), he 
got the precedence of them, before them; air 
th., first, foremost ; t. is deireadh na luinge,the 
bow and stern of the ship ; air th. air, before 
him ; an t., first, in the first place ; ’s fheairrde 
sinn an t. e, we are the better of it to begin 
with—Mcl. 140. 17 ; a’ toirt toisich, giving pre- 
cedence. 

toiseach, -ich, -ichean, s.m. Chief of a clan or 
tribe. 

toiseachadh, -aidh, s.m. Beginning, act of be- 
ginning or commencing, commencement. A’ 
t—, pr. pt. of tòisich. ` 

toiseachail, -e, a. Primitive. 
dence. 

toiseachair,** s,m. Beginner. KE 

toiseachd,** s.f. Commencement, priority, pre- 
cedence. No. A 

ftoiseadaireachd, s.f. Beginning, leading, com- 
mand. 

ttoiseadrach,* -aich, s.m. Crowner. 

toiseagan, see toimhseachan. 

toisg, -e, ean, s.f. Occasion, fit season, proper 


2**Fond of prece- 


Original from 
LU N | V = pi 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


SITY OF ILLINOIS AT 








e Ftoisg 
time, opportunity. [s.m.*] d 

ftoisg, s.f. Thing, object. 2 Errand, expedition, 
embassy. 3*'*Circumstance. 4?*Business. 5 
** Wholesome administration, 

toisg, (AC) a. Left. Togam mo làmh th, an 
suas, [will rarse my left hand on high. ['* An 
suas " is uncommon but correct. } 

toi-g, n.pl. of tosg. Back-teeth, grinders, tusks, 

toisgeal, eil, an, s.m. Finding of a thing that 
was lost. 2 Reward Luach toisgeil, the re- 
ward for finding a thing that was lost 

toisgeal, a a, Left 2 Unlucky,unpropitious 
3 Sinister, ın heraldry Glun t., a (eft knee ; 
an làmh th., the left hand 

—— TT s.m. The unlucky hand. 

——ach, -aiche, a. Left-handed. 

achas,(MS) s.m Left-handedness, 

toisgealta,** a. Left, sinister. 

toisgeil, eil, a. see toisgeal. 

each, æ. see toisgealach. 

tóisich, pr. pt. a’ tòiseachadh, v.g, dn Begin, 
commence, fall to, assay, Th. iad air cuid de 
'n t-sluagh a bhualadh agus a mharbhadh, 
they began to smite and kill some of the people. 
EM tòisich v. (with accent), but toiseach 8. 
no duration mark although accented in 
speech.)] 

toisiche,** s.m. Leader, chief, prince. 2 Prim- 
ate. 3 Nobleman. 

tòisichear, fut.pass. of tòisich. Shall be begun. 

toisichte, past pt. of tòisich. Begun,commenced. 

ttoisidh, s.pl. Shoes. 

toisneadh,** s.m, Leavening. 

toit, pr.pt. a’ toiteadh, v.a. d n. BSmoke, fume 
2 Boil quickly, steam. 3 Perfume 

toit, -e, -ean, s. f, Smoke, vapour, fume, 2tt 
Piece, fragment, (rarely** ) 3f1Heap. 41i 
Small rick of corn,{(temporary in Uist.) 

ftoit, a Whole,gentire. 

1toite, a. Aice ta 'chroiteag is toite (‘ tight ” 
in current edition) 's an Eorpa, she has the 
trimmest (lit. tightest) figure in Europe— Mol- 
adh Morag 84. 

toiteach, -eiche, a. Smoky, vapoury, fumy. 

toiteach, ech, s.m. Steamboat, packet. 

toiteachan,** -ain, s.m, Vent, chimney. 

toiteadh,** s.m. Assation, 2 Roasting. 8 Fu- 
migation, 

toiteal, zm. Attack in battle. 2 Warlike moye- 
ment. 3 Flock of water-fowl—Sar-Obair, 

toitean,** -ein, s.m. Flame, conflagration. 

toltean, -ein, -an,s.m. Piece of flesh of any kind. 
2 Collop, steak, chop. 3**Piece of flesh roast- 
ed on embers, 4 Little heap, 

—-— —-àch, -aiche,@.Abounding in pieces of flesh 
2 Like a collop. 3 Abounding in little heaps. 

toitear,** a. Lumpy. 

toitearlach,* -aich, s.m. Smother, dense column 
of smoke 2 Thick gigantic man—Sar-Ovarr. 

toiteil, see toiteach. 

toith, see toth. 

toithbheum, see toibheum, 

toitheastal, see toichiosdal, 

toithleannan,** -ain, s.m, Paramour, concubine. 

toitlinn,* s.f. see toit. 

toitlinneach,* -eiche, s.m see toiteach. 

toitreach,** -ich, s.m. Conflagration. 

ftol, s.m. Churchyard. 

ttola,** s.m. Church-officer, 
Sleep. 








2 Superfluity. 3 


ttoladh,** -aidh, s.m. Destruction. 2 Sleep. 

tolair,-ean, s.m. Foxhound, beagle. 2 Mastiff 
JGC.W, 89. Bheir e leis a’ chréig sibh, mar a 
thug an sionnach na tolairean, he will lead you 
over the precipice, as the fox did the hounds. 

tolair-mhaigheach, s.m. Harrier. 

tolg, tuilg, -an, s.m. Hollow induced upon a 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


961 


tollta 

smooth surface. 2**Bruise, as on the surface 
of laminated metal vessels. 3**Sinkings of any 
undulating surface. 4**Wave. 5**Orevice. 6 
**Pride. 7**rarely, Bed. 8Colour. 9* Hol- 
low, asin a kettle. ([*3.7.] 

tolg v.a. Sputter, vomit, as a mountain torrent, 
2 Dint, pit or dent, especially of metals. 3 


Colour 4* Make hollows, as in à kettle or 
cauldron. 
tolgach, -aiche, a. Hollowed, 2 Having many 


3 Of many colours. 4 Gaudy,showy, 
6**Proud, haughty 7** Full 
8* Freakish, 


hollows. 
5 Inconstant 
of bruises, as a plate of metal. 
A bbiorraid th., hus dented helm, 

tolgachadh, ft -aidh, sm. & pr pt of tolgaich, 
see tolgadh 

tolgadb. sm Sputtering, vomiting, as a mount: 
aiu torrent 2 Dinting. 3 Bending, as grass. 

tolgaich, v. see tolg. 

toll, pr pt. a’ tolladh, v.a. Bore, perforate. 2 
Make a hole, dig a hole or pit. 3*Exhale, emit 
vapours. 

toll, tuill, pl. tuill & tollan, s. m. Hole, bore, 
perforation. 2 Hollow, cavity, 3 Crevice. 
4 Wicket. 5 Ear-mark on sheep, see comh- 
arradh-cluaise, 6 **Pit, cave, den  7**rare- 
ly Head. T. domhain, æ deep hole 

tollach, -aiche, o Full of holes, 2 Perforating, 
boring 3 That perforates. 

tollachan,** -ain, em. Piercer. 

tolladair, -ean, s.m. Borer, piercer. 2**Wimble. 
3 Stone-borer, 4 (MS) Poser. 

——eachd, s./.nd. Boring. 

tolladh, -aich, ssm. Boring, act of boring,pierc- 
ing or perforating. 2 Digging of holes or pits. 
3* Edging in. A’ t—, pr.pt. of toll. Tha e a’ 
tolladh fodham, he is undermining me. 

tolladh-fasair, s.m. Plug-hole of a boat. 

tollag,(AF) s.f. Crab-louse. 

tollainn,* s.f. Exhalation,vapour in damp places 
in summer. 2 Steam, gas. 

tollair,** -ean,s.m. Borer, piercer. 2 Foxhound. 

tollaire,* an, s.f. One that edges his way. 2 
Genteel intruder, 

toll-alpaidh, s.m. Mortice. * 

tollan, -ain, -an, San., dim, of toll. Little hole 
or orifice. 

ach, -aiche, a. Full of little holes. 

toll-an-t-331,( DM K) s.m. Vent of a fish. 

toll-an-tuc, s.m. Plug-hole of a boat— Lewis. 

tollaran, -ain, -an, s.m. Glutton. 

toll-bütha, -uill-bhutha, s.m. Gaol, tolbooth. 

toll-cartaidh,(DMK) s.m. Square opening 1n the 
wall of à bere through which the muck ig 
thrown out to the dunghill.—Carthness. 

toll-choinein, s.m Rabbit-burrow. 

toll-cluaise, -uill-chluaise, s.m. Touch-hole of a 
gun. 

toll-cluaisean, see toll-cluaise. 

toll-cnaig, sm, Plug hole of a boat. 

toll-cnaip, 8.2. Button-hole. 

tolldach,(MS) -aiche, a. Full of holes. 

tolldair,tt -ean, s.m. Borer. 

eachd, s f. Boring. 

toll-dubh,- uill-dhubha, s.m. Prison, gaol. 

toll-gaineimh, s.m. Sand-pit. 

toll-gaoithe,* -uill-ghaotha, s.m. Air-hole. 

toll-guail, s.m. Coal-pit. 

toll-ua-stidireach, sm. Rudder-band,see rudder 
No. 4, p. 78. There are two rudder-bands, one 
attached to a hole and one to a pin—this is 
the former. . 

toll-prine,(AC) s.m,Plug-hole in a boat— A rgyll. 

toll-putain,* -uill-phutain, s.m. Button-hole. 

toll-silidh, see toll-siolaidh. 

toll-siolaidh, s.m. Plug-hole of a boat. 

tollta, past pt. of toll. Bored, perfurated, pierced. 








Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


g ———— € A 


tolltach 


tolltach, -aiche, «. Full of holes. 2 Full of pits. 
8 Piercing. perforating, causing holes. 
ris an rideal, as full of holes as a Sieve. 

toll-tora, sm. Wimble-hole. 

toll-torain, s.m. Wicket. 2(AH) Hole about 30 
inches square that can be closed or opened in 
back wall of barn and directly opposite the 
door. itis opened when winnowing is to be 
engaged in. 

tolm, -uilm, an, gan, Hillock of a round form, 


mound, knoll, 2 Bush, thicket. 2*High hil- 
loek 

-——ach, -aiche, @. Abounding in hillocks, 
knolly 


tolmag, -aig, an, &.f., dum. of toll. Little knoll. 
ach, -aiche, a. Full of small billocks. 
tolman, -ain, s.m. Little knoll, hill or mound, 
acn,-aiche, a. Knolly, full of knolls or 
mounds, 
toin,tuim, pl. -àn & -annan, s.m. Round hillock 
or knoll, rising ground, swell, green emin- 
ence. 2 Any round heap. 8 Tuft of anything. 
3* Bush, thicket. 5 Ant-hill. 6* Stool—IJslay. 7 
*Volume of a book. 8** Bank. 9**Grave 10** 
rarely The plague. 11**Conical knoll, Tom 
is applied in many parts of the North, especi- 
ally Arran to a bush that grows wild, as, 
t. fraoich, a tuft of heather ; t. airnean, @ 
sloe-bush—preas is not used there. 
T.-ghroiseid, o gooseberry-bush , tha e air a 
th., he is a! stool; thug e car mu th. asam, 
he jilted m^, cheated me ; "am bun an tuim, 
Bheltered by the thicket ; tha b. "aa bhealach, 
there is a bush in the gateway—gateways were 
formerly closed by a bush instead of a gate ; 
dosain is tuim nan ruadhag, the thickets and 
hillocks of roes. 
tom, v. see tum. 
tomach, -aiche, œ. Full of knolls or tufts,tufty. 
2 Bushy. 
tomad, -aid, -an, see tomult. 
ach, -aiche, og see tomultach. 
achd, see tomultachd. 
tomadn,** s.m. Rasure, 2 see timadh. 
tomaidh, see tumatdh. 
toma3ir, s.m. Protection. 2 Protector, 8 see 
tumair. 
tomald, see tomult. 
tomalt, see tomult. 
—-—ach, see tomultach. 
achd, see tomultachd, 
toman, -ain, -an, s.m.dim. of tom. Hillock, any 
small heap or tuft. 2{fSmall thicket or bush. 
tomanach, -aiche, œ. Full of little knolls, small 
heaps or tufts. 2 Of small thickets, bushy, 
tuity. 
tom-an-ionghnaidh,(AF) em, The wonder-tuft 
or -clump In some parts of the North the 
name hedgehog was given to a mysterious 
animal, which when met with among the 
corn, had only the appearance of a grey stone, 
but could change its shape. When thus met, 
a quantity of the corn was left standing a 
round it and only the ears of grain cut. Such 
a clump has been seen by A.F., and above was 
given asthe cause of its existence, which, as 
few knew, almost every one who saw ib wọn- 
dered why it was there, 
tomanta,* o Rule. 
tomataisean,(DMIE&) s.m. Hypochondria— West 
coast of Ross. 
tombaca, $s.m.ind. Tobacco—nicotiana tobacum. 
2**3nuff. T. seabh, t. cagnaidh, tobacco; feuch 
t.. give; me some tobacco or snuff, 
toin-famha, s.m., Mole-hill, 
tomh, pr. pt, a’ tomhadh, v.a. & n, Offer, at- 
tem;t 2 Threaten, 3 Aim. 4* Point with 














Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


942 


tónag | ~z- 


are 
the finger. 5**Remark. 6ftPresent. 


Cho t. | tomhadh, -aidh, s.m. Offering, act of offering 


or attempting. 2 Threatening, act of threat: 
ening, threat. 3 Act of aiming. 4 Pointing 
with the finger. 6 Frown, AT t—, pr. pt. of 


tomh. 

tomhail,** s.f. Terror, fright. 

———— ,** a, Vast, terrible. 

each,** a. Vast, terrible, frightful. 

eachd, s.f.ind. Vastness, terribleness- 
frightfulness. 

ftomhailt, v.a. Eat. | 

tomhais, pr.pt. a tomhas, v.a. Measure, survey, 
compute the length, breadth, height, depth, 
quantity, distance or weight,balance, fathom, 
sound. 2 Guess, unriddle, solve an enigma, 
T. am fiodh, measure the wood ; t. am fear- 
ann, survey the land ; t. cóa chunnaic mi, 
guess whom I saw, also guess who saw me. 

ean, s.pl. Weights, scales, balances. 

te, past pt. of tomhais. Measured, fath- 
omed, weighed, 2 Guessed, solved as a riddle. 

tomhartaich, s. f. Twittering. 2 Suspense, un- 
certainty, hesitation, hesitancy,pendency. Tha 
mi sant, Z am hesitating. 











tomhas. -a18, pl. -an & toimhsean, $m. Measure, 


measurement, dimension. 2 Weight. 3 Bal- 
ance, scale, 4 Survey. § Mensuration. 6 
Measuring, act of measuring. 7 Guessing, act 
of guessing or solving, as a riddle. 8** Riddle. 
9 **Hint, 13** Mode in music. 11 Modera- 
tion. 12 Weighing. 13 Surveying. A’ t—, pr. 
pt. of tomhais. Gabh mo th., take my measure; 
dé"n t. a th’ ann P what is is its measure- 
ment ? glat-thomhais, a measuring-wand ; 
thar tomhais, beyond measure or moderation ; 
soitheach-tomhais, a measuring vessel ; t.-düb- 
ailt, o double-measure;,t. cruithneachd, a meg- 
sure of wheat. There is a feat still practised 
by boys in the Highlands in climbing a tree— 
standing on tip-toe, they touch a certain 
branch with their caman, and then sprirg up 
to get a grip of the place so marked out. ‘his 
is a’ tomhas leuma. 

tomhasach, -aiche, a. Mensural. 

tomnhasail, -e, a. Mensural. 

tomhasa&ir,** sm. Balancer. 

tomhas-iüil, s.pl. Mathematics. 

tomhas-riaghlair,** s.m. Assizer. 

tomhas-taise, sm. Hygrometer. 

tomhas-troidh,( DMK) s.m. Foot-rule, 

tomhas-uine, $.m. Metronome. prov 

tomhlachd,* s.f.ind. Thick milk.  2**Curds. 

ttomhladh, -aidh. (AF) s.m. Cow's milk, 

ftomhradh,-aidh, s.m. Protection. 

Ttomhraiche, s.m. Protector, patron, 

tomnach,** -aich, s.m. Testator. 

tomradh,** -aidh, s.m. Fustian, bombast. 

tom-sheangan, s.m. Ant-hill. 

tomudach, see tomultach. 

tomult, -uilt, -an, s.m. Bulk, largeness. 2 Bur- 
liness, 39 Size, dimension, magnitude, ampli- 
deed 4 Influence, authority. 6 Respecta- 

ility. 

tomultach, -aiche, a. Bulky,large, gigantic, big, 
sizeable. 2 Fleshy, brawny. 3 Influential. 4 
Respectable. ? 

—d,** s. f. Bulkiness, ampleness, size 
ableness. 

tón,^óine &-a, pl. ap, &. f. The fundament. 

_ breech, anus. 

tona, see ton. 

tonach, -aiche,a.Of, or belonging to, the breech 
2 Broad-breeched. 3 Large-hipped. 

,* ach, $,f. Broad-bottomed woman. 

tonach, -aich, s.m. Shirt, garment. 2 Bath, 

tonag, -aig, -an tis. Clew of yarn, 2**Tera 


prov. 








Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS Ak 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 








M tónag 
of ridicule for a squat waddling female. 
(Fionn) Small squat measure used for measur- 
inn and holding liquids (also tuanag.) 

tónagach, -aiche, a. Abounding in clews of yarn. 

X tonag-a'-chladaich 11 s.j. Thrift, sea-gillyflower. 

tonair,* -ean, $.3n. Broad-bottomed man. 

tonalas,** s.m. Cringing, adulation. 

tonasy,** s.f. Ball of yarn, 

ttonc,** s.m. Chain. 

ton-chlodhach, see toin-chlodhach. 

ton-chruaidh, see tóin-chruaidh. 

1tonda, a. Stubborn. 

tón-dhearg,*| st Redstart, see ceann-dearg. 

ton-dubh, (an) s.f. Crane, see corra-thon-dubh, 

tonlagain, pr.pt. a’ tónlagan, v.n, Hobble, slide 
on the breech. 

tonlagan,* -ain, s,m. Sliding on the breech, 
hobbling. 2ttCringing, fawning. A’ t—, pr. 
pt. of tonlagain. 

ton-lodanach,** -aiche, a, Having a fawning or 
‘cringing*spirié, 

ton-lodanadh, -aidh, 
mean soliciting 

tonn, tuinn & tuinne, pl. tuinn, tonna & tonn- 
an, s.m. Wave, surge, billow 2 *Splash. 3 
Any quantity of liquid—Arran. 

Thog tuinn an cinn, waves reared their 
heads ; an t. baistidh, sacred baptism water ; 
t. air tràigh leis fhéin, a solitary wave on the 
shore ; nuallan nan tonn, the raging norse of 
the waves ; tha t. math uisge ‘sa’ chuinneig 
fhathast, there is a good drop of water in the 
pail yet. (*s.f ] 

tonn,* v.n. Splash, pour out irregularly,  2** 
Undulate. ’Ga thounadh m’ a cheann, splash- 
ing it about his head, 

ttonn, s. Skin, hide, 

tonnach, -aiche, a, Waved,fundulated. 2**Wavy, 
billowy, tempestuous. An fhairge ghlas ;th., 
the blue billowy ocean. 

—,** -aich, s.m. Mound, rampart. 


s.m. Fawning, cringing, 





663, Tonn-a’-chladaich. 

tonn-a'-chladaich,$ s.m ‘Thrift, sea-pink—ar. 
mera marina 

tonnadair, see tunnadair. 

tonnadh,** -aidh, s.m Vomiting 2 Death by 
poison. 

tonnag, -aig.-an, s.f Small square of tartan or 
of any coarse woollen material, used as a 
loose covering for the shoulders by women. 
2 Mantle 

tonnag., -aig, -an, s.f dun, of tonn. Little wave. 

ach. -»iche. æ Plaided,wearing a plaid 
over the shoulder. 

tonnan,** -ain, s.m., duin. of tonn, 
tonn. 

tonn-ghluasad,** -aid, s.m, Undulation. 

tonn-luaisg, pr pt. a tonn-luasgadh, v.a. Toss 
or rock by waves, or ag if by waves, pitch or 
reel, as a vessel. 





2 n.pl. of 


Digitized by 
Jigitized Dy 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


963 
3|tonn-luasgach, -aiche, a Rocking or reelin:;,asg 


torair 


the waves. 2**Causing a reeling motion, ag 
of a ship at sea. 

toun-luasgadh, -aidh,s.m.Act or state of tossing, 
as on the waves, pitching or keeling of a ship, 
A’ t—, pr.pt. of toun-lIuaisg. 

Lonn-luaisgte, past pt. of tonn-luaisg. Waye- 
tossed. 

tonnmhor,ft -mhoire, a. Billowy. 

top,** s.m. Hop, see lus-an-leanna. 

top, -a, pl. -an & -annan, s.m. Top, tuft. T. cir- 
ce, the tuft on the head of a hen. 

topach, -aiche, a. Having a top or tuft,topped, 
tufted. Cearc th., a tufted hen. 

topag, s.f. Lark (bird)—Lewis. Isean na top- 
aig, the lark’s young. 

topainn,** s.f. Teasıng, pulling by the hair. 

topan, -ain, s.m. Tuft, top-knot. 2 Tuft of wool 
on the distaff, 

Geert -aiche, a. Havingja small top or 
tuft. 

topar,** .air, s.m. Taper. 

topas, Gaelic form of topaz. 

a 0 db Heavy shower, 2 Bush, shrub. 3 (AF) 

ull. 

ftor, a. Heavy. 

tor, -oir, -an, see tur. 

ftor, tuir, s.m. Answer, reply, 2 Bull. 3 Pur- 
suer. 4 Fear, dread. 5 Tear. 6 Sovereign, 
lord, noble. 7 Weariness. 8 Crest. 

tora ! int. Cry to enrage a bull—A rran. 

tora, toraichean & torachan s.m. Auger 
wimble, iron for boring holes. ^ 

torach, -aiche, a. Having augers. 2 Like an au- 
ger. 3 Fertile, fruitful, productive. 4 Effi- 
cient. 5 Substantial. 6 Rank. °7**see torrach, 
Siol t., productive or rank corn ; talamh t., 
fertile land ; buailean t., eficient or energetic 
strokes, as in rowing. 

torach, gen. sing. of tòir. 

torachas-biadhain,t s.m. Celery-leaved crowfoot 
—ranunculus sceleratus. 

torachd, s.f. Pursuit, chase, pursuing with hos- 
tile intention. 2  Inquiring, asking, strict 
inquiry or search. 3 Craving. 4 Retaliation. 
6 Persecution. 6frRestitution, Cha d’ rinn 
iad t,, they did not puraue ; tha e a’ t., he is 
making strict inquiry ; a’ t. chaorach, search- 
ing for sheep , luchd-t., persecutors, pursuers; 
air eagal gu 'a coinnich an luchd-t. sibh, lest 
the pursuers meet you ; fuileachdach ’san t., 
bloody wn the chase ; tha e a’t. orm, he craves 
or insinuates his clavm to such; tha t. orm, 
lam pursued. 

toradh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Fruit, produce. 2 
**Fruitfulness, 3 Profit, advantage. 4 Con- 
sequence, effect, result, 5**Answer. 6(AF) 
Milking. 7 Taking. 8 Supply. Thug Cain 
de th. an fhearainn, Cain brought of the pro- 
duce of the ground; t. do ghniomharan, the 
natural effects or consequence of your deeds. 

toradh, -aidh, -ean, s.m. see tora. 2 Answer, 
3** see torradh, Tollftoraidh, an auger-hole, | 

toradhadair, sm. Fruiterer. 

toradhair,(AF) s.m. Monster. 2**Dwarf. 

toradhan, see torunn, 

torag,"* .aig. $.f. Wench. 

toraich, (MS) v.a. Beget. 

toraicheas, -e1s, see torraicheas. 

toraicinn, s$. Peat-knife. Arran for toirsgian. 

toraidh ! wt. Cry to excite a bull. 

torail, see torrail. 

toraileachd,** s.f. Fruitfulness. 

torain, s.pl. Insects, worm, grub, a certain ver 
min in corn. Mar lus is torain ’ga reubadh, 
like a herb that worms devour. 

toralachd, see torralachd. 

torair,* -ean, s.m, see toranach & **torain, 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


, URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


toran 
toran,(AF) see toranach. 





664. Toran. 

toran, -ain, s.m. Balistraria, loop-hole, An t. 
"san t-sabhal, the loop-hole in the barn.—Sg.- 
nan-caol. 141. 

toran, -ain, see torrail. 

toranach,f -aich, s.m. Grub-worm, borer-worm. 

torinan,(DC) s.m. see torranan, 

torann, -ainn, s.m. see torunn. 

toras, -ais. sm. Weariness. 2 Journey. 3 Lord. 

torathair, see toradhair. 

torb,** s.m. Throng. 2 Rout. 

tore, uire, s.m. Hog, boar. 2(AF) Brawn. 3 
Castrated boar—Islay. 4* Whale—Ossian. 5 
(AC)Cleft, notch, indentation, scollop. 6(AC) 
Three-cornered hole made in the ground if 
hard, to assist in pulling the carrots on Domh- 
nach Curran—carrot Sunday inthe W. Isles. 
7(AC) Monarch’s necklace. A’ tomhas an 
tuirc, measuring the boar ; t. nimhe, a wild 
boar ; t. alluidh, a wild boar ; lorg nan t., the 
track of the whales. 

torc,(DC)s.m. Sod. A special use of it was the 
sod turned up as a mark to indicate divisions 
of arable land, during the run-rig system of 
cultivation. In Argyl/ it is durc,—aà mark in 
land, a piece of anything. 

¢torc, s.m. Sovereign, lord. 2 Heart. 
4 Collar. 

torcach,** -aiche, a. Like a boar or hog. 

torc-chluasach,(AC) a. Notch-eared. 

torcan, s.m. dim. of torc. Little cleft. 
cies of biforcated carrot—cardionis benedictus. 

torcan, s.m. Fattening pig, porker. 

torchair, past pass. of torchuir. He fell, died, 
was killed. 2 It happened, 

torchair, see torchuir. 

torchair,** s.m. Leveller. 

torchair, gen.sing. of torchar. a 

forchar, -air, -an, sm. Fall. 2 Killing, death. 
3 Hurt by a fali. 

torchanach, v.n. Prosper. 

tor-chathair, -chathrach, -chathraichean, s. 7. 
Throne, see torr-chathair, 

torchos,(AF) s.f. Calf. 

torchos-bréige, (AF) s.m. Moon-calf (fabulous.) 

torchradh, -aidh, s.m. Transfixing act of trans- 
fixing, piercing, wounding. 2 Killing. A't—, 
pr.pt. of torchuir. 

torchraidh, /ut.af.a. of torchuir. 

—, fý s. Bars in music. 2 Elegy. 

torchuir, pr.pt. a’ torchradh, v.a. & n. ‘Transfix, 
wound, pierce. 2 Kill. 3 Kill by knocking 
or throwing down. 4**Perish, happen. 

torc-mhuineal,-eil, sam, Hog’s neck, boar's neck. 

tore-nimhe,(AF) san, Fierce or wild boar. 2 
(AF) Reptile. 

tordhan,"* -ain, s.m. Elegy. 

torgan,** see torghan. 

torghan,f-ain,-au, s.m. Purling sound, musi- 
cal sound, 2**Din, noise, cattle, boot, 

torgianach,** ag. Rattlinv. 

torghansaich,** sf. Rattling. 


8 Face. 





Digitized by 


NTERNET AR 


l Qm Ni 
i A L i V 


964 


2 Spe- 


torrach 


torlais,** $. Person who talks at random, 

torluinn, see tuirling. 

torm,‘AC) s.m. Murmur, 

tormach, see tàrmachan. 

tormach,** -aich, s.m. Increase. 2 Feeding of 
cows a short time before and after calving. 

tormachadh,** -aidh, s.m. Increasing. 

tormachag, 6.f. see tàrmachan. 

tormachan, see tarmachan. `> 

tormachan an t-sléibhe, (CR) s.m. Ptarmigan 
—W. of Ross. 

tormachan-dé, W. of Ross for dearbadan-dé. 

tormachan-tuinne,(CR) s. m. Small sea-bird— 
W. of Rosg. a 

tormadh,** a. Pregnant. growing big. 

tormagan-dé, $.f. see dearbadan-dé. 


ftormaich,** v.g, Magnify, increase, enlarge, _. 





665. Torman ^ 


torman,§ -ain, s.m. Wild clary, vervain sage— 
salvia verbenacea. - 
torman, -ain, -àn, $.m. Noise, sound, rumbling. 


2 Music. 3 Musieal sound, [murmur, sound 
of the drone of a bagpipe. 4** Dronefof a bag- 
pipe. 6 Stringed musical instrument.  6** 
Harp. T.-ciùil, æ harp. 

tormanach, -aiche, o Noisy, loud, murmuring, 
rumbling, making a musical murmur. 

tormanaich, v.n. Bubble. 

tormanaich-bruidhinn, s.f. Broken, inarticulate 
speech—JGC., W. 133. 

Coa s.m. Stringed “instrumend. 3 

arp. 

torman-dé, W. of Ross for dearbadan-dé, 

torm-fheadan,** s. Bassoon. 

torm-fhiodhull,** s, Bass-viol. 

Ttorn, s.m. Kiln, furnace, oven. 2 Lord. 

tornail, $.f. Knocking one thing against another. 

tornair,** s.m. Turner. 

tornamh,** -aimh, s.m. Humiliation. 2 Descent. 

toroisg,** s.f. Hand-saw. 2 File, 

torpan, see tarpan. 

torr, -a, -an, s.m. Hill, mountain of an abrupt 
or conical form, lofty hill. 2 Eminence. 3 
Mound, large heap. 4** Rock. 5 Grave, 
tomb. 6 Tower. 7 Heap of ruins. 8 Castle. 
9 Body of men, congregation, crowd.  10* 
Womb—Ossian. fll Belly. '12(DU) Large 
quantity of anything. T gainneimh, a hea 
of sand ; t.-coirce, @ quantity of oats built 
in little cocks on the rigs or ground—Lewis— 
(DMy.; o thorr-thir an t-sneachd, from the 
hilly land of snow ; mo chlann ‘san torr, my 
children in the tomb. 

torr, pr. pt. a’ tòrradh, v.a. Heap up, pile up. 
hoard. 2 Form into heaps. 3 Teem. 4 Bury. 
5 Come alive. 

torrach, -aiche, «. Pregnant (of women only.) 2 
Fruitful. 


Original trom 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 4 
, URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


torrach 


torrach**-aiche, à, Towery. 2 Full of eminences, 

torrachas, see torraicheas. 

torradair,** s.m. Burier. 

torradh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Heaping, act of 
piling together. 2 Heap. 3 burial, inter- 
ment, act of burying. 4 Burial solemnities 
or procession. 6 Watching or waking of the 
dead. 6*Embtankwent of adam. 7 Payment 
for keeping up a mill-dam 8 see tora & tor- 
adh A’t—, pr. pl of torr A’ t airgid, 
heaping or hoarding money ; air a t le miall- 
an, teeming withiice; air at le gràisg, teem- 
ing with rabble. 

torraghan,** -ain, s.m. Murmur, purling noise, 
gurgle. 

—ach,** a. Murmuring, purling. 

—aich, v.a Gurgle. 

torraich, pr.pt. a’ torrachadh, v.a. £ n. Make 
pregnant, impregnate, 2**Conceive, become 
fruitful or pregnant. 8 Teem, 

torraiche, comp. of torrach. 

torraichead, eil, s.m. Degree of fruitfulness. 
2** Pregnancy. 

torraicheas, -eis, s.f Conception, pregnancy. 2 
Fertility, fruitfulness Meudaichidh mı do thb., 
I will increase thy conception. 

--— anabuich, s. Embryo, foetus, 2 Un- 
timely birth. 

torrail,** o Fertile, productive, prolific. 

eachd,** s.f. Fertility, productiveness, 

torraisgil, (AG) s.f. Reay country for toirsgian. 

torramh,"* s.m. Pilgrimage. 

torran, -ain, -an, s.m., dim. of torr. Little hill, 
rising ground, mound or knoll. 211Knuob. 3 
**Grave. 4(CR) Dunghill—Arran. 5 see 
torrunn. 

ESCH -aiche, o. Knolled, abounding in hill- 
ocks. 

torranach, s.m. Figwort, see lus-nan-cnapan. 

torranan, s.m. Figwort, see lus-nan-cnapan. 

torr-chathair, -ehathrach, -chathraichean, s.f. 
Citadel, fortress. 2 Throne, 

torr-leus, -leóis, -an, s.m. Torch. 

torroichim, s. Deep snoring. 2 Sleep.—Mac Mh. 
Alasdaer, 

torr-sgian, $.f. Peat-spade. 

torrthair, see toradhair. 

terrunn, -uinn, s. m. Loud or murmuring noise, 











murmur. 2 Thunder. 
torrunnach, -aiche, a. Thunderous, 2 Making 
a loud or murmuring noise, noisy. 3**Sound- 


ing like thunder. Le buille th., with a thun- 
dering blow. 

tor-stol,** s.m. Chair of stato. 

tort,” s.m. Little loaf or cake. 

tort, Shiskwne, Arran for tobhta. 

tortail,** a. Strong, stout. 2 Tight, firm. 

tortaileachd,** s.f. Strength, stoutness. 2 Tight- 
ness, firmness. 

tortaobh,** s. Confidence. 

torthair,** s.m. Monster. 2 Dwarf, 

each,** a. Monstrous. 

—eachd, s.f. Monstrousness. 

torunn, see torrunn, 

tòs, see tùs. 

tòs, an, for air thùs, at first. 

tosach, s.m. Suth'd. for toiseach, 2 (DMu) Used 
to express satisfaction on hearing of one’s wel- 
fare. Cia mar tha sibh ? tha gn slàn, O is 
maith an tosach, how do you do? I amin good 
health, Oh that’s well.—Black isle. 

tósan, for tasan—Wm. Ross, p. 106. 

tosan, s.m. Onset. 2 Beginning, prelude—Sér- 
Obair. 

tosd, s.m.ind. Silence, quietness, stillness. Bi 
"nad th., be silent ; t. na h‘oidhche, the silence 
of the night. 








Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


905 


trabhsdanach 


tos:l,* a. see tosdach. 

| tosd,” po & n. see tosdaich. 

Losdach, -aiche, a. Silent, peaceful, quiet, still. 
? Causing silence or stillness. Talla t. na di 
chuimhne,the sient hall of forgetfulness; gu t. 
silently, quietly. ; 

tosdachadh,11 -aidb, s.m. Putting to silence. 2 
Act or state of becoming sient. <A’ t— pr. 
pt. of tosda:ch. 1 

tosdachd, s.f.nd. Silence, quietness, peaceful. 
ness. 

tosdaich, pr.pt. a’ tosdachadh,v.a & n. Confute, 
put to silence,.make quiet. 2 Become quiet, 
Tosdaicheam, 1 will put to silence, 

-—————ar, fut pass, of tosdaich. 

tosdal, see tostal 

—-—ach, see tostalach. 

tosdalachd,tf s.f. Sedateness 

tosg, Mi ia s.m. Journey. 2 Embassy 3 Be- 
port. 

tosg, -oisg & -uisg, pi tuisg & an s.m. Tusk 93 
Peat-cutter, see toirsgian. 3(AF) Tusk (fish.) 
4**Back-tooth, fang, grinder. 5** Gash, cut. 
(tts. f] 

——, pr.pt. a’ tosgadh, v.a. Cut irregularly. 





tosgach, -aiche, o Tusky, like a tusk. 2 Ous 
in an uneven way 

tosgaid, see togsaid. 

tosgair, -ean, s.m, Ambassador. 2 Post. 8 One 


who goes on a message, messenger, harbin- 
ger. 4 One who cuts irregularly, or who 
botches in cutting. [ *tosgaire. ] 
eachd, sind Going on an errand. 2* 
Embassy. 3 Journeying, jaunting. 
tosgal, -ail, s.n. Arrogance. 
tosgan, m.pt. of tosg. 
testal, see toichiosdal. 
tostal, -ail, s,m. Arrogance, presumption. 
ach, -aiche, o Presumptuous, arrogant. 
tot,* v.a. Roast or toast hurriedly on the em: 
bers. 2 Boil hurriedly. 
ttot, -oit, sm. Wave. 2 Sod, turf 3 Woman, 
tota, pl. totan & totaiehean, see tobhta. 
tota-braghad, see tobhta-braghaid, 
tota-deireadh, see tobhta-deiridh. 
totadh, -aidh, s.m. Puff. 
total,* ail, s.m. see tóstal. 
total-eun,* -ail, s.m. Bevy. 
totarnachd,** s.7. Stuttering, stammering. 
tóth, s. Eagerness, inclination. Arran form of 
(in) tow (with.) Ann an t. dol ann, eager to 
go ; ann an t. leis, greatly attached to or taken 
up by itor kim, 
toth, -a,j-an s.m. Foul blast of vapour, stench. 
2**Fume. 3**Puff of smoke. 
Ttoth, -a, s.m. Female. 2 Pudenda muliebria, 
totha, see todha. 
tothach, -aiche, a. Vapoury. 
tothachd,** s.f. Validity. 2 Substance. 
tothadh,** s.m. Effluvia. [ sers, 
tothag,* -aig, -an, s.f. Wonderfully short trou- 
tothair,* po. see todhair. 
tothair,** s.m. Freebooter. 
Ttothbhall, -bhuill, s. Pudenda muliebria. 
toth-grod, s.m. Miasma, 
tot-tilgte, see tobhta-tilgte. 
tra, -than, see trath. 
tràbail, (CR) s. Slightly bedraggled—W. of Ross. 
trabalach,(CR) a. Bedraggled—W. of Ross. 
trabhach,* see trabhach. 
trabhach, -aich, s.f. Rubbish of any kind cast, 
ashore by the flood on the bank of a river, or 
on the sea-shore. 2 Fiorin grass. 3 In Lewis 
pronounced ‘‘ tràthoch," and =rabhann, 
trabhailt,* -e, -eau, s.f. see treabhailt. 
trabhsdan,ff see trasdan. 
—ach,tf -aiche, o see trasdanach 








Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


trach 966 traoidhtearachd 


trach,(DC) a, s.m. Ditch. t raill,** s.f. Kneading-trough. 2 Tray. 

tràchd,* see drachd. T2 Tract, treatise, history, | traill, (-e,) -ean, s. m. & f. Slave, bondman or 
narration, report. bondwoman. 2 Drudge. 3 Slovenly person. 

tràchd, v.a. Negotiate, traffic, treat, handle. 2| 4 Hard-wrought person. 6 seetraille,  6** 
tt Propose. Labourer. 

trachdach,** a. Negotiating. trafficing. Lraille, -achan, 8.f. Tusk (fish.) 

trachdadh, -aidh, -ean, s.m. Negotiating, nego- | trailleach,§ s.m.Seaware of all kinds—alge. 
tiation. 2 Proposal,Spurposing. 3 Traffic. | trà lleach, -eiche, a. see tràilleil. 


ttiachdadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Tradition. 2| tràilleachd, s.f. Bondage, slavery. 2 Slavish- ` 
Treatise. ness, abjectness, servility. 3 Drudgery. 4 
tràchdail,** s,f. Negotiation. Slovenliness, 5**Captivity. 
trachdair, -ean, s.m Historian, recorder, one | trailleadh,(DC)s.m Halibut— Uist. 
who writes treatises. traillealachd, see tràilleachd. 2*Utmost degra- 
tràchdaireachd,*" s.f. Business of a historian, | dation. 
history, writing of tracts. ttraillear, -eir, s.m. Baker. 
trachdalachd,tt s.f.ind. History, negotiation. | trailleas,** -eis, s m. Slavery. [s.f."*] 
trachlach,** o Fatiguing, laborious. trailleil, -e, æ. Servile,?slavish. 2 Enslaved. O- 
trachladh, -aidh, s.m. Loosening 2 see treach- | bair th., servile work. 
ladh traille-manach, see traille (fish.) 
trachlaiche,** s.m. Drudge, one employed at |traillidh, see trailleil. 
dirty laborious work. 2 Squanderer. eachd, see tràilleachd. 
tradan,** Ain, s.m. Scolding person. 2 Quarrel- | traill-luingeas, -eis, s.f. Galley, convict-ship. 
some person. traineach, Landrail, see tréan-ri-tréan. 
—-—ach,** a. Scolding, quarrelsome, litigious. | traineadh, -idh, s.m. Culling, choosing. 
tradh, -aidh, -an, s.f. Lance. 2 Fishing-spear, | trainge,* s.f. Throngness, pressure of business. 
trag (AF) s.f. Snipe— Ross-shire. 2 Crowding. 
tragh, v.n. see traogh. trainge, comp. of trang. Busier, busiest. 
tràgha, gen.sing. of traigh. trainnse, s.f. Trench, drain. 
traghadair,*" s.m. Appeaser. ar, -eir, s.m. Plate, trencher. 
tràghadh, -aidh, s.m. Ebbing,'aet or state of eb- | traisg,* v.a. Parch with thirst, Th. mo chridhe. 
bing or subsiding. A’ t—, pr.pt. of tràgh. my very heart parched. 
traghadh-asbhuinneach, (DC) s.m. ** Flooding ” | traisg, pr.pt. ai trasgadh & a’ trasg, v.a. Fast, 
of women— Uist. abstain from food. 2 Observe a fast. 3** Be 
traghaid,(MS) s.f, see treaghaid. hungry. Th. e tri laithean, he fasted thres 
traghais, (CR) s.f. Commotion, stir. 2 Lumber. days ; c’ ar sun a th. sibh P why did ye fast 3 
H of Ross. traisg, s.f. see trasg. 
traghna, s Landrail, see tréan-ri-tréan. traisgeach, -eiche, a. see trasgach, 
traibeal, see trabail. traisgidh, fut.af.a. of traisg. 
traiuleach,** -dich, s.m. Warrior. tràiszte, past pt. of traisg. Parched of thirst. 
traidh, see troidh. traisgte,** o Cross, cross-grained. 
traidhtear,* -eir, -an,s.m. Rogue. 2(MS) Be-| trait, -e, -ean, sf. Oatap!asm, poultice. 2 Rags, 
trayer. bandages. 
traidhtearach, -eiche, a. Traitorous, disloyal.  |traiteach,"* o, Of, or belonging to a cataplasm, 
— — —4, s.f. Treason, perfidy,disloyalty. | 2 Like a cataplasm. 
tràigh, pr pt a’ traghadh, v.g. & n. see traogh. | traith, see tràigh. 
traigh, -e, tragha & tràghad, pl. -ean [tràinnean | traithnin,f $. sea machal-coille. 
"m 5kye,] s.f. Sea-shore. 2 Beach exposed at|trall,** s.f. Drab, trull. 
low water. 3** Shore of a lake or river. 4**| lramailt,* e -ean, $.f. Most unaccountable 
Reflux or ebbing of the tide. 6* Sand-beach, whim or freak. [ trea kish. 
strand Ghios(dh’ ionnsuidh) na tragha, to | —— ——each,* -eiche, a. Whimsical, capricious, 
tue shore ; mat th. fhuaimear a’ chnain,like the | tramasgal, s.m. Trash. : 
raging reltux of the sea ; a dh’ ionasuidh na|trang," -ainge, a. Throng, very busy. 2 On good 
tragha, towards the shore; onfhadh na;tràighe, | terms. 3 Very intimate. 
the ragin; billows of the shore, 'san t. mhaor- | trannsa, s.f. Entry, lobby, passage. 
ach, in the ebb for shei/fish ; ’san t. shiolag, | traochlaiche,** s. Tilt, tournament. 
wn the ebb for sand-eels ; ged bheirear t. | traodh, see traogh. 
dhinn cha toirear timchioll, we may lose the adh, see traoghadh. 
ford but not the road—at high-water the short ta, see traoighte. 
cut across a bay is closed to one,but the round- | traogh, pr.pt. a traoghadh, "oa & n. Ebb. 2 
' about way isalways open Subside, sink down,settle,as a disturbed fluid, 
traizn,(AC) at Basement of a house. 9 Abate. 4 Exhaust, drain, empty, pour ouf. 
traigh,** s.m. Strength. 2 Lazy person. 5 Pacify, appease, assuage. Th. e, it ebbed ; 
tràigh-cheum, -éim, an, s$. m. Path along the} th. na h-uisgeachan, the walers abated. 
shore of the sea or a lake. traogh,** a. Empty. 2 Ebbed. 
traixheach, -cich, s.f Refuse left by a high or | traoghach,** œ. Assuasive, subsiding soon, tead- 
flood tide on the bank of a river. ing to ebb or abate. 
tràigheach,]f -eiche, a. Beachy. traoghadair,** s.m. Assuager. 
traigheanach,** -aich, s.m. Lazy person. traoghadh, -aidh, s.m. Ebbing, act or state of 
tràüigh-gheadh,* s.m. Stock-gannet. 2(AF)Tame| ebbing. 2 Subsiding, act of subsiding. 8 
or Shore goose. Settling, as an agitated fluid. 4 Exhausting. 
traighideach,** a. Trazical. act of exhausting or emptying. 5 Assuaging, 
tràighleachan, s.m. Bird that nests on the shore| assuagement. 6* Abating, abatement, as of a 
above high-water mark— Arran. swelling. 7*, Draining, A’ t—, pr.pt. of traogh. 
triicgh-mara,** s.f. Sea-shore. 2 Ebbing of the|traoghte, see travighte. 




















Sea. traoidhte,** s,f. Treachery, treason, practice of 
tràighte, past pt. of tràigh, see traoighte, An treason, deceitfulness, i 
talanıi t., the dry land. traoidhtear,** -an, s.m. Gaelic form of traitor. 
traightear, see traidhtear. ———- ——-achd,** sm. Faithlessness. 
Original from 
Digitized by UNIVERSITY GF ILLINOIS AT 


IMTERMET AR C HIVE. . URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 








Toce c m 


-— wen 


i traoidhteil 
'tracidhteil,"* a. Bewraying, faithless. 


LS 


traoighte, past pt. of traogh. Ebbed. 2 Subsi- 
ded, settled, as any agitated fluid, 3 Exhaust. 


ed, emptied, drained. 4 Abated 

raoill,** s.f. Cant, 
traoit, see trait. 
'traon,** -oin, s.m. see traona—Skye. 
traona, -n, s.m. Land-rail, eee trean-ri-tréan. 
traonair,** s,m. Idler. 
——-eachd,** s.f. Leisure. 
traoth, v. 8ee traogh. 
“trap,” v.a. Take places in a class. 2 Carp 
——,* s.m. Trap-stair, 2 Snare, 
trapan, -ain, -an, s.m. Bunch, cluster, group, 


2 Vacancy 


trapanach, -aiche, a. Clustering, clustered, in 


groups. 
tris (i.e. an tràth seo) see tràth 


trasd. adv. Across, aslope, athwart, crosswise, 


traverse, 2* Awkwardly placed. 


‘trasd,** -a, s.m, Cross, thwart, disappointment, 


‘trasda, a. Diagonal, cross, laid across, horizon- 
| tal Gu t., horizontally. 
'trasdach, -aiche, a. see trasda, 





| Antithesis in gram. 

'&rasdair,* -ean, s.m. Diameter. 

trasdan, -ain, s.m. Cross-beam or-line, 2 Oro- 
zier. 


Crossbill. (trosdan 


) 
trasdanach,tt ta. Awkward about the legs. [ft 


EE, 
E, be. Antithesis. 
trasd-fhacal,(MS) s.m. Solecism, 
rasg, -aisg, -an, s.f. Fast, fasting. 

fasting ; "pa b., she fasting ; dh’ éigh iad t., 

they proclaimed a fast ; là traisg, o fast-day. 
traszach, -aiche,@. Abstinent, fasting. 2 Of, 

ere bé a fast. ` f 
trasgadh, -aidh, s. m. Fasting, ach of fasting, 
' fast. A’ t—, pr.pt, of traisg. 


trasgadh, -aidh, s. m, Scorching of the palate 


with thirst. ; 

trasgaid,** s.f. Abrogation, oppression. 2 Over- 
throw. 

trasgair,**jv. Abrogate, destroy. 2łłOverwhelm, 
oppress. 3**Kill. [throw. 

teasgairt,** s.f,Abrogation, oppression. 2 Over- 

‘trasgar,"* air, s.m. Destruction. 2 Oppression. 
3 Great fall. 

trasgradh, -aidh, s.m, Abrogating. 2 Oppress- 

. ing oroverwhelmiag, oppression, 3**Killing, 
A’ t—, pr.pt. of trasgair. 

trasgraidh, fut. aff.a. of trasgair. 

trasnan,"* -ain, s.m. Ledge. 2 Cross-beam. 

frat, s.m. Trick. 

tratach, a. Tricky, playful. Bu duine t. Cail- 

| fon, Colin was a tricky fellow—Sgeul.-nan- 
caol. 

trataran, see trèan-ri-tròan. 

-tréan, see trèan-ri-trèan. 

tràth, A & tràith, an, s.m. Time,day,hour, sea- 
son. 2 Diet of food. 3**Prayer-time. Da th, 
'san la, two meals a day ; 'sna tràthaibh ceart, 
Qt ihe proper seasons ; mu th. an fheasgair, 
at the time of the evening meal ; facal 'na th., 
a word in season ; an ceann an naoidheamh 

(t, at the end of the ninth day ; t. bìdh, meal- 

^ time; t. feasgair, eventide, evening ; t. ùrnuigh, 
prayer-time ; t.-noin, mid-day, noon-tide. 

tràth, Aitbhe, o Early in season, timeous, be- 
times. 2 Speedy, quick. 

tràth, adv, In due time, seasonably. 





2 Early, 


soon. 3**When. Dèan t. e, do it in good time; 


bi an seo t. be here early; an t. seo (an 
. dràad),) at present, now. 
tràthach, -aiche, a. see trathail, 
———— —— d, s.f. see trathalachd, 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


967 


d, s.f.ind. Athwartness, crossness. 2 


8* Crutch. 4 Stilt. 6 Diagonal. 6(AF) 


Na th., he 


Ttreabhar, air, s.m. Tide. 
treabhla, see treamhla. 
treabhlachd, s.f. Family, household. 
treabhta, past pt. of treabh. Ploughed, tilled, 





t-eadhan 


trathadair, -ean, s, m. Clock, time-keeper. 
Observer of seasons, 

tràthail, -e, a. Seasonable. 2 In good time,early, 
soon 

trathalachd, s.f. Seasonableness. 

trath feasgair,** s.m. Eventide. 

trathnan,** -ain, s.m, Little stalk of grass, 

tràth nòin, s.m, Noon-tide, mid-day, 

tre, prep. Through. 2 By means of. 
chiéith, through my casement. 

treabh, pr. pt. a’ treabhadh, po Plough, till 
the ground, cultivate, delye. Iadsan a 
threabhas euceart, they who plough iniquity. 

„tł 8.7. see treabha. 

treabh, -éibh, pl. -an & -achan, s.m. see treubh. 

treabh, -eibh, s.m. Farmed village. 2**Tiiling, 
agriculture, 

treahha,l s.m. Thrave, (two cocks of corn, each 
containing 12 sheaves.) 

treabhach, -aiche, a. Ploughing, that ploughs, 
aratory, 

treabhach,} -aich, s. m. Water-cress—barbarea 
vulgaris. 

treabhachail,** a. Agricultural. 2 Arable. 

treabhachas, -ais, Se am. Husbandry, agriculture. 
2 Arable farm. 3**Specimen of ploughing. Is 
sibhse t. Dhé, ye are the husbandry of God. 

treabhachd, s.f. see treabhachas. 

treabhadair,* -ean, s.m. see treabhaiche. 

treabhadh, -aidh, s.m. Ploughing, act of plough- 
ing. A't—, pr.pt. of treabh. T. choire, oat- 
husbandry ; t.-eórna, barley-husbandry ; tal- 
amh treabhaidh, plough-land, arable land. 

treabhaich, see treabhaiche. 

—— ——— —e, -an, S.M. Ploughman. 2 Husband. 
man, agriculturist, farmer of arable land,” till- 
er. 3**Peasant. 

treabhaidb,** a. Arable. 

treabhailt (MS) a. Arable. 

treabhailt, -ean, s.f. Grain-box in a mill, hopper. 
2**Mill-hopper. 3 in ridicule, Bulky female. 

treabhair, s,coll. Houses in a cluster, steadings, 
out-houses, farm-buildings, homestall, home- 
stead. 2(DU) Building of any kind. 

iir aul -ean, s.m. see treabhaiche. 2 Surety, 

ail, 
treabhaireachd,** s.f. Husbandry. 
treabhar,** a. Discreet, skilful. 


2 Activity. 3 Choice. 


——- 


T. mo 





cultivated. 


treabhte, see treabhta. 


treachaid, s.f. Tilling. Nach math a tha 'n tal- 

amh sin air a th., how well that land is tilled ; 

t.na h-uadhach, opening of @ grave—conveys 

an idea of neatness and care in work— Gael.Soc, 

Inv., xiv, 11. 

treachail, pr. pt. a’ treachladh, v. a. Dig, dig 
deep. 2 Harass, fatigue. 8 Oppress with la- 

bour, overwork. Chlaidh e slochd is th. e, he 

dug a ditch and dug it deep. [*prov.] 

treachaill,(MS) s. Gutter. 

E MNT (an), s.m. Name of Fionn’s 
oat. 

treachailte, past pt. & a. Dug. 2 Fatigued with 

labour, overwrought. Clachan t. le 'm buinn, 

stones dg up with their feet. 

treachdair,** s.m. Historian. 

treachlach,** -aich, sam Squanderer, 

treachladh, aidb, s.m. Digging. 2 Fatiguing. 
S TAMENS; hardship A’ t—, pr.pt. of reach, 
ail. 

treaehlaidh, fut.af.a. of treachail. 

Ttregad -eid, see trod. 

tread, Gaelic form of ‘rade, 

treadhan, -ain, 8. m. Fast of three days. 2 Ebb, 


Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS A 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


prone- > — es, CUN 


treadhan 


3 Want. 4 Louse, 
treadhanas,** ag, s.m. Abstinence, 
¢treagh, s.m. Spear. 
treagha,* prep. Through. 
treaghaid, -e, -ean, s.f. Darting or transfixing 


pain, stitch in the side, 2 Pleurisy (With 
art. an] 3(MS) Dolour. 

Ut NDS -eiche, a, Ill of stitches. 2 Pain- 
ul. 


trealaich, -e, s.f. Lumber, trash, mixed heap of 
valueless articles, 2 Apparatus, tackling, 3* 
Man’s — in ridicule T. chatha, armour, 

trealais, s The spleen. 

trealamh, -aimh, -aimhean, s.m. Indisposition, 
sickness, weakness. 2** Apparel 8** Furni- 
ture. 

trealbhaidh,* o, Adult, grown up. 

treall,* s.f Short space, while. ST. 

treallach, -aich, s.m. see trealaich. d: 

treallaidh,** soe trealaich, : 

treallain, s.m, Doggerel. 

treallan, see treall. 

treaman, -ain, s.m. Alien. 

treamant,(AH) a. Weli-developed, well-grown, 
manly, womanty, said ofa boy or girl. Balach 
t., tapaidh, a smart, well-deve'opsd boy 

treamhia, (CR) s.m. Illness, ailment — Loch- 
broom & Garlock, 

treamhiaidh,tf -ean, 8.7. Lingering sickness. 

treamhlainn.(CR) Gatrlech for trezinhla. 

treamhnadh,( MS) s.m. Conduct. 

treamsgal,-ail, s.m. INous:;nse, balderdash. 2 
Medley, litter. 3 Tauniing languago. 

trèan, v. Gaelic form of train, v. 

treanadh,** -aidh, s.m. Lamentation, wailing 
2 Whitsuntide, the week from Thursday pre- 
ceding to Thursday following Whit Sunday, 
(not Whitsunday.) 

treanaire,(AY) see tróan-ri-tréan. 

treananta, a. Triangular. 

treanas,** -ais, sm. Abstinence, 

treann,(AC) v.a. Cut, lop, trim, shape. 

en s. Filok; 

trèan-ri-trèan, s. m. Landrail, corn-craik—crez 
pra/'ensis. 

treanta, a. Gaelic form of trained. 

trearach,** -aich, s.m. Artificer. 

Tirearach,** s. Science, art. 

ttreartha, see trearach. 

jtrearthach, -aiche, a. Skilled in arts, 2 Scien- 





tific. 
4treas, -a, -an, s.m. Battle. 2 Skirmish. 3 
Treason. 4 Treachery. 5**Adversity. Gach 


cridhe gun t., each heart without treachery 
—Oran nam fineachan. [**gen.sing. treis.] 

treas,tt -cise, a. Strong, powerful. 

treas, a. Third. 3as. 8rd. ; an t. uair, thrice; the 
third time ; an t. cuid, the third part. 

treasa, comp. of treun. [Not comp. of làidir, as 
stated in Gaelic grammars. ] _ 

treasad, 3rd.comp. of treun. [Not of làidir, as 
stated in Gaelic grammars. } 

treasad, see treise. 

treasadh,** a. Subtuple. 

treasaid,** s.f. Third crop. 

treag-bàrr,** s.m. Third crop. 

treas-cuid,** s.f. Third part. 

treasd,* s.m. Long form or seat, as in & school. 

,* v.a. Bespeak, engage—Islay. 

ach, -aiche, @. -Thorough pacing (of hor- 
ses.) 2**Sure-footed. Each t. luath-bhar, a 
sure-footed, quick-pecing horse. 

treasg,(DC) s.m.Chaff, corn, or bran steeped in 
boiling water for feeding cows, &c, ‘* mash.” 

treasg, -eisg, s.m. Refuse of malt that has been 
brewed, draff. 2 Groats. 3*Weaver's paste, 
(see treisginn) 4 (MS) Hog's wash, GI 

. Gieat drought. 6** Brewers grains, 








Diait 


gitized py 
| 
| 


LÍ 
INTERNET ARCHIVE 


$88 


"oo ———— —— e a ee we. 


treise 


treasg, Gairloch for tréasgan-{DU.) 

treasgach, a. Dratty. 

treasgin,(CR) s. m. Useless, good-for-nothing 
person — Suth'd. 

treas-tarruing,* st Spirits of wine. 
distilled whisky. 
4 The third time 

treathart, s. see treaghaid 

- each, see treaghaideach | 

fireathan, ain, s.m. Wave. 2 Sea. 8 High-wa- 
ter. 4 Foot 5 Trace. 

treathghamhnach,^ ach, s. f. Cow that has a 
calf in two years— Jslay. 

treathlaich, see trealaich, 

treathnach,* -aich, s.f. Gimlet. 

ftreblait, now trioblaid. 

ttregat, s. Darting pain. 

tréibh. see treabh. 

tréibhdhireach, -eiche, a. Upright, sincere, vir- 
tuous, righteous, honest, faithful to one's en- 
gagement. T. agus gun tuisleach, sincere and 
without offence. 

— d. s.f. see tréibhdhireas. 

tréibhá freas, 818, $.m. Sincerity, uprightness, 
honesty, faithfuluess, trustiness, punctuality, 

treibhireach, see tréibhdhrreach. 

treibhse, s.f. Room, place, stead. 

ach, a. Apt to change. 

———achii, s.f. Changeableness. | 

trów, pr.pt. a tréigaan, v.g. & n. Leave, quit, 
reiinquish, desert, forsake, abandon. 2 Be- 
tray. 3 Cease. 4 Depart, abdicate. Na t. mi 
gu buileach no gu brath, forsake me not utter- 
ly nor fer ever ; gaoth a thogas is a thréigeas 
andos,a wind that agitaies the bush and 
leaves it ; an dithis niu dheireadh a thréigeas 
thu, do chu 1s mac do pheathar, bhe two last to 
desert you, your doy and your sister’s son; t. 
olc, depart yrom evil ; th. e combairle, he for- 
800k advice. 

tréigeach, a. Apt to desert, forsake or abandon. 

tréigeadh, see tréigsinn. 

tréigeal,** s.m. Departure. 2 Gaelic spelling of 
treacle. 

tréigean,** ein, s.m. Leaving, forsaking, aban- 
donment. 

tréigear, fut.pass. of tréig. 

treigheannas,** -ais, s.m. Fasting, abstinence. 

tréigsinn, s.m. Leaving, act of leaving, forsak- 
ing, quitting, relinquishing, abandoning, a- 
bandonment, deserting, desertion. 2 Act or 
state of ceasing or departing, A’ t—, pr. pt. 

of tréig. Mo chail 'gam th., my strength failing. 

-— ————each, a. Apt to forsake, abandon or de- 


sert. 
each,** s.m. Desorter, forsaker. 

eachd,Tf s.f. Abandonment. 

tréigte, past pt. of tréig. Forsaken, abandoned, 
deserted. 2**Forlorn, 

tréin, gen.sing. of treun. 

tréine, s.f.ind. Might, power, strength. Mar th. 
tuinne, like the strength of a wave. 

tréine, comp. of treun. 

ad, -eid, s.m. Degree of fortitude, power or 
valour. 

tréineas, -eis, s.m. see tréine. 

tréin-fhear, -fhir, s.m. Brave man. 

treinidh,(WC)s.f. ** Kinks "of whooping-cough. 
Thàinig an t. air, the convulsions came on him. 

treiunse,** s.f. Gaelic form of trench. 

treis, -e, s.f. While, spell Uer er) 2 Distance 
of place. T. mhath, & g while ; t. air as- 
tar, a good way off; o cheann treise, a while 
ago. 

treis, §.m. see treise. 

(reise, (for treasa, comp. of treun.) More or mosb 
powerful. 2(DC) Used as a positive (Strong) 
in Uist 


2 Thrice. 
3** 'lhrice-distilled spirits. 





2**Foot. 

















Original fram 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS A 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


"-—4 





$ treise 969 treunna M UC! 
treise, s.f. Force, bodily strength, vigour, ani-! gallantry. 
mal power. 2 Trial, adversity, 3 Trial of|treubhaiche, comp, of treubhach. 


strength, battle, 


forsaking her. 
treise, s.m. Supporter, protector. 


treisead, -eid, s.m. Degree of strength, vigour, 


or power. 
treiseil, -e, a. Strong, powerful, vigorous, 
treisg,* s. see treasg. 2 Trash—Argyll. 
treisginn, s. f. Weaver's paste. 


gyll. 

ttréite, s.f. Embrocation. 

ftreith,** s. f. Erudition, accomplishment, 2 

ualification. 

tréith, gen sing. & n.pl. of triath. 

ttreithe, s.f. Ignorance, 2 Weakness. 

treitheach,** a. Accomplished, learned. 

treobh, see treabh. 

adair, see treabhadair. 

adh, see treabhadh. 

aiche, see treabhaiche, 

treobhair, (an), s.m, That part of a boat below 
tho “ leagail.”’ 

treobhla, see treamhla. 

treodas,** -ais, s.m. Food. 

treodhair, ean, s.m». Smith's nail (mould, for 











forming heads of nails. [*treodhaire.] 2(DMy) 


In weaving, the gauge for holding the web in 
place. 3 (DMy) The rope drawn over the 
cleithean and below the thatehing straw in 
the space above the sgrathan, to ‘prevent the 
thatch LM ling Uim 

treoghaid, see t aid. 

it dm -e, S.f. Strength, force, might, power, vi- 
gour, energy. 2 Direction. 3 Troop. 4 see 
treodhair. 

tredir,* v.n. Flag. 

tredsireil, comp. treoireala, a. Pithy. 

tredirichsar, see tredraichear. 

treona,( DC) s.f. Laudrail, see tréan-ri-tréan. 

treonach,(DO)s.f. Landrail, see tréan-ri-tréan. 

trednachan, s.m. Landrail, see tréan-ri-tréan. 

treonal (DC) s.f. Crowd, group. 

treòrach, -aiehe, a. Vigorous, powerful. 2**Act- 
ive. 





adh, -aidh, s.m. Leading, act of leading, 
guiding or directing, supporting. A’ t—, pr. 
pt. of treoraich. 

treòrachail, -e, e. Conducting. 

treorachair, -ir, -an, s.m. see tredraichear. 

treóraich, pr. pt.a’ treorachadh, v.a. & n. Lead, 
guide, conduet, direct. 2 Strengthen. 3 Give 
strength to aceomplish. 

treoraich,(AC) s.f. Leading. 
leaving—deuth-blessing. 

treoraiche,** -ean, s. m. 
guide. 

treóraíchear, Ar, -an, E. m, 
conductor, 2 Finger-post. 

—— —— ——-, fut.pass. of treòraich. 

treòraichte, past pt. of treòraich. Directed, led, 
guided, conducted. 2** Strengthened, 

treoran,** -ain, s.m. Active little child. 

,"* s. Three parts. 

treordail, (a), (AC) s.f. Staggering. 

tresg,** see treasg. 

treubh, -éibh & a, pl. -an & -achan, s.f. Tribe, 
family, clan, kin, iDo réir 'ur tréibh, accord- 
ing to your tribe. 

ach, -aiehe, æ. Strenuous, valorous,heroic, 

gallant. 2**Clannish. 3 In tribes or clans, 

4 Relating to a tribe or clan Na fir t., the 

valiant men. 

&ch,** -aich, s.m. One of a tribe or family. 

trenbhachas, -ais, see treubhantas 

treubhachd,** sg. f. Clan:ishness. 2 Bravery, 


T. anama, o soul- 
Leader, 
Leader, guide, 


eonductor 











Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


Dh’ eug mo th., my vigour 
has died away ; a b. 'ga fàgail, her strength 







2 Trash—A - 


,"* s.m, One of a tribe or family. 

— ——-&àd,"*.id, s. m Degree of bravery 
A’ dol an t., growing braver and braver ; ais 
ath ‘sam bheil iad, however brave they be. 

treubhan, -ain,** s.m. Tribune, 

: ach, a. Tribunitial. 

treubhanta,* .ainte, æ Heroic, fond of feats or 
achievements, 

treubhantas, -ais, s.m. Bravery, valour, chival- 
ry. 2 Feat, exploit. 3 **Magnanimity. 
4* Display offeats or achievements. 5*Boast- 
ing. Bearta treubhantais, deeds of valour. 

treubhas,* aus, s.f. see treubhantas. 

— ——-Ach, -aiehe, see treubhanta. 2*Ostenta- 
tious, 

treubhna,% e, Landrail, see tréan-ri-tréan. 

reubhun, -uin, see treubhan. 

treud, tréid & a, pl. an, 8. m. Flock. 2 Herd 
of animals. 3 Followers. 4 Band of men Mar 
fhuaim tuinne bha gach t., each band was like 
A roaring wave. 

-——ach, -aiche,a. Having many flocks or herds, 
Se er 2 Of, or belonging to a flock or 

erd, 

treudachadh,(MS) s.m. Aggregation. 

treudaich,(MS) v.a. Aggregate, 

———e, -an, s.m. Shepherd, herdsman, dro- 
ver, cowherd, swineherd. ?tffPastor. [MeL 
& D gives nom.sing. -aich.] 

treudaire,* an see treudaiche. 

treuinide,(AC) comp. of treun. 

treun, o Ist. comp. tréine, & treise or treasa, 
2nd. comp. treasaid, 3vd.comp, treasad. Strong, 
powerful, mighty, vigorous. 2 Brave,valiant. 
3 Persevering and successful beyond expect- 
ation, as a weak person, surprising. Ist. a 
fhnuara lh tu, you did surprisingly ; is t. leam 
fhéin a gu 'm urrainn thu,l am surprised that 
you were able; is t. a gheibhear thu, you do 
Surprisingly ; t. an neart, mighty in strength ; 
bha sibh t. thar gloir, you were brave beyond 
praise. 

treun, tréin,s.m. Brave man, warrior, champion, 
hero. Am measg treun a shluaigh, among the 
brave of his people. . 

treun,(DU) s.f. Strength, the acme or pitch of 
strength. Ann an treun a neirt, in the fullness 
of his strength. 

treunachas, -ais, s.m. Strength, might. 2 Val- 
our, bravery. 3 Manhood. 

treunachd, s.f. see treunachas. 2*Perseverance. 
3* Suecess. 4* Surprising conduct. 

treunad, -aid, s.m. Degree of bravery, valour, 
success, &c. A’ dolan t., growing braver and 
gl ; air a th. ’s a bheil e, however brave ha 

e 

treunadas,*-ais, $& f. Exploits. 2 see treunachas, 

—-——~—ach, -aiche, s.f, Performing brave ex: 
ploits. 

treun-adhairceach,** s.m. Rhinoceros, 

treunair,* -ean, s.m. Diligent man, 

treunas, -ais,s.m. Chivalry, strength,might, bra- 
very, courage. A’ taomadh a th., pouring his 
strength. 

treun-dhan, -ain, s.m. Epic or heroic poem, 

treunear,** -ir,see treun-fhear. Dhüisg na treun- 
ir lasair, the heroes kindled a flame, 

treun-fhear,tr s.m. Strong man, hero,champíon. 
trena-fheardha, a. Na fir bheura th., the sharp, 
strong, brave men— F'ilidh. p. 65. 








| treun-lamhach, -aiche, a. Armipotent, 


treun-laoch, -laoich, s.m, Strong warrior, hero. 


champion. 
treunmhor, -mhoire, ~ Very brave. 
"treunn&, | see tréan-ri-tréan. 
3 P 
Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


tréun-ri-tréun 


tréun-ri-tréun, see tréan-ri-tréan. 

treuntas,** -ais, s.m. Strength, power. 2 Mag: 
nanimity. 3(MS) Flourish Thréig iad an t., 
they have forsaken thar magnanwunity. 

treun-thoisgeach,** a. Brave with expedition, 2 
Performing explotts in quick succession. 

treuthach,(MS) a. Strenuous. 

tri, a. Three, T. uairean, thrice; t. maighdeana 
beaga caomha, rugadh 'san son oidhche ri 
Criosd, three lovely little maidens born the 
same night as Christ—Faith, Hope and Char, 
ity When counting 1, 2, 3, &c., say, *‘-a h- 
aon, a dha, a tri" &c. In A thri bhliadhna 
an ama seo, three years at this time, a is the 
prep, do. 

tTtriabhall, -aill, s.m. see triall, 

triachan,** -ain, s.m. Sock. 2 Shoe. 

triadh, see triath. 

triagzhanach, (MMcD) s, f. see tri-ghamhnach, 

triall,pr.pt.a' triall, v.a. n. Go,depart, set out. 
2 Intend, purpose, imagine, devise, plot. 3 
Stroll, travel, walk, march, journey,traverse. 

triall, s.m. Journey, departure. 2 Going, act 
of going, departing or marching. 3 Purpose, 

. design. 4 Way, expedition. 5 Travelling 6 
Designing, act of designing or intending. 7 
(AC) Procession of people and herds to the 
summer sheiling. 8 (AC) Flock. 9** March. 
10(DMu) Luggage, baggage. And’ thug thu 
an t. leat ? have you brought the luggage wiih 
yeu? beannaieh ant. 's an stor, bless the 
flock and the store ; &. nan curaidh, the heroes’ 
march ; air mo th., on my way. 


triallach,** a. Itinerant, travelling. 2 Fond of 
walking. 3 Of, or belonging to, a journey. 

trialladh, -aidh, s.m. Elongation. 2 Journey, 
travelling, journeying 

triallaiche,** s.m. Pedestrian, traveller, wayfar- 


ing man, 
triallair, -ean, s. m. Traveller, wayfaring man, 
pedestrian. [triallatre.* ] 


triall-chaismeachd, ff -an,s.f, Signal for moving. 

triamant, see treamant. 

triamh,** o see tritheamh. 

triamh,** s.m. The '' three ” at cards or dice. 2 
(AH) An triamh ball’’ at cards—A rgyll. 

triamhain,** a. Weary. 

triamhnasth, -aidh, s.m. Weariness, 

triamhnuin,** s. Lamentation. 

triamhtinneach,** a. Mournful. 

trian, s.m.ınd. Third part. 2 Particle. 3 Ray. 
4 District. T. a chliù, the third of his fame ; 
gearrar dà th., two thirds shall be cut; t. de 
shoillse, « ray of light ; an treas t., the third 
part ; m&'8 pill, cha'n fhiù iad t., before they 
return they are not worth a third of it; 
o'nchaill,mi trian na h-analach, since J lost 
one third of my breath or lung-power—a man 
can only hold out as long as his wind is un- 
broken—Cead deireannach nam Beann. 

trianach, a. Of the third part. 2 Three,by three. 

trianaich,** v.n. Trine. | 

trianaichte, past pt. Trined. 

Trianaid, see Trionaid. 

trianail,** v.a.** v.a. Handle or finger a string- 
ed musical instrument. 2 Strike. 

Tri-an-aon,tt s.f. The Triune God, the Trinity. 

triantach, ach, s.m. see triantan. 

——-.———, -aiche, a. see triantanach. 2*In thirds, 

triantan, -ain, pl. -an & -ain, s.m. Triangle, 

triantan, s.pl. Thirds. 

————ach, -aiche, a. Triangular, 
metrical. 

achd, s.f. Trigonometry. 

trian-tarruing,§ s,Rest-harrow,see sreang-bogha, 
Little shrubby plant with flowers like broom, 


2 Trigono- 





Digitized by 


970 


tri-chearnach 


but rosy instead of yellow. 
triar. see trùir. 
triarach,** a. Thirdly 
triasg,(CR) s.m. Useless person—W of Rose 
Slender, inactive, idle man—ditto 
(CR) v.n. Dry up, shrink. become leaky 
triath, gen triaith, tréith & a, pl. tréith & an 
s.m, Lord, king, chief, noble, prince,chieftain 
hero, leader, personage 2**Wave '3 rarely 
Hillock. 

An T.,(poetical) God; an t. atha borb,the heri 
that ws fierce ; coimeas do p charraig an b., 
like the rock is the hero; thog na triaith 
sleagh a’ bhàis, the heroes lifted the spear o 
death ; mo Dhia,is tu ant. ro mhór, my G 
thow art the mighty Lord 

triath,(AF) s. Hog, sow, boar 

triath,** a, Noble. 2 Valuable 3 Weak 

triathach, -aiche, a. Noble, lordly, magnificent, 
2 Triumphant. 

triathach,** -aich, s.m. Trophy 

triathail,* e o see triathach, 








~ a 


666. Tri-bhileach. 
tri-bhileach,t s.f. Common valerian, all-heal or 


St. George's herb—valerana oficinalis 2(* 
& Mc & D) Marsh-trefoil, 
tri-bhileag, s.f. Clover. 
tri-bhilean,$ s.m. Red-clover, see’seamrag-chap- 
uill, 2l Bog-bean, marsh-trefoil, see pònair- 
chapuill. 
tribuail,** for trtobuail. 
tric, -e, a Frequent, often. 
trice, comp. of tric.*Oftener, 
triceachd,(MS) s.f. Resort. 
tricead, -eid, s.m. Degree of frequency 
an b., growing more and more frequent. 
———.,* a. Thirty. 
tri-chasach, o Three-footed, tripetal. 
—————,, s.m, Tripod. 
tricealachd,(MS) s.f. Frequency, crebritude. 
tri-cheannach, a. Tricipital. 
tri-chearnach, -aich,s f Triangle, 
————-, a. Triangular. 


1 [often. 
Gu t.. frequentiy, 


oftenest. 
A dol 



































«chothromach, Equilateral tri- 
angle. 
——-—- chruinnbhil, Spherical triangle. 
——— fhiar-oisinneach, Oblique-angled 
triangle. 
gheur-oisinneach, Acute-angied 
triangle. 
— lurg-ionnan, Isosceles triangle, 
mhaol-oisinneach, Obtuse-angled 
triangle. 





stabhach, Scalena triangle. 
thacbh-ionnan, Kaguilateral tbri- 








Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 


| Aye 
-7 m RAI A Fa st EIL JF Sé 
INTERNET ARCHIVE 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN ME 


tri-chearnach 971 triubhas NNNM 


tion, tribulation. 2*Distress, calamity. Là 
mo th., the day af my trouble, is lionmhor t. 
agus teinn a thi» air an fhìrean choir, many 
s/raits and calamities fall to the lot of the up- 
right , le t. chruaidh, with sore distress 

trioblaideach, -eiche, æ. Troubled, distressed. 2 ` 
Distressing, calamitous, afflicting, distressful, 
vexatious, afflicted 3 Busy. Ni t., a distress- 
ful thing, sore distressed. 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Troubling, acb of 
troubling, annoying or distressing. A' t—, 
pr pt. of trioblaidich. 

trioblaidich, pr. pt. a’ trioblaideachadh, oo, 
Trouble, molest, vex, distress, afflict. 

——..-——-—te, past pt. of trioblaidich. Troubled, 
vexed, distressed. 

triobuail, pr. pt. a’ triobualadh, v.a. & n. Mi: 
brate, quiver. 2 Swing. 3 Play. 4 Strike, 
handle or finger à stringed instrument. 

triobualadh, -aidh, s. m. Quavering, thrilling. 

triobuilte,* a, see tri-fillte. 

trioch, see triogh. 

ttriochad, a. Thirty. 

triochdadh,(DC) v.a. Save, rescue—Skye, . , 

ttriodach, -aiche, a. Transparent. | 

triogh,* s.f. see triuthach. 2* Fit of laughing 
or coughing. 

trioisinneach, o, Triangular. 

, Ach, s.m. Triangle. 















angle. 

tri-chlaiseach, s.m. Claymore, so called from 
the three grooves usually in the blade—Donn. 
Ban. 

 tri-chosach, s. & q. see tri-chasach, 

tri-chuairt, a. Three times, thrice. 

trid, prep. Through, by, by means of T. a 
chéile, through other,promiscuously ; v. amach, 
throughout; d'a th., through hum (or it.); trid- 
san, through him. [also trid—t] 

trìd,t s. f. Rag, clout, stitch. 

trid-amhartan, -ain, -an, s.m. Mishap, ill-luck. 

trideabac,tt -aic, -an, s.f. Mistake, ill-luck. 

tri-deug, a. Thirteen, Tri-fir-deug, thirteen men, 

trid-shiubhal,tf-ail, sm, Permeation. 

trìd-shoilleir, æ. see trid-shoillseach. 

trid-shoilleireachd, s.f, see trid-shoillseachd. 

trid-shoillse, -an, s.f. Transparency. 

—_————ach, -eiche, a. Transparent. 

——— Chan, -ain, s.m. Transparency. 

—— achd, $. f. Transparency, transparent- 
ness, clearness, limpidness. 

trid-shoillsean,** -ein, s.m. Transparency. 

trif(DMK) s. Elegant appearance. ‘Se sina 
chuireadh t. air, that is what would make it 
look elegant—W. coast of Ross. 

tri-fhoghair, -e, -ean, s.f Triphthong. 

tri-fichead, æ. Sixty. Tri-fichead ’s a h-aon,six- 




















| ty-one ; tri-fichead saighdear '8 a b-aon deug,| ———— 
1 71 soldiers. .. | tri-oisinneag, -eig, -an, s. f. Triangle, triangu- 
| tri-ficheadamh, a. Sixtieth. lar figure. : : "M 

| tri-fillte, a. Threefold, triple. , | triolanta,** o, Quavering, warbling. 2 Trifling, 
| tri-fillteach, see tri-fillte. | inconsiderable. Le d' phuirt thriolanta, with 


d| thy warbling strains. 
trioliachan, see trilleachan. 2**Schemer, 

triolluinn, (MS) a. Perplexed, 

ftriom, for tromham. 

trioman,§ s.m. Large fuzz-ball, see beach. 

Ttrioimn-sa, emphat. form of triom. 

Trionaid, -e, 8&7. The Holy Trinity. An T. 
Chruithear, the Godhead, 

——— —each, -eiche, a. Of the Holy Trinity. 2 
Trinitarian. 

each, s.m. Trinitarian, 

triopaiseach,(MS) a. Hemorrhoidal. 

triopall,* -aill, s.m. Bunch, cluster, festoon, 

ach, seo trioplach. 

trioplach, -aiche, a. Bunchy,zclustered, in fes- 
toons, 2**Trim, tidy. 

triosgan,** -ain, s.m, Household stuff, 

triotar, only seems to occur in “a thriotar bi 
you knave—Suth'd. [trudair] 

ttriotha, for trompa. 

tripleag, s.f. Fairy spell. 

triplich,** oo Cube 


trig, see triuthach. 

trigeadan,** s.pl, Trigentals. 

trigbamhnach, s.f. Cow that,has been three 
years without calving— Lewis. 

tri-ghuth, s.m. Triphthong. 

trileachan, see trilleachan. 

iere Gin, s.m. Quavering sound. 2 Warb- 
ing. 

trileanta,{t -einte, œ. Thrilling. 2 Warbling. 8 
Triffing. 4 Quaveriog. 6 Quick in sound or 

ion. 

Ttrilis, trilse, s.f. Locks of hair. 2 Bushy or 
luxuriant hair. A’ cleachdadh le 'n trilsibh. 
struggling with their luxuriant locks. 

; -each, a. Euxuriant or bushy, as hair. 

trilleach,(DC) s.m. Disturbance, breach of the 
peace —Uist. K 

trilleachail,(DC) a. Industrious. 

trilleachan, s. m. Pied oyster-catcher, sea-piet, 
sand-piper. 2 Guillemot. 

trìlleachan, -ain, s.m. Grey plover--squatavola 








neren. - 
——-———-— las, H s.m. Sand-piper, see luathar.|tri-ràmhaeh, -aich, s.f. Three-oared boat, tri. 
an glas. reme, 


————— —— , -aiche, a. Three-oared, 

tri-shiolach, a. Of three syllables. | 

———— ——-, 84m. "Trisyllable,? | 

tri-shioladh, -aidh, -aidhean,s.m. Trisyllable.  : 

tri-shliosnach, @. Trilateral. 

ttrist, a. Sad. 2 Tired. 

Tf—, s. Curse, 

tritheamh,it a. Third. An t. fear, the third man, 

Trithinn, gen. sing. of Tritheann. Occurs ma 
place-name (Sgeir-an-Trithinn) in Loch Torri- 
don, which consists of three humps. 

¢Tritheann,(AC) -inn, s.f. The Trinity. 

tri-theudach, a. Three-stringed. 

'Trithion, see ‘Tritheann. 

tri-uairean,** adv. Thrice. 2 Three hours (for 
tri uairean an uaireadair.) 3 Three oi elock. 

triubhas, -ais, -an, s.m. Trousers, pantaloons. 2 
Ancient article of Highland dress, generally 

_made of tartan cloth aud consisting of trousers 
and stockings in one piece, trews. P (Fionn) 

CR 


-————— tràighe,4 s.m. Ringed plover—chara- 
. Qrius) hiaicula, 2 d Sand-lark, sea-lark, see 
luatharan. 3**Collared oyster-catcher. 
— traghad, see trilleachan-traighe. 
trillsean, ein, -ean, s.m. Lantern, small torch, 
lamp, flambeau, rushlight. 2*Glimmer, glim- 
Smering fire, rush-wick, 3**s.pl. Sparkles. 
| trillseineach, -aiche, a. Of, or abounding in lan- 
[ terns, rush-wicks or torches. 2 Glimmering, 
peeing twinkling. 
i trilisidb,** s.f. Torch. 2 Lamp. 
| tri-mheurach,** -aich, s,m,Any instrument with 
Re prongs, 2 Three-pronged fork. 3 Tri- 
ent. 
| triunse,** s.f. Trench. 
| trinnsear, -ir, an, s.m. Plate, trencher. 
E EET (CR) s.m. Cheat, knave, rascal—W, of 
S 





EE 38— — 
D 














988. 
triob!aicb,* v.a. Triple, make three-fold. 
trioblaid, -e, -ean, s.f. Trouble, anxiety, vexa- 


Original fram 
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS A 


Ex EN 


i INTERNET ARCHIVE URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 





triubhas 


* Roe of a fish—prov. (—Argyll & West of In- 
~ verness-shire—AH.) 

triubhasach, -aiche, a. Trousered. 

triubhsair,* s.m. Gaelic spelling of trouser. 
triucair, -ean, s.m, Rascal, rogue, 

| — —-e&ch, -eiche, a. Roguish, rascally. 

»— ———eachd, S.T Roguery, villainy. 

| £riuchan, -ain, -an, s.m. Stripe of distinguishing 

, colourin tartan. T. geal is dubh, æ white and 

n black stripe. 

| triuchanach, @. In stripes, 

i triughas, see triubhas. 

,triugh,* see triuthach. 

Mtriuine,** s.f. Poverty. 

"triùir, s. Three persons. [Governs gen. pl.) Rug 
mi dha t, mhac, J bore him three sons. 

triüir-an-aon, s. The Trinity. 

triuirean,* -ein, -an, s. m. Marble, children's 
play-bullet. 2**Sheep's purl. Ag iomairt air 
triuireanan, playing at marbles, 
triullainn,(MS) a. Intricate. 

triullainn, see treallain. 

: £riun, s.m. Poor person, 

' »—, a. Poor. 

ptriusair, -ean, $.?n. see triùbhsair. 

Ptriuthach, (an), -aich, s.f. Whooping-cough. 

i triuthaire, Gairloch for triobhaire. 

£ -—achd,(DMy) s.f. Dishonesty. 

MOM ety s.f. Kinks of the whooping-cough 

|^ —Uhist. 

- triuthas, -ais, -an, s.m. see triubhas. 

‘triutraich, s.f. Twittering. ’S àluinn mo th. 
’s mo ghlagan, my twittering and my irilling 
are superD—An Smedrach, MeD., 13. 8. 

‘trò, s.m. Visit, occasion, Air an t. seo, on this 

| Occasion, 2ttTrip. 

itro’, for troimh, 

ttroatag, s.f. Loose coab or cloak—W. coast Ross. 

"brobh, see tro. 

‘trobhad, Come, come to me, come along with 
mo—the opposite of chugad, [Used only in 
conversation—**] 

aibh, Come (ye), come (ye) to me. 

trobhd, see trobhad. 

, troc,** v.a. Chaffer. 

Froe, (DU) s.m. Trash, rubbish, scum. 

trócainn,** s. Chaffery, haggling. 

-trocair,'-e, -ean, s.f. Mercy, pity. 2 Act of com- 
passion. 3 Blessing, favour. 4**Pardon. 

each, -eiche, a. Merciful, compassionate, 

pitiful. Gu t., mercifully. 

eachd, s.7. Mercifulness,clemeney,willing- 
ness to pardon, compassionate regard. 

trdcairiche, comp. of tròcaireach. More or most 
merciful. 

ttroch, s. Short life. 

trochd, v.n. Negotiate. 

trochladh,** -aidh, s.m. Loosening. 

trod,-uid & -oid,s.m.Scolding,reproof, 2 Quarrel, 
strife, struggle, battle, contention. 3 *Quar- 

; rel among ladies. 4 Reprimand. 65**Starling. 
Cridhe nach sgithich an t., a heart that will 
nol tire in battle ; fhuair e a th., he got a [lit. 
his] scolding. 

trod, -oid, s.m. Scolding, aet of scolding, A’ 
t—, pr.pt. of troid. 

trod, v. see troid. 

trodach, -aiche, a. Apt to scold, 2 Quarrelsome, 
riotous, quarrelling. 3 Scolding. 4 Strug- 
gling. Gut., fightingly. 

troilachas, -ais, s.m. see trodaireachd. 

$rodah,** -aidh, s.m. Scolding. 

trodag, -aig, -an, s.f. Scolding female. 

trodail, -e, à. see trodach. 

trodair, -ean, s.m: Scolder, quarrelsome person, 
{*trodaire] i 

trodaiveachd, zf, Scolding habit of scolding or 

quarreling, 














Digitized by 
C eas 


3 C des P 
CRNCI ARC M 


972 | troimh = 


trodan, -ain, -an, s. m. dim. of trod. Slight 
scolding or quarrelling. 

ach, o Quarrelsome. 

trodhan, -ain, s. m. **Valture. 2 (AF) Bird of 

rey. 

Ve $. Business— Badenoch. 2 Busyness. 81 
Busy dealing.' 

trog, pr.pt. a’ trogail, v.a. Prov. for tog. [Tog 
with prep. roinserted—1.] - 

trog,-oig, sm "Trash. 

trog,tt s.m. Truck, barter Scots, trock. 

troga,(AC) s, War. Oba troga, a spell of war, 

trogair( AH) s.m. Person engaged in cattle- 
dealing on a small scale. 

trogbhail,t s.f, Quarrel. 

trogbhoil,* s.f. Grumbling, murmuring, grunt- 
ing. 2 Eternal scold, quarrel,dispute,wrang- 
ling. Na tog t.air an ain-eol, do not quar- 
rel with a stranger. 

—each,* a. Apt to murmur or grumble 

gruntingly. 

ttrogh, s, Children. 

troghad, s. Soft-rolling, full-orbed eyes. 

troghan,** -ain, s.m. Raven. 

troghbhail, see trògbhail. 

troghna, see trean-ri-tréan.’ 

troghnadh, (AF) s.m. Corncraik, see tréan-rie 
trèan. 

troich, e, -ean, s m, & f. i:Dwarf, hunchback 








person. 2 Coward. 3 Evil-disposed person. 4  . 


*Ninny. 

—eachd,tI s.f. Deformity. 

ealachd, s.f. see droichealachd. 

eil, -e, a. see droicheil. 

troichilean,tt s.m. Pigmy, dwarf. 2 (AF)Wil- 
low wren. 

troid, pr.pt. a’ trod, v.a. Scold, wrangle, fight, 
quarrel, strive, contend. 2 Rebuke, repri- 
maud. Th.mo bhean is th. i rium, is th. mi 
rithe o ’na th. i rium, my wife scolded me 
im earnest, and I scotded her because she did 80. 

troid, gen.sing. of trod. 

troid-each,(AF) s.m. War-horse. 

troidh, see troigh. 

troidht, (CR) s. f. Shoe worn out of shape— 
Skye, [trait] 2 (trait) Cataplasm, poultice, 
bandages. 

troigh, -e, -ean, s.f. The foot, a foot. 2 Measure 
of 12 inches. 3 Sole of the foot. 4** rarely, 
Sorrow. Tomhais eletroighibh rùisgte, mede 
sure it barefooted. 

troigh,** a. Short-lived. e 

troigheach,** Ach, s.m. Footman. 2 Pedestrian. 
3 Foot soldier. 

—— ———.—&an,(DMy) s.m. Flap of a headless 
stocking which covers the trotgh, and is kept 
in place by srulachan round the second aud 
third toes.j 

troighean, -ein, s.m. Pedal. 

troight, -e, -ean, SJ. see trait. 

ear, see traoidhtear. 

troightearachd, see traoidhtearachd. Thes 

troileis, -e, s.f. Any trifling thing. 21fChildish 
merriment. 

each, -eiche, a. Trifling, little worth, 8 
Given to trifles, childish. e 

— ————eachd, s.f. see troileis, 

troimchill,** s.f. Sanctuary. 

troime, see truime. 

ad, see truimead. 

achd, see truimeachd. ` ; 

troimh, prep. Through, from side to side. 2 All 
over, along the whole extent. 3 By, from, by 
means of. Thus combimed with the personal 
pronouns :— tromham, through me ; tromhad, 
through thee ; troimhe, through him ; troimpe, 
through her; tromhainn, through us ; tromb- 
aibh, through you; trompa,through them. LAs 


Original from 











»* 
DTI 








PS d 








UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


troimh 


978 


tromh-luaidhe 


Nee een 
pirates a word following and governs the da- tromaltan,| s.m. Numbness from pressure, 2 


tive.) ? 

troinh-a-chéile, adv. Through other, mixed, 
confused. 

————, 8. Agitation. 

troimhe, (troimh-re) prep. pron. Through him 
or it. 

troimh-lot, v.a. Empale. 
mortal wound. 

troimh-rannsaich, v.g. Explore. 

troimh-sgrüd, v.a, Explore. 

troimpe, (troimh +i) prep.pron. Through her. 

troinusear, see truinnsear. 

troisg, see traisg. 

.———, -e, -ean, s.f. see trasg. 

troisgeach, -eiche, see trasgach, 

——————4, s.f. see trasgadh. 

troisgeadh, see trasgadh. 

troisgeul,(AH) s.m. (droch sgeul) Ill-omened in- 
telligence. Mach an t.! away with the un- 
lucky news ! This is a common exclamation 
from a listener when one tells of the death of 
a cow or horse belonging to a third party, as 
such news is believed to entail loss in the live 





2 Pierce. 3 Give a 


stock of the person in whose dwelling it 1s re- 


counted. 
troiste, s.f. Three-footed stool. 
troite, see traoidhte, 
-.—— ar, see traoidhtear. 
arachd, -see traoidhtearachd, 
troll,** s, Corruption. 





trom, truime, sim. Weight, any weight,burden, 


load. 2 Encumbrance. 8 Difficulty. 4 Pro- 
tection, charge, defence. 5 Pregnancy. 6* 
Embarrassment, impediment. 7tftSinker (lead) 
of a fishing-line. Tog do th. dhiom, remove 
your burden or charge from me, do not be so se- 
were on me; nach bitheadh a th. oirnn, that 
he would not be à burden to us ; cha bhi sin 
‘na th. ort, that will not be an encumbrance 
to you. 

trom, -uime, ad, Heavy, ponderous, weighty, 2 
Afflictive, sore, oppressive. 3 Difficult, hard, 
painful, laborious. 4 Wearying, fatiguing. 65 
Sorrowful, sad, dejected, melancholy, mourn- 
ful. 6 Causing grief or sadness. 7 Dull of 
hearing. 8 Sleepy. 9 Pregnant. 10 Addict- 
ed. 11* Luxuriant, rank. 12 Deep,profound, 
as sleep, T. air an òl, addicted to liquor ; barr 
t.a rank or luxuriant crop ;eallach th., a hea- 
vy burden, oppressive burden ; cadal t., pro- 
found sleep; am fonn a’ briseadh gu t., the 
strain breaking mournfully ; is taitneach ach 
is t. do ghuth, pleasant but sad is thy voice ; 
dioghailt th., severe vengeance ; an sealladh t., 
the sad spectacle. 

trom, s.m. Blame, rebuke. 

troma, 8.m. Shaft or tram of a cart— Lewis. 

tromachadh, -aidh, s. m. Making heavy, act of 

. increasing the weight of, 2 Burdening act of 
burdening. 3 Oppressing, act of oppressing. 4 
“Aggravating, loading. 5 Making sad or de- 
jected. 6* Getting heavier, more ponderous 
or addicted. A’ t—, pr.pt. of tromaich. 

tromadas, -ais, 3.m.{Drowsiness, 2 Depression. 

tromaich, pr.pt. a’ tromachadh, v.a. én. Make 
heavy or heavier. 2 Burden, oppress. 3.Be- 
come heavy or heavier. 4 Get more addicted. 
b Aggravate. 6 Deject, make melancholy. 

te, past pt. of tromaich. Made heavy or 
heavier. 2 Loaded, burdened. 3 Oppressed, 
4 Made sad, saddened. 

trom-aileach, -eiche, a, Strong-smelling. 

tromainntinn, see truime-inntinn. 

—— ---——-each, see trom-inntianeach. 

troma!ach,tff -aich, er, Heavier portion. 

tromalighe, see trom-luighe. 





Digitized by 
INTERNET ARCHIVE 


(DMiK)s. m. Cold in the head, complicated 
with pains in various parts of the body— 
Caithness. 
troman, -ain, -an, s.m. Great weight. 
troman, -ain, -au,s.m. Wood of the bore-tree. 
see droman. 
tromara,*" s.m, see tromarach. 
—— ——ch,** .aich, s.m. Client, 
tromb, -a &-uimb, pi an, 8 f. 
~ trump.'' 
——aid, -e, -ean, s.f. Trumpet. 
aideach, o Like a trumpet. 
aidear, -eir, -an, 3sm Trumpeter, 
trombair, -ean, see trombaidear, 
eachd, 8.f. Trumpeting, business of a 
trumpeter. 2 Playing ona jew's harp. 3* 
Harping. 4* Carping. 5* Canting. 
trom-bhoid, see trom bhód. 


Jew's harp. 











667. Trom-bhód. 
trom-bhod, -an, s. m. Vervain, mallow—verbena 
officinalis, Also called holy herb, Juno's tears, 


pigeon's grass and simpler's joy. [trom-bhad 


trom-bhanoglach, -aich, s.f. Female client. 

trom-bholachd, s.f. Strong smell. 

trom-bhuail,** v,@. Strike heavily, strike hard. 
Trom-bhuailear leis, if shall be struck hard 
by him. 

trom-bhuidheann,** -bhuidhne, s.f. Tribe of vas- 
sals, clan. 

trom-chadal, ail, s.m. Heavy sleep. 2 Lethargy, 

———-——ach, &. Sleeping heavily. 2 Causing 
deep sleep. 3 Lethargic. 

——~--————-aiche, ** s.m. Lethargic person. 

trom-chasair,** s,m. Heavy shower. 

trom-cheannach, -aiche, a. Heayy-headed. 

trom-cheannachd,ft s,f. Dackwardness. 

trom-cheannas,(MS)-s.m. Idleness. 

trom-chluasach, -aiche, œ. Dull of hearing. 

trom-chuis, s.f. Important case. 

—each, a. Important, of great concern, 

trom-ghean, -a, sm. Melancholy. 

por prep. pron. (troimh+thu) Through 

ee. | 
tromhaibh, prep. pron. (troimh+sibh) Through 





you. 

tromhainn, prep. pron. (troimh+sinn) Through 
us, 

tromham, prep.pron. (troimh+mi) Through me, 
through my means. 

trom-inntinn, -e, see truime-inntinn. 

——_——---——each, -eiche, a. Melancholy, de. 
jected. Gu b., dejectedly. 

tromla,(AC) s. Cows. 

tromlach, -aich, s.m., Weight, bulk. Na’smi- 
adhaile uimpe na an t. dhinn féin, esteeming 
her more than most of ourselves. 

trom-lighe, see trom-luighe. [line 

trom-luaidhe,(A H)s,f. Leaden sinker of a fishing 


Origit al from 


trom-luighe 


trom-luighe, s.f. Nightmare. 2 Weight on the 
heart or spirits. 3 Distracting grief. 4**Over- 
laying. Gach maraiche air seachran le t., each 
pi Se forgetting (leaving) his course through 
grief. 

trom-luigh, v.n. Overlay. 

trom-inhàthair, -mhathar, s.f. Matron. 

trom-oglach,** -aich, aam, Client. 

tromp, -oimp & -uimp, see tromb. 

trompa, prep.pron. (troimh +iad) Through them. 

trompaid, -ean, see trombaid. 

trompair, -ean, see trombair. 

tromsanach, -aiche, a. Sad, heavy, dull, dozy. 

—-——adh,(MS) s.m. Obstupefaction. 

tromsanaich, -e, s.f. Heaviness, dulness, stupe- 
faction, sleepiness. 

—— —— ——,(M$S) v.n. Benumb. 2 Mope. 

trom-shuain,** st Profound sieep. 9 Lethargy, 

trom-thuradh,** s.m. Great draught, 

trom-tric,** a. Pell-mell. 

troraid, -e, -ean, s.f. Spire, steeple. 

ttrosc, s.m. Leper. 

trosdail, -e & -ala, a. Ofa serious humour or 
disposition. 2 Dull, inclined to melancholy, 
moody, serious, sedate, demure. 

trosdalachd, s.f. Seriousness. 2 Inclination to 
melaucholy, dulness, demureness3. 

trosdan, -ain, -an, s.m. Pace. 2 Foot. 3 Foot- 
stool, 4 Crutch, prop, support, stilt. 5 f}Pil- 
grim's staff. 6ffDwart. 7* Trap. 

trosdanach, -aich, s.m. Stout or well-built per- 
son. 

trosg, -uisg [** -oisg], s.m. Cod-fish, 2 Stupid 
fellow, lubber, booby. 3 Religious fasting. 4 
ttTusk-fish. see traisg & trosgadh. 

trosgach, -aiche, a. Abounding in, of or belong- 
lug to, cod-fish. 2 Stupid, senseless, like a 
booby. 3 Tasting. 

trosgadh, -aidh, see trasgadh. 

trosgair, -ean, s.m. Cod-fisher. 
Fasting, frequent fasting. 

troszan,** s.m. Goods, chattels. 

troslog,** -oig, s.f. Hop, limp. 

trosnan, -ain, -an, see trostan. 

trost,(CR) s.m. Knock, fall, stroke, as of one 
striking the ground after falling from a 
height— West coast of Ross. 

trost,* s.m. Clank, as of metal. 2**Sturdy little 
fellow. 3 Dwarf. 

trosiach, a. Sturdy. 2 Dwarfish. 

trostan,** .ain, s.m. Pace. 2 Foot. 
prop, pillar. 4 Stilt, crutch. 
five pillars. 

trostan,** see trosdan. 

trot, 77.pt. a’ trotadh, v.a, & n. Trot. 

trot, -a, s.m. see trotan. 2* Sheep's foot. Cuir 
an t-each "na th., put the horse a-trotting. 

trotail, s.f. Trotting. 2Jogging motion. 

trotair, -ean, sm, Trotter, one who trots, 

——eachd, s.f. Trotting. 

trotan, -ain, -an, s.m. Trot, trotting pace. 

trotanach, -aiche, a. Trotting. 

tróth,* s.m, Trip. 2 Taint. 3(CR) Turn,oceasion, 
attempt, trial—Skye, Knapdale, Arran. Bha 
e an scot., he was here on one occasion ; t. eile, 
another time; feuch t. eile, try again, make 
another attempt. 

troth, see trath. 

trotha, s. Mast-step— Lewis. 

trothach,** a. Tainted. 

trr-had ! int. Instigation of a dog from a dis- 
tance. 

ttru, s. Face. 2 Fall. 

truacanach,(MS) a. Merciful. 

truacanta, -ainte, a Compassionate, merciful, 
pitiful. 2 Affectionate, teuder-hearted.  . 

truacantachd, s.f. see truacantas. 2 (MS) Re- 


2 Cod-fishing. 3 


3 Support, 
Coig trostain, 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


974 trüaílleadafr | 


-— 


morse. 

truacantas, -ais, s.m. Pity, compassion, com 
passionateness,  pitifulness, tender-hearted 
ness. 2 Affectionateness. 

truadh, see truagh. 

——-—an, see truaghan, 

iruagh, -uaighe, a. Wretched, miserable,distress 
ing, sad, sorrowful, unhappy. 2 Worthless. $ 
Miserly. 4 Poor. 5 Baleful. 6 Pitiful. Och. 
is duine t. mi! O wretched man that I am !, 
duine t.,@ poor man ; gu t. trom, wretched and 
sad ; ist. leam th., I pity you; nach t. mo 
chàradh, how piteous is my case; is t.nach 
fhaca mi e, it is a pity I did not se» him ; is 
t. mar a thachair, sad is this occurrence ; is t. 
an tabhartas e, it is a miserable gift; comh- 
arra t. a’ bhàis, the dismal symptoms of death ; 
cha t. leam thu, I do notpity you; ma's t. 
leat e, if you pity him. In Arran, truagh gu 
'n robh e—pity but he were ; t. gu'n robh thu 
eadar Allasan agus Kabhainu, pity but you 
were between Ailsa Craig and Sanda—form 
of imprecation, 

truaghaileach,** q. 
hearted. 

———d, s.f. Compassionateness, tender- 

heartedness. 

truaghan, -ain, -an, s. m. Poor, distressed or 
wretched creature, 2 Object of pity. 3 Child 
of misfortune, 4 Miser. 5 '' A thruaghain,” 
term of compassion. Na sàruich an t., op- 
press not the distressed. 

truaghanach,{} -aiche, a. Life-weary. 2 (MS) 
Commiserable., 

truaghauachd, see truaghantachd. 

truaghauta, -ainte, a. Lamentable, wretched, 
pitiable. 

truaghantachd, s.f. Lamentableness, pitiable- 
ness, abjectness, miserableness, wretehedness, 
unfortunateness. 2 (MS) Villainage. 

truaghas, see truas. 

truagh-mheileach, see truaighe-mheileach. 

truaighe, comp. of truagh. 

truaighe, -an, s.f. Misery, woe, mischief, evil. 2 
2 Bale, calamity. 3 Pity. 4 Wretchedness. 
Tha ’n t. ort-sa, you have exceeded all bounds, 
gone to the mischief ; mo th. thu! woe unto 
you ! na cuimhnicheadh e a th. na’s mó, let 
him remember his misery no more;mo th.sinne ! 
woe unto us ! tuireach a thruaighe, the sad tale 
of his calamity ; mo th. ! woeis me ! mo th. 
sinne, woe unto us ! 

truaighmheil, see truaighe-mheile, 

truaighmheileach, see truaighe-mheileach. 

truaighe-mheile,1fs.f. Compassion, pity. 

(ruaighe-mheileach, -eiche, a. Compassionate, 

itiful. 

brasil: -e, -ean, Sheath, scabbard. 2** rarely, 
Carcase,  Tharruing e a chlaidheamh as à 
th., he drew his sword out of the sheath. 

truaill, pr.pt. à! truailleadh, v.a. Pollute, defile. 
2 Violate, ravish. 3;Unhallow, profane.  3* 
Qualify, reduce spirits to a standard. 5 Adul- 
terate. 6 Sheathe, Th. thu am fearann, you 
have polluted the land ; cha t. thu thu-féin, 
thou shalt not pollute thyself ; th. do chlaidhs 
eamh, sheathe thy sword. 

truailleach,** Ach, s.m. Sheath. 

— —-—, 4. Polluting, defiling violating. ` 

truailleachadh, -aidh, s.m. Polluting, defiling 
or adulterating, pollution,defilement, adulter- 
ation. 

truailleachan, -ain, s.m. Mean person. 

truailleachd,* s.f. Mean quantity, consideration 
or disposition. 2 Abjection. 3 Baseness, pol- 
lution, adulteration, 4**Defilement, 

truailleadair, -ean, s,m. Corrupter, violater, 


Compassionate, tender- 





Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT $ 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 





truailleadh 


Vruailleadh, -idh, s.m. Polluting, act of pollut- : 
2 Profaning, act of | truimid, comp. of trom. Is t. e sin, it 18 the hea* 


ing or defilivg, poHutioen. 
profaning, profanation. 


6 Adulteration, corruption 


A’ t—, pt.pt. of truaill. 
truaillealachd, see truailleachd, 
truaillean, -ein, sm. Niggard. 
—————ach, -aieh, s.m. Miser. ` 
truailleanta,( MS) a. Pervertible. ` 


truaillich,** v.a. Pollute, unhallow, profane, 2 


Deflower. 3 Adulterate. 
truaillidh, fut.af.a. of truaill. 


truaillidh, -e, à. Corrupt, corrupted. 2 Corrupt- 
4 g- 
tardly, mean, shabby. 6 Polinting. 6 Bast- 


ing, that corrupts, 3 Rotten, rotted, 


ard. 7 Polluted, defiled, contaminated. 8** 


Miserable wretched, dismal. 


rupt man. 


truaillidheachd, s.f. Pollution, corruption. 2 


Rottenness. 8 Wretchedness, miserablemess, 


4 Meanness of disposition, niggardliness, 5 
Ri t. thubhairt mi, Z said to 


Pollutedness. 
corruption, 
truaillte, past pt. of truaill. Defiled, corrupted, 
polluted, 2 Violated,deflowered, 3 Profaned. 
4* Reduced to a standard, as spirits. 5 Adul- 


terated. Uisge b., patlxted water ; uisge-beatha 


t., reduced or qualified whisky. 
truain, pl. -ean & -tean, s.m. Screw, - 
truan," -ain, s.f. see trüghan. = 
truas, -ais, s.m. Pity, ruth, compassion. 2 Lean- 
ness, wretchedneass, poverty. Ghabh e t. dhith. 
he pitied her wretchedness ù t, mo chòir, the 
wretchedness of my conditi/n. 
truasachadh, -aidb, s.m. Pitying, act of;pitying. 
A’ t—, pr.pt. of truasaich. 
truasaich, pr.pt. a’ truasachadh, v.n. Pity, com- 
passionate, take pity upon. 
E, -e, 4. Compassionate, pitying. 2 Piti- 
able. 
truasalachd, &.f. Readiness to pity or be com- 
passionate. 
trudair, -ean, s.m. Stammerer. 2 Dirty, filthy 
-or obscene person, see trusdair, 
trudaireachd, s. f. Dirtiness, filthiness, nasti- 
ness, worthlessness, impurity, obscenity. 
trudanach, -aich, s.m. Wrangler. 
trudar, -air, -an, see trusdar. 
trudarpach, -aich, s.m. Stammerer. 
trughaid,** s, Gripe. 
trüschan, -ain, s.m, Trowel. : 
truid,** s,/. Field of battle 2 Strife, battle. 
=~ 2 Tidy, neat female. Céarr am measg t., 
awkward in the midst of strife. 
truid,* see druid & trod. 
truideag, see druideag. 
truidhleach, s.m. Lumber, baggage, 
truidleag (AF) Mavis. 
truidreaeh,** Ach, s.m. Melody. 2 Warbling, 
chirping, chattering, twittering. 
truigeanta,** a. Miserable. 
truileach,* s.f. Worthless person. 
truille,* sam. & f. Worthless, dirty person. 
truilleach, -ich, s.m. & f. Dirty or base person. 2 
Fitthy food. 
truime, s.f. Weight, heaviness, weightiness, 2 


Dejection. T. inntinn, dejection, melancholy. ` 


truime, gen. & comp. of trom. 

truimeachd,** s.f. Heaviness, weight. 2 Sad- 
ness, 

truimead, ed, s.m. Degree of heaviness, faint. 
nessor dejectedness. A’ dol an t., growing 

- heavier and heavier. 

truime-in»tinn, s.f, Dejection, melancholy, 


` D D D 
Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


975 


3**Deflowerment, de- 


filement. 4*Reducing of spirits to a standard. 
6 Profanity. 


Sruth glan gun t.,a stream pure and undefiled. 


Bha "pn tal- 
amh t., thecarth was corrupt ; duine t., @ cor- 









. ` trasdaireachd 


truimpleasg, s.m. Fulmination, explosion, 


BE ee Es 


ver for that, 

truinnse,** $.f, Trench, i 

truinnsear,** er, $.m Trencher, plate, salver, 

truinnsich,** v.a. Trench, ? Enclose. 

truis, pr.pt. a’ truiseadh, v.a, Tear or snateh a. 
way. 2 Collect, truss up, gather, tuck up, 3 
(MS) Shell. 

truis ! int, (Ait. gather your tail) Word by which 
dogs are silenced or driven away, *Also 
sail to a person iu contempt. Truis a mach 1 
get out ! begone ! 

truis,* s.f. seo drùis, 

truis a mach ! iat. Get out, clear out altogether 
—animal call—Jsiay, £e. see truis asin ! 

truis a sin | inf. Get out of the way, get to one 
side—animal call—Islay, «c, 

truis-bhraghad,ff -e-, -ean-bh-, ert Necklace, 2 
Band of harness. 

truis-bhrat,tf%-ait, -an, s.m. Pack-cloth, 

truisealach, see drüisealach, 

—— —--—&dh, -aidh, s.m. Act of tucking up, ag 
the clothes. 2 State of having one's clothes 
tucked up. A't-—, pr.pt. of truisealaich, 

————— .— 4d, see drùisealachd, 

truigealadh, -aidh, see truisealachadh, 

truisealaich, pr. pt. a’ truisealachadh, v.a, Tuck 
up, as the clothes. a 

truiseil,* -e, a. see drüieeil. 

truisidh sin! seo truis a sin 1 

truiste, a, Succinct. 

truitean,(A F) s.m. Badger. 

truitrich, v.n. 'Ewitter, 

trulainn, a. Topsy-turvy. H d 

Ttrul, -a, 8.m. Head. m emm « 

trumachath, -aidh, s.m. £ pr.pt. of trumaich. 


NU YIN 


‘ 
t 
4 


in 


‘trumadas, see tromadas, 


trumaich, see tromaich, 

trumpa, see trompa. j 

srumpadair, seo trombaidear, ~ -— 

trùp, -a, -an, s.m. Troop of horse, 2HNap. (**s/] 

trup, «d». Once. Bha mi ann t., I was there 
once—Strontian. [ Eng. trip] 

trupach, a. In troops. 

trüpair, -ean, s.m. Trooper. 2* Romp. 

—  — —eachd, s.f. Trooping. 

(rüp-each, -a-,-an, see trùp. 

trus, pr. pt. a’ trusadh, v.a. Truss, tuck up,gird. 
2 Bundle together. 3 Collect, as sheep. 4** 
Reprimand. 5 Goto, repair to. Th. do chinn- 
eadh ri chéile, thy kindred gathered together; 
a thrusadh lus mu bhun nan stùc, to gather 
herbs at the foot of the rocks ; trus ort! be off, 
begone ! a’ trusadh do 'n taigh ósda, repairing 
to the alehouse. 

trus, -uis, s.m. Belt, girdle, 2**Girt. 3 Bundle. 

trus ! see truis ! 

trusach, ftt -aich, s.m. Sheaf. 

trusach,-aiche, o. That gathereth,gathering,col- 
lecting, bundling, trussing. 

irusachan, -ain, -an, s.m. Parcel, pack, 

trusadh, -aidh, $.m. Gathering, act of gatkering 
or collecting, as sheep. 2 Tucking, girding, 
trussing, bundling. 8 Collection, bundle. 

trusag, aig, an, s.f. Wad. 2 Bale. 

trusaiche, -an, s.0. Gatherer, collector. 

trus-aite, -an, s.m. Wardrobe. 2 Lumber-room. 

trusalachadh, -aidh,s.m. Girding up, preparing, 
making ready. 

trusaladh, -aidh, s.m. Girding up, preparing, 
bestirring. 

trusalaich, pr. pt. a’ trusalachadh, v.a, Gird up. 
prepare, make ready, bestir. 

trusin, 5.0», seo trusag, 

trusean, see trusgan. 

trusdaireachd,* s.f. Filthiness,Abominableness 


Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


ege Am. trisdaireachd ' ^ 
+ 2 Dirtiness of person. 3 Filth, dirt, trash, 
trusdar, -air, -airean,s.m.Filthy or nasty fellow, 
| indecent or obscene person, 2 Debauchee 3 
' Clown. 4 Drab. 5 Filth, dirt, dust. [*nom. 
trusdair.] 
trusdarach, -aiche, a, Cullionly, mueky 4 - 
trusdarail,( MS) a. Abominable, 
trusdarnach, -aich, a um. Stammerer, 
trusdrachd,tf 8.7. Filthiness, filth. 
trusdromach, -aich, s.m. Busybody; 


e 
t 


ko 
“ ` FA > 
k, | CA “© 
T4 d Pe 
= > E 
| AN A Ae 
AE | NA ZEN 
NS Ls 
S el Lé d 
Cj Å | As 
E 1 NIE í Aw 
M M S 


fa 


J 
3 7, 
A 


$ 


Ax & y 
668. Trusgan. 
trisean, -ain, m, s.m. Clothes,dress, vesture, 
mantle, garment, suit of clothes. 2 Shroud. 
3 **Man's privy parts. 4Smelt. 5 Furniture, 
chattels. 68 Lady’s mantle (plant)—aichemtl-. 
da alpina. So called from its form and the 
iny under side of the leaves. An ft. de 
‘dhealan, tn a shroud of lightning; t. air cruit 
au amer lady’s manile on the ridge of the 
ill. 
trusganach, a. Abounding in, or pertaining to, 
. lady's mantle. 2 Having many’or geod clothes. 
t Tir mheasail, mhiaghail, th., the esteemed and 
! femous land abounding in lady's mantle. 
trusgar,** -air, 3.m. Oarweed. 
truslag,** -aig, St. Leap. 
trutag,(DMK) s.f. Loose garment in the form of 
a cape, worn over the shoulders and back in 
wet weather—A pplecross. 
Tiruth,-2,8.m. Vile beast, beastly thing. 2 Shrew. 
3 Sloven. 
truthair, -ean, s.m. Traitor, villain. 2 Filthy 
fellow. 3 Prevaricator, liar, deluder, knave. 
4 (*truthaire) Bankrupt. 
truthaireachd, s.f. Villainy, low mean actions, 
knavery, bribery, deceit. 2 Revolt. 
truthaireach, -eiche, a. Pettifogging. 
truthdar, -air, s.m. Dirty, indecent or obscene 
person, sloven, slattern. 
truthdaireachd, s.f. Dirtiness, slovenliness,filth- 
iness, obscenity. 
tu, pers.pron. Thou, you. [For information as 
to the distinctive uses of tu and thu, see under 
thu ; and for-the difference between thu and 
sibh, see under sibh. Istu an gille, thou art 
the (right) fellow ; is gabhaidh tu mi a steach, 
and thou shalt take me in; na'n tigeadh tu, if 
thou wert to come. 
tuacaird, s,f. Winding of yarn. 
tuachail, a. Prudent, wise, cunning. 
tuachioll, see tuaicheal. 
tuadh, -aidh, -an, s.f. seetuagh. 2 rarely, Re- 
nown. 
tuadhi ! int. Call to a bull—Suth’d. 
tuafair, sm. Bungler, humdrum. 
tuafaireachd, s.f. Bungle. 
tuagh, -aivh, an. 3.f. lIotchet, axe. 12$ Yew. 
Mar t. an glaic saoir, like an axe in the qrasp 
oj a carpenter ;iarunn na tuaighe, ave-head. 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


Digitized by 


976 









tuaiream 


ttuagha, s.pl. Hooks, crooks 2 Hinges. 
tuaghach,tt a Like a hatchet or axe 
tuagh-airm, tuaigh-, an. s.f Battle-axe, 





669. Tuaghan-catha. 

tuagh-chatha, tuaigh-,-an-, $,f. Battle-axe, Loch 
aber-axe. 

tuagh-chuillse, s.f Fleam, cattle lancet, instru. 
ment for bleeding cattle, 

tuagh-fhola, s.f Fleam. 

tuaibheisteach,(MS) s.m. Scrawl. 2 Scrawler. 

tuaicheal, -eil, -an,s.m. Dizziness, confusion, be- 
wilderment of mind, vertigo, E 

tuaichealach, -aiche, a. Dizzy 2 Causing diz- 
ziness. 3 Vermicular. 

tuaichle, s.f. Augury. 2 Enchantment. 

tuaifear, see tuafair. 

tuaighe,(AF) s.m. Farm bull. 

tuaileachd, sr Daybreak, twilight. 

tuaileas, -eis, -an, s.m. Reproach, slander, cal- 
umny, libel, defamation, detraction, imputa- 
tion, scandal, 2 Disorder. S3TffDark view. 

tuaileas, v.a. Defame—Dain Iain Ghobha. 

tuaileasach, -aiche, a. Reproachful, calumuious, 
dealing in scandal, defamatory, slanderous, li- 
bellous, detraetory. 2**Turbulent. 

tuaileasachd, s.f.ind. Contumeliousness, calum- 
niousness, talebearing. 12 Crepuscule. | 

tuaileasag, -aig, -an, s. f. Woman addicted to 
scolding or scandal, quarrelsome female, foul- 
mouthed femate, disorderly female. 

tuaileasaieh,(MS) v.e. Baekbite, disdaip, de- 
tract. 2 Belie, 

tuaileasaiche, s.m. Calumniator. 

tuailt, see tubhailt. 

tuailte, see tubhailt. 

tuailteach, see tubhailteach. 

tuailéear, see tubhailtear. 

tuailtearachd, see tubhailtearachd 

tuaim, s.f. Fence. 2 gen.smg. of tuam. 

tuaimeil,* v.g. Swathe awkwardly, huddle on 
clothes, 

tuain, v.a. Loosen —Uist. . 

tuaineal, eil, -an, s.m. Stupor, dizziness, verti- 
go. Ghlac e an t-aosdharaeh 'na th., he grasp- 
ed th» oak in his dizziness. 

tuainealach, -aiche, a. Dizzy, causing dizziness. 

tuainealach, -aich, see tuainealaien. 

tuainealaich, -e, s.f. Giddiness, dizziness, stu- 
pidity, amazement, | 

tuainig, see tualaig. 

tuair, gen.seng, of tuar. 

1tuair, v.n. Bode, portend, predict. 

tuair, see tuathair. 

tuairealachd,** s.f. Hardihood, 

tuaiream, -eim, -an, s.f. Guess, conjecture, ran- 
dom, venture. 2 Quantity, number. 3 Aim, 
design. 4 Sense, judgment. 5 Vicinity, near- j 
ness, neighbourhood, 6 MS)Average. 7**Opin- | 
ion. 8*Direction. 9 Pursuit. Cha'n 'eil dith t. ' 
air,he does not want sense ; 'dé 'n t, a th’ ann P 
what quantity or number are there of them? dh’ 
fhalbh em'at,, he went in pursuit of her ; 
thilg e m’ ath. e, he aimed it at him ; dh’fhag 
mim’ an t. seo e, Z left it heveabott ; mu th. 





Original from | 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS ATS 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


sche TAL 


tuaiream’ 


977 


tuar 





PO UÁ— —— 
an aon àite, much about the same place; thaobh 
thuaireim, at venture; thuit i mu thuaiream, 
she fell beside hom; mu 'n t. sin, thereabout ; 

. Sluagh mu 'r t., hosts around you. 

Mu thuaiream,in Arran —to,in the sense of 
sending to, dh’ ionnsuidh; chuir mi litir m' a 
thuaiream, mu thuaiream Sheumais, I sent a 
letter to him, to James. 

tuaireamach, -aiche, a. Conjectural. 2 Sensible, 

tuaireamas,ft see tuairmeas. 

tuaireap, -eip, -an, s.m. Turbulence, confusion, 
fray, squabble, fight, tumul*, 

tuaireapach, -aiche, a. Turbulent, squabbling, 
fighting, tumultuous, boisterous, disorderly, 
causing squabbles, awkward. 

tuaireapachd, s.f. Boisterousness. 

tuaireapadh,(MS) s.m. Boisterousness. 
tuaireil,a. Hale. 2 Hardy—Glendochart. see 
tuarail. 

tuairgne,* s.f Confusion, ado, affray, tumult, 
riot, squabble, fray, fight, 2 (MS) Distemper. 
Ughdar na t., the author of confusion. 

tuairgin, s.f. Hatchel, 2 Washing-staff, 

tuairgneach, -eiche, a. Confused, disturbed, tu- 
multuous, disorderly. 2 Causing confusion. 3 
Seditious. Gu t., tumulttovsly. 

tuairgneadh, -idh, s.m. Confusion, chaos, dis- 
turbance, agitation, bluster, broil. 2 Sedition. 
3 Dismay— Dain I. Ghobha. 

tuairgnich,* v.g. Confound, concern, puzzle. 2 
Bamboozle. 3 Blast. 

ftuairisg, -e, -ean, 8.7. Symbol, character. 2 No- 
tification, account. 

tuairisgeul -eil [& sgedil,] pl. an, s.m. Detail, 
description, definition. 2 Made-up-story. 3 
Defamation, calumny, slander, bad report. 
Droch th., a badireport ; t. mhóran, the defa- 

Qo mation of many ;t. bréige, a false report. 

' tuairisgeulach, -aiche, a. Describing, descrip- 
tive. 2 Raising calumnies, calumuious, de- 
faming, defamatory, slanderous. 

tuairisgeulaich, v.a. Define, describe, depict. 

tuairisgeulaiche, s.m. Describer. 
tuairisglich, (MS) v.a. Depaint, 

tuairmeachach, -aich, see tuaireamach, 

tuairmeachadh, -aidh, s. m. Guessing, ventur- 
ing, aiming. 

tuairmeachd, see tuaiream. 

tuairmeas, -eis, $.m. Guess, venture, opinion, 
conjecture, 2 Hap-hazard, venture. Thaobh 
thuairmeis, at a venture ; mu thuairmeis, see 
tuaiream, 

tuairmeasach, -aiche, a. Random, 

tuairmeis, see tuaiream, 

tuarrmich, v.@. Guess, conjecture. 2 Venture, 
aim. 

tuairmis, see tuaiream. 

tuairmis,{ v.q. Hit on, discover, 2ttAim indef- 
inately. 

tuairmse, see tuaiream, An t-urram àrd gun 
tuairms’, the high honour without doubt. 
— Moladh na Gàidhlig 

tuairmseachadh, see tuairmeachadh. 2 (MS) 
Adventure. 

tuairmsear,(MS) s,m. Guesser. 

tuairmsich,(MS) v.a. Aim, conjecture, guess. 

+tuairn, s.f. **Turning-loom (? lathe.) 

ttuairneadh, -idh, -idhean, s.m. Foreboding. 

tuairneag, -eig, -an, s.f. Anything round, boss. 
2 Neat, tidy little woman. 3 Ball. 4 Small 
wooden drinking-cup, also called cuach., 5 
Cap. 6 *Coble, kind of punt, 

tuairneagach, -aiche, a. Neat, tidy, 2 Roundish. 
24tFull of caps. 

tuairneal,** s.m. Trundle. 

tuairnean, -ein, -an, s.m. Mallet, hammer, bee- 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


tuaithealan,[I -ain,-an, 8.7h. 





tuairnear, -ir, -an, s.n. Turner. 


tuairnearachd, s.f. Turning, turner's trade, em- 


ployment of turning, working at a lathe. 
1tuairp, -e, -ean, s.f. Prophecy. 


tuairsgeul, "see tuairisgeul, 


—ach, see tuairisgeulach. 


tuaisd,* s.m. Dolt, awkward person 2(AH)Base 


contemptible fellow, 


| 3 Dimninutive person. 4 
ttSlovenly person 


tuaisdeach, -eiche, a/ Awkward, stupid, clown- 


ish, slovenly, untidy, unseemly, 2 Preposter- 


ous, 
tuaisdeachd,s.f. Stupidity, slovenliness, unseem- 


liness. 


tuazisdealachd, s.j. Stupidity, clumsiness, awk- 


wardness. 


tuaisdear, -eir, -an, s.m. Clown, dolt, awkward 


fellow, bungler. 211 Large stick. 


tuaisdearachd, s.f. Clumsiness, awkwardness. 


tuaisdeil,-e, a. Awkward, stupid, 


tuaisgeart,** s. The North, 


tuaiteal,'’a/ Austere. 


tuaitealachd, s.f. Austereness, 


tuaith, s.f. Lordship, territory. 
tuaith, infection of«uath, 


tuaitheheall, s. Skill, sagacity. 


tuaitheallaehd, s.f. Husbandry, 


tuaitheal, -eile, a. see tuathal. 


tuaithealaeh, a. see tuathal. 
Wrong, ill-doing 
man. 


tuaithleus,(MS) s. Amaurosis. 
tual, see tuathal, 


tual, a. Noted, remarkable for either good or 
evil. 2 Awkward. 
tualachd, s.f. Possibility. 


tualag, s.f. Diarrhoea, 
tualagach, o Purgative. 


tualaig, t v.a. Loose, ravel. 2 Have flux. 3 Uns 
yoke, as horses—Perthshire. 


tualaigte, a. Loose, slack. 


tualaing, a. Abte. 
tualaing, see fulaing. 
tualaing, sf. Patience. 


tual-bheairt, s.pl. Exploits, brave deeds. 
tual-chaiunt, s.f. Ribaldry, jargon, gibberish. 
tuam, gee tuama, 


Cadal nan tuam, the sleep of 
grass (beard) of 


3 Moat. 


the grave; ula nan tuam, the 

the mounds. 

tuama, -n, s.f. Tomb, grave. 

4 Mound. 4 rarely Farm. 

tuamach, ‘aiche, a. Abounding in graves, tombs 
or mounds. 2 Of, or belonging to, tombs, 
graves or mounds, 3 Like a tomb. 

tnamaich, og, Entomb. 

tuamaichte, past pt. of tuamaich. Entombed. 

tuamail, see tuamach. 

tuamann, a. Fierce. 2 Morose, 

tuamhsgaoil, v.c. Roll'in clothes, huddle, endea- 

vour to extricate out ofa labyrinth or great 

deal of clothes. 

tuanag, see tualaig]& tonag. 

tuanlaig, v. Loose, have flux — Perthshire. 

tua-pholl, -phuill, s.m. Whirlpool. 

tuar, -air, -an, s.m. Colour, hue, appearance, 
countenance,complexion. 2 Hardship. 3 Food. 
4 Cast. 5 Fear. 6 Life. 7 Presage, omen, 
foreboding. auspice. 8 Forerunner. 9 House. 
10 Advantage, profit. 11*Merit, desert. 12 
Meriting,deserving. A’ t—, pr.pt.of tuar. Cha 
'n 'eil t. air an t-iasgach tighinn na b’ fhèarr, 
there is no appearance of the fishing improving ; 
gnò sam bith thuair,any kind of hardship; fail- 
eus mu'n t.,a shade upon their countenanes;mar 
th. na soillse, dike the appearance of light ; ion- 
cantas mu'n tuar, wonder at their fear ; gun 
teach gun t., without house or life ; tràth 


2 Cave. 


Original fram 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


A tuar 978 


bhios tuar ’dol as air na gobhair, cha bheir 


tubhadaireachd 
north country, the North: 


lad ach buie, when the goats are about to be- | tuith, -a, s.f.coll. Tenantry, peasantry, laity, 


come extinct (senseless), they only bring forth 
bucks ; bha a th, air a’ bhreitheamh mo leig- 
eil mu sgaoil, the judge appeared likely to let 
7n? go. 

tuar, pr.pt. a’ tuar, v.a. Deserve, merit. An ni 
ath. thu, what you deserved ; 'dé a. tha thu a’ 
tuar a dheanamh ort P what do you deserve to 
be dons to you ? tha thu a’ t. do chrochadh, 
you deserve to be hanged. 

tuaradh,* -aidh, sm. Quantity, number. ’Dé’n 
t. à th’ ann ? what quantity is there ? mu'n t. 
sin, about that quantity. 

tuaradh, -aidh, sm. Sauce. 

tuaragan, -ain, s.m. Bleacher. 

tuarail, e, a. Having a good complexion, hue 
Ee 2 Hardy, stout, firm. 3 see tuath- 
rail. 

tuaram, see tuaiream. 

tuarasdal, ail, an, sam, Wages, reward, hire, 
fee, salary, stipend. 2 Desert. Ainmich do 
th., appoint thy wages; là Fhéill Brighde 
gheibh na seirbhisich t. slàn, on Candlemas 
Day servants get their full waye—i.e. they can 
work from 6 a.m. to 6 p.m. The saying re- 
fers to Candlemas Old Style, now 14th. Feb. 

tuarasdalach, -aich, see tuasasdalaiche. 

turrasdalachadh,-aidh, s.m. Hiring, act of hir- 
ing. A' t—, pr.pt. of tuarasdalaich. 

tuarasdalaich, pr.pt. a’ tuarasdalachadh, v. a. 
Hire, engage for a fee. 

tuarasdalaiche, -ean, s. m. Hireling, mercenary. 
2 On? who hires. 

tuaras'alaichte, past pt. of tuarasdalaich. 

tuaraszar,( AT) s.m. Shellfish, 

tuarz, s.m. Beetle, mall. 

tuargan, -ain, s.m. Discontent, dissatisfaction, 
complaining, squabble, misunderstanding. 2 
Beating. 3 Sedition. 

tuarganach, -aiche, œ. Dissatisfied, discontent- 
ed, squabbling. 

ftuarganach-catha, s.m. Chief, commander, 
field-znarshal, generalissimo. 

tuarganachd, s.f. Discontentedness, dissatisfac- 
tion. 

tuargnadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s. m. Discontent, 
dissatisfaction. 2 Sedition. 3 Misunderstand- 
ing. 

tuar-mhanadh,tt -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Omen. 

tuarnairich, v.a. Make by turning. 

tuarnalaich, Gairloch for tuainealaich. 

tuartan, (DMK) s.m. Cold in the head—Caith- 
n^s8. 

tuasaid, -e, -ean, $.f. Tumult, quarrel, row,fray, 
brawl, wrangle, fight, contention, 2 Bluster. 
31iSedition. T. ghaoith agus chreag, the bat- 
tle of winds and rocks. 

tuasaideach, -eiche, a. Quarrelsome, tumultu- 
ous, rioteus,brawling,wrangling. 2 Seditious, 

tuasaideach, s.f. Squabbling, quarrelsomeness, 
wraneling, 

$uasaideachd,( MS) s.f. Turbulence. 

tuasaidich,( MS) v. Brawl. 

tuasdair, see tuaisdear. 

tuasgail, see fuasgail. 

tuasgailte, see fuasgailte. 

Ttuasgart, a. North, northern. 

tuasglach, -aich, s.m. One who releases. 

—— —— —, a. Aperient, see fuasglach. 

tuasgladh, see fuasgladh, 

tuasglagadh,** -aidh, s.m. Releasing, loosening. 
2 Dissolving. 

tuath, a. North, northern. An airde t., the 
North ; bho ’n t., from the North or north- 
ward ; gaoth t., north wind; t. ort, north- 
werd of you; an taobh t., the north side, the! 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


conntry people, husbandmen, aggregate num- 
ber cf any land proprietors, farmers or ten- 
ants. Air an t, on the country ; an t., an 
tuath-cheathairn, the tenantry ; is treasa t. na 
tighearna, tenantry are stronger than laird. 





or belonging to, the tenantry. 3 Northerly. 

ach, ach, s. m. North Highlander. 2 
rarely, Lord, proprietor. 

Ttuathachd, s.f.ind. Sovereignty, lordship, pro- 
prietorship. 

tuathag, -aig, -an, s.f. see tuthag. 

tuathair, -e, -ean, $.f. Northern exposure. 2 
Countryside lying towards the North. í**gen. 
tuathrach.] 

tuathaiste,( MS) s.f. Stumble. 

tuathaisteach,( MS) a. Uncouth. 

tuathal, aile, a. Contrary to the course of the 
sun, and consequently regarded as unlucky. 
2 To the left, wrong. .8 Cross, athwart. 4 
Ominous. 5 Awkward. 6 Backward. 7 see 
tuathach. 8**Brave. Cart., a wrong turn; 
o shealladh an laoich th., from the sight of the 
brave hero. 

tuathanach, -2ich, a. Farmer, rustic, peasant, 
husbandman, agriculturist, layman. 
- —ail, -e, a. Agricultural. 

—-—as, "ais, s.m., Farming, agriculture, 
husbandry. 

tuathanachd,** s.f. Agriculture, husbandry. 2 
Condition of a farmer or peasant, 

tuathanas, -ais, see tuathanachas, 

tuath-cheatharna,** s.f. Yeomanry, 2 Peasant- 
ry, common people. Neach de 'n t., one of 
the common people ; bu lionmhor ar t., numer- 
ous were our peasantry. 

tuath-fhras,** -ais, s.m. Northern blast. 

tuath-ghaoth,** -ghaoithe, s.f. North wind. 

ach,** a. Aquilonial, Mios t., an 


aquilonial month. 
tuathlach,** a. Ominous. 2 Unlucky. 3 Awk- 
2 Unlucki- 














ward. 4 Left-handed. 

—d,** s. f. Ominousness. 
ness. 3 Awkwardness, rusticity. 

tuathlan,** -ain, s.m. Awkward, ungainly per- 
son. 2 Boor, rustic, plebeian. 

tuathrach, gen.sing. of tuathair. 

—,** a, Having a northern exposure. 

tuba, -chan & -nnan, s.f, Tub, vat. (vat, 

tubag, -aig, -an, s.f.,dim. of tuba. Little tub or 

tubagach, a. Like, of, or belongiug to, a little 
tub or vat. 

tubag-leigidh, $.f. Dropping-tub (in distilling.) 

tubag-shilidh, s.f. Dropping-tub (in distilling.) 

tubaist, -e, -ean, s.f. Misfortune, mischance, 
mishap, calamity, mischief. 9 Accident. 3ff 
Wretch. Is trom na tubaistean air na slib- 
istean, the clumsy are very liable to accidents ; 
t. ort | mischief take you ! a thaobh t., by ac- 
cident ; thig t. air, mischief shall befall him. 

tubaisteach, -eiche, a. Unlucky, unfortunate, 2 
Accidental, calamitous, untoward, unpropi- 
tious. 








d, s.f. Unfortunate occurrence, un- 
fortunateness, 2 Accidentalness, calamitous- 
ness, unluckiness, liability to accident. 

tubait,** -ean, $.f. Tippet. 

tuban, -ain,-an, s.m. *Tub. 2seetoban. | 

tubanach, -aiche, @ Having many tufts of wool 
or lint. 3 

tubh, see tugh. 

tübh, see taobh. » 

tubhach, see tughach. 

tubhadair, see tughadair. 

—eachü, see tughadaireachd. 








Original from 


UNIVERSITY. OF ILLI NOIS AT, 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGNSS 


ach, -aiche,a. Having many tenants. 2 Of, ` 





KA 


wei KE 


i ` 
` 

^ i 4 . 

4 45^ m T Sw 


| 

| 
x 
d 





^» 4 L TESS 
e eg CS - 


al 
, 1 
- km * 


- 
b de h 


/ 
aa, DAD. 


4 


i; 








» Ri tubhadh 


tu’: hadh, see tughadh. 

tubhag,(MS) s.f. Patch. 

tibh'gachas, s.m. Patchery. 

tubhagaiche,(MS) $.m. Patcher. 

tübhailt, -e, -ean, sf. Towel, hand-towel, dia- 
per. T.-bhüird, a table-cloth. 

each,tf a. Abounding in towels. 2 Like 
a towel. 

— ——— ear,** eir, sm. Weaver of towels. 

earachd,** et Business or occupation 
of towel-weavinz. 

tubbta, see tughta. 

tubhte, see tughta. 

tuca,** sm. Tuck, rapier. 

tücadair, -ean, see fùcadair. 

eachd, see fücadaireachd, 

tucaid,* .e, -ean, s.f. Dove-cot. 

tuch !* int. Tut ! hush ! 

tüch, pr. pt. a’ tùchadh, v.a. dn Stop, shut, 
smother as atlame. 2 Extinguish, quench. 3 
Become hoarse. 4 Fumigate. Tha mo mbuin- 
eal air a thüchadh, my throat has become 
hoarse. 

tucha,** s. Pore. 

tüchach, -aiche, a. Causing hoarseness. 

tùchadh, -aidh, s.m. Stopping. 2 Act of cover- 
ing, as with alid. 3 State of becoming hoarse, 
hoarseness. 4 Wheezing. 5 Extinguishing, 
smothering, as a flame, 6{tCooing. A’ t—, pr. 
pt. of tüch. 

tuchair,* -ean, $.m. Smotherer. 

tùchan, -ain, s.m. Cooing of a dove, 2 Hoarse- 
ness, gutturalness. 3 Fit of hoarseness caused 
by a cold or an exertion of the voice, 4 Half- 

- smothered fire ; le t.’s le cnatan, with hoarse- 
ness and cold, 

ach, -aiche, o Hoarse, guttural, bass, 

whirring. 2 Causing hoarseness.. 

achd, s.f.ind. Raucity, gutturalness. 

ftuchd, s. Form. 2 Time, soason. 

tuchraidh,** $.f. Appointed time. 2 Critical 

Made hoarse. 2 Af. 


time, 
3 Extinguished or 

















tüchta, past pt. of Loch, 
fected with hoarseness, 
smothered, as a flame. 

tüchte, see tüchta. 

tùd, s.m. Heap. 2 see tüdan. 

. tud !* int, Tut ! whist ! 
budagan, see tutagan. 

tùdan, -ain, -an, s.m. Small heap, as of dough. 
2 Small stack of corn or hay. (Permanent 
stack in Swth'd.) 3 Lump. 4 Tuft, as of 
wool. 5 **Turd. 6 Suds, see tutag. 7* Man- 
nikin. (Short u in Gairloch & W.of Ross. DU] 

ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in small stacks 
of hay or corn, 

fudraig, a. Vigorous—Arran. 

tufag, -aig, s.f. Foist. 2 Stench. 

tug, ( for thug), see thoir. 

tugadh, past aff. neg. & interr. of thoir, Was 





given. 

tugaid,** s.f. Cause, reason. 

-each,(MS) a. Amusive, jocose, arch. 

tugaidean, s.p]. Witticisms, facetiousness, hu- 

|J monr, jocoseness, roguery. 

tugainn, irr. past sub). of thoir. 

bugn, pr.pt. a’ tughadh, v. a. Thatch, cover. 2 
Back. T. a staigh e, back him in—said of a 
horse. 

ugha, s.f. Thatch, covering, any material, such 
as straw, heath or fern, wherewith the roof of 
a house is thatched. 2**Opposition. Taigh- 
ean tugha, thatched houses. 

[ughach,** a. Thatched. 2 Like thatch. 

tughadair, -ean, s.m. Thatcher. 

—eachd,tt s.f. Employment or business 

of thatehiug. 








Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


979 


tuill 


tughadh, -aidh, s.m. Thatching, act of thatch. 
ing. 2 Thatch. A’ t—, pr.pt. of tugh. 

tüghag (CR) s.f. Patch—W. of Ross. Is fhearr 
breid no toll, ach is uaisle toll na tughag, a 
patch is better than a hole, but æ hole is mors 


genteel, 
Cughta, past pt. of tugh. Thatched. 
tugtadh, past subj. pass. of thoir. s 


tuidble,** æ. Pleasant 

1 tuidnme, $.J. Confederacy, conjunction, 

tuidhtearachd, s.£ Wardship. 

tuig, pr.pt. a’ tuigsinn, v.a, dn Understand, 
perceive, discern, comprehend. Th. e do 
cbridhe, he understood thy heart ; cò a thuig- 
eas uile sheachrain fhéin ? who can understand 
al/ his own errors ? an sin tuigidh tu eagal an 
Tighearna, then shalt thou understand the 
fear of the Lord. 

tuigear, ful.pass. of tuig, 

tuigim, (for tuigidh mi), I shall understand. 

tuigse, $,f.nd. Understanding, reason, know- 
ledge, skill, sense, judgment. A' call a th., 
losing his senses?or judgment; is beag t. a th’ 
agad air sin, you have little skill at that ; faigh 
t., get understanding. 

tuigseach, -eiche, o Intelligent, sensible, wise, 
prudent, judicious, knowing. 2 Skilled, ex- 
pert. Duine t., a prudent or intelligent mant; 
t. air a leithid sin, expert in such things ; gu t. 
intelligently. 

—adh, (MS) s.m. Apprehension. 

— — — —d,** s.f. Apprehensiveness. 

tuigssil,(M*) a. Apprehensible. 

tuigsinn, st, Understanding, act'of understand- 
ing, comprehending, discerning or perceiving. 
A’ t—, pr.pt. of tnig. 

—each, -eiche, a. see tuigseach. 

—each, -eich, s.m. Knowing person. 

———eachd, s.f. Deducement. 

tuil,-e, -ean & -tean, s.f. Flood, deluge. 2 
Heavy rain, torrent. 3 Overflowing of run- 
ning waters. 4 Tide. An T. Ruadh, Noah’s 
Flood; bhrùchd cuimhne mar th., memory 
aes forth like æ flood. [**pl. tuilte & tuilte- 
chan. 

tuil-aodich,** -aich, s.m. Apron. 

tuil-bheum, -eim, -an, s.m. Torrent. 2 Torrent 
caused by the bursting of a thunder-cloud or 
by the sudden melting of snow. 3 Thunder- 
Shower, Tha iad mar th., they are like a 
torrent ; is lionmhor tuil-bheuman a’ bheath- 
aich laig, the weak animal meets with many 
obstacles (lit. torrents.) [**gen, tuil-bheuma.] 














tuil-bheumach, -aiche, œ. Rushing asa torrent. 


tuilcheanach,** -aich, s.m. Handsel. 

tuil-dhorus, -uis, -dhorsan, s.m. Flood-gate. 2 
Gate of a canal- or river-lock. Tuil-dhorsan 
neimh, the windows of heaven. 

tulleach, -eiche,ia. Like a flood, deluging. 

tuileachadh, -aidh, s.m. Flooding, act of delug- 
ing. A’ t—, pr.pt. of tuilich. 

tuileachas, s.m. Flooding. Dhia a rinn lionadh 
is tràgh' 1s tuileachas, God who made ebb and 
flow and flooding—Impromptu verse by Mac- 
Kellar, author of Laoidh MhicEalair. 

tuile-thalmhainn, s.f. Bulbous crowfoot, see 
fuile-thalmhainn. 

tuil-cudach, see tuil-aodach. 

tuiliac, see tuilleag. 

tuilich, pr.pt. a’ tuileachadh, v.a. & n. Overflow, 
deluge, inundate, flood. 

, S.M, see tuilleadh. 

tùilinn,** s.f. Twilled linen. 
of twilled linen. 

tuiliop,$ s. Tulip —tulipa sylvestris. 

tuill, gen. sing. & n. pl. of toll. Ofahole, a 
Holes, caves,  Tuill an fhirich, the mountain 





Léine th., @ shirt 


Original fram 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


tuill 980 tuiridh 
caves. tuineadh, -idh, s. m. Abode, dwelling-place, 
tuille, s., adv. & conj. see tuilleadh. T. eile,fur-| place of residence, retreat, den. 2 Receptacle. 
thermore. T. nan treun, the dwelling-place of heroes. 


tuillead,** -eid, s.m.Greater quantity, additional 
quantity. Gheibh thu an t., you will get the 
(nore ; a th. air sin, over and above that. 

tuilleadh, s.m. More, ‘addition, additional quan- 
tity or number Thoir dhomh t., give me more; 
t. 'sa choir, too much, superabundance ; t£. 
t., in apposition. 

tuilleadh, adv. More, any more, farther, more- 
over. T. ' us, too ;t. fos, t. eile, moreover ; 
cha till mi t., 
mi ’nam aonrachd t., I shall be no longer soli- 

t. gu brath, any more for ever ; t. cha 


[4 


y Farry ; 


; léir dhuit, thou shalt see no more ; cha'n fhaod 


thu tighinn t., you must not come any more, 

tuilleadhnach,(MS) a. Ascititious. 

tuilleag, (AF) s.f. Common skua-gull. 

tuillean, see tollan. 

tuille eile, conj. Furthermore, moreover, nay 
more. 

tuillein, see tollan. 

tuillidh, «o> tuilleadh.” 

tuillinn, s./. Canvas. 2 Sea-storm. 3 Shipped 
Wave. Sàr-Obair. E e 

tuilm, gen.sing. £ n.pl. of tolm, 

‘ftuilm, s.f. Gift. 

anil, -e, $.f. Elm. 2 Oak. 3 Pudenda mulie- 

ria. 

tuilmean, s.m. Little knoll. 

tuilmeineach, og, Full of knolls or tufts. 

tuillis,(AC)'s. Overloading the stomach, 'espe- 

| cially with liquids. 

tuil-mhaoim,** 3.f. Sudden deluge, &c., see tuil 
bheum. Mar a leaghas sneachd ‘na th., as 
snow melts in torrents. 

£uitte, mn ol. of tuil. 

tuilt each, -diche, o Flooding, that covers ðr 
floods with water, foverflowing, inundating, 
deluging, causing a deluge. 

tuilteach, -eich, s. B Torrent. Air t. gaoithe 
sgaoil i a sgiathan, on o torrent of air | she 
spread her wings. de i 

tuilteachan, n.pl. of tuil, 

tuiltean, n.pl. of tuil.§ 

Ttuiltin, s. Merit, demerit, see toiltinn, 

tuim, gen.sing. £ n.vl. of tom. f 

tuim, -e, S.f. see taoim. 

tuimbseach, -eiche, a. Beating, striking, TECUM 
ing. 

tuimhseachadh, -aidh, s.m. Beating, act of beat. 
ing, striking or thumping. 2 Blow, thump. 
A" t—, pr. pt. of tuimhsich. 

tuimhserdh, -idh, see tuimhseachadh, 

tuimhsich, pr.pt. a? tuimhseachadh, v. a. Beat, 
drub. 2 Stagger to and fro. 3ttKnock against. 

—te, past pt. of tuimbhsich. Beaten, 
struck, thumped. 

tuimpe, * see neup. 

tuims, pr.pt. a’ tuimseadh, v.a. see tuimsich, 

ituin,* v.n. see tuinich. 

tuin,* s.m. [**f.] see tuineadh. 

tuine,ff s.f. Dread, terror, alarm, confusion. 

tuineach, œ. Dreadful, alarming. 

,-lch, -ichean, s.m. iia e abode, 

* lodging. 8 Resort. 3 Resident. 4 Lodger. 

' Ani cas na creige do th. P is the shelter of 
the rock thy dwelling : ? 

adh, -aidh, sm. Dwelling, act or state of 
dwelling. .2 Resorting, act of resorting or 

| frequenting. 9 Colonizing, gathering into a 

| place for residence. 4 Sojourn, resideuce. A’ 
t—, pr.pt. of tuinich. 

e—— —— A8, "AIS, S.M, 


-1 











Sojourning, sojourn. 2 


Aboda, dw eling, home.  $* Colony. 4**Re- 
coptacle, 
Digitized by 


L- 


AR C HIV 


INTERNET 


I shall never return ; cha bhi 





tuineas, -eis, sm. Abode, house. 2** Receptacle. 
T. nao sleagh, the receptacle of spears. 

tuineasach,** a. Of, or belonging to, an abode. 
2 Residing. 3 Inhabiting. 

ttuinge,** ST. Oath. | 

tüinich, pr. pt. a’ tuineachadh, v. n. Sojourn, 
dwell, inhabit. 2 Frequent, resort to. 3* 
Gather, as ‘matter in suppuration, settle or 
fix in a place as a movable tumour. Ar Col- 
onize, settle in a place. 

tüiniche. s.m. Dweller, lodger. 

tuinidhe, see tuineadh. [lings. 

tuinn, gen.sing. & n.pl. of tonn. 1?2(AF) Duck- 

tuinne, gen.sing. of tonn. An gob na tuinne, at 
the edge of the water or wave. 5 

tuinneadh, see tuineadh. 

Ituinneamh, -eimh, s.f. Death. 

tuinneas, -eis, see thineas. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Deathful, causing death. 

2 Mortal. : 

tuinnidh, -e, a. Hard, firm. 

tuinnleag; (CR) et, Reay country for seillean. 

tuinnse, -Achan, s.m. Blow. 2 Fatal blow given 
by the wheel of fortune. 3tfSurge. 

tuinnseadh, tf -eidh, -ean, 5$. m. 
(MS) Fling. 3( MS) Pretusion. 

tuir, & tuire, gen.sing. & n.pl. of tur. 

Ttuir, s.m. Lord. 2 Pillar. 

tuir, pr.pt.a’ tursadh, a’ tuireadh & a’ tuire unk. 
v:a. Relate, rehearse. 2 Chant with à m urn- 
ful cadence, accompany a rehearsal with a 
mournful air. 38 Mourn, deplore, *lameut 
for the dead. 4 Weep. Theiriginn mo dheòir 
na’n tuitinn gach ànadh, my tears wovid 
fail were 1 to deplore every ‘disaster ; tuir an 
aitiris neo-adhmhor, deplore the hapless tale. 

tuirbheach, a. Shamefaced, bashful, modest. 

tuire, gen.sing. & n.pl. of torc. 

tuire, seo tuireadh. 

tuireadh, -idh, -ean & tuireannan, s.m. Relating, 
act of relating. 2 Mourning, act of mourning, 
deploring, bewailing or lamenting. 3 Weep- 
ing, act of weeping. 4 Lamentation, la:nent 
for the dead, wail,dirze,elegy. 6 Melancholy 
narrative, 6 Death- -song. 7 Request. A’ t-, 
pr.pt. of tuir, 





Dnh'éisd sinn ri t. a thruaighe, we liste»od to ` 


him while bewatling his hard fate ; cion fàth 
do thuiridh P? what is the cause of your lament? 
le t. glaoidh thog e a cheann, with loud la men- 
lation he raised his head ; 'nan tuireannaibh, 
in their lamentations. 

tuiream,(AC) s.m. Mourning for the dead. T. 
bais, death-mourning. 

tuireamh, -imh,-s.m. see tuireadh. 

tuirean, -ein, s.m. Troop, multitude. 

tuireann, -einn, -an, s.m, Spark of fire from an 
anvil, 2**Lightning. 3** Trocp. crowd, 4$ 
Wheat, see cruithneachd. [gen. sing. & n pl. 
also tuirinn. ] i 

tuiteannan, pl. of tuireann. +g: 8 Bär: 

tuireanta, à. Pregnant. Sel 24 

tuaireapadh,(MS) s.f. Anger. 4 

tuireasg, -isg, -au, s.m. Saw. 2**File, 8**Axe. 
Ee d an t. e féin ? will the axe exall it- 
self t 

ach, -aiche, fa. That saweth. 3 Furnish- 
ed with saws, 3 Like a saw, file or axe. 
aiche,** s.m. One who saws or axes, { 

————— -luaithre,** s. Sawdust. 

tuireid, see turaid. 

tuirginn, s.f. Flood. 2 Broad, squat person. 
3 Wash-staff. 4 Bottle. 5**Beetle. 

tuiridh, s.f. Pillar 2 Supporter. 3 Request, 


Original from 
UNIV 
URBANA-CHAM PAIGN 


Jogging. 2 


é 

A 

E 
"A 
KM 
^ 







ERSITY OF ILLINOIS SÉ 


"IJ 


———M— So BRE 





— 





SCHEER TAGE 
CC. EA 


LS ilem "A" 
arce RE. KZ: 


U 

















Se ‘tuiridh 


4** Elegy. 
tuirighin,** E, Pillar. 


uest. , 
tuirigleadh, (AH) s.m. Wailing, lamentation— 
Argyll, 
tuirinn, see tuireann, 
tuiriosg, see tuireasg. 
tuirisge, see tuireasg. i 
tuirl, v. see tuirling. Thuirleadh e, let him des- 
cend; thuirlibh, a thaibhse ! descend, ye ghosts! 
t(h)uirleadh, 3rd. p. sing. & pl. imp. of tuirl. 
tuirleig,* s.m. Water-spout 
tuirleum,^ s.m. Fearful leap. 2 Onset. 3 Con- 
test. 4 see tuirling, 
tuirlibh, 2nd. p. pl. imp, of tuirl. 
tuirlich,* s.f. Rumbling noise. 
t(h)uirlidh ! int. Call to a cow—A ran, 
t(h)uirlidh mhineig ! int. Call to à cow—Arran. 
tuirlin, see tuirling. 
tuirling, pr.pt. a’ tuirling, v. a Descend, des- 
cend rapidly or with a noise, come down. 
Alight, come off a horse. 3**Fall upon, | 
, sf. Descending, nct of descending 
uiekly or with a noise, descent. 2**Slope, 
eclivity. A't—, pr.pt. of tuirling, 
tuirlinn,* see tuirling. 
tuirmheach, see tuirbheach. | 
—d,** s.f. Modesty. ‘ 
tuirnealas, s.m. Striking of heads against each 
other, as rams, contact, collision—Sar-Obatr, 
tüirneanach,(CR) s.m. Blow with the fist—W. 
of Ross. 
tuirse, s.7. ind. Sadness, melancholy, mourning, 
sorrow, dejection. 2 Afflictedness. 3 Dirge. 
4 Elegy. T. nam bard, the dirge of the bards; 
is mór fàth mo th., great is the cause of my 
sorrow ; bu trom a t. is bu chian, heavy and 
lasting was her sorrow. 
tùirseach, -eiche, œ. Sad, mournful, sorrowful, 
melaneholy, 2 Causing sorrow or sadness. 
Chan ioghnadh mise "bing t., no wonder that I 
be sorrowful ; but. tearc a làithean, sad and 
Few were his days ; gu t., sorrowfully; bu twr- 
siche gu mór Ronan, far more sad was Ronan, 
gu t. trom, sad and dejected ` arsa Fionn gu t., 
said Fionn mournfully. 


A d e 


À T. 


2 Supporter. 3 Con- 











670. Tüirseach. 

tüirseach,$ eich, s.m. Greater stitchwort, ad- 
der's meat, moon-flower, satin-flower—stel/a- 
ria holostea. 

tuirseachi, s.f.ind. Pensiveness, sadness, melan- 
choly, dejection. : 

tuirse,(CR) v. a. Lift, bundle up. 2 Prepare, 
begin, set out, Th. e air, he began, set out ; 
th. e air de shealltainn oirre, be bestirred him- 
self and went to see her—Suth’d. 

fuirszeadh, s.m. Preparing fora journey. A’ 
t—, pr.pt. of tnirsg.  'S mithich dhomh bhi 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


981 











tuigle,** s.f. Fall, slip, stumble. 


—— ——aàdh, -aidh, -ean, 


—————aàch,** æ. Desultory. 


tuiteam 
t., it is time for me to be off. 


tùirsich, v.n. Make mournful or sad. 


—e, comp. of tùirseach. 


tùirsneach,** a. Troubled, heavy in mind. 
tùirsueadh,-idh,s m.Trouble, heaviness of mind, 
tuirtealachd, s.f. Dumps. 

tüis,-e, -ean, s.f Incense, frankincense 2 rare- 


ly, Jewel. 3 rarely, King, noble. 


Altair na 
tùise, the altar of incense. 


tuis, gen.sing. of tus. 

tuisdeach,** -ich, s.m. Parent, 
tuüiseach, o, Abounding in incense, 
tiiseach,** Ach, s.m. 
tüisear, -eir, pl. -an & -ean, s.m. Censer, T. dir, 


ealer, commander. 


a golden censer, 


tuisg, g^n.sing. & n. pl. of tosg, 
tuisil,(DC) s.f. Joint, hinge, pivot, 
tuisill,* v.n. Stumble, fall, slip. 2 Stammer. 3 


**Deliver, bring forth, 


, 'all, 2 Trespass. 8 
Delivery, bringing forth. 


tuisleach, -eiche, a. Stumbling, that stumbles, 


2 Causing to stumble. 
steady, infirm, fallible. 


3 Accidental. 
5 Slippery. 
8. m. Stumble, stum- 
bling, act of stumbling. 2 Accident. 3 Offence, 
4 Delivery, bringing forth. 5 Jumble, jastle. 

A’ t—, pr.pt. of tuislich. 


4 Un- 


tuisleachair,** s.m. Backslider, 

tuisleachail,** a, Fallible. 

tuisleachd, s.f. Fallibility. 

tuisleadh, -idh, s.m. Stumbling, slippiug,falling. 


stumble, slip, fall. 


2 Decay. 3 Offence. 4 
Delivery. 


. Treibhdhireach agus gun t., sin- 
cere and without offence, 


tuisleadh-asbhuianeach,(DC) s.m.Miscarriage— 


Uist. 


tuisleag,** -eig, s.j. Fall, slight fall, slip. 2 


Jump, leap. 
; SH 2 Leapiug, skip- 
ping. 3 Slipping, stumbling. 


tuislich, pr. pt, a’ tuisleachadh, v. a. Stumble, 


slip, fall. 2 Commit a fault, err, blunder. 3 
Deliver, bring forth, bear. 4 Jostle. Th. e, 
he Stan bied ; tuislichidh mo luchd-tóir, my 
pursuers shall stumble. 


tuistichte, past pt. of tuislich. Stumbled,fallen. 


2 Delivered. 3 Overturned. 


tuismeachan,** -ain, s.m. Accoucheur. 
tuismeachd,** s.f. Stumble, frequent stumbling 


or falling. 


tuisneach, -eiche, œ. see tuisleach, 


tuismeadh,** s.m. Nativity. 


tuismich, see tuislich.—North.* 
tuit, pr. pt. a’ tuiteam, v. n. Fall. 


2 Happen, 
befall, chance. 3 Stumble, slip. 4 Subside. 
5 Sink. 6 Set,jasthe sun. 7 Benight, 8 Be 
seduced by. 9 Fail. 10 Damp. 

Th. dhuinn tachairt, we met by chance ; th. 
iad, they fell ; th. dhaibh tighinn a steach, 
they happened to come in; th. an oidhche 
oirnn, we were benighted ; th. i leis, she was 
seduced by him; tuitidh a’ ghaoth, the wind 
will subside ; th. do ghrian gu sìor, thy sun 
has set for ever ; th. a chridhe, his heart failed 
him ; cna t. e, he will not fall. 

ttuit,** s. The flat of anything. 

tuiteadh, imperf. subj. of tuit. Should fall. 2 
8rd. p. sing.imper. of tuit. T.e, let him fall. 

tuiteam, 1st.per.sing.imper. of tuit. Let me fall. 
(emphatic, tuiteam-sa.)  2(** for tuitim.) 

tuiteam, -eim, -an, s. m. Fall, falling, act of 
falling. 2 Chance. 3 Dusk, dawn. 4**Orver- 
turn. A’ t—, pr.pt. of tuit. Fhuair et., he 
got a fall; mu th. na h-oidhehe, about the 
dusk of the evening (fall of night,) A’ t—, pr. 
pt. of tuit, 


Original fram 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS A 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


tuiteamach 98 


tuiteamach, -aiche, a. That falleth, fallible,fall- 
ing, apt to fall. 2 Accidental. 3 Epileptic. 
4 Casual, contingent, incident. 5 Causing to 
fallor stumble. 6**Frail. 7**Ruinous. Tin- 
neas t., epilepsy. 

tuiteamach,** -aich, s.f Epilepsy. 

tuiteamachd, s.f. see tuiteamas. 
ness. 

tuiteamas, -ais, s.m. Contingence, chance, inci- 
dence. 2 Fall. 3 Occurence, accident. 4 Ac- 
cidentalness, 5 Epilepsy. 6 Fallibility, lia- 
bility to fall. 7**Lot. Thachair sinn le t., 
we met by accident ; cha’n 'eil t. sam bith 
gu’n tachair sinn am feasd, there is no chance 
of our ever meeting ; gach droch th., every bad 
occurrence ; an dàil gach tuiteamais, to face 
any event, in contact with any danger ; chan 
'eil ann acht, it is only a chance ; tinn leis an 
tuiteamas, ill with the epilepsy, 2 lunatic. 

tuiteam-oidhche, s.m. Nightfall. 

tuitean,* ein, s.m. Badger. 

tuitear, fut.pass. of tuit. Shall be made to fall. 
Also used impersonally. 

tuitear,** sm. Executor, governor. 2** Tutor, 
preceptor. 

-achd,* s.f. Wardship, guardianship. 2** 
Tutorage, tuition, employment of a preceptor. 

tuithtear, -eir, s.m, see tuitear. 

tuitidh, see tuit. 

tuitidh, for tuitidh mi. 

ttul, -uil, s.m. Beginning, 2 Face. 
4 Relique. 5 Flood. 

tul-, prefix (uile.) Entirely, wholly, completely. 
Breug, a die ; tul-bhreug, æ perfect falsehood. 

tul,(AC) s.m. Fire. 2 Hearth. 3 Heap,hillock. 

tula, s.m. see tulach. 

tula,*a.Complete,most notorious, see tul-, prefix. 

tulach, -aich, -aichean, s. m. Hillock, knoll, 
mound. 2 Small green hill. 3**Top ofa gen- 
tle rising ground, low, smooth hill or ridge. 4 
(AC)House. 6(AC) Ruins. 6*Tomb. Mi ’nam 
shuidhe air an t., I sitting on the knoll ; an t. 
laghach air an robh Tuara, the fine hillock on 
which T. stood ; chàirich sinn 'san t. an laoch, 
we inierred (be hero in the green knoll or 
tomb. 

tulachach,** a. Knolly. 

tulachan, -ain, -an, s.m., dim. of tulach. Little 
hillock, little knoll, mound or tomb. 2 
Calf-skin stuffed, and presented to the cow, 
as if living, to induce her to giveher milk. 3 
Man appointed as a bishop after the Reform- 
ation, who was a bishop in name only and 
whose revenue was drawn,by his patron. Tha 
iad uile ’nan tulachain, they are all in their 
graves. 

tulachainn,(MS) s. Backside, breech. 

pale hayek -àiehe, a. Abounding in little hil- 
ocks. 

tulachann, see tulehann, 

tulag, -aig, -an. s.f. Whiting, pollock, gwiniad. 

-—— ach, «a. Abounding in, of, or belonging to, 
pollocks. 

ttulagadh, -aidh, s.m. Change of labourers, 

tulagan, -ain, sm. see tulachan. 2 Rocking. 

tulaich, gen.sing. & n.pl. of tulach. 

ean, n. pl. of tulach. 
Higbhlant reel. 

tul-aigne,** s. f. Intention, purpose, motive. 

tülaiun, a €, Dowlas. 

tulaman,(MMcD) s.m. Wild drake. T. a’ chinn 
uaine, a green-headed wild drake— Lewis, 

tulan,** .aiu, s.m. Kettle. 

tul-bhreac,** a. Spotted, speckled, freckled. 

tul-bhreicneach, -elche, a. Spotted, freckled. 

tul-bhreug, -éize, an, s.f. Direct lie, entire false- 
hood, Ag iunseadh nan tul-bhreugan, telling 


2 Deciduous- 





3 Fashion 





2 Certain kind of. 


2 tulmanach 


most notorious lies. 
———ach, -aiche, a. That tells direct lies, 
lying impudently. 
——adair, -ean, s.m. Impudent liar. 
tule, see tulg. 
tulehabhchan,(AF) s. Owl. 
tulchach, see tulachach. -~ 
tulchainn, gen.sing. of tulchann. 
—each, a. Having high gables. 2 Gabled. 
tulchair,** s.m. Emulator. 
tulchan, see tulachan. 
tulchann, -ainn, -an, s.f. Gable, end-wall of a 
house, 2 Corner, 3 Backside, breech.  4ff 
The hips. 5ttHorse’s croup. 6 **Stern of a 
ship. [* & tt give tulchainn, gen. -e, s.f.] 
tulch!aon,** oa, Slant, slope. 2 Form in a zig- 
zag line, 
—— —— —,** a. Slanting, sloping, in a zig-zag. 
—ach, a. Tending to a slope, sloping 
gently. 2 In a zig-zag line. 
— —&ehd,** s. f. Slanting, gradual descent, 
declivity. 2 Zig-zagging. 
tulchoir,** a. Obstinate. 
tul-chombhraic,** s.f. Assembly. 
tul-chrom,** a. Slant, sloping. 
tul-chromadh,** -aidh, s.m. Slanting, sloping, 
slant, slope. | 
tul-chuis, e, s.f. Confidence, boldness. 2 Per- 
severance. 3 Acuteness, penetration, adroit- 
ness. 

—each, -eiche, a. Confident, bold,brave, 
plucky, 2 Persevering, plodding, assiduous. 
3 Acute, penetrating. O 'n eas-charaid th., 
from the brave or persevering foe. 

tul-fhirinn,(CR) eg The whole truth, the real 
truth— W. of Ross. 

tulg, -a, s.m. Bruise or hollow on the surface 
of any laminated metal. 2 Hollow between 
billows. 3 Sinking of any undulating surface. 
4 Jolting. 5 Grudge— Sàr-Obair. 6 Upraid- 
ing, picking—Sé@r-Obair. T. thonn, the rock- 
ing of waves. 

tulg, v.a. & n. Rock, toss, roll, oseillate, wave, 
fluctuate, jostle, swing, jolt.push. 2 Make & 
hollow, as on the surface of a plate of metal. 
T. a’ chreathall, rock the cradle ; an long a’ 
tulgadh, the ship rolling ; an doire a’ tulgadh, 
the grove waving. 

tulga. see tulgach. 

tulgach,* -aiche, a. Rocking, tossing. 2 Incon- 
stant, as the surface of agitated water. 3 
Causing a jolting or rockivg motion. 4 Un- 
easy, as a seat. 6 Uncertain, unfixed, as an 
office or employment. 6 see tolgach. Gun t., 
firm, motionless, unshaken. 

tulgag tt -aig, -an, s.f. Jerk. 

tulgadh, -aidh, s.m. Tossing, rocking, lurching, 
fluctuation, exagitation, jolting. 2 Denting, 
making an impression on a metal surface. 
3**Undulation. 4 Lurch, toss. A’ t—, pr.pt. 
of tulg. f t 

tulgaid, s.f. Throw—Cailleach nan cnò by Neil 
MacLeod. 

tulgan,** -ain, s.m. Rocking motion, as caused 
by agitated water. 2 Little bruise, as on a 
metal surface. 

ach,** a. Hilly, knolly. 

tulgatuinn,** s. Estuation. 

tulgnadh, -aidh, see tolgnadh. 

tulg-tuinn, s. Trough of the waves. 

tuliac,fT see fasgadan. 

tulla,(AC) see tul. 

tullachnach, see tulachanach. 

tulm, -uilm, s.f. see tolm. 

tulmach, -aiche, a. see tolmach. 

tulman, see toiman. d 

ach, see tolmanach., 











Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


Digitized by 
gh A hen Ag 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 








tul-mhagadh 


tul-mhagadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Downright 
mockery. 
tul-mhéirleach, eich, s,m. Daring thief. 
tul-radhare, see sül-radharc. 
--—ach, see sül-radharcach. 
—--—achd, sse sül-radharcachd. 
tulpaist,** s.f. Avenue, walk before a door. 
an,** -ain, s.m. Spreading. 2 Loosening, 3 
Bursting, 
tul-thapadh, -aidh, -aidhean, s.m. Mere chance, 
tum, pr.pt. a’ tumadh, v.a. Dip, plunge, steep, 
immerse, duck, bathe. Th. iad an còta 'san 
fhuil, they dipped the coat in the blood ; a chas 
a’ tumadh ’sa chaochan, his foot immersed in 
the gurgling streamlet, 
tuma,** em, see tuama. 
tuma, see tumadh. 
tumachan, see tumair. 
tumadh, -aidh, -aidhean, ¢.m. Dipping, act of 
dipping or ducking, immersion, dip. 2 
Bounce. A’ t—, pr.pt. of tum. 
tumadair, see taoman, 
tumair, -ean, s.m. Dipper, diver,ducker, bather. 
[* gives nom, -e.] 
tum-aite,** s.m. Bath, bathing-place. 
tumarraid, s. Deray, hubbub, rummage. 
tum-dhias,** s.f. Bushy ear of corn. 
tumhartaich, s.f. Equivocation. 
tum-ionad,** s.m. Bath, bathing-place, 
tumta, past pt. of tum, Dipped, immersed,bath- 
ed, steeped. 
tum-tam,* s.m. Great hesitation, 2 Stupid con- 
duct, 3* Hum-drum. 
tumte, see tumta. 
tunaich, see tuinich. 
tunaiche, s.m. Lodger, resident, inhabitant. 
tunaidh, see tuinich & tuineadh. 
tung,* s. Enclosed family burial-ground, 
- tomb, vault— Argyll. 
tunga, see tuama. 
tungach,(MS) a. Sepulchral. 
tungaid,* s.f. Stratagem, notorious lie. 
each,* -eiche, a. Full of stratagems or 
notorious lies. 
tüugaidh, -e, a. Moist— W. of Ross. 








tuugais, see tuam. 


tungarlagh (AF) s. Old cow, 

tuun,** v.a. Tun, barrel. 

tunna, chan, s.m, Ton. 2 Tun, butt, barrel. 

tunnach, a, Abounding in small casks. 2 Like 
a small cask, 

adh, s. m. Beating, dashing, lashing, 
booming of waves against a ship—Dain lawn 
Ghobha. 

tunna-chis, s. Tonnage. 

tunnadair, -ean, s.m. Funnel, filler, £2 Tunning- 
dish, tunner. 

—eachd, et Tunning, barrelling. 

tunnag, -aig, -an, s.f. Duck. 2 in derision, Short 
legged woman. 3tf Hobbling woman. 4 See 
tonnag. T. fhirionn, a drake. 

ach,-aiche, q«. Abounding in ducks, 2 

Like a duck. 

-dhearg-cheannach,T s.f. Pochard, dun 

bird, see lach-mhasach. 

—- dhubh,TT s.f. Common scoter—oidemia 

nigra. 

fhiacailleach,(AF) s.f. Goosander. 

fhiadhaich, s.f. Wild duck. 

gùleust, f s. f. Velvet scoter, see lacn 

dhubh. 

-- riabhach, T s.f. Wild duck, see lach. 

tur, -üir, s.m. Sense,understanding,intelligence, 
penetration, sagacity, genius, 2 Intention, 
inclination, desire. 3 Mind. 4 Meauing. 5 
(AC) Earth. 6**Petition. 7**Heaviness. 

Cha duine gun t. a dheanadh e, it is not a 





























Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


983 


turbaideach 


man without genius that could accomplish it 
gliocas agus t., wisdom and understanding i 
inntinn 18 t. nam fear, the mind and acuteness 
of the men ; is e do th, a bha beachdail, 
how observant your mund was ! 

tur, -uir, s.m. Gaelic spelling of tour, Ghabh 
sinn tur is tàmh is fois, we travelled and toot 
our rest. 

tur, pr.pt. a’ turadh, v.a. Devise, invent, con- 
trive, frame. Air athuradh le Seumas, in- 
vented by James ; a thuras ole, that devises 
evil; a thür oibre ealanta, to deviseor plan 
cunning works. 

tur, pr.pt. a’ turadh. v.n, Get fair, as weather. 

tur, -üir, $.m. Tower, fortification, turres, fort, 
castle. T. Bhabeil, the tower of Babel; trath 
dh’ fhasas sean gach t. is talla, when every 
tower and hall grows old. 

tur, (i.e. gu tur) adv, Entirely, altogether. Is 
t. a dh’ fhairslich e ort ! how completely it has 
defied you ! tha e mar sin gu t., it is absolute- 
ly so; Struidh e gu t. ar n-airgiod, he has com- 
pletely squandered our money. 

tur, &. Whole, absolute, complete, entire. 2 
Dry, without condiment. Greim t., a dry 
morsel ; aran t.,bread without butter or cheese ; 
buntata t., potatoes and nothing with them ; 
chuir e t. stad air m'/aiteas, he has put a com- 
plete stop to my joy. 

turabal,(AC) (i.e, a’ turabal) pr.pt. Oscillating. 

turach, -aiche, o Towery, having towers, tur- 
retted. 2 Intelligent, ingenious. | fing, 

adh, -aidh, s.m. Towering. 2 Tower-buili- 

turachdach,* -aiche, œ. Without condiment, as 
meal, potatoes, &c. 

turach-air-tharach,tt a. Topsy-turvy. 

turachan,** -ain, s. m. Big-bellied person, 2 
Ranter. 3 Beggar. 

turadan, -ain, -an, s.m. Small heap. 2** see tur. 
raban. 

turadh, -aidh, s.m. Fair or dry weather. Tha 
e'na th., it is fair; rinn e t., it faired, tha 
rain ceased ` am bheil e ’na th. ? or am bhail 
an t. anu P is it fine ? 

turag,ts.f. Trifling illness, as of a child—Ar- 





turaich,** va. & n. Tower, build towers, 2 
Fortify with towers. 3 Invent, devise. 

turaid, -e, -ean, s.f. Turret, tower. 

each,-eicho, a. Turreted. 2 Like a turret, 

— —— -faire, s.f. Watch-tower, 

türail,-e, o. Sagacious, shrewd, sensible, inge- 
nious, intelligent. 2 Acute, skilful. 3 Atten- 
tive, heedful. Gach duine toileach t., every 
willing, skilful man. 

turainn, s.f. Fit of sickness. Fhuair e an drech 
th., he has a bad fit of sickness. 

each, -etehe, a. Delicate in health,liable 

to sickness. 

— ———iche, s.m. Invalid. 

turait, see turaid. 

each, see turaideach. 

turalachd, s.f.ind. Sagacity, shrewdness. 2 
Skilfulness. 3 Attentiveness, 4(MS) Quali- 
fication, 

turam, see turram. 

——— aich, see turraban. 

turaman, -ain, -an, s.m, See turraban 

achadh, -aidh, see turraban. 

turamanaich, see turrabanaich. 

turaraich, s.f. Rattle. 2 Disorder. 

turas, -ais, -an, see turus. 

turasgair, see turasgar, 

turasgar,** s.m. Seaweed. 2 Shellfish. 

turbaid, e, -ean, s.f. Turbot. 2 Halibut—-Lewis. 
3 Rhomboid. 

——--—each, M Rhomboidal, 








Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


turbhaidh,** s f. Mi«chance, misfortune. 

turcach,f -aich, s. m. "Turkey, see coileach- 
Frangach. 

turca-laich, st Nodding, sudden jerk from the 
sensation of sleep—Sar-Obair. 

turcaid, -can, s.f. see turcais. 

turcaire,T s.m. Turkey, see coileach-Frangach. 

turcais.* -ean, 8.f. Tweezers, pincers. 2 Smith's 
hoof-pincers. (durcais. ) 

turcan-mara, see turcar-mara 

turcar-mara,( AF) s. Sea-snail, pe,iwinkle. 

turcbar,** air, s.m. Riches, wealth. 

tur-chadail,** v.n. Slumber. 

tur-charlal, -ail, s.m. Slumber, dozing. 2 Leth- 
argy. drowsiness, An sgrios a’ tur-chadal, 
their destruction slumbering. 

—ach,** a. Slumbering, dozing. 2 Leth- 

argic. 3 Causing drowsiness. 

tur-chomhrac,** -aic, s.m Assembly. 

tur-chuil,(MS) v.a. Abominate. 

tur-dhiubhair,** s. Contradistiuction. 

tur-fhuath,ffs. Animosity. 

¢tur-ehabhadh,** -aidh, s.m. Iniquity. 

tür-ghabhail,** $. f. Course, journey, most fre- 
quently applied to the sun's course, 

tur-vhabhalach,** æ. Iniquitous, guilty. 

turgain, see turguin. 

turguin, -ean, s.m. Destruction. Gu'n dean thu 
art., that thou canst effect our destruction. 

turguineach, -eiche, a. Destructive. 

turlach, -aich, -aichean, s.m. Large fire, bonfire, 
conflagration. 2 Bulky or squat person. A" 
Ugly head of hair. 5** see turloch. T. na 
féisde, the banquet-Rre. 

turlach,tf -aich, -aichean, s.m. Heap, great 
quantity. 

turlas, s.m. Cupboard— Perthshire. 

turloch, -oich, -an, s.m. Brook. 2 Ground cory- 
ered with water in winter and dry in summer. 

tur-lom, v.n. Make quite bare. 2 Strip naked. 
2 Glean. Cha t. thu t’ fhion-lies, thou skalt 
not glean thy vineyard. 

tur-lom,** a. Quite bare, naked. 

adh,** -aidh, s. m. Making quite bare, 
stripping. 

turn, -uirn, [ttp]. -an,] s.m. Turn, job, feat. 2 
**Char. 3 Bent. T. odhar, a mite, one-twelfth 
of a penny ; droch th., a bad job. 

Tturnadh, -aidh, sam, Escape. 2 Spinning-wheel. 

türnaiche, s.m. One employed in jobs. 

turnair, -ean, E.A, see tuairnear. 

fturnamh, -aimn, s.m. Descent. 2 Humiliation. 
3 Rest. 

tur-óinnseacbh,** Ach, s.f. Mere idiot. 

turr,* v.a, Rock hither and thither. 

turr,* s.m. Tomb, large heap. 

turraban, -ain, s.m. Rocking motion of the body 
when sitting. 2 Grief. 3* Vibration, oscilla- 
tion. 4 Nodding as in sieep. 5 Moving. 

turrabanaich, e, s.f Constant rocking or moving 
of the body. 2 Nodding, act of nodding or 
shaking. 3**Hesitancy. A’ t—, pr.pt. of turr- 
abanaich, 

—-——, pr.pt. of turrabanaich, v. n. Nod, 
move, rock, shake. 2 Vibrate, oscillate. 

turraban-nan-tunnag, s.m. (lit. the waddling of 
the ducks) Old Highland dance. 

turrach, (DMK) 8. m. The craving for tobacco— 
W. coast of Ross. 

rurra-chadail, see tur-chadail. 

turra-chadal, -ail, -an, s.m. see tur-chadal. 

turra-chadalacb, -aiche, a. see tur-chadalach. 

turrachd.a], see tur-chadal. 

turradan, Arran for turraban. In Shiskine they 
say, ait thurrachdain, shaking. 

turra ih, (CR) -aidh, sm. Surprise, coming or at- 
tempting to come upon one unawares -Skye. 








Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


984 


Ge ainmeach 


turrag, -aig, -an, s.f. Accident mishap. 2 Ad- 
venture, 3**Confliet, 4**Wench. Srt Slight 
illness, i 

ach, -aiche, a. Accidental, unlucky. 

turraig,* s.f. Stool, in ridicule. 2**Push, thrust. 
Aig do th., at stool. 

turraim, see turraban. 

turraing,tt s.f. Turn of illness. 





turram, -aim, -an, s. m. Soft sound, murmur, 


whisper, low whispering noise. An raineach 
ri t. ’sa ghaoith, the fern whispering in the 
wind ;tha e 'na th. suain, he i$ 1n sound sleep. 

turramain, v. see turvabanaich. 

turraman, see turraban. 

-——— ——àich, see turrabanaich. 

tur-rannsachadh, -aidh, s.m. Analysis. 

tur-rannsachail,** a, Analytical. 

tur-rannsaich,** v.a. Analyze. 

turruraich, s.f. Twittering. 2 Warbling,"purl- 
ing noise—Mac Mh. Alasdair. 

tùrs, (for tuirse) Bidh ar marbhtach le garbh 
thùrs ann, there will be destructive slaughter 
and (with) deep sorrow.—Duanaire, p. 159, 
Garbh is often used to signify rough tothe 
senses or feelings. 

tùrsa, s.f. see tüirse. 

ch,* -aiche, «, see tùirseach. 

türsachd,** see tüirseachd. 

türsadh, see tuirse. 





tursarain,S s. Lesser stitchwort—stellaria gram- . 


Hw 2** Greater stitch wort—stellaria holos- 

ed. 

turseair, s.f. Equipage. 

tursgan, s.pl. Implements. ~ 

turtan,** -ain, s.m. Sod, turf. 

turtur, -uir,ff an, s.f. Turtle. 2 Turtle-dove 
—columba tutsur. A thabhartas de thurtur- 
aibh, his offering of turtles. 

turturach, a. Of, or pertaining to, turtles or 
turtle-doves. 

tu-ruidh ! int. Call to a cow or calf—W.of Ross. 

tururaich, see turaraich. 

turus, -uis, -an, s.m. & f. Journey, voyage, expe- 
dition, travel, course, occasion. Tha 'n t. mér, 
the journey is great ; chriochnaich mi mo th,, 
I have finished my journy ; t. mhath leat, @ 
good journey to you; t. shoirbheasach, a pros- 
perous journey. 

turus&ch, -aiche, a. Making frequent journeys. 

4»2 Of, or pertaining to, a journey. 3 Travelling 
much. 

—  ———, -aich, s.m. see turusaiche. 

— — — d, s.f.ind. Travelling, pilgrimage. 2 Pe- 
destrianism. 

turusaiche, an, s.m. Traveller, pilgrim, pedes- 
trian. 2(MS) Vagabond. 

turusan, -ain, s.m. Traveller, pilgrim. 

turus-cuain,(AH) s.m. Voyage. 

turusgar, s.m. Giblets, equipage. 

türusgar,$-air, s.m. The seaweed grapes—sat- 
gassum vulgare or bacciferum. 

tus, Dis, s.m. Beginning, the beginning, com- 
mencement, origin, 2 Front, van, as of an 
army.  Eilidh, t, ar cràidh, Helen, the source 
of our severe affliction ; air t. an airm, in the 
van of the army ; air a th. is air a thoiseach, 
first and foremost ; '8 e t. a’ ghliocais eagal 
Dhé, the fear of God is the beginning of wis- 
dom ; air t. m' aimsir bha mi baoth, in the be- 
ginning of my life I was foolish. 

tusa, emphatic of tu 

tüsach, -aiche, a. Precedent. 

tùsachd, s. f. Previousness. : : 

Mem id -e, a. Primal, originary, original, radi- 
cal. 

tüs-ainm, -ean, s.m. Patrony mic. 

tus-ainmeach,** a, Patronymic. 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 2 





" 
4 





tasair 


tisair, s.m. Beginner. 

tüsalachd, s.f. Originality. 

tùsanach, -aich, s.m. Native. ^ 

tüsanaich,(MS) s.pl. Aborigines. 

ttusarnach,** -aich, s.m. Parricide. 

tusbailteach, see susbailteach. 

tusg,-uisg, see to 

—ach, see toszach. 

tusgairn, s.f. Fiction. [** says f.] 

tusgarnach, -aich, s.m. Libeller. 2 Story-teller. 

ftusgarnadh, -aidh, s.m. Fiction. 

tis-ghuothach, -aich,-aichean, s.f. Preliminary. 

t(h)usgus ! inf. Dairymaid’s call to an unruly. 
cow—Suth’d. 

tus-imeachd,**s.f. Ante-ambulation,antecedence. 

tus-ionad, -aid, -an, s.m. Anteriority. 

tuslang, -aing, s.m. Wrestling. 

ftuslog, -oig, -an, s.f. Heap, little jump. 

ttusmet,t s. Parturition. 

tüs-mhuiuntir,* s.p/. Aborigines. 

tusornachd,** s.f. Whispering. , 

tut ! čut. Expressive of cold. 2 Inticating im- 
patience. 

tat, -ùit, -an, 8. m. Stink, stench. 
vix audibilis, 

tat, v.n. Stink, stench. 

tutach, -aiche, a. ,Stinking, 2 Breaking wind 

[ , silently. 

*ühtach, -aich, see dùdach., 

tutag,** -an, s. Suds. 

tutag ! int. Expressive of cold. 

tutagaidh ! int. Expressive of cold. 

tutagan,** s. Suds. L 

tataiche, comp. of tutach. 

fütair,* s.m. Stinker, 2 Dunghill, 3 (MS) Bad- 
ger. 

tuthag, -aig, -an, s.f. Patch, clout. 

ach, -aiche, a, Clouted, patched. 

achadh, -aadh, s.m Vai ching. 

achd, s.f. Patchedness. 

aich, v.a. Patch, piece, cobble. 2 Vamp. 

tuthadair, see tughadair, 

tuthadh, see tughadh. 

tuthagaich, see tuathagaich. 

tùthan (DMK) s.pl. Long rafters laid across 
the couples m the roof of a house—Caithiiess. 
see taobhan. 

tuthan, -ain, sf. Slub. 

tutht, see tat. 

-——ach, see tütach. 


2 Crepitus 

















U u 


u, the 18th, letter of the Gaelic alphabet now in 
use, called ur, yew-trea, 

It has three sounds—(1) long, like oo in 
moon, as, tur, a tower; stùr, dust. (2) short, 
like u ia push, as, ur, a child ; urram, honour. 
(3) short and obscure, like win rut, as, mur, 
uf not. | 

u Á int, Expressive of surprise, disappointment, 

c 


ua, prep. From, out of. For ite use see o, prep. 

fua, s.m. & f. now ogba. 

uabairt, -e, -ean $.f. Expulsion, prov. 

— ————each, -eiche, a. Expelling. 

uabhais, gen.siny. of uabhas (uamhas) 

uabhann, see uamhann. 

uabhannach, see uamhannach. 

uabhar, -air, s.m. Pride, insolence, bluster, 
vain-glory. 2**Pomp. 3**Heat. 4* Extreme 
ride. Air son an uabhair, for their pride; 
uchd-uabhair mhallaicht^, the cursed proud. 


ys5 


uaibhreach 


uabharach, -aiche, a. see uaibhreach. 
uabharr,** a. Proud, haughty, insolent. 
ging. 3 Terrible. 
u&hhas, see uamhas, 
ach, see uamhasach, 
uabheist,* sea uadh-bheist, 
uacar, Arran for uachdar. 
fuacha, prep. (ua+iad) see uapa. 


: ? Ra- 
Stoirm u., a raging storm. 





| uachdair, s. Farm-stock, Fo u., under stock-a 


Sar-Obatr. 

uachdar, -air, -an, s.m. Top, surface. 2 Summit 
or upper part. 3 Cream. 4 Upper leather of 
a shoe. 5 Woof of cloth, prov. Air u., on the 
surface ; u. is ìochdar, top anl bottom ; grugh 
is u., curds and cream ; fhuair e làmh an u., 
he got the snastery ; &' tighinn an u., coming to 
the surface, budding, as lint, potatoes. de: an 
u. mu seach, alternately up and down; an u., 
above, aboard. 

uachdar,§ -air, -an, $.m. Bog-violet, see mothan. 
2** Mountain sanicle. (pers of shoes. 

uachdarach, -aich, s.f. Leather suitable for up- 

uachdarach, -aiche, @ Upper, higher, upper- 
most, highest. 2 Abounding in cream, 3* 
Producing cream, 4* Superficial. A’ Bheall- 
tuinn u., cream-producing May. 

uachdarachd, s.f. State of being superior or 
higher, supremacy, superiority. O 'nu. gus 
an iochdarachd, from top to bottom. 2* Sur- 
face, top. 

uachdaraiche, cemp. of uachdarach. 

uachdaran, -ain, -an, s.m. Governor, ruler,chief, 
superior, prince. Nimi e 'na u., I wil! make 
him @ prince. 

uachdarasachd, s.f. Government, sovereignty, 
principality, supremacy,dominion, rule. Bibh- 
eadh u. aca, let them have dominion;; bithidh 
u. agad air thou shalt have dominion over him. 

uachdar-na-troidhe, s.m, Taben. 

uachdrach, s»e uachdarach, 

uachdraiche, see uachdaraiche. 

uachdran, see uachdaran. 

-— — —-Achd, see uachdaranachd. 

uadh., (tuath) prefix signifying Dread. 

uadh, -aidh, see uagh. 

uadha, seo uaimh. 

uadhach, see uaghach. 

uadhadh,'see uagkaidh. 

uadhag,(Al) s.t. Sheep-louse—Argyll, 

uadhaiche, s.m. Sub:laer, 

uadharlh, see uaimh. 

uadh-l.heist, -ean, s.m. Monster (fabulous.) 

uadhb-chrith, e s.f. Dread, horror, terror. 

uagh, s.m. **ferrer, dread. 2 see uaigh. 3 
seo uamh-bheist. 

uaghach, -aiehe, a. Full of graves. 2 Full of 
caves. 3"*Dreadful, terrible. 

uaghaich, v.a, Grave, bury. 

uaghaidh,** -ean, s.f. Cave, cavern, den. 

———-20&ch,** a. Fuil of caves or dens. 

uaghan, see uan. 

uagh-bheist, see uadh-bhesst. 

uaibh, prep.pron. (ua+sibh) From you. 2 Want- 
2 by you. 3 From among you. 4 Being your 

aty. 

Tha u. falbh, you had better be gone ; fada u., 
far from you; cuiribb u, na diathan coimh- 
each, put away the strange gods ; eiod tha u. P 
what do you want ? thigibh u., come forward 
—expression of defiance. 

uaibhreach, -eiche, œ. Proud, haughty, vain- 
glorious, arrogaut. 2 Spirited. 3** Airy, su- 
perb, gorgeous. 4* Extremely proud. Gu h- 
u. proudly ; piuthar u. reul nan speur, the gor- 
geous sister of the stars—the moon}; Alasdair 
u., Aleranier the great. 5**Insolent. 

-—, -eich, sm. Proud, a 





LL "d i j) 


L d V A i 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


^E LL NO c h 


uaibhreach 


person. Tha Dia a’ cur an aghaidh nan u., 
God resisteth the proud. 

uaibhreachas, ais, s.m. Pride, pomp,vain-glory, 
haughtiness, arrogance. 2 Insolence. 3** 
Great haughtiness, extreme degree of pride or 
vain-glory. Lan uaibhreachais 'nad shaothair, 
full of pride in thy work. 

uaibhreachd, $.f. see uaibhreachas. 

uaibhreas, -eis, s.m. see uaibhreachas. 

uaibh-se, emphatic of uaibh. 

uaidean, s.m. Plough-handle or stilb, 

uaidh, see uaith. 

uaidne, -an, $.f. Stilt of a plough. 

uaigealta, a. Weird, eerie, lonesome, 

uaigealtachd, s.f. Loneliness, eeriness. 

uaigealtas, -ais, s.m. Loneliness, eeriness, 

uaigh, -e & uaghach, pl. uaighean & uaghaich- 
ean, s.f. Grave, tomb, sepulchre, 2 Den,cave, 
cavern, Gus an carar mi 'san u., till J am in- 


uaigneach, -eiche,a. Lonesome, solitary, retired. 
2 Secret, private. 3 Deserted, retired. 4 Dull, 
melancholy. Duine u., @ reserved person ; àite 
u., œ solitary or remote place ; gnothach u., 
private business, a private message ; bile nan 
sruthan n., the banks ef the lonely streamilets. 

uaigneachd,* see uaigneas. 2* Retired, morose 
disposition. 

uaigneas, -eis, s sa. Secrecy, privacy,solitariness, 
lonesomeness. 2* Retired manners or habits. 
Thug e air u. e., he took him aside (into a pri- 
vate place) ; tha 'n t-aran adh’ ithear an u. 
taitneach, bread eaten m secret i$ pleasant ; 
‘uaigneas-san, his retired manner or disposi- 
tion ; an u., in secret, in Q retired place ; mar 
thonn an u., like a lonely wave. 

uaignidh, æ. see uaigneach. 
— ———— each, see uaigneach, 

eag, see uaigneas. 

fuaigh-reir,** a. Having arbitrary sway. 

tuaigh-reirs,** s, Arbitrary sway. 

fuail, si Wail, howl, lament. 

uailean,(DMK) 8.p/. Stilts or handles of a plough 
—Cuithness. 

uaill, -e, s.f. Vanity, pride, vain-glory. 9 Dig- 
nity, coneeib, foppery, fame, pomp. 3 Boast- 
ing, 1**Howl. OSttNobility, Na dean u. as 
an là màireach, boast not of to-morrow ; Càit’ 
am bheil aoblrar uaille P? where is there cause 
for beasting ? a dh’ àrdaich an t-ionnsachadh 
chun u., whom learning has raised to dignity. 

uaill, a. Prowd, famous. 

uaille,** s. Crest. 

uail'each, -eiche, œ. see uallach,” 

uailleag, -eig, -an, s.f. Conceited female. 

uaillcagach,tt &. Like a conceited female. 

uailleagan,tt s.m. Dandy. ^*^ 

uaillealachd, s.f. Loftiness. 

uaillean, -ein, s.m. Fop, coxcomb. 

uailleanachd, s,f. Foppery. 

uaillear,* -eir, -ean, s.m. Fop, spark.  [* gives 
nom. -eir, gen. -e.] 

uailleart,** -eirt, see ulfhart, 

ach,** a. see ulfhartach. 

uailleil, -e, a. Haughty, vain. 

uaill-fheart, -eirt, -an, s.m. Illustrious deed. 9 
see ulfhart, 

-—ach, -aiche, «, Of noble virtues or 

e jievements. 2 Ostentatious. 8 see ulfhart- 

acDe 


~— --- 











--—achd, s.f. see uaill-fheartaich. 

uaill fheartaich, s.f. Howling, yelling. 

uaillich,** v.a. Elevate. 2 Make proud or vain. 
3 Roar, howl. 

uailiire, see uaillear 


uaill-mhiann, -a, s.m. Ambition, fondness for 
rank or distinctiois. 
Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


986 


naipe 

uaill-mhiinuach, -aiche, a. Ambiiioug, foud of 
rank or di:tinction. 

uaillrianach,(MS) a. Aristocratical, 

uaillse, see uaisle. 

uaillseachadh, see uais!eachadh, 

uailisean, see uaislean. 

uaillsich,** see uaislich. 

ean, see uaislean.. 

uaillsichte, see uaislichte. 

uailse, Laggan for uaisle. 

uaim,** s.f. Embroidery. 2 see fuaim. 
ver’s harness. 4 Union. 

uaimeach,** -miche, a. Solitary. 

uaimh, uamha & e pl. uamhan &-ean, 8. f. 
Den, cave. 2 Hollow. 3 Grave. 4 Grotto. 
Ma ’s carraig no u. do chòmhnuidh, whether & 
rock or a cave be thy dwelling. 

uaimheach, a. Full of caves. 2 Like a cave. 

uaimhgealta, see uxrigealta . 

—— —— — —chd, see uaigeultachd. 

uaimhgealtas, see uaigealtas. 

uaimhinn, -e 8.f. see uumhann.4 

uaimhneach, -eiche, a. Preadful,terrible,horrid. 

uaimhneachd,* s. f. Horriiness. 2 Horrifying 
nature or quality. 

uaimhnich,** v.a. Terrify. 

uain, gen.sing. & n.pl. of uan. 

uain,** s.f. Loan. 2 Pin, peg. 

uainceann, see uainicionn, 

uain’-chnotal, s.m. Crotal sage, (colour.) 

uaincionn, -inn, -ean, see uainicionn, 

uaine, comp. uaine, a. Green. 2 Pale, wan, 
pallid. 3 Livid.. Ogain nam breacan uaine, 
the green-plaided youths. 

uaine, s.f. Green (colour.) 2 Greennocss, livid- 
ness, 3 The gree: sickness. 4 Menstrual 
courses. 5 Safety. 6 Wooden pin. 

uaine, comp. of uaine, 

uaineach,( DU) a.Tedious. Fad an là u., through 
the tedious day. 

uaineachadh, -aidh, s.m. State of turiing green. 
2 State of becoming pale or ghastly. Ag u—, 
pr.pt. of uainich. 

uaineachail,(MS) a. Porraceous, 

uaineachan,* -ain, s.m. see uainealach. 

uainead, -id, ¢.m. Degree of greenness, or of 3 
Paleness, pallidness or wanness, A’ dol an u., 
growing greener and greener. 

uainealach, -aiche, a. Greenish, verdant. 2 Pale. 

—_—_—_—,* -aich, s.m. Wan, pallid person. 

uainealachd,** s.f. Verdure, vreeness, 

uainean, -ein, Am, s.m.dim. of uan. Little lamb. 

uaine-donn, $8.14. Bronze-green (colour.) 

uaine- dorcha, s.m. Olive (colour.) 

uainein, see uanan. 

—— ————each, see uananach. 

uainfheoil, -fheola, s.f. Lamb (i.e. lamb's flesh.) 

uainiceag, -eig, -an, SP, see uainicionn. 

uainich,* v.n. Become green. 2 Become pale. 3 
(Ms) Mould. . 

uainicionn, s.f. Lamb's skin. 

—ach, a. Of, or belonging to, lamb’s 


~ 





3 Wes- 





skins. 

uainn, Diren. Dron, (ua+sinn) From us, 
amongst us. 3 Wanted by us. 4 Missing by 
us. 5 Necessary for us, our duty. Tha tri u., 
we want three, we miss three ; tha u, falbh, it 
is our duty togo ; cha'n el u. ach an ceartas, 
we only want justice ; ciod tha u. ? what do 
we want? 

uainne, emphat, form of uainn, 

tuainnearach, -eiche, see uaigneach, 

tuaiunearas, -ais, see uaigneas. , 

uainneart,f s.m. Bustle. 2 Wallowing. Bade- 
noch. 

uaip,* v.a. Bungle, botch, 

uaipe, prep.pron. (ua+i) From her, off her, 2 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


2 From 


FT 
e 


= m a 





uaipe 


Wanted by her. 3 Missing by her. 
u. ? what does she want ? 

uaipear, -cir, -an, s.m. see uipear. 

uaipe-san, emphat. form of uaipe. 

tuair, adv. see oir. 

uair, -e & uarach, pl. -ean & -eannan, s. f£. Hour, 
any given space of time, 2 Time of day or 
night, a time. 3 Life, one’s life-time, 4 Al- 
loted hour of one's death. 5 Weather. 6 Op: 
portunity,on a time,at another time, one time, 
once, once on atime, occasion. 7 Season. 8 
Rotation. 

Aon uair, one o'clock, one hour; mu u. an 
uaire «iar, about an hour ; leth-uair an déidh 
u. (not an déidh aon u.,) half-past one ; 'dé 'n 
u.atha e P what time is it? mu dha u.,about 
two o' clock ; eadar a h-aon 's a dha, between 
one and two ; u. sam bith, any time ; na h-uile 
u., at ali times ; an u. mu dheireadh, the last 
time ; a’ cheud u., at first, the first time; 'se 
seo m’ u.-sa, this is my turn (or rotation) ; tha 
u. air, he is subject to fils of good humour or 
generosity ; air uairibh, sometimes ; an ceart 
u.. the very time, immediately ; gach u., at ali 
times ; u. eile, at another lime ; u. éiridh iad 
gu néamh, u. théid iad gu doimhne sios, one 
time they mount to the skies, another they sink 
to the abyss;thug mi i an uaigneas u., I brought 
her apart once ; u. a rinn mi sin, once I did 
that ; rinn e sin u. is u., he did that repeat- 
edly ; cia lion u. a thig e? how many ‘times 
will he come * ’na uaireannan, sometimes ; ni 
mi e u. air an u., Z wù? do it immediately ; u. 
mu seach, alternately, in rotation ; an uair 
gàbhaidh, in time of danger ; an u. òir, au- 
rora ; an uair, when ; ’s fhèarr u, de bhean an 
taighe na obair-là ban-dglaich, better an hour 
of the mistress than a da/'s work of the servant 
—the difficulty of getting good domestic ser- 
vants thus seems to have been as great in the 
iv Aba as elsewhere, even in Nicolson's 

ime. 

uairceag,(MS) s.f. Budge. 

ua'reneach, Gairloch for uaigneach., 

uaircheas,** -eis, s.m, Cock-boat. 

uairgnoach, Perth, Strathspey, W. of Ross, Skye 
& Lewis for uaigneach. 

uaireach,(MS) «a. Horal, hourly. 2**Needless, 
useless, insignificant, unimportant, unnecess- 
ary. 3 Capricious. Is u. dhuit, it is needles 
for you ;ni mó is bean u. mise, neitheram 1 
@ woman of no importance ; imrich u., @ cap- 
vicious flitting—leaving a place for no suff- 
cient reason— Inverness district —DC. 

uaireachan,** .ain, s.m. Timepiece 

uaireadair, -ean,s.m.Watch, time-keeper of any 
kind. Clag-uaireadair, or u.-cluig, clock; u.- 
gainneimh or u.-gloine, sand-glass ; u.-laimhe 
or u.-póca, watch ; u,-gealaich** or u.-gréine, 
sun-dial ; u.-gaineamhain, sand-glass. 

-———~— each, a. Abounding in, or pertaining 
to, time-pieces. 

—iche, -an, 
maker. 

uaireiginn,* adv. Sometime, once, Uair no u., 
sometime or other. 

uaireil, -e, a Hourly, by the hour, horary. 

uairgneaeh, N. Uist (Gairloch—DU) for uaig- 
neach. 

uairibh, (air)adv. Sometimes, at times. 

uair làn,** .àin, s.m. Sun-dial, 

uair oir,**s.f, Aurora, morning, 

tuais, see uasal, 

uaiseach,** -ich, -ichean, s.m. Hero. 

uaisle. s.f.ind. Nobility, as of descent, gentility. 
pride, genteel extraction, high birth, gentle- 
manly manners. 2 Liberality, generosity. 


Ciod tha 


s.m. Watch-maker, clock- 





Dig tized by 


IRITE ARIC T AR EI ILIC 
W I E l o LT Li ri Í (H e 
n a 1 = ti d ue "v oe 


987 


uamh 


uaisle, comp. of uasal. 

, contr. for uaislean. 

uaisleachladh,-aidh,s.m. Ennobling,act of ennob- 
ing or dignifying. Ag u—, pr. pt. of uaislich. 

uaisleachd,* s.f. Nobility, gentility. 2 Pride. 
3 Dignity of port or miud. 

pnis cm -eid, s.m. Degree of nobility or gentil- 
ity. 

uaislean, s.pl. Nobles, gentry. 

uaislich, pr. pt. ag uaisleachadh, oo, 
exalt, dignify. 

te, past pt. of uaislaich. Ennobled, ex- 

alted, dignified. 

uait, see uat. 

uaith, prep.pron. From him, from it. Ciod tha 
u. P what does he want?? thigeadh e u., let him 
come forward—said in defiance ; ciod a bheir 
là uaith, what a day may bring forth ; ma’s 
tu ath’ ann, is tu chaith u., 1f it 18 you, how 
you have shrunk—NGP gives ** chaidh y, '' 

uaithe, see uaipe. 

uaitheantach, -aiche, a. Ablative 

tuaithne,l s. Puerperium. 

fuaithne,* s.m. Pillar, post. 

uaith-san, emphat. form of uaith. 

uallach, -aiche, a. Cheerful, airy, gay, giddy. 2 
Conceited, proud, vain,vain-glorious. 3 Freak- 
ish, fantastic. 4 Proud, stately, noble. 6 
Sportive, playful, lively, ostentatious,gallant. 
6 Light, indifferent as to weight. 7**Ostenta- 
tious. 8**Gallant. 9 Light-headed. 
Thog e gu h-u. e, he raised it so lively ; duine 
u., @ light headed person. 

uallach, -aich, pl. -an & -aichean, s.m. Burden, 
load. 2 Charge, assigned task, responsibility, 
3 Oppressive weight. 

U. an ni sin ormsa, the charge of that thing 
to me; a’ giùlan uallaich taighe Ioseiph, bear- 
ing the charge of the house of Joseph ; chan u, 
sin air, that isno hard task to him; u. a 
ghnothaich, the responsibility of that affair ` 
is aotrom an t-u. mo ghràdh, my love ie o 
light burden; fo u. le misg, overcome with 
drunkenness ; is trom an t-u. an aois, age ts œ 
heavy burden ; ro-uallach, an overcharge. 

uallach, -aich, s.m, Conceited fellow, fop. 

adh, -aidh, pm. Loading, act of load- 
ing or burdening. 2 Encumbering. 3 Mak- 
ing conceited or arrogant. 4 Becoming con- 
ceited,*arrogant or airy. Ag u—, pr. pt. of 
uallaich. : 

uallach^g, -aig, -an, 8.f. Coquette, arry, conceit- 
ed girl. 

die osa -ain, -an, S. m. Little load.  2** 
Showy stripling. 3**Gallant. 4**Coxcomb, 
fop, Swaeggerer. 5t{Infant. 6 dim. of uallaeh 

uallachas, ais, s.m. Cheerfulness, gaiety, airi- 
ness. 2 Conceit, vanity, pride, stateliness, fop- 

ery. 3 Freakishness. 4 Sportiveness. 5}f 
SE 6 rarely, Lewdness. 7**Gallantry. 

uallachd,* s.f. Extreme conceit, vanity, alriness 
or ostentation. 

uallaien, pr. pt. ag uallaehadh, v.a. & n. Load, 
burden. 2 Encumber. 3 Daub, 4 Make con- 
ceited. 5 Become conceited. 

— ——te, past mt, of uallaich. Loaded, burden- 
ed. 2 Encumbered. 

uallair,* -ean, s.m. Coxcomb. 

uam, prep. pron. (ua--mi) From me 2 Wanted 
by me, 3 At a distance from me. Fan u., 
k2^p at a distance from me ; gu 'm bu fada sin 
bhuam, be that far from me; tha sin u., I 
want that. 

uamh, -aimh, -annan, s.f. see uaimh. 2* Savage, 
terrible fellow. Cha'n ’eil ann ach u. dhuine, 
he is only a savage of a fellow. e 








Ennoble, 





| IR AARIA es ARADO A IER 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


LINOIS AT 


uamh 


uamh,** -aimh, s.m. Ornament. 

uamha, see uaimh. 

uamhach, see uaimheach. 

uamhag,t s.f. Sheep-louse, sheep-ked, tick— 
metaphagus ovinus— North * 

ach, -aich, æ. Full of sheep-lice. 

uamhaich,(MS) v.a. Encave. 

wambaidh, see uainih. 

—each, see u2imheach. 

Tuamhain, -e, -ean, s.f Bake-house. (Eng.oven.) 

uamhainn, gen. sing. of uamhann, 

—each, see uamhannach, 

uamhais, gen. sing. of uamhas, 

uamhal, s.m. Sheep-ked. 

uamhalt, -a>a@. Lonely, solitary. 

uamhaltachd, st Loneliness, solitariness, 

uamhann, -ainn, s.m. Dread, terror, dismay,hor- 

bror, amazement. Righ nan u., the king of ter- 
rors; u. a’ bhlàir, the terror of battle ; tuitidh 
u. orra, @mazement shail fall on them. 

, a. see uamhannach. 

ach, o Terrible. 2 Horrible. 3 As- 
tounding. 4 Shocking. Le tartar u. na mara, 
with the dreadful noise of the sea. 

-————achadh,(MS) s.m. Astonishingness, af- 
frightment. 

—achd,** s.f. Amazedness. 

aich,(MS) v.a. Astonish, astound. 

uamhanta,* -ainte, 4. see uamhasach. 

uamharr, -à, @ Dreadful, terrible, horrible, 
direful. 2 Shocking, loathsome, abominable, 
repulsive. 3 Atrocious, heinous. 4 Morose, 
gloomy. 5 Proud, arrogant. 6 Excessive. [tf 
says uamharra. | 

wamharrach, see uamharr. 

d, sf. Frightfulness, horror. 2 
Loathsomeness, abominableness. 3 Atrocity, 
4 Moreseness, gloominess. 5 *Heinousness. 
6 Excessiveness, direness. 7** Pride, arro- 
gance, 

uamharraidh, -e, @ see uamharr. 

uamhas, -ais, -an, s.m. Monster. 2 Spectre, ap- 
parition. 3 Dread, horror, fright, terror. 4 
Great quantity, prodigy. 5 Dismay, astonish- 
ment. 6* Horrid deed, atrocity. 7*Deed done 
in a cave. Fhuair iad u. éisg, they gota great 
quantity of fish ; chunnaic iad u., they saw an 
apparition ; u. dhaoine, a large number of 
people. l 

uamhasach, -aiche, o, Terrible, horrible, awful, 
dreadful, shocking. 2 Wonderful, astonishing, 
prodigious. 

-——d, s.f.ind. Terribleness, awfulness, 
dreadfulness. 2 Horribleness, abominable- 
ness, loathsomeness.  3** Admirability. 4* 
Extreme atrocity. 5**Astonishment. 

uamhasaich, v.q. Affright. 

uamh-bheist, -ean, s.m. see uadh-bheist. 

uamh-chreadha,** s. Brick-kiln. 

uamh-chrith, -e, s.f. see uadh-chrith. 

uamhlach, sm Monster. 

uamhlaiih, (DM K) intensitive particle, used to 
qualify the adj. maith, U. maith, exceedingly 
good. In W.of Ross, dc. the term is restricted 
to mvith—uamhasach is the term used to 
qualify dona. 

uamhraidh. -e, œ: Full of caves or dens. 21f| 
Gloomy, fearful. 

——-—-—, adv. Excessively, awfully. 

uamh-rod (rathad),** sm Adit. 

uamn-sheomar,** s. Cell. 

uamhunn, see uamhann., 

— ach, see uamhannach. 

——achaih, see uamhannachadh.. 

aich, sce uamhannaich. 

uam-sa, empha/!. of uim. 

uan, in, s.m. Lamb; 









































r1 
LÀ 


T k f 
L 
rd Lope = " 
` j j lj 
"I t | LT. 
i i ia h 


955 


"bag : 


iHe C SOR. egen A 

uanach, -aiche, œ. Abounding in lambs. 2 Like 
a lamb. 3** Lamb-prodlucing. 

uanachan, -ain, s.m. Lamb, lambkin. 

uanachd,** s.f. Yeaniug, earning. 

uanalach,* -aich, s.m. Lamb's wool. 

uanan, -ain, -an, s.m.,dim. of uan. Little lamb. 
2 Young lamb. 3 Milk coming from a cow for 
several times after calving. 

uananach, œ. Abounding in little lambs. 

uan-Càisge,* s.m. Pascal lamb. 

uan-fheóil, -fheola, s.f. Lamb (flesh.) 

uan leth-aon, s.m. 'Twin-lauib. 

uapa, prep. pron. (uat+iad) From them, away 
from them, from amongst them. 2 Distant 
from them. 3 Wanted by them. 'Dé tha 
u. P what do they want ? tha u. a bhi falbh, 
they had better be gone ; thigeadh iad u., leb 
them come forward —said in defiance, 

uapa-san, emphat. form of uapa. 

uar,Í sm. Waterfall. 2 Heavy shower. 

uarach, -aiche, @ Hourly. 2 Temporary. 

uarach-m'ullaieh, see odharach-mhullach. 

uaraich,(MS) v.a. Quench. 

uaran,** -ain, s.m. Fresh water, 

uarraidh, see uamharr. 

uas,* s.m. College cap used when graduating. g 
**Crown or ornament of silver worn by the or- 
der of poets next to ollamh. x 

uasal, uaisle, o Noble, gentle, well-born. 2 
Genteel, polite. 3 Proud. 4 Elegant, fine. & 
Precious, valuable.  6* Novel, new. 7 Fas- 
tidious. Duin’ u., a gentleman; beanu., d 
lady ; tha e tuille "au, uime, he is too fastidi- 
ous about it ; rinn thu do ghnothach gu h-u., 
you did your business like q gentleman; a char 
uasail ! thou noble ally; os cionn chlach uasal, 
above precious stones ; is ann u. tha an irios- 
lachd, 'tis humility that (e noble. 

uasal, -ail, pl. uaislean, s. m, Gentleman. 


(fuaran) 


. Nobleman. Uasail lsir! uasail ionmhuinn ! 
dear sir ! 

uasalach, -aiche, gd. Genteel, graceful in beha- 
VlIOUF. 


uasal-ghniomhach, -aiche, a. Acting genteelly. 

uaslaid,** s.f. Gentleness. 2 Redemption. 

uat, Diren. Dron, (uat+thu) From thee. 2 Want- 
ed by thee. 3 At a distance from thee. Tha 
u. a bhi falbh, you had better be gone ; tha w 
a dheanamh, you had better do it ; 'dé tha u. P 
what do you want 1 

uat ! int. Away with it ! 

*uath, s.m. Dread, terror, : 

uath,$? s. Old Gaelic name for hawthorn (sgith- 
each geal) 2 Earth. 8 Small number. 4 
Retirement. 

fuath,** a. Solitary, alone, single, lonesome. 2 
Terrible. 

uatha, prep. pron. (uat+iad) From them. 2 
Wanted by them. 3 Retirement from them. 
Uatha-san ceannaichidh sibh, from them ye 
shall buy ; 'dé tha u.? what do they want 1 

uathail,** æ. Solitary, single. 

uatha-san, emphat. form of uatha 

uathbhas, see uamhas. 

—— ———ach, see uamhasach. 

uathmhorachd,(MS) s.f. Abominableness& 

uathrais,(DU) s.f. Violent restlessness. 

uathrais air tharais, Helter-skelter. 

ub ! ub ! ubub ! int. Expression of aversion or 
contempt. 

ub,(AC) gen. uib & uibe, pl.uibe, uibean,s. Spell, 
charm, incantation, superstitious ceremony. 
(also ob) 

uba, see ub. 

ubag,* -aie, -an, s.f.,dim, of ub. Enchantment, 
incantation, 2 Charm, spell, superstitious 
ceremony. 


na t Ü re 
n 1 = ef, A oh Ps 

| | d Bi ki ke, a [| IT 

= ^ W l xal h, 


s Ëm =x xc 
1 EC A 
| LJ 3 EN 
| Ip e 
CO E 


| ^NI p ARADA ged. 
4 L  — i mW Ec [ A 
br | 3 E ti "LE Ww 


ùbhla, see übhladh. 


weagacn 


uba:;ach, -a'che, a. Skilied in charms,enchant- 
ments or incantations. 2**Hnchanting. 3 Su- 
perstitious. 4** Likea charm. Cuach u., à 
charmed cup. 

ubagaich,** v.a. Subdue by charms or spells, 
enchant. 

ubagaiche,** s.m.' One who subdues by charms 
or philtre. 

ubagail,* pr.pt. of ubaig. Enchanting, 

ubaid, s.f. Pulpit. 

ubaidh, s.f. see ubag. 

ubaig, pr.pt. ag ubagail, v.a. Enchant. 

ùbairt. (Oi )s.f. Moving heavy articles. 2 Bustle. 

ubarrail,* see übrai:l. 

- ————-each, see tbraideach, 

ubh, uibhe, uibhean, s.m. Egg. 2** rarely, Point 
of à weapon. see ugh. 

ubh ! ubh! int, Expression of surprise, disap- 
pointment or iucredulity. 

ubh! ùbh ! übhan ! int. Alas ! alas ! expression 
of grief or dixgust. Oh dear ! 

ubhach, -aiche, o see ughach. 

ubhagan,* -ain s.m. see uigheagan. 

u'haidh, see ubag. 

u 'hail, -e, a. Oval, elliptical, oviform. 

ubhal,-ail, pl. ùbhlan, s.m. Apple—pyrus malus. 

ach, -aiche, @ Apple-bearing, 

& chruachain, s.m. The knot-like bone at 

the hip-joint, Chaidh a’ bho á ubhal a 

cruachain, the cow dislocated her hup-joint. 

An sgórnain,$.m. The ball of the throttle. 

bhrign, s. Cider. 

fialhain, s.m. Wild apple, wilding. 

-ghort, -oirt, -oirtean, s.m. Orchard, gar- 




















den. 





-ghortach,** a. Abounding in orchards. 
2 Of, or belonging to an orchard. 

———— -gaiuthais, sm. Pine-apple. 

na eoise, 8.7. Ankle. 

—— na leise, s.m. Hip-bone. 

——— ni sùla, s.m. Apple of the eye. 

ubh-bhreitheach, -eiche, a. Oviparous, 

ubh-biiuidheagan, -ain, -an, s.m. Egg-yolk. 

ubh-ehearcall,** s, Ellipsis. 

ubn-chlach, s.f. Oolite. 

unn-e^ruth, -ainn, s.pl. Spawn.. 

ubh-chumpach, -aich, s.f. Oblong spheroid, 

————— ——.—, -aiche, @. Oval, elliptical. 

2 cont, of ubhlan. 

ùbhlach, -aiche, a. Abounding in apples 
or belonging to, apples. 3 Apt to impose a 
fine. 4 Relating to a fine. - 

ubhlath, -aidhean, s.m. Fine, penalty, tribute, 
tax, impost. 2*Fine in church courts, eccle- 
siaatical fiue, Cuirear u, air, he shall be fined. 

übh!an, n.pé. of ubhal. 

ubh-mhial,((AF) s. Nit. 

ubhtraid,(DC) s.f. Service road in a township, 
especially one branching off a main-road— 
Uist. see àdrathad. 

ubraid, -e, -ean, s.f. Dispute, confusion. 

v braideach, -eiche, a. Confused. 

ücadair, see füca:lair. 

eachd, see füca laireachd, 

ucaid,** s.f. Occasion, 

ucain,** s.f. Harshuess., 

ücair, see fùcadair. 

—-— each l, see fucadaireachd. 

ucas, -ais, s.m, Coal-flsh—gadus vireus. 

uch ! int. Expression of complaint, Oh ! alas! 

uchanaich,** s. f, Sobbing, groaning, sighing. 

uchd, 8.m.ind. Breast, bosom, 
side of a hill. 





2 Of, 


4 *Point, or very time. 


AT bhais—Perthsh,); fag gu u. a Mhorair e, 


Digitized by 


IKI TCDRICT A E à VIE 
Li ri i APL VL 


VSI 


2 Lap. 3 Brow, 
5 Hu- 
manity, clemency, mercy. 6** Intercession. 
U. mo ghaoil, the breast of my love ; ri u. (or 
ri beul) bais, at the point of death —(aig roiun 


uchdail 


leave it to his lordship’s clemency ; a’ tbogail 
an u., ascending the face of the hill; ri u. 

cruadail, braving difficulties ; na h-uchdan, the 
breasts ; u. natroidhe, the instep ; beul ri beul 
is uchd ri uchd, mouth to mouth and breast to 
breast. 





671. Ucas fiadhain. 
ucas fiadbain,§ s.m. Common mallow—malva 
sylvestris. 





672.:\Ucas Frangach. 

ucas Y'rangach,? s.m. Dwarf mallow—malva re- 
tundiflora. 

uchdach, -aich, s.f. Ascent, brae, steep, steep- 
ness. 2 Stomacher. 3 Breast-plate. 4 Ex- 
tension of voice. 5 Clef, in music. 6 Sine of 
an augle, 7* Delivery in speech.  8* Pith, 
energy. 9 Steepfportion of a high-road, short 
steep ascent. 10 Up-hillroad. 11**Meadow. 
1XCR Panting, breathing hard—W. of Ross. 
13(CR) Breast-band, to keep the saddle from 
slipping backwards. 14 Shoulder-bandof a . 
creel— Lewis. E i 

A’ togail na h-uchdaich, ascending the ac- 

clivity ; ’sann aige tha 'n u., how grand his 
delivery ! cha’n "eil uo, aigo dha, he has not 
energy to encounter such œ dificulty ` gun u, a 
dhireadh, without climbing an ascent ;sgoilt i 
an u. phrìseil, she split the precious breastp:ate. 

uchdach, -aich, a. Prominent, 2 Steep, preci- 
pitous. 3 Pectoral, thoracic. 

uchdag,(DU) s.f. Panting. 

— —— —Aail,** a. Acclivious. 2 Convex. 

uchdail, -e, a. Stout-breasted. 2 Erect, high- 
headed. 


-m = "'" S Ile — n me 


uchdall 990 ugh 


fuchdall,** æ. High, erect. 

uchdan, -ain, pl. -àin & an, &.m. Hillock, accli- 
vity. 2 Instep of a foot or shoe. 3 Child's bib 
or pinafore, 4tt Raised bank, terrace, embank- 
ment. 5**Short, steep ascent. 6**Steep por- 
tion of road, up-hill road. 7**Sob. U na 
troidhe, the instep. 

—— ——-àach, a. Abounding in hillocks or steep 
ascents. 2**Steep cr uneven, as a highway. 
3**Sobbing. 

uchdanachadh, -aidh, s.m. Sobbing, sighing, 
groaning. 

uchdanaich,** v.n. Sob, sigh, groan. 

--—,s.f. Frequent sobbing, groaning. 

uchd-aodach, -aich, s.m. Breast-plate, armour 
for the breast,"breast-clothes. 

uchdardach,* a. High-crested. 2 Bold, brave. 3 
Presumptuous. 4 High-breasted. 

——d, s.f. Pomposity, presumptuous- 
ness, pomp. 

uchdas-fiadhain, see ucas-fiadhain. 

uchdas-Frangach, see ueas-Frangach. 

uchd-bhan,** @. Fair-breasted. 

uchd-bheart, s,f. Cuirass. 

ESCH -à, -an, s.m. Stomacher, breast- 

and. 

uchd-crochta, s.m. Hanging-back (of loom.) 

uchd-eudach, see uchd-aodach. 

uchd-éideadh, -idh, -idhean, see uchd-aodach. 

uchd-gheal, a. White-breasted. 

uchd-lar, s. The floor of a kiln round about the 


eye. 

uchd-mhac, -mhic, s.m. Adopted son. 

-—ach, a. Of, or belonging to adoption, 

-—achadh, -aidh, s.m. Adopting, act of 

adopting or affiliating. 2 Circumstance of a- 

dopting. Ag u—, pr.pt. a’ uchd-mhacaich. 

-—achd, s.f. Adoption, affiliation. 2 Fre- 
quent adopting. A’ feitheamh ris an uchd- 
mhacachd, waiting for the adoption. 

————-—àjich, pr.pt. ag uchd-mhacachadh, v. 
a. Adopt as son and heir. 

—— —.—Aàichte, past pt. Adopted. 

uchd-mhacair,** s.m. Adopter. 

uchd ri uchd, Abreast. 

uchd-riomhadh,** s m. Breast-knot. 

uchd.ruadh,** æ. Red-breasted, brown-breasted. 
Am bannal u., the red-breasfed covey. 

uchd-suidhichte, s.m. Standing back (ef loom.) 

Fuchtard,l s. Strumosus, 

ucsa, see ucas.* 

ucsach, a. Abounding in coal-fish. 

ud, demon.adj. That, yon, yonder. Thall ud,over 
there ; am baile ud thall, that town yonder. 

udabac,* -baic, s.m. Porch, out-house. 2 But- 
tress or support,usually of stone, built against 
a wall. 3 Wall about 6 ft. high and 7 ft. or 
8 ft. long, built in front of a main door at a 
distance of about 4 ft. from it to break the 
force of the wind. They were common in the 
north of Skye till quite recently and may still 
be seen in some parts. 4 Backhouse. [üda- 
bac—Uist.] 

udacag, ai, -an, $.f. see coileach-coille. 

udacag-crom-nan-duilleag, see coileach-coille. 

udag, d -aig, an, 8. f. Woodcock, see coileach- 
coille. 

udag,(AH) s.f. Fluster, flutter, stew—Argyll. 

—ach, a. Excitable. 

udagoe, see coileach-coille. 

udail, pr.pt. ag udal, v.a. Cause tototter or 
shake. 3 Remove, cause to remove. 4 Float. 
5 Dangle, shake, toss. 6 *""Oscillate. 7** 
Flounder. 

tidail, -e, a. Inhospitable, churlish, 2 Gloomy. 

udail,* s.m. Churl. i 

udail, see udal. 

















Digitized by 


Aea Rh "T 
dIERNET ARCHIVE 


udiil,** a Wavering. 2 Totterine. 3 Tossinz. 
4 Slow. 5 Inhospitable. 6* Gloomy. Cha br 
u. thu am measz chàich, thou wert not slow 
among the rest. 

udal, -ail, s.m. Distress. 2 Jeopardy. 3 Tossing. 
4 Floating. 5 Moving. dan ling, wavering, 
oscillating, fluctuating, moving to and fro, as 
any light substance in an eddy. U. cuain, dis- 
tress at sa, tossing on the ocean ; cha bhi thu 
air u., yor shall not b» uncared for; cha'n fhaic 
mis’ air u. thu, Z will not ses you a dependant. 
6 State of being ejected. 7* State of being 
tossed from place to place, as a person eject- 
ed. 8 State of being absent. 9 Pensioner on 
the bounty of others, as a person once in good 
circumstances. Ag u—, pr.»t. of udail. 

udalach, -aiche, o. Wavering, tossing, tossed. 3 
Removing. 3 Undulating. 4 Causing distress 
or jeopardy. 5* Tossed from place to place, as 
a person. 

udaladh, see udal. 

ulalaich,(MS) v.a. Curl. 

u lalan, -ain, -an, $.m. Swivel. 2 Swivel of & 
tether. 3 Runner of a cart. 4(DMy) Hinge, 
wooden hinge of a door. Cha chinn cdinn- 
each air cloich an udalain, moss grows mot on 
the oft-turned stone—NGP. 

bere -aiche, o. Pendulous, swinging. 2 

ib. | 

—d, s.f. See-saw. 

udarag, -aig,s.m. Woodcock, see coilleach-coille. 

udan, see rudan. 

udbhail,(MS) s.m. Dregs, dross. 

udbhoil,* see udal. 

each, -eiche, à. see udalach. 

udhaehd,** s.f. Will, testament. 2 Confession. 

üdhar, see odhar. 

udhar, -air, -an, $.m. Boil, ulcer, sore. 2 
Wound. 

——ach, -aiche, a. Afflicted with sores, ulcer« 
ous, sore. 2 Wounded. 

udlaiche, -an, s.m. Stag. 2 (AF) Old hart. 3 
(AF) Ass in its 4th. year. 

udlaidh, -e, a. Gloomy, dark, churlish, morose, 
uusociable, lonely. 

udlan, see udalan. 

———achd,** s.f. Trough of the sea. 

üdrathad, -aid, -aidean, s.f. Free egress and re- 
gress to common pasture. 2 Common road to 
common grazing, peats, &c. U.-mdine, com- 
mon road to à, peat-moss. 

ach, a. Having a road for cattle. 2.0f, 
or belonging to, a cattle-road. 

ud ! ud ! int. No! no! it cannot be, pity, pity. 

uga,(DU) Gairloch for ugan. Cnaimh an uga, 
the collar-bone. 

uga.lh,** -aidh, s.m. Birth. e 

ugan, -ain, -annan, s.m.[& f.] Upper part of the 
breast, fore part of the neck, throat. 3 Col- 
lar-bone— Lewis. Slag (for lag) na h-ugain, 
hollow of the collar bon» ; crith-chiüil air m’ 
u., warbling in my throat, 

ugh, ùigh, -an, s.m. see uth. 

ugh, uigh, uighean, s.m. Egg. U. eireig, a pul- 
let’s egg; u.-nid, à nest-eqq; gealagan uighe, 
the white of an egg; buidheagan uighe, the 
yolk of an egg ; u.-cliath-feannaig, an egg that 
is much under the hen’s usual standard of 
size, as though she had taken up with a hood- 
ed crow !—W. of Ross-shire ; u.-maola-feann- 
aig, isa little egg sometimes laid by a hen, at 
one time popularly supposed to be laid cnce 
in seven years by the cock (cockatrice siory) ; 
u. air Inid eun air Càisg, mur b' eaig an 
fhitheach bithidh am bas—not feannaig as is 
sometimes given, for the latter is not very 
early in nesting but the former is, (McL & 











UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS Al 


=| EN Fi d A Tam ARA r A | mm n. 
Uu [^ LJ r | a Le | H "Ir i-i, Li A 


| 


ugh 
D an!1 give ubh.] | 
ug!iaen. -aiche, a. Oviform, oval. 2 Like an egg. 
3 Full of eges. 4 EHeg-producing. 5 Pointed. 
fuzhaim, -a, -ean, SE see uidheam. 
uzhagau,** -ain, s.m. Custard, pancake. 
ughdain, s m. Knuckle. [Given as “ vulgar ” 
by M3) (for rùdan.) 
üghdur, see ùghdar. 
ughdaireachadh,(MS) s.m. Authorization. 
ùghdar, -air, -airean,'$.m. Author. Oir cha'n e 
Dia u na mi-riaghailt, for God is not the author 
of confusion. 
ach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to, an 
au’hor. 2 Authentic, having an author, 38 
Authoritative. 
achd, s.f. Authorship, authority ,authen- 








tie tv. 

ügh tarachadh, -aidh, s.m. Authorizing, act of 
authorizing. Ag u., pr.pt. of ughdaraich. 

dgndaraich, pr.pt. ag ügdarachadh, v.a. Author- 
ize, empower. 2 **Own, as an anthor. ` 

-—te, past pt. of ughdaraich. Authoriz- 
ed, empowered, authentic. 2 Owned, as a 
book by its author. 

ürh'larail, e a. Authentic. 

ü «üiilaraileachd,** 8.f. Authenticity. 

uzhilaralas,** -ais, s.m., Authenticity. 

ughdirra,* see ùghdar. 

ü:shdarrach,** a. Authoritative. 

trhdatrachd, see ughdarachd. 

ùghdarrais, s.f. Lumber, stuff in one’s way. 2 
Strursgls. (uütrais) 

a hdarras, -ais,s.m-Authority,power, command. 
A’ texgai:g mar neach aig am bheil u., teach- 
ing as one having authority. 

ùghdarrasach, -aiche,a. Authentic, authoritative. 

ugh:Imhail,(Ms) s. Ofal. 

ughpag,( Ms) s.f. Protrusion, 

ùghdrathad, see udrathad. 

ùghtarrais, see ùgh larrais. (ùtrais) 

ugotrail (DC) s.m. Side-road off a high-road. 2 
see u lrathad. 

ugsa, pl. -n & -ichean, &.m. see ucas. 

ugsach, soe ucsach. 

uibs, -achan, s.m. Mass, lump, commonly of 
dough. 2 Bloek of anything, as marble, 3 
Lump of a person. (also ioba) 

uib2acn, .eiche, œ. Lumpish, massive. 2 Round, 

J. globular, rotund, circular. 

—-an, -ain, -an, s.m. Little mass or lump. 

uibeachd,** s.f. Roundness, circularity, globu- 
larity, rotundity. 

uibeag, s.f.,dim, of ub. 

uibh, see uigh. 

uitiheagan, -ain, $.m. see uigheagan. 

uibhir, s.find. Number, quantity, sum. 
A^count, Tha u. is u. aca, they have share 
and share alike ; u. eile, as much again ; 'dé'n 
u.a th’ aun ? what quantity is there ? u. "aa 
ti’ ann, as much as there are ; u. na circe, the 
eqwiva ent (value) of œ hen; na h-uibhir, a 
great numer or quantity; na h-u. de dhaoine, 
a great number of men; u. ri cach, as much 
as 'h» resi ; 'se na h-u,, tt ts so much ; mi fhéin | 
a dh’ fhavtainn na h-u. de dhragh, my getting 
so much trouble—W.H. 1.18. 

uibhireach, s.m. Arithmetician. 

uibhireach, -eiche, a. Numerous. 2¢+ Equal, 
alike. 3(MS) Arithmetical. 

uibaireachd,s.f. Computing, casting up of sums, 
tale, arithmetic. 

uibhir-fhaisneachd,(MS) s.f. Arithmancy. 

uibhreachail, -e, @ Arithmetical, numerous. 
numerical. 

uibhreachan, tt s.m. Abacist, numerator, arith- 
metitian. 

uibhreachau-diine, s.m. Almanac, 








9*x* 


M M M M——— t —— MÀ ——S 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


991 


ùigeach 


uibhseann, see uinaseann. 
—ach, see uinnseannach. 

uideal, s, Flail. 

uileal.** s.m. Unsteadiness, tossing about, wa- 
vering, tottering, moving to and fro, 2** 
Jeopardy. Gun sibh bhi fo u., without your 
being moved or shaken, 

uidealach,** ag. Waverinz, tottering. 2 Causing 
to wave ortotter 3 In jeopardy. 

ùidh, e -ean, et Ford. 2 Part of a stream 
which leaves a lake before breaking into a 
current, slow running water between two 
lochs. 3 Desire, wish 4 Partiality, fondness, 
affection, 5 Hope, expectation. 6 Care, 
heed. 7**Attention, hearing. 8* Intention, 
hope. 9 (DMy) Isthmus. 

Gun u,ri sòlas, without hope of consolation ; 
an obair aans an do chuir mi m’ u, the work 
on which 1 set my intentions. 

uidh, -e, 8./. Degree, step, span, space. 2 Way. 
3Journey. U. air ’n u., gradually ; 's ann 
u. air ‘nu, à thogar an caisteal, the castle ig 
built little by little ; ceann uidhe, destination ; 
aig ceann ar n-uidhe, af our journey's end. 

uidh,** v.a. & n. Favour, countenance. 2 Take 
art. Cha’n u, thu leis, thou shalt not favour 
un. 

uidhe, see uidh. 

uiihea^h 1,(MS) et Gradation. 

uidheam, -eim, -an, $.f. Farniture, 2 Equipage, 
regimentals, uniform,accoutrements. 8 Dress, 
clothes, habiliments. 4 Decoration, 5**Har- 
ness. 6 Order, arrangement. 7 Preparation. 
8 Use, need. 9 Instruments. 10 Rigging. 11 
(AH) Set of sails. 12* Materials, apparatus. 
Fo làn u., in full dress ; fo lan u. Ghàidheal- 
ach, in fuU Highland dress ; dhoanainn sin 
'nam bitheadh an u. agam, I would do that 
if I hal tie materials; u.ghreusachd,shoemak- 
ing tools; u. shaoirsnevchd, joinery tools ; u. 
thogalach, distilling apparatus. 

uidhaamach, -aiche, «. Well-furnished, accou- 
tred or dressed. 2 Provided with materials or 
apparatus, 

o adh, -aidh, s.m. Furnishing, act of 
furnishing witii necessary implements, appa- 
ratus or dress. 2 Arranging, act of arranging. 
3 Preparing. arranging matters. Ag u—,pr.pt, 
of uidheamaich. 

uidheamachd,(Ms) s.f. Qualification. 

uidheamaich, pr. pt. ag uidheamachadh, v. a. 
Equip, furnish with instruments or dress. 2 
Arrange. 3 Prepare. 4 Address. U. thu- 
féin, equip thyself. 

uidheamaichidh, fut. of. oa. of uidheamaieh. 

uidheamaichte, past pt. of uidheamaich. Equip- 
pel, furnished. 2 Arranged. 3 Prepared. 

uidheam-chozaidh,{f s.f. Military accoutrements, 

————- -eic) ,{t's.f. Horse-trappings. 

— m E s.f. Ammunition, 

—— ——— -leapa, s.f. Bedding. 

uidhear, -ir, -an, s.m. Traveller, pilgrim. 

uidh-ghiile, s.m. Footman. 2 Errand-boy. 

uidhis,** v, Adhibit. 

,** &, Adhibition. 

uidhsealaehd, see üisealachd. 

uidhseil, --e, a. see ùiseil. 

uidhsinn,** v.a. Employ. 

üig, -e, pl. -ean & -eachan, $.f. Nook, retired or 
solitary hollow, cave or den, 2* Steep, coni- 
cal rock. 

tuige, s.f. Jewel, precious stone, pebble. 2 Web, 
3 Carded wool for spinning,—hence 4 The 
spinning out of a story or poem. 5 rarely, 
E skill, ingenuity, understanding. 
6 Poem. 








| t'geach, -eiche, a, Abounding in nooks or sali 


Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


uigeach 

tary hollows. 

uigeach,** a. Abounding in jewels or precious 
stones. 2 Like a jewel or precious stone. 

ùigean, -ein, -ean, s.m. Fugitive, lonely wan- 


992 


uil’-ioe 
uile-choitchionnachd, s.f. Universality, 
uile-chomasach, -aiche, a. All-powerful. 
- —-d,** sf. All-sufficiency. 
uile-chruthach, -aiche, a. Omniform. 








derer. 2 see uigeann. | _ | uile-chumhachd, $.f. Omnipotence. 
üigeanach, -aiche, a. Of, or belonging to fugi- | —-——-————ach, -aiche, a. Almighty, omni- 
tives. 2 Like a fugitive. potant, all-powerful. | 


uigeann,** -einn, s.m. Forepart of the neck, 

ùigeanta, -einte, a. Of a retired or unsociable 
disposition, 2 see üigeach. 

üizeantachd, s.f. Gloominess. 2 Unsociableness. 

uighe, see uidh. 

uighe, gen.sing. of ugh. 

uigheach,** Ach, s.m. Traveller. 

uigheagan, s.m. Custard. 2 Ovary. 

üighealachd, s.f. Quality of giving pleasure. 2 
Care“ heed. see aoigheachd. 

uigheam, see uidheam. 

ach, see uidheamach. 

achadh, see uidheamachadh. 

aich, see uidheamaich. 

——aichidh, see uidheamaichidh. 

—-——aichte, see uidheamaichte. 

uighean, n.pl. of ugh. 

uighean-sithein, s. pl. Fairy egg, (beans, nuts 
and seeds. borne across the Atlantic by the 
Gulf Stream with the weed türusgar.) 

üigheil, -e, a. Giving pleasure. 2 Careful, heed- 
ful. 3(DMy) Pleasant to the taste, palatable. 

uigh air ’n uigh, for uich air 'n uidh. 

uighimich, see uigheamaich. 

uighpear,( MS) s.m. Dabbler. 

uilbh,(AF) st Wolf—Suthd, 

uilc, gen.sing. d n.p. of ole. 

uild, gen.sing. & n.pl. of ald. (for allt.) 

uile, a. All, the whole, altogether, quite, every, 
wholly. Tha iad mar sin u., they are all 80 ; 
thainig iad u., they have all come ; tha mi u. 
thoileach, I am quite willing ; a h-u. uair, al- 
ways ; u. air chaochladh, all changed ; u. gu 
léir, altogether, compl-tely, wholly ; a’ choille 
gu h-u. làn duillich,the wood quite fell of foli- 
age ; na h-uile, everyone, all, the whole; chan 
ann am Bòid u. 'tha 'n t-olc, the mischief is 
not all in Bute—NGP. 

uileach,** æ. Universal. 2 General. 

uileachd, s.f.ind. Universality, generality. 2 
Totality. 

uileadh, tt -idh, 3. m. Entirety, completeness. 

uilidh, a. All. Gu h-uilidh, entirely, totally. 

uileann,-inn,uille,uillne & uilne, pl. an, sg El- 
bow. 2 Corner,angle. U. na beinne, the angle 
or corner of the mountain ; air u. nan leac, on 
the corner of the flags; 'nuair a bha e air u., 
when he was embarrassed, on the eve of failing; 
thug iu. gu tuiteam, she bent to fall. 

ach, "aiche, a. Angular, angled. 2** 

Elbowed. 3 Cornered. 

ach, -aich, s. m. Antler, 
branch of à deer's antler.; 

uilear, a. see fuilear. 

uile-bheist, -ean, s.m. Monster, g Wild beast. 
3 Lamprey. 4 Hideous wild beast, Mar u. 
mi-chiallach, like a mad monster 

uile-bheist a’ chuain,(AF) s.m. Sea-serpent. 

uile-bheisteil, a. Monstrous. 

uie-bheannaichte, a. Truly blessed, all-blessed. 
2fT Al!-holy. 

üile-bheothachail,** æ. All-cheering. 

uile-bhreftheach, -aiche, a, All- judging. 

nile-bhuadhach, -aiche, a. All-victorsous, all- 
triumphant. 

uile-chaithteach, ff a. All-consuming. 

uile-chaochlaideach, a. All-changing. 

uile-chinnteach, -eiche, a. All-certain, unerring. 
2 All-sufficient. 

uile-ehliuiteach, tt a. All-praised, 

ile-choitchionn, a. Universal. 








E 





2 Lowest 





D 


| 
vaso CAE MEE m 
d = zt i — Fu mE Lgs E 
k LN ARCHIV 
— 1 — LI 3 Të 1 — 


uile-chuthaichte, a. All-enraged. 
uile-dhiongmhalta, o All-sufficient. 
uile-fhaicsinneach,** œ. All-seeing, omniscient, 
uile-fbaicsinneachd, st Infinite vision, omni- 
science. 
uile-fhiosrach, a. All-knowing, omniscient. 
uile-fhiosrachd, s.f. Omniscience., 
uile-fhoillseachail,tf a. All-discovering. 
uile-fhradharcach, a. Omniscient, all-seeing. 
uile-fhuathach, {tf a. All-abhorred. 


| uile-ghlic, a. All-wise. 


uile-ghliocas,"* -ais, a. Infinite wisdom. 


| uile-ghlormhor, a. All-glorious. 


uile-ghrasmhor, o. All-gracious. 
uile-iomlanachd,** s.f. All-sufficiency. 
uile-làthaireach, o Omnipresent. 
uilc-lathaireachd, s.f. Oranipresence. 
uile-léirsinneach, a. Omniscient, 
uile-léirsinneachd,"* s.f. Divine perfection of 
seeing all things, ommiscience. 
uile-mhaitheasach, a. All-good. 
uile-mhaslaichte,TI a. All-disgraced. 
uile-mhath,H a. All-good. 
uile-mhathasach, see uile-mhaitheasach. 
uile-mhillteach,** a. All-consuming, all-devour- 
ing. 
uile-naomh, &. All-holy. [McL & D gives uile- 
naomha. ] 
uile-neartmber, d. All-powerful. 
uile-riaghlach, a. All-ruling. 
uile-sgriosach,tt æ. All-destroying. 2 All-devour- 
ing. 
uile-shlugach, a. All-devouring. 
uile-shoillseachail, a. All-lightening. 
uile-thoireach, see uile-thorach. 
uile-thorach, a. All-bearing. 
uile-thréigte, a. All-abandoned, 
uile-throcaireach, a. All-merciful, 
uile-thuigsinneach,1] a. All-comprehensible. 
uil’-fhaicsinneach, a. Omniscicnt. 
uil’-fhiosrach, &. All-knowing, omniscient. 
uil’-fhiosrachd, a. Omniscience. 
uil’-fhoghainteach, o All-sufficient. 
uil’-fhoghainteachd, s.f All-sufficiency. 
uil’-fhoghainteas, see uil'-fhoghainteachd, 
üilic, see uil -ioc. 
uilidh,** s.f. Lake. 
uilidh, o, All, total. 
sally. 
uilim, see uilm. 
uilinne, see uileann. 
uilinneachd,** $,f. Elbowing. 2 Side by side. 
uil’-inntinneach, a. With all the mind, without 
mental reservation. 


Gu h-u., totally, univer. 





nil'-íoc 


mmm 
nil’-ioc, s. Mistletoe—viscum album. [said by 
some to be the badge of the Hays, but it does 
not grow wild in Scotland. | (March. 
The Druids gathered the mistletoe on 10th. 
‘Pliny, in the 16th. book of his Nat. Hist., says 
“The Druids hold nothing in such sacred re- 
spect as the mistletoe, and the tree on which 
it grows, provided it bean oak. ‘They select 
certain woods of oak, and they dv not perform 
any sacred rite without the leaf of that tree ; 
go that hence it is likely they have been call- 
ed Druids, explaining the name from the 
Greek drus, an oak ; Druidze, oakit^s. What- 
ever grows on that tree, more than its natural 
growth,they think has been sent from heaven, 
and is a proof that the tree bas beeu chosen 
by God himself... However that [species of 
mistletoe] is very rarely found, and when 
found it is sought after with great devotion, 
and especially at the sixth moon, which is the 
beginning‘ of their months and years, and 
when the tree has passed its thirtieth year, 
because it has already abundaut vigour, 
though not half-grown. They call it by a 
word signifying in their own language, '' all- 
heal " ; and having prepared sacrifices and 
feasts under the tree, they bring up two 
white bulls, whose horns are then first bound; 
the priest in a white robe ascends the tree, 
and cuts it off with a golden knife ; it is recei- 
ved in a white sheet, Then, and not till then, 
they sacrifice the victims, praying that God 
would render his gift E to those on 
whom he had bestowed it. When mistletoe 
ig given as a potion, they are of opinion that 
it can remove animal barrenness, and that it 
is a remedy against all poisons, 
uil'-iomlaineachd, s. f. All-sufficiency, full per- 
fection or completeness. 
u:l’-iemlan, a. All-perfect. 
uil’-iomlanachd, see uil’-iomlaineachd. 
uil'-ionadaeh, à. Omnipresent. 
uil’-ionadachd, s.f. Omnipresence, 
uil’-itheach,** a. All-devouring. 
uilionn, see uileann. foil, grease, 
dill, pr.pt. ag ùilleadh, oa, Oil, besmear with 
uille, gen.sing. of uileann. 2 gen. sing. of uillidh. 
ùilleadh, -idh, s.m. Oil for lamps, &c. Ag ü—, 
pr.pt. of üill. Oiling, smearing with oil. 
üilleaih-cuidhleach, $. m. Oil for a spinning- 
wheel, i wool. 
hilleadh-na-h-ola, s m. Sweet oil (iit, oil of the 
üilleag,(MMcL)'s.f. Dily surface on; water, &c, 
uilleag,* -eig, -an, s.f. Jostle, elbowing. 
uilleagaich,* v.a. dg, Jostle, elbow. 
uillean,(DMy) s.pl. The beads of oil on the sur- 
face of the bree of meat or fish. 
uilleann, -inn, s.f. Honeysuckle, woodbine—ltoni- 
cera periclymenum, 2 Klecampane, seejaill- 
ean, 
ùillich, oo, see will. 
uillichd,(AF) s.f. Frog. 
ùillidh, uille, s.m, Oil. 
- ,-6, a. Oily, greasy. 
Uillidheach,** a. Greasy. 
——_—-—d, s.f. Oiliness. 
uillinnich, v. see uill, 
uillne, gen.sing. of uileann, 
uilnean, n.pl. of uileann, 
uillnich,* v.a. Jostle, elbow. 
uillt, gen. sing. d n.pl. of allt. 
üil'te, past pt. of ill, Oiled. 
uilm,(AC) s. Sacred bag for alms, 
ury, offertory. 
uilne, gen.stng. of uileann, 
uilneag,tj -eig, 3.7. Push, shove, elbowing. 
atch,(MS) v.a. Hitech. 
uilj (^ F) s. Fox. 





coffer, treas- 





Di 


E = 2 — zu = = 
1 ID NIE A PN: KP 
d — DN 1 IL. Ch Ai L e WV [- 


| Liu 


993 





674. Uilleann. 

uilpean,(AF) s.m. Fox. 

uilt, gen.sing. & m. pl. of alt, U. 
backbone joints. 

tuim, prep. Forin used in conjunction with per- 
sonal pronouns. 

tuim, s.f. Earth. 2 Country. 3 Brass, copper. 

uim'-astar,** s. Circumference. 

ee, -aich, s.m. Any close private 
place. 

uime; prep.pron. (mu+e) About him, around 
him or it, 2 Of, concerning, respecting or re- 
garding bim orit. Agus chuir iad u. aodach 
purpur, and they put on (about) hima purple 
robe ; cia uime P about whom ? 

uime, s. tiarness Chuirean lair "oa h-u., ke 
harnessed the mare ; cuir na h-eich 'nan u. aa 
chrann, yoke the horses to the plough. (uidh- 


an droma, 


eam.) 
uimeach,** Ach, s.m. Brazier, 
uimeachd,tt s.f. Boundary, circuit,see imeachd, 
uim’-chlodh,** s. Dizziness. 
uim’-dhortach, see ioma-dhoirte&ch. 
uim'-ühórtadh, see ioma-dhortadh. 
uime-bhal ach, ** a. see ioma-bhallach. 
uime-chladh, see ioma-chladh. 
uime-chladhach, see ioma-chladhach. 
uime-cbla/lhaich, see iema-chladhaich. 
uime-chrith, see ioma-chrith. 
uime-dhruidte, see ioma-dhruidte. 
uime-dhruideadh, see ioma-dhruideadh. 
uime-fhilleadh, see ioma-fhilleadh. 
uime-itealaiche, see iom'-itealaiche. 
uime-labhairt, see ioma-labhairt. 
nime-labhradh, see iom-labhradh. 
uime-lionach, see ioma-lionach. 
uime-ról, see ioma-rol. 
uime-róladh, see ioma-róladh. 
u:me-sheól, see 10ma-sheól. 
uime-sheóladh, see ioma-shedladh. 
uime-sheoladair, see ioma-sheóladair. 
uime-shruth, see ioma-shruth. 
uime-shruthach, a. see ioma-shruthach. 
uime-shruthachadh,s.7n. see joma- shruthachadh. 
uime-shuidheachadh, s.m, Circumposition. 
uime sin, adv. Therefore, on that account, con- 

cerning that, on that head. 
uim'-ghlac, see ioma-ghlac. 
uimhir, see uibhir. 
uimbireach, see wibhireach. 
uimhreach, see uibhireach. 
uimhreachail, see uibhreachail. 
uimhreachan, -ain, see uibhreachan, 
uimhseag, -eig, -an, s.f. Jerk. 
Uimhseann, see uinnseann. 
uimhleac, -ic, -an, see imleag 
uimhridheachd,( MS) s.f. Tale. 
uimite,** a, Corpulent. 


uimpe, prep.pron. (mu-i) Around or about her 


uimpe 994 


er it. 2 Of, or concerning her or it. 
din, see üine. 
ùine, s.f.ind. Time, a time, season. 2 Life, life- 


time. 8 Interval, leisure. U. thri laithean, 
the space of three days ; caith t' à, pass your 
time, mis-spend-—your time; ar n-ü. a’ ruith 
air sgiathaibh, our time fleeting on wings ; 
'nuair a bhitheas à. agam. when I have time. 

uineachd,** s.f. Leisure, vacation. 

üineadaireaehd,** s.f. Chronology. 

uineam2id,** s, Balsam. 

Tuineamh,** s.m. Strength. 

üine-chünntas,** s.m. Chronology. 

uine-shaor, s.f. Leisure, vacation. 

uinge, s.f. Ounce. 

ùinich, -e. s.f. Bustle, hurry. 2*Fumbling. 3** 
Contending. 4**Coufusion, disturbance, 

uinicionn, see uainicionn. 

üinidh, see üinich. 

uinigneach, Suth’d for uaigneach. 

uinneag, -eig, -an, St Window. 9(DMK) Re- 
cess in the wall of the kitchen used asa re- 
pository for miscellaneous articles—Suth'd, 
Vinneavan nèimh, the windows of heaven ; a’ 
gearradh a mach uinneagan, cutting out win- 
dows. 

uinneagach, -aiche, a. Windowed, having win- 
dows, of, or belonging to, a window. 

uinneagachadh, -aidh, sm. Dawn, dawning. 2 
Making windows, cutting out windows. Ag 
u—, pr.pt. of uinneagaich. 'N'iair a bha ’n là 
ag u., when the day began to dawn, 

uinneagaich.pr.pt.ag uinneagachadh,v.n. Dawn, 
begin to dawn. 2 Make windows, insert win- 
dows, provide with windows. 

uinneagaichte, past pt. Windowed. 

uinn an, ein, -an, s.m. Onion—allium cepa. 2 
(DM K)Ball of the ankle— Lochbroom. 3 (CR) 
Anvil—W. of Ross, 4 Bunion on the foot. 

uinneanach, -aiche, a. Abounding in onions. 
2 Like an onion. 3 Produciug onions, 

uinneanaich,** v.a. Provide with onions. 

uinnein, see uinnean. 

uinnle, gen. of uileann. 

uinnleag, -eig, -an, sf, Thrust with the elbow, 

uinnlean, see uileann. 

uinnse, see uinnseann, 

uinnseachadh, -aidh, $.m. Managing. 
pr.pt. of uiunsich. 

uinnseann,§ Ann, s.m. Ash, ash-tree. 2 Wood 
or timber of the ash-tree, 

uinnsean,* a. Ashen. 

-—————-2ch, a. Ashen. 

uinnsich,* pr.pt. ag uinnseachadh, v.a. Manage, 
sway 

ninseann, see uinnseann. 

uipear, -ir, -an, s.m. Unhandy craftsman, bung- 
ler, botcher. 2 Clown, churl, surly fellow, 
boor 3ttIdiot. 

uipearach, -aiche, og Unhandy, awkward, un- 
skilful. 2 Clownish, churlish, boorish, surly 
3 Inhospitable. 

uipearachd,** s.f. Bungling. 2 Churlishness, 
snrliness. 3 Inhospitality. 4 Clownishness, 
hoorish ness. 

uipinn, -e, -ean, s.f. Treasure, hoard. 

uir, for air. Fir na h-uir tholmbhanta,—this is 
not wir, as given in W.H.Tales, but the inten- 
sitive particle air. 

ùir, -e & ureach, s.f. Mould, dust, earth, soil. 2 
Rody. 3** Mound. 4**Fire. 5**Grave. An 
à: thioram, the dry land ; thogas ano tharta, 
the earth was raised over them ; tog-sa muir, 
raise thou my grave ; fo 'n ù., in thegrave';cair- 
ibh 'san ù., bury, inter. 

tuir, e, s. Name of the letter U. 

uirce&n, -ein,-an, s.n. Pig. 2 Grice, young 


Ag u—, 


/ 
Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


uirghioll 


pg, sucking-pig. 3 Cetacean. 
uirccanach, -aiche,a. Abounding in pigs. 2 Like 
a pig. 3 Cetaceous. 
uircean-garaidh.(AF) sm. Hedgehog. 
uircean-soua,(AF) s.m. Hedgehog. 
uirceineach, see uirceanach. 
uirchir, (AF) s. Cricket, fen-cricket, chir-worm. 
ur: ehlàr,^ M5) s.m. Earth-board of a plough. 


uir-chombnuidh,** s.m. Dwelling of clay, grave, ` 


tomb. Thogadh u. do 'n laoch, o tomb wag 
raised to the hero. 

uir-chuil’,(AF) s. Cricket. 2 Grasshopper. 3 
Salamander, 

üird, gen.sing. & n.pl. of ord. 

uir-dhreachadh,** s.m. Delinoation. 

ùire, s f. see ùrachd. 

ùire, comp. of ùr. 

ùireach, gen. sing. of ùir. A’ bùrach na h-ù., 
stirring up the mould. 

ùireach, (AF) s.m. Mole, 

—, see urach. 

uiread, s.m ind. So much,as much,equal quan- 
tity. U.is uiread, equal shares; u. eile, as 
much again ; u. a bhidhich, as much as a mal 
(of food) ; tha u 'agam 's a th’ agad-sa, 7 have 





as much as you hav» ; leth u., halfas much 3a — 


dha u. araia, Lwice as much bread. [Line pos- 
sessive pronoun, which is understood, appears 
when sentence is made more emphatic by in- 
troducing ceart, as, tha a cheart uiread. &c. 


Uiread is never met with in company with an ` 


—cha'n 'eil u, (not jan u.) sin agam, Z have 
not as much as that; na h-u, cheannais oirnne, 
so much superiority over us. 

uiread,* .eid,!s.f. see trad. 

uiread, adv. see uthard. 

u'reaga!l,** ail, s.m. Dread, terror. 

uireagalach, æ. Terribly afraid. 

uireal, Suth’d for uil2ar. 

uirealachd, s f. Karthtipess, 

uireal!,* s.m. Ferule, rin. 

uireallach,* -aich, s.m. Dagger, dirk. 

üireas,* an, SI. Want, necessary, family or deo- 
mestic necessary. 2 Maim. 3** Bail, security, 
warrant. <A’ dol air tòir uireasan, going for 
little family necessaries. 

uireas, adv. see ioras. 

uireasach, see uireasbhach. 

uireasaich,* s.f. Want, necessary. U, sam 
bith ath’ ort, any necessary you want ; 'dé a 
tha ‘du. P what do you want? 'dé iad na h- 
uireasbhuidhean a tha dhith ort? what art 
the necessaries you want f am fear air am bi 
anu biodh an t-saothair, he that wants must 
take the trouble —N GP 

uireasbhach, -aich, s.m. Needy person. 2 Want, 
indigence,lack,poverty, abjectness,deficiency. 


uireasbhach, -aiche, a. Very much wanted, de- 


fective. 2 Bare. 3 Aidless. 4 Maimed, 
lame. 5 Indigent, needy, destitute. Niu, 
a thing very much wanted ; duine u., a mam- 
ed person ` làmh u., a maimed hand. 
uireasbhuidh, e, -ean, s.f. Want, indigence, pe- 
verty. 2 Defect, maim, deficiency. | 
uireasbhuidheach, see uireasbhach. 
———— —_——,** s.m. Indigent man, beggar, 
uireasnidh, see uireasbhuidh. 
uireil,** o Earthen. 
auir-fhamh (AF) s.m. Mole, 
a mole-hi. 
üir.f^amha, s.f. Mole-hill. 
uirghioll, -ill, sm. Faculty of speech, delivery. 
utterance. 2 Speech, oration. 3 Mistory, 
narration. 4 Eloquencs. 5 Command. Cha 
'n 'eil cainnt nou. ann am bheul, there i$ nei- 
ther language nor speech iu my lips, u. cruai.ih, 
dificult utterance, 


Ducan tir-fhaimh, 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 1 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 








uirghiollach 


uirghiollach, -aiche, a. Eloquent, 

uirghreann, 8.m. Puberty. 

uirghreannach,** g. Adolescent, at the age of 
puberty. 

uirghreannachd,tt s,f.Puberty, ripeness of age. 

uirich, see uirigh. 

uiridh, s. (an uiridh,) Last year, Mu 'n am seo 
an u., about this time last year ; am bliadhna 
's an u., this year and (ast year. 

uiridh,(A F) s. Monster. 

uiridheach,** æ. 'l'horal. 

uirigh, e, -ean, s.f. Couch, bed. pallet. 
luighe air u., stretched on a pallet. 

uirigh-làir,* s.f. Couch. 

uirigh-creige, s.f. Shelf of rock—J GC. W, 32. 

uirigioll, see uirghioll. 

uirigleach, (MS) a. Eloquent. 

uiriglea lh,(MS) s.m. Speech, utterance. 

uirrol!ach, -aich, em. Precipice. 

u:riosa!, see iriosal. 

achd, see irioslachd. 

nirisle,** s.f. Meanness. 2 Lowliness, 

uirislich,** v.a. Debase, humble, cast down. 2 
Disparage. 

—-te, past pt. of uirislich. 

üirleach,(CR) s.m. Live ashes, red embers—W. 
of Ross. 

üirle-thiruis, $.f.ind. Hurly-burly, confusion. 

üirlios, -is -an, s.m. Garden, walled garden. 

üir-luch,( DO) 8.7. Mole. 

uirm, for fuirm, (seat), Gaelic spelling of form. 

uirneas, -eis, s.m. Furnace. [ft gives nom. -eis.] 

üirneasach, see àirneis»ach., 

uirneis, 's.coll, see àirneis. 

each, see àirneiseach. 

uirneisich, see àirneisich, 

tuirre, see oirre. 

uir-reathadh, ft -aidh, -ean, s.m. Mole, 

uir-reothadh, see üir-reathadh. 

uirsgeil,áfs. (air+sgaoil) Spreading, as of dung 


"INA 





e 








or hay. 

uirsgeul,(DU) v.a. Spread dung— Gairloch, 

ùirsgeul, -sgeoil, -an, s. m., Fable, novel. 2 
*News, intelligence. 3* Blarney, 4 Spread- 
ing, as of hay or dung to dry (for air-sgaoil) 
— Badenoch. 

ùirsgeulach, -aiche, o, Fabulous. ` ` 

uirsgeulath,(DU) s.m. Act of spreading dung— 
Gairloch, 

ü;rsgeulaiche, -an, s.m. Teller of stories, novel- 
ist, fabulist. 

Uirthilleach, part of a plough, see p. 263. 

uis, -e, s.f. Use, utility, service. 2 Courteous 
reception, hospitality 3%* Hospitality carried 
almost to excess, unnecessary hurry-burry at 
one’s reception. 'S ann rompa bha ’n 
u., they met with a most courteous reception ; 
tha mi’deanamh ù. dheth, Z am making use 


of rt. 
uisdealachd,** s.f, Supplication 
uiseag, -eig, an,sf Lark, sky-lark. Guth na 
faoin uiseig, the voice of the lonely lark, 
u a’ chàth, chaffinch. 
u. bhreac na mara, see u. mhara. 
u. chabach, tufted lark 
u. choille, wood lark—alauda arborea, 
u. dhubh, black shore lark. 
. mhara, sea-coot, 
. Moire, crested lark. 
. na traighe, sea-piet. 
. oidhche, sedge warbler, see glas-eun. 
. riasgach, mountain plover. 
u. sneachda, fieldfare. 
u. thapaidh, quick or clerk bird. 2 Lark. 
u. thopach, tufted lark. H 
ach, iche, a. Of, or belonging to, larks. 
2 Like a lark. 


ecece 





Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


995 


uisg’-phiobachadh 


tuisealachd,* s f, Courtesy, courteousness. 
tility, usefulness. 3 Advantageousness. 
Highest degree of hospitality. 
comfort. 

üiseil, -e, a. Useful, comfortable, advantageous, 
serviceable, 2 Dignified, high-born, respected. 
3 *Courteous, hospitable in the highest degree 
imaginable. 4"Snug. 5ttWorthy. Gu h-ü, 
entertained with the utmost hospiiatity; à. aea, 
entertained in the politest manner by them. 

uisg’, see uisge. 

uisge, -an & -achan, s.m. Water. 2 Shower rain. 
3 Billow, wave. 4 River, stream. 5§ Water- 
aveng, see machall-uisge. 

Fo 'n u.,under water ; dh’ éirich uisge, a 
billow arose ; mar u. balbh a’ ghlinne, like the 
smooth stream of the valley ; u. an easain air a 
dhos—a charm to preserve one from danger, 
especially at sea;u. beatha, whisky ; U. na 
B atha, the Water of Life; air an aon u., in 
each other's wake (as boats); fior.u., a running 
stream ; loch fior-u., a fresh-water loch ; uisg- 
eachan na Dile, the waters of the Flood ; sior- 
u., constant rain ; tha 'n t-u. ann, it is rain- 
ing. In Arran u. is applied to both rain and 
water, 

uisge, v.n. Rain. 
Suth'd, £c. 

uisgeach, -eiche, a. Aquatic, hydraulic, watery, 
pluvial, casing rain, 2 Lymphatic. 

uisgeacha, cunt. of uisgeachan. 

uisgeachan, pl. of uisge. 

uisgeacha lh, -aidh, s.m. Watering, act of wa- 
tering or moistening. Ag u—, pr pt.of uisgich. 
Ag u. na talmhainn, watering the earth. 

uisgeachail,( MS) a. Aquatic. 

uisgeachd, see uisgidheachd. 

uisgealachd, see uisgidheachd, 

uisgeanta,(MS) a. Aquatile. 

uisgearradh,** o Aquatic. 

uisge-beatha, s.m. Whisky. U. baoghal, whisky 
four times distilled. 

uisge-baoghal,** s.m. Alcohol. 

uisge-coisrigte, sm. Holy water. 

uisge-coisreachd,** s.m. Kind of holy water, for- 
merly drunk by the Gael at Christmas, and 
believed to be @ preservative agaiust the ma- 
chinations of evil spirits and witchcraft till 
the next anniversary. 

uisgeil, -e, a. Watering, irrigating. 2Swampy, 
aqueous, fenny, moorish. 

uisge-fuarain, s.m, Spring-well water. 

uisge-leighiseach, a. Hydropathic. 

uisge-mhil, s.f. Hydromel. 

uisge-nimhe, s.m. Aquafortis, sulphuric or vit- 
riolic acid. 

uisge-oillt,** s f, Hydrophobia. 

uisg'-eólas, s.m. Hydraulics. 

uisge-ruithe, s.m. Running water, stream. Os 
cionn nan uisge-ruithe, above the running 
waters. 

uisge-thomhas,** s.m. Hydrometry. 

uisgeul, see ur-sgeul. 

aiche, see ur-sgeulaiche, 

uisgich, pr.pt. ag uisgeachadh.v.a. Water, moist- 
en, wet. 

te, past pt. of uisgich. "Watered, irrigated. 

uisgidh, s.pl. Waters. 2 Rivers. Na h-uisgidh 
dorcha, the dark waters. 

a. Watery, waterish.§ 2 Faint-heart- 
ed. 3 Fluid, clammy, greasy, moist, 4 (MS) 
Rainy. 

uisgidheaehd, s. f. Wateriness, aqueousness, 
moistness, clamminess, greasiness. 2 Swampi- 
ness. 

uisgrian,** ein, s.m. Aqueduct. 

uisg’-phiobachadh, s.coll. Hydraulics, - 


2 U- 
4* 
5* Snuguess, 


Tha e ag u., it is raining.— 











em a 


ise Homhag 


o c'.thomhais, s.codl. Hydrostatics. 

uis arach,** .aich, s.m. Petitioner. 

üi-inneachadh, -aidh, s.m Using, act of using. 
2 Treatment. Ag à—, pr.pt. of üisinnich, 

uisinnich, pr. pt. ag üisinneachadh, v.a. Use, 
treat, 

-—te, past pt. of àisinnich, Used 

uisir, see eisir. 

uis!ean,(DC) s.m. Child whose father is not ap- 
parent or is unknown, 

üislig.( DU) s.f. Object of terror. Bu tu ana. ! 
what an awe-inspiring object you are ! 

uisliginn, -e, &. f. Disturbance, confusion. 2 
Rage, fury. 

uisliun, -e, -ean, s.f, Sport, diversion, wanton- 
ness. 

uist ! int. Silence ! hist ! hush ! hold your peace ! 
you don't say so! 

uitbhlean.(DC) s.m. Orphan— Skye. 

ula, chan, s.f. Beard. 9 Rank or long grass, 
3 Branchesoftrees. 4*Heavy, curled hair. 5 
Clothes, Ri fead an u. na h-uamha, whist- 
ling inthe long grass of the cavern ;'u. aosda 
air 'uchd, his aged beard on his breast. 

¢ulabhard, -aird, s.m, Dwarf elder. s 

ulabur, s.m. Tail—Arran. S 

ulacan,(AF)s. Screeeh owl, 

ulach,** -aich, s.m. Beard. 

ulach,** a. Bearded. 

uladh, s.m. Jerk. 2seeula. 8 see ubhladh. 

ulag, -aig, -an, s.f. Block, pulley. 2 Thick mix- 
ture of oatmeal and coll water, see ullag. 3 
(DO) Swivel—Uist. 4ffS8nóowball. 

—ach, -aiche, o Furnished with, of, or be- 
longing to, blocks or pulleys. 2 Like à block 
or pulley. 

ulaidh, -e, pl. -ean & `-nean, s.f. Treasure. 2 
Treasure-trove, 3 Pack-saddle. 4 Darling. 
5 Waif. M’ u. ! my treasure ; chaill sinn an 
t-sàr u., we have lost the precious treasure. 

ulainn,* s.m. Cbarne!-house, 

ulaith-faol, s.m. Wolf. 

ulartaieh, see ulfhartaich. 

ulathach, see ultach. 

ulbh ! iní. You brute ! 

ulbhach,t -aich, 8.1. Ashes—Badeno^h. 

ulbhag, (CR) 8.7. Stone or bouller larger than 
one man can handle—W. of Ross. [Bulbhag 
in A rgyll.) "m 

ule, see lc. 

ulchadh,** -aidh, s.m. Beard. 

ulfhart, -airt, s.m. Cry, roar, gell, howl of a dog. 

aich, 8. fand. Howling, roaring. Lan ul- 
fhairt, full of howling. 

ulfhiartair,** s.m. Sniveller. 

ullabheist,* -e, -ean, s.f. see uile-bheist. 

———--— eil,* see uile-bheisteil, 

ullachadh, -aidh, s.m. Preparing, act of prepar- 








ing. 2 Preparation, provision. 3 Accommo- 
dation. 4* Dressing, making ready, Ag u—, 


pr pt. of ullaich, 

ullag, ag, -an, sf. Mouthful of meal. 2**Pupil. 
3*"*Muiture. 4 As much of meal or any pal- 
verized substance as can be lifted between the 
thumb and two fingers. 5 Freshly bruised 
oatmeal worked into a handful with water, 
milk or whisky and eaten unbaked— Cath. 
ness, Suth’d & Lewis; handful of “oatmeal 
eaten dry in other parts. 6 (DMy) U, was 
made of barley grain as soon as reaped, dried 
in a pot till brown, then ground on the quern 
and mixed with hot water and a little salt, 
when it was very palatable— Ness, Lewis. In 
Argyll, ullag-shneachd isa snowball ; and, a’ 
tileeil ullagan, throwina snowballs. 

ullaich, pr.pt. ag ullachadh. va. Prepare make 


996 


umam 


Adjust, put in order Ullaichibh ’ur cridhe 
chum au Tighearn, prepare your hearts unto 
the Lord. 

———te, past pt. Prepared. 2 Provided. 3 
Appointed, made ready, adjusted, 

ullaiche, see udlaiche. 

ullaid-sgriach,(AF) s. Screech-owl, 

ullaidh,(AF) v. Owl. 

adharcach,(AF) s. Horned owl. 

ullain, for olluinn—J. na F. 89. a. 8. 

ullamh, see ollamh. 

ullamh, -aimhe, a. Ready, prepared, finished, 
done, over, in readiness. 2 Ready, prone to. 
U. ealamh, ready and handy—applied to per- 
sons having a smart bearing ; is u, le neach 
sin a dheanamh, one is prone to do that ; air- 
giod u., ready money ; am bheil thu u. P are 
you ready ? 

achd, s.f.ind. Readiness, proneness, ap- 

titude, aptness. 2 Completion, completeness. 

3 Preparedness. 4 Promptuess. 65 Facility. 

aich,* see ullaich. 

aichte, see ullaichte. 

ullehabhasan,** s.m. Long-eared owl, horned 
owl, see comhachag-adharcaiche. 

ulidach, see ultach. 

———— ail (MS) a. Solitary. 

ulldaich, s.m. Night stalker— Su'A'd, 

ulluchadh, see ullachadh. 

ulluich, see ullaich. : 

. te, see ullaichte, 

ulmhach,(AF) s. Wolf. 

———-adh, see ullachadh. : 

ultach, -aich, -aichean, s. m. Burden carried 
within the fold or grasp of the arms, arm'ul. 
2 Lapful. 3 Load. 4(CR) Burden on the back 
—Arran, b5fiiBosom. 6 Lap. 7* Bundle, fag- 
got or truss, fit to be carried on the back— 
Perthshire. U. a dhroma, as muchas he can 
carry on his back ; u. fadir, an armful of grass; 
rinn i 'adhart de "nn bu tioraime, she made 
his pillew ef the dviest bundle (of grass.) 

ultag, (A FE) s.f. Whinchat. f 

ultanaich, (CR) s.f. Slender, wiry-looking grass, 
the earlies5 that grows on the moors, called 
from its appearance, deer’s-hair grass — SutAd, 

ultan (CR) Reay country for annlan. 

uitan aittan, MS) s.m. Children’s game ‘‘ hob 
cockles.” 

















tum, prep, see uim & uime. 

umad, prep.prom. (mu+thu) About thee, upon 
thee. 2 Conceri:ing thee, in reference to thee. 
3 On thy account. Tilg t’ fhailuinn u., cast 
thy mantle about thee ; a’ labhairt u., speaking 
about thee. 

umadail, -e, a. Sottish, boorish. 2 Unsocial. 

umadh,** -aidh, s.m. Withe used to fasten the 
door of a cow-house. 

umaibh, prep.pron. (mu+sibh) About you, re- 
garding you. 2 Concerning you, in reference 
to you. 3 On your account. Cuiribh u., cast 
about you ; a' labhairt u., speaking wn reference 
to you ; fo amharus u., iv doubt about you. 

ùmaidh, -ean, s.m. see ùmpaidh., 

——, -e. a. see umpadail. 

ümaidheach, see ümpadai!. 

—— d, s.f. Blockisiness. ‘ 

ümaillt,*s.f. Degrading submission of one’s judg- 
ment to curry favour, obsequiousness. 

each,* -eiche, a. Meanly submissive to cur- 
ry favour, fawning. 

umainn, prep.pren. (mu -- sinn) About us,around 
us. 2 Concerning us. 3 On our account. Dh’ 
iadh iad u., they surrounded vs ; ag ràdh u., 
saying in reference to us, 

umairt,(AC) see icmairt. 








ready. 2 Procure, provide. 3 Appoint, 4|umam, prep. pron. (mu4 mi) About me. 2 Cone 
Original from 
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
NTERNET ARCHIVE URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


FS 


uman 


cerning me. 3 Ou my account. Au ann um- | 
am-sa ? is it with reference to me ? 

à'nanta,(MS)a. Animal. 2 Absurd. 

umar, -air, see Amar, 

umarlaid, 8.7. Ronion, vulgar bulky female, 

umastar, -air, 8.m. Circumference. 

umbadail,* -e, a. see Umpadail. 

umbaidh, see ùmpaidh. 

un-dhruid, see ioma-diruid, 

um-ghlac, see ioma-ghlac. | 

umha, s.m.ind. Brass. 2 Copper. [umh*.] 

ch,** a. Brassy, brazen. 2 Of copper. 

umhadair, -ean, s.m. Brazier. 

—eachd,** s.f. Braziery, business of a 
copper-smith. 

umha-ghràbhair,** s.m, Chalcographer. 

umhail, s.f.in!. Heed, attention, care,consider- 
ation, advertence. 2 Doubt, suspicion 2 
Feeling. Na biodh u. agad da, never mind 
him ; gun u. do ’n lot ’na chliabh féin, re. 
gardless of the wound in his own side ; chuir 
mi an u., 7 half suspected ; 'dé 'n u, a th’ agad- 
sa P what business is it of yours ? cha’n’eil u., 
there is no matter or business ; cha do chuir 
mi u. air dada bha tuathal, 4 did not notice 
anything wrong. 

uimnaill, see umhail. 

each, -eiche, a. Suspicious. 2 Advert- 
ent, scrupulous, careful, heedful, attentive. 

——— ——-eachd, s,f. Suspieiousness. 2 Heedful- 
ness, attentiveness, habit of attention. 

umhailt, see ümhal. 

—eachd, s.f. see ümhailteas. 

ümhailteas, -eis, s.m. Humility, obedience, 
tractabHity. 

ùmhal, -aile, a. Submissive, obedient. 2 Hum- 
ble, lowly, meek, 3 Obsequious fawning. Cho 
ù. ri luch fo spòg a’ chait, as submissive as a 
mouse under the cat’s paw ; u. an cridhe, low- 
ly in spirit ; u. do ’n lagh, obedient to the law. 

umh-ghrà^haladh,** s.m. Chalcography. 

umh'a, see ubhladh. 

umbhlach, see ubhlach. 

adh, see ubhladh., 

ùmhlachadh, -aidh, s. m. Humbling, act of 
humbling. 2 Humiliation, submission, 3 
Obeying, act of obeving. 4 (MS)Chastisement. 
5 Homage. Ag ù—, pr.pt. of ùmhlaich. 

amhlachail,** a. Liable to penalty or fine,penal. 

ùmhlachd, sf. Obedience, 2 Humility, obse- 
quiousness.. 3 Meekness. 4 Obeisance, salu- 
tation, homage. 5**Submixsion, submissive- 
ness. 6**Practice of imposing penalties. 7** 
Taxation. Dean t' ù., make your obeisance ; 
u. a’ chreidimh, the obedience of faith ; rinn 
^ à. dha, he made obeisance to him, saluted 

"m. 

ünihladair,** s.m. Inflicter, 

uiohl!adh, see ubhladh. 

ùmhladh, s.m. Forfeiture, fine. 2 see ümhlach- 
adh & ùmhlachd. 

ùmhlagh, san. Fine —A rgyll. 

















(ùnlagh) 


= ùmhlaich, pr.pt. ag ùmhlachadh, v.a. & n.Hum- 


bie, subdue, conquer. 2 Obey, submit,  3** 

Amerce. 4 Humiliate. 5 Ch^stise. 

-te, past pi. of ùmhlaich, Humbled, 
subilned. 

umhraisg, -ean, $.*n. see ùruisg, 

——-——each, see uru sgeach, 

umpa, prep.pron. (mu+iad) About them. 2 Of, 
or concerning them, respecting them. Labh- 
air e u., he spoke about them. 

umpa tail, -e, a. Humdrum, doltish, clownish, 
boorish, 2 Vulgar, ignorant. 3 Foggy. 4 

. Cowardly. 5* Very stupid, 

umpadalachd, s.f. Grossness, boorishness. 

ùmpaidh, -ean, s.m. Dunce, boor, clown, rude 
idiot, doit, blockhead, fool, hum-drum, fellow 





Digitized by 
INTERNET AR 


CHIV 


AML 


997 ur 





of vulgar manners, 2 Coward. ‘San duine 
choir cha bhiach u., the worthy man shali be 
ded a boor., 
umpair, -ean, $.m. Umpire, arbiter, judge. 2 
Moderator. 
each, a. Like, of, or belonging to an um- 
pire or arbiter. 
: eachd, s,f Office of an umpire, arbitra- 
ion. 
urmadb, N.ArgyU for iomradh. 
umurlaid,** sr Vulgar, bulky female, 
un, Skye & Perth for chun. 
unach,** -aich, s.m. Bleaching, 2 Washing. 
uuaich,** s.f. Hurry, bustle, coufusion, disturb- 
ance, 2 Struzgle, rivalry. Le móran u.,with 
much bustle. 
unamaid,** s,f. Ointment, salve. 
undais,** s. Winch, windlass. 
unfairt,** v.n. Toss, wallow, tumble. 
,"* s.f. Tossing, wallowing, tumbling. 
ung, pr.pt. ag ungadh, v.a. Anoint, oil. 2 Be- 
smear, daub. Dh’ u thu mo cheann, thou 
hast anointed my head. 
unga,(CR) s.m. Ounce-land, 20-penny-land, or 
one-eighth of a mark-land. 
unga,** s.m. Brass, copper. 
-——, prov. for ungta. 
ungach, a. Brassy. 
ungadh, -aidh, s.m. Anointing, act of anoint- 
ing. 2 Unction, ointment, unguent. Agu -, 
pr.pt. ot ung, U. deireannach, or u,-bais, ex- 
treme unction. 
ungaidh, fut.af.a. of ung. 
ungaidh,(CR) a. Mouldy, rusty—Suth’d. 
ungail,** a. Balsamic., 
ungar, fut. pass. of ung. 
uneta, past pt. of ung. Anointed. 2 Besmeared, 
beiaubed. 
unlagh,tt s.m. Fine, penalty. 
unnan, $. Creich, Suih'd for aon. 
unndais, $./. Winch, windlass. 
each, a. Of, or belonging to, a wind- 
lass. 
unnlar,* see ùrlar. 
unnsa, -idhean & ünnsachan, s.m. Ounce. 
ünradh, -aidh, s.m, Adversity. 
üusa, see ünnsa. 
untas, -ais, see unndais. 
ach, see unndaiseach. 
up, pr.pt. ag üpadh, ra, Push, jostle, push out. 
üpadh, -aidh, s.m. Pushing, act of pushing or 
jostling. 2 Push, thrust. Ag à—, pr.pt. of ùp. 
upag, s. f. Trifling superstitious observance — 
JGC. S, 229. 
üpag, -aig, -an, $.f. Slight push, shove, thrust. 
-——ach, -aiche, a. That pusheth or thrusteth 
away, shoving, pushing, thrusting. 
-——aich,** E f. Pushing, shoving, thrusting, 
jostling. 
SUMA pa, Push, shove, thrust, jostle. 2 
olt. 
üpaidh, see ùmpaidh. 
upaig (DMK) s.m. & f. Old and useless person, 
one regarded as being in the way. Thae’na 
u. anns an rathad, ke is a lumber in the way 
— Caitliness. 
upainn, -e, -ean, s.f. see uipinn. 
upairneach, -eiche, e. Bustling excessively. 
—--—d,"* Bustle, noise. 2 Continued or 
frequent bustle or noise. 
uprait, sce ubrait. 
each, see übraideach. 
ur, tire, a. Fresh, new, recent. 
vigorous. 3 Young, youthful, 
fair. 5 *Novel, curious. 
A’ ghealach ur, the new moon; sgadan ur, 
æ fresh herring ; im ùr, fresh buiter ; ni sain 
bith ur, anyihing novel or curious ; as ur, a 











2 Ingot. 


— 











2 Flourishing, 
4 Beantiful, 


| a, LFF'FEBNMT FREU 
A d V En — I d Ir 


URBANA-CHAMPAIG 


NOIS AT 


Y 


ur 


seconl tims, afresh ; thòisich iad as ur, they 
cominenced anew ; trusgan ur, à new suit of 
clothes ; oiteag ur nan sliabh, the fresh breeze 
of the mountains ; ur nodha, quite new ; sgaoil 
cuirm as ur, the feast was spread @ second time; 
righ ur, a new king. 

ur, -achan, s.f. Child. 
infant. 

ur, s.m. Tail. 2 Harm. 3 Border, brink. 

ur,* adv. Newly. Dh’ ur-thdisich iad, they 
have newly begun. 

ur, poss. pron. see bhur. 

ur$ s. Heath--Fortingall, not common else- 
where, 2 Gaelic name of the letter U. (also 
uir.) 

tur, s.m, Fire. 





2 Person. Ur bheag, an 


2Mou!d. 3 Beginning. 





i 
` 
Q 


y | N 
E 
~N CH 


675. Ura bhallach. 


ura bhallach, -aich, 3. f. Devil’s-bit scabious 
blue bonnets, blue buttons—srahiosa sucissa. 

uracag,(AH)-aig,-an,s.f. Thole-pin— N. Lochaber, 
see bata, No. 39b, p. 76. 2 Belaying-pin. 

uracagan, s.pl. Thole-pins, see bata,No 39,p.76. 

türach, -aich, 8.17. Earth. 2 Beginning. 3 Con- 
tention. 4 Bottle. 5 Fail, £6 Smalltub. 7 
(CR) Change, alteration,—used as '* atharr- 
achadh ” is sometimes, but with the sense of 
newness rather than mere change, Chuir e air 
ù. dhóighe, he put it in a new way—FPertheh. 

urach,* see uireach. 

üracb, -aiche, a. Earthy, dusty. 

ùrachadh, -aidh, s.m. Renewing, act of renew- 
ing. 2 Refreshing, act of refreshing. 3 Re- 
freshment, freshening,renewa] ,recommencing, 
recommencement. Ag u—, pr.pt. cf. üraich. 

urachair, see furachair. 

ür^ch-bhallach,$ -aich, -aichean, s.f. Spotted or- 
chis—orchis maculata. 

ùrachd, 8.f.ind. Newness, novelty, 2 Freshness. 
3 Strangeness. Am bheil o naidheachd agad ? 
have you any news ? 

urachdagan, for uracagan, 8.f. Thole-pins. 

urach-mhullaich, see ura-bhallach. 

urad, -aid, s.m. Newness, degree of newness. 2 
Greenvness. A’ dol an ù., increasing in green- 
NESS 

urad, see uthard & uiread. 

Uradh,(MMcL) aam Oil or grease put in wool. 
Ag ù. na cloimhe, oiling the wool. 

uradh,(DMK) s.m. Stale urine used for wash- 
ing on account of the ammonia it contains— 
Caithness, (DU) Water in which clothes have 
been washed. 3(DU) Dirty water wrung out 
of wool, 

ürag,-aige, a. Nice, bland. 

——, “aig, -an, 8.f. Nice, bland young woman. 
2 Little chi'd. 

uraghusach,** a. Haughty. 

Turaiceachd, s.f. Accidence, primer, rudiments 
of education. 

ùraich, pr.pt. ag ùrachadh, va. d n. Renew. 2 
Be renewed, 3 Refresh, recreate, 4 Become 


998 


urchallacn 


fresh or green. 5**Strive. 6 Invigorate. Dh’ 
ù. e mo chràdh, he ren^wed my torment ; ach 
cha'n ù, mo gheug, but my branch shall never 
become green ; dh’ à. an deoch e, the potion 
refreshed him ; 'nuair a dh' üraicheas an stri, 
when the battle renews, 

te, past pt. Renewed, made fresh, re- 
freshed. à 

uraidh, see uiridh. 

urail, -e, a. Flourishing, young, gay, see ùrar, 

urair, see ùrar. 

- — cachd, see ürerachd. 

ùraisg, see ùruisg. 

uralachd, see ùraireachd. 
ural, ** sm. Proposal. 

uran, -ain, s.m. Cold bath. 

——ach, see furanach. 

tùranach, a. Ignoble. 2 Conyersant. 

üranach,** sm. Novice (in religion.) 

tranach, -aich, s.m. Upstart. 

üren? chd,** s.f. Condition of an up tart. 2 Cold 
bathing. 3 Conversation. 

nranta, see urranta, 

ùrar, @  Flourishing, young, gay, blooming. 
2 Fresh. 3 Green. 4 Juicy. "San iarmailt 
ù., in the fresh firmament ; a’ choiliteach ù., 
the geeen woedland. 

-—achd, s. f. Freshness, newness. 
ness, verdure. 
Vividness. 

-——achd-na-ba, (AF) $. f. Fat of the cow, 2 
Milk, cream, butter. 3 Neat foot oil, 

urard,** a. Very high.z 

27 s.m. High place, high ground. 

urball, see earball. 

ur-bhallach, -aich, see ura-bhallach. 

àr-bharail,(MS) s. After-thought. 

ür-bharr,, MS) s. After-math. 

ür-bh*rrach,** -aich, &. Green branches, green 
foliage. 

ur-bheachd, -an, s.m. New view, second thought 
or view, after-thought. | 

ür-bheist,(AF) s. Monster. 

ur-bhlaith,**a@. Fruitful,abounding in blossoms. 

ür-bhlàth, -àith, an, s. m. Blossom, flower. 2 
Fresh blossom. 

ür-bhreith, e, -ean, 8.f.New birth,regeneration. 
2 Recent birth. 

ür-bhuidh, -e, -ean, 8.f. Rustling noise, tumb- 
ling, tossing. 

urc,(AF) s. Sow. 2 Whale. 
fold. 

urcag, see uracag. 

urchaid, -e, -ean, 8.f. Evilness, evil, damage, 2 
Venereal disease— MacMhaigh, Alasdair. 

urchail, s.pl. Fetters, chains. 

urchaill, -e, -ean, s.f. Furrow-board or mou ld 
board of à plough. 

urchailte, a. Fettered, chained. 

urchair, -e & -each, pl. urchraichean, s.f. Shot. 
2 Cast, throw, push. 3 **Repor; of a gun, 4 
Sudden sally or movement. 5 Cartridge. 

U. cloiche, a stone cast, throw with a stone 
or hammer ; beul ri u. gunna air falbh, abort 
a gun-shot of ; thug eu. dha, he gave hina 
violent push or throw ; leig u., fire, shoot at. 

ürchair,* s.f. Mould-board of a plough— West. 

urchaireach, -eiche, a. Shooting, that shoots. 2 
Pushing, that pushes or throws. 

—--d, &.f. Shooting, throwing, casting, 

as SC stone, pushing, amusement of shooting 

or firing. 

urchall, -aill,-an, s.m. Shackles, fetters. 2 
Chain. 3 Hinderance. 4**Spaniel. 

ach, -aich, gr Heifer 14 years old. 

ach, -aiche. a. Having on fetters or shack 

les, 2Likea fetter or shackle, 























see 2 furan, 


2 Green- 
8 Juiciness. 4 Coolness. 6 ` 





3 em, Enclosure, 











Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


Urehallachadh GF ürlar 
Foo tere alic ies MNA 
urchallachadh, -aidh, s.m, am, Fettering, act of | act of | ür-g!àirdcachas, -ais, s.m, Rejoicing, great or 


KSC with feiters. Ag u—, pr.pt. of urchall- 

aic 

urchallaich, pr.pt. ag urchallachadh, po Bind 
with fetters or manacles. 

—-Le, past pt. Bound with fetters or 
manacles. 

urchasg, -aisg, -an, um. Physic, 
tive against evil. 3 Antidote. 

urchasgach,** a. Antidotal. 

urcheann,(MMcL) s. Wooden hinge on a chest, 





2 Preserva- 


&c. 

ür-chleas, -a, -an, s.m. Feàt, deed. 2 Ludicrous 
or strange deed. 3 Clever action. 

ach, -aiche, o Nimble, active, quick 

at foats. 2 Performing ludicrous or strange 

actions. 

achd, s,f. Nimbleness, activity. 2 Per- 
forming of strange or ludicrous actious. 3 
Legerdemain, juggling. 

—— ———-aiche,** s. m. Adept in leger:lemain, 
juggler, conjurer, 








urchoid, -e, s.f. Hurt,harm, detriment, mischief. 
2 Calamity, loss, accident. Sg Adversity. 4 
Violence. 5**Complaint. 6H8u $e. Anlà 
H u., in the day of thy calamit, ; leu, with 
violence. [* says f. 

urchoideach, -eiche, o. Injurious, hurtful. 2 
Calamitous, 3 Adverse, detrimental, mis- 
chievous. 





-—d,** 8.f. Noxiousness. 

ur-choille, -]tean, St, Green wood. 

ür-choillteaeh, -eiche, a. Abounding in green 
wooils, 

urchoir, see urchair. 

each, see urchaireach. 

eachd, see urchaireachd. 

ur-chosg, s.m, see ur-chasg. 

ach, see ur-chasgach. 

c 318 (MS) s. After-cost. 

ur-chradh, -aidh, s.m. Recent distress, 

E Mm -aiche, a. Wretched, keenly gric- 
ve 

ur-chrann, ann, "et Blooming or fresh tree, 
green tree. 2 Fresh branch, green branch. 3 
Flourishing tree. Maru. uaine, like a four- 
ishing green tree. 

—ach, -aiche, a. Abounding in blooming 











trees. 
ür-chriosdaidh,** e Catechumen, 
urchuid, see urchoid. 
——— -— eàch, see urchoideach. 
urchuir, see urchair. 
ur- -chullach, see ur-challach. 


» urchur, -uir, -an, see urchair, 


urcuil, gee uir-chuil, 

furdail, s.f. Collection, large share. 

ür-dharag,"* s. f. Young oak, flourishing oak. 
Sgaoilidh do chlià-sa mar à., thy fame shall 
spread like a young oak. [**ür- dharaig. | 

ur-dhathaichte, a. New-coloured. 

ür-dhubhadh, -aidh, -ean, s.m. Eclipse, darken- 
ing. U.na gréine, an eclipse of the sun. 

ur-fhailteach, a. Anecdotal, jocular, cheerful in 

- conyersation—Sar-Obair. 

ur-fhallain, -e, a. Fresh and healthy. 

ùr- fhalluinn, ** s.f. New robe or garment. 

ùr-fhàs, -ais, m. Bloom, sprout, shoot. 2 Off- 
spring. 3 New growth, fresh growth. 4 Bud, 

——, v.a.Grow again, bud forth, sprout,shoot. 
Ur-fhasaidh i, it (the tree) ‘will grow again. 

, 4m, After-math, growing again, 2 State 

of growing again. Ag ü—, pr. pt. of ur-fhas. 

ach, a. ing sprouts or buds. 2 Pro- 
Mo way sprouts, buds or shoots, 

, & After-cost, 
ir i -fhoghar, s.m, Autumn. 








Digitized by 
INTERNET ARCHIVE 


"ducere rejoicing or joy. 2 Congratulation. 

us ghàiriich, (MS) v.n. Overjoy. 

urgals ** s./, Exchauge. 2 Alteration. 

furghais, see urgais. 

urg;.art, -airt, s.m. Bad luck. 2 Misfortune. 3 
Victory. 

ur-ghlaine,( MS) s. Maidenhead. 

ur- ghorm, ** o. Freshly-green. Ag ionaltradh 
p? ai fhàsach ù., grazing on the freshly vivid 

elc 

ur-ghreannachd,** art Puberty. 

urgra,** s.m. Battle. 2 Loss. 

i ürla, sm. ind. Face, front, forehead. 2 Coun- 
tenance, visage. 3 Hair, lock of hair. 4 
Breast, chest. 5 A: ‘pect. 6 Bottom. 7 Place 
lying low among hiiis. M’ u. ag éirigh ard, 
my breast rising high. [* says f.] 

ürla, see urlar, 

üi-labhair, pr.pt. ag ür-labhairt, v.n. Speak elo- 
quently. 

Meron. H f. Act of speaking eloquently, elo- 
e "etoric, oratory, Ag à—, pr. pt. of 

hat 


— ach, ff -eiche, a. Eloquent, oratori- 
cal, rhetorical. 
teachd, s.f.ind. Eloquence, rhetoric, 








oratory. 





tear, -ir, -an, $.m. Orator, rhetorician, 
graceful spe aker. 

ür- -labhrach, -aiche, see ur-labhairteach. 

ut labhradh, sce ür-labhairt. Anas gach ù., in 
ail utterance. 

ür-labtraiche, -an, see ur-labhairtear. 

urlach,** a, Having long hair. 2j Having ring- 
lets or curis, Cas-u., curled, 

urladh, -aidh, -ean, see urla. 

üciaich, as pi. ag ürlachadh,v.a. £ n. Nauseate, 
hate, detest, turn from in disgust. 

turlaidh, s.f. Skirmish, 

ùrlaigh, v.a. Turn (di-gustfully )— Argyll. 

ürlaim, -e, s.f. Readiness, preparation. 

ür -laimh, -e, a. Neat, quick, expert,ready-hand- 
ed. 2 Qu: ck in reading. 

,** sf. Readiness, preparation.’ 

eachd, s.f. Quickness, expertness,ready- 
handedness. 

urlainn,(AH) s.f. Fore-part of a ship. 2@Staff 
of a spear. 3 The countenance. 4 Beauty. 
Sàr-Obair. 

urlamaich, ** v.a. Prepare, make ready. ` ` 

ür- -Jàmhacbadh, -aidh,s.m. Act of es ready, 
preparing. Ag u—, pr. pt.’ of ur-lamhaich. 

ur làmhachas, -ais, see ür-làmhas. 

ür-làmhaich, pr.pt. ag üàr-lànhachadh,v.a. Make 
ready, prepare. 

e,** s. Possessor. 

-ais, s.m. Possession. 2 Authority, 
supreme power. 3 Captivity. 

ür-làn,** a. Very full. 

ürlann, -ainn, -an, s.m. Staff, 2 Spear. 

ürlar, -air, “aD, s.m. The lowest part. 2 Floor 
of a house. 3 Ground-floor. 4 Earth, 5 Floor 
of earth or Se 6* Layer, course, vein, as 

7 Theme or groundwork of a bag- 

pipe tune. 8 Low place or bottom among 

hills, 9 Bottom (inside) of a cart. 10**Paye- 

ment. U.arbhair, a corn-foor ; cuir à. mu 

seach 'san dunain, put course abovt in the 

dunghill ; air an ù., on the floor ; à. chlach, @ 

pavement of stones. [Not used in the sense of 

jioor in W. of Ross, except as ürlar-bualaidh, 

a threshing- floor. If the floor is of earth, clay, 

or stone, /ar is used, if of wood either up- 

stairs or downstairs, it is called lebht—CR, 

At Loch Ewe ùrlar is used for floor to a limi- 

ted extent, as, chuir e car dheth air an ur- 





urlamhas, 


in a mine. 


Original from 


UNIV 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


'ERSITY OF ILLINOIS A 


urlar 


1000 


urras 





SS ee E RR 
lar. U. a’ bhaile, is the lower part of a town- | urradh, for urrainn, Cha'n urradh dhomh, Z 


ship next the sen DU.) 

urlarach.tt a. Floored. 

ürlarach,** -aich, s.m. Close housekeeper. 

ürlarachadh,** -aidh, s.m. Act of flooring or lay- 
ing a floor. Ag à—, pr.pt. of ùrlarsich. 

urlaraich, v.a. Floor, lay a floor, pave. 

e,** s.m. One who lays a floor, one who 
mines or prepares earth or clay for a floor. 

——--— —te,** past pt. Floored. 

urlatach,** .aich, s.m. Tumbler, stage-player. 

urlataidh,** a. Agility. Fear u., a tumbler. ? 

ur-loisgeach, -eiche, a. Keen, zealous, fervent, 
causing or promoting zeal. 

ur-losgadh, -:idh, s.m. Fervour, zeal, keenness. 

ur-luachair,} 3.7. Soft rush, see luachair bhog. 2 
Green rushes, young rushes. 

urluinn, -e, -ean,s.f. beauty. 2 Fore-part of a 
ship. 3 see urla. 

urmach,** -aich, em, Armoury, 

ür-mhaiseach, -eiche, a. Beautiful, graceful 
handsome. 

ur-mhoireachd, see uralachd. 

ur-mheangan,** Ain, s.m. Young branch, twig. 
Ür-mheangain nan carn, the young branches 
of the rocks. 

ürmhor, -oire, d. see trail & ùrar. 

ürnuicn, see ùrnuigh. 

ùrnuigh, e, -can, s.f. Prayer, prayers, petition, 
Ag u., or ri ù., praying ; miltean u. 'gad lean- 
achd, thousands of prayers /oliowing thee; dean 
ü., pray. 

Turphaisin, s. Cancer. : 

urr, conir. for urradh, 

urr, see ur. 

urr,* fur urra. 

urra, seo oirre. 

urra, see urrainn, 

urra,** a. Able, capable, 

urra, -idhean, s.f Person. 
chin. 4 Surety.  5** Power, strength. 6** 
Good author. 7**Authority. 8** Defendant 
atlaw. 9** Chieftain. 10 Body. 11 see urr- 
adh. [tt gives pl. also -achan.] 

U. a chuireas leam, a person who will aid 
me. [It has various meanings in W.Isies. An 
e seo an u. bheag ? is this the little one ? phòs 
e nighean u. mhóir, he married the daughter 
oj a nobleman ; feumaidh tu an u. a dh’ innis 
sin dhuit a thoirt dhòmh-sa, you must give me 
the authority who told you that ; 's e a bha ’n 
u. an crodh a chumail as an arbhar, he was 
the one responsible for keeping the cattle out of 
the corn. In these last two examples it must 
be connected with '' urras " or ** urrainn.” 

Uurracag, -aig, -an, 8.f. see uracag. 

urrach,* -aidh, sm. Pull, haul, pulling. 2 see 
urralir, 

ürracha/!,( M8) a, Authentical. 

urrach:i,* s.f. Dependence, reliance. Cha ruig 
thu leas u. a dheanamh asa sin, you need not 
put any reliance on that ; an u. riut-sa, rely- 
ing on you; anu. a chosnaidh, depending on 
his industry ; am u.-sa, in dependence on me ; 
chan 'eil mi 'nam u., Z am not able. 

urrachdaz, see urracag. 

urrad, s. e uthard & uiread. 

uradh, -aiih, -ean, 8.0 Author, authority, pro- 
moter or begiuner of anything. 2 Power, &- 
bility. 3 Defendant at law. 4* Owner, pro- 
prietor. Ann an taigh urraidh mhòir, in a 
great persor’s house ; co is u. dhuit ? who is 
your authority ? chan eil sgeul gun u. agam, 
my version is not without authority ? có is u. 
dha seo ? who ts the owner of this ? cha robh 
caora riamh gun u., @ Sheep never was with- 
Out Qu owner. 





2 Infant. 8 **Ur- 


eae vutpg -= 
1 ) ^ ` ri f [| 
VIER d E ARC H VE 


cannot. 

urrag.tt -aiz, -an, 8.f. Infant, see urag.  2(AF) 
Urchin, hedgehog. 

urraichd, a. Excellent,notably good — Rob Donn, 

urrail, -e, a. Forward, impudent, bold, confi- 
dent, self sufficient. 

urraiin, gen.sing. of urram, 

urrainn, a. Able, capable. Na'mb' u, mi, if I 
were able ; ma's u.'mi, if I can ; anu. iad ? are 
they able! anu. sina bhi? canthat be? 

- , &f. Author. 2 Authority. 8 Ability, 
power. 4 Stay, support. Sgeul gun u., a tale 
without an author; na bi 'nad u. anns ai 
bhréig, be not the author of a iie ; cha'n u. 
dhuit éirigh, you cannot rise; cha'n 'eil mi am 
u., I am not able, I am not fit. 

each,(MS) a. Adequate. 

eachd,** s.f. Ableness, efficacy. 

urraisge, -an, see ùruisg. 

—an, s. pl. lmundations, overflowings, 

spates —Sàr-Obair. 

urralach,tt a. Forward, impudent. 

urralachd, s. f. Forwardness, boldness, impu- 
dence, confidence, self- iency. 

urram, -aim, s.m. Respect, reverence, deference, 
worship. 2 Honour, dignity. 3*Precedence, 
preference. 4 Significance, signification. 

'Nam meadhon bhau. do ’n righ, in their 
midst was reverence for the king ; air son urr- 
aim do t’ fhacai-sa, owt of deference to your 
word ; uat-sa tha 'teachd saoibhreas agus u., 
from thee proceed riches and honour ; bheir mt 
an t-u. dhuit air na chunnaic mi riamh, I 
will give you the preference over all I ever saw ; 
an t-u. do ’n laoch ! precedence to the hero ! a, 
toirt urraim, giving honour. 

———ach, -aiche, a, Noble, honourable. 2 Revy- 
erend, venerable, worthy of respect, distin- 
guished, worshipful. 3 Honorary. 4 Princi- 
pal. 5 Respectful, submissive, Ball u., an 
honorary member ; sibh-se a's urramaiche‘ de 
'n treud, you, tke principal of the flock ; tha 
'ainm u., hi$ name ie revered ; rian e gu h-u., 
he did it masterly ; trì nitheau u., urram na 
Trianaid, urram na cléire is urram na h-aoise, 
three noble things, reverence for the Trinity, 
Get for the clergy and reverence for the 
aged. 

urramachadh, -aidh, s. m. Honouring, act of 
honouring, reverencing. 2 Obeying. 3 Hom- 














age. Ag u—, pr.pt. of urramaich. 
urramachd, s.f. Nobility, nobleness, honour- 

ableness. 2* Reverence, respectfulness. 8 

Respectability. 4 Homage, submission. 


urramaich, pr.pt. ag urramachadh, v.a. Honour, 
revere, reverence, respect. 2 Worship, adore. 
3 Distinguish. 

e, comp. of urramach, Bha e na b' 
u., he was more honourable. 

—— ———te, past pt. of urramaich. Honoured, 
revered, respected. 

urramail,** o Excellent, 

urramair,** s.m. Admirer, 

urranta, -ainte, a. Bold, daring, dauntle:s, in- 
trepid, audacious. 2 Powerful, capable. 3 
Self-sufficient, confident in one's own streugth 
or capacity. Fir mheanmnach u.,high-spirited 
and powerful men ; gu h-u., adequately. 

—— ——chd, s.f. Boldness, daring, intrepidity, 
dauntlessness. 2 *Audacity, presumption, 3 
Confidence in one's own strength or capacity, 
selt-sufficiency. 

urras, -ais, -an, $.m, Surety, security. 2 Cau- 
tioner, one who becomes bail for another. 3 
Ren}, insurance, warrant, bail, caution, 4 
Boldness, assurance, 6 Bondsman, bondswo 





A down. 


urras 


1001 


ùruisg 


ĖS EE, 


man, 
security for you ? théid mis’ anu. ort-sa, 
will warrant you ; ma tha thuan u., if you 
are surety ; chvn fhèarr an t. na ’n t-earras, 
the bail 1s not better than the principal ; chan 
'eil u. a dhìth orm, Z want no &?curity ; théid 
mis’ an u. air do shon, Z will go bail for you, 

urrasach, -aiche, o Trustworthy, secure, sure. 
2 Bold, daring, self-confident. 3 Requiring 
bail or security. 1 

—— —— d, s.f. Trustworthiness. 2 Practice of 
becoming bail. 3 Insurance. 4 Boldness, in- 
trepidity. 5 Self-confidence, assumption. 

urrasaich,* v.a. Insure, bail. - 

urrasail,-e, a. Confident, secure. 2**Bailable. 
Cionta u., à bailable offence. 

urrasair, -ean, s.m. Insurer. 

urrasanta,(MS) a. Bailable. 

uir'-eigin, s.m. Somebody. y 

urras-teine, s.m. Fire-insurance, fire-policy. Oi- 
fig-urras-teine, Yre-office. 

urrlach,** a. Having thick or bushy hair. 

urs’, see ursag, 

ursa, -nnan, 8.m. see ursainn. 

ursa,tt s.m. Bear— Lhuyd. 

ursach,** o Bearish. 2 Full of bears. 

** sf. Bearishness, 2 Bearish temper. 
$.f. She-bear. 2 Little bear, young 


ursau,(AF) -ain, s.m. He-bear. 2 Defender, 

ursainn, gen.sing. of ursann. 

lursainn, enn, s.m. Door-post, side of a door. 2 
Pillar ofa gate. 3 Jamb. 4f[lIRuler of a bat- 
tle. 5itRanks ofa battle. 6 Support, prop. 

ursaiun-chatha,** s.m. Support in time of war. 
2 Bulwark in battle. 3 Chief, champion. 4 
Ranks of an army in battle-order. Chi mi tri 
ursanna-chatha, I see three champions ; bris 
ear leis ursanna-chatha, the ranks of battle 
shall be broken by him, 

ursan,** -ain, s.m. Defender. 

ursann, -ainn, -an, see ursainn, 

—-—ach, a. Having door-posts. 

ursgar,** .air, s.m. Loud bawl. 

urszartach,** a. Sweepingcleanly. 

ursgartadh, -aidh, s.m. Sweeping clean, 2 Driv- 
iug away, as of cattle from grass or corn. 3 
**S weepstakes., 

ùr-sgeul, -sgeoil, -an, s.m. Tale, romance,novel, 
2 Recent account. 3 Tale of recent tiines, 
modern tale. i 

ür-sgeulach, -aiche, œ. Tale-telling, fabulous, 
romantic, rehearsing tales. 2 Bringing recent 
intelligence. 

—— —— —4d, s.f. see ùr-sgeul. 

ur-szenlaiche, an, s.m. Fabulist, novelist, one 
who relates tales of modern times, romancer. 

ur-szeulail,** a. Fabulous. 

ursluig,** v. Disgorge. 

ursnaulhim,** s.m. Pin or jack to fasten the 
cords of a harp. 

. ür-sneachd, s.m. Fresh snow, new-laid snow. 
Mar ù. air barraibh gheug, like new-laid snow 
on the branches. 

ur-speal, v.a. Cut or mow down quickly. 

—ach,{f -aiche, o New-scythed or -mow- 

ed. 2**Ontting or mowing down quickly. 

—achd,** 8. £; Process of cutting or mow- 

ing down quickly. 

h, -aidh, sm, Act of mowing or cut- 

ting down quickly. Ag u—, pr.pt. of ur-speal. 

—aiche,** s.m. One who cuts or mows 

2 Destroyer. 

~ arstan,(MMcL) s.m. Feast when a child is born 

| — Lewis. 

ursuinn, see ursann, 

fursul, -uil, s.m, Pair of tongs. 


ursag (AF) 
` bear 








— — Y 





Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIV 


Có a théid anu. ort P who will become ur-thalmhuinn,§ s. Black-spleenwort, see dubhe 
I| 


chasach 2$ Asplemium viride. 

, ür-thoiseach, -ich, s.m. The very beginning. 2 

| Noviciate. 

‘ur-uaine,$s. Laurel, bay-tree, see labhras. The 
ür-chraobh uaine mentioned in Psalm xxxvii, 
is supposed to be the rose-bay (nerium olean- 
der) it being very common in Palestine, while 
the common laurel is very scarce there. 

uruis-bacau,(DC) s.m. Top of house-walls inside 
— Harris & Uist. (anainn in most places.) 

üruisg, -ean, s.m. Being supposed to haunt lone- 
ly and sequestered places, water-god. 9 
Brownie, 3 Diviner, one who foretells future 
events. 4*Savage ugly-lookiug fellow. 5(AF) 
Bear. 6(MMcL) Sloven, slut. 

The uruisg had the qualities of man and 
spirit curiously commingled. He had a pecu- 
liar fondness for solitude at certain seasons 
of the year. About the end of harvest he be- 
came more sociable, and hovered about farm- 
yards, stables and cattle-houses. He had a 
particular fondness for the products of the 
dairy, and wasa fearful intruder on milk- 
maids, who made regular libations of milk or 
cream to charm him off, or to procure his fa- 
vour. He could be seen only by those who had 
the second sight; yet I have heard of instances 
where he made himself visible to persons not 
80 gifted. He is said to have been a jolly per- 
sonable being, with a broad blue bonnet, 
flowing yellow hair,and a long walking-staff. 
Every inanor-house had its àruis», and in the 
kitchen, close by the fire, was a seat which 
was left unoccupied for him. The house of a 
proprietor on the banks of the Tay is, even to 
this day, believed to have been haunted by 
this sprite, and a particular apartment there- 
in has been for centuries called Seòmar Bhrün- 
aidh ( Brownie's room. ) When irritated 
through neglect or disrespectful treatment, 
he would not hesitate to become wantonly 
mischievous. He was notwithstanding, ra- 
ther gainly and good-natured than formid- 
able. Though, on the whole, a lazy,lounging 
hobgoblin, he would often bestir himself on 
behalf of those who understood his humours, 
aud suited themselves thereto. When in this 
mood, he was known to perform many ardu- 
ous exploits in kitchen, barn and stable, with 
marvellous precision and rapidity. These kind 
turns were done without bribe, fee or reward, 
for the offer of any one of these would banish 
him for ever. Kind treatment was all that 
he wished for, and it never failed to procure 
his favour. In the northern parts of Scot- 
laud the uruisg’s disposition was more mer- 
cenary. Brand, in his description of Zetland, 
observes, ''* that not above forty or fifty years 
ago alinost every family had a brownie, or 
evil spirit; so called, which served them, to 
which they gave a sacrifice for his service ; 
as when they churned their milk, they took 
a part thereof, and sprinkled every:corner of 
the house with it for Brownie’s use ; likewise, 
when they brewed, they had a stone which 
they called Brownie’s stane, wherein there 
was a little hole, into which they poured some 
wort for a sacrifice to Brownie. They also had 
stacks of corn which they called Brownie’s 
stacks, which, though they were not bound 
with straw ropes, or in any way fenced as 
other stacks used to be,yet the greatest storm 
of wind was not able to blow away straw off 
them.’’ The brownies seldom discoursed 
w.th man, but they held frequent and affecte 
ionate conyerse with one another. Thog had 


M LIN wll 


URB 


a | 2 NE 
1 [d 1 
LINOIS A 


BANA-CHAMPAIGN 


ùruisg 


their general assemblies too, and on these oc- 
casions they commonly selected for their ren- 
dezvous the rocky recesses of some remote 
torrent, whence their loud voices, mingling 
with the water’s roar, carried to the ears of 
wondering superstition detached parts of 
their unearthly colloquies. In a certain dis- 
trict of the Highlands, Peallaidh an spuit, 
Slochdaill a’ chùirt, and Brünaidh an easain, 
were names of note at those congresses, and 
they still live in legends which continue to 
amuse old age and infancy, —** 
uruisgeach,** a, Like a brownie. 
by brownies, 
"ug, see agus. 
us,* s.m. Impudence, presumption. Na bith- 
eadh adh’ us agad, presume not, dare not. 
fus, s.m. News. 2 Story. 
usa, (fhusa) comp. of furasda. Easier, easiest. 
Isu. ràdh na chur an gnìomh, it is easier said 
than done. 
usachd, s./. see fusachd. 
usad, aid, s.m. see fusad. 
usadh, see usa. 
ugaid,* -e, -ean, s.f. :Querulousness, aptness to 
complain with any or a very slight reason. 2 
**U se. 
SEH -eiche, œ. Querulous, too apt to'com- 
ain. 
ZER s.f.|Querulousness, aptnesg to com- 
plain or weep for little or no reason. 
usca, see ucas. 
usg | usg ! int. Call to a dog to drive away cat- 
tle— Perthshire. 
usga (AC) a. Holy, sacred, 2 8. see usgar. 
usgadh,** -aidh, s.m. Goose-grease. 
usgaidh ! (CR) int. Call to a dog to drive away 
cattle— Perthshire. e 
usgaidh, see utsgidh. 
—eachd, see uisgidheachd. 
usgaireach,(MS) a, Armillary. 
uszar, -air & usgrach, pl. -an & usgraichean,s.m. 
Jewel, any ornament. 2 Bracelet. 38 Pearl. 
4 Necklace. 5Square. 6 Present. 7 Bell on 
liquor. U. de’n or, an ornament of gold ; thug 
e leis usgraichean, he took jewels with him ; 
le usgraichibh, with jewels. 
u.-bhraghad, necklace. 2 Jewel for the neck. 
u.-laimhe, bracelet, jewel for the hand or 
wrist. 
u.-mheur, jewelled ring. 
usgarach,** -aichean, s.m. Separation. 2 Jew- 
ellery. 
usgarach, -aiche, a. Ornamented with laces or 
jewels, 
usgaraiehe, -an, s.m. Jeweller, 
usgaraidh,** s.f. Jewellery. ) 
De h,(CR) s.m. Act of driving away cattle, 
c., as from hay or corn. 
usgartaich, "v.a. Drive slowly, as cattle,* 
usgraichean, pl. of usgar, 
usgraidh, see usgaraidh. 
usgus ! see usg ! usg ! 
tuslainn,** s.f. Play, sport. 
fuslainneach,"* o, Cheerful, brisk, merry. 2 
Nimble. Gu h-u., cheerfully. 
üspas, -aig,-an, s.f. Push. 2 see ospag. 
uspag,(CR) s.f. Start aside, shy. "Thugan t- 
each E ae taobh, the horse started aside, shied 
—Suth’d. 
üspacach, see ospagach. 
uspair, -ean, s.m. Ugly or lumpish fellow. 
üspairn, -e, s.f. Contention, strife, struggle. 
**Imulation. 
dspairneach, -eiche, a. Striving, struggling,con- 
tentious. 2**Emulous, causing emulation. 
uspairneachd, s.7. Struggling, contending. 2%? 
Emulation, practice of emulation, 


2 Haunted 





2 


E 


L ege fen fe, H. fm rege «Ss = re 
TERNET ARCHIVE 

l KEN GAP ï 
1 KL i Y Sa. P E 


1002 


ut ut 


üspairniche, s.m. Emulous person. 

üspairt, v.a, Flounder. 

üspairt. o, s.f. see üspairu. 

uspan, -ain, $.m. Shapeless mass, 2 Uncouth 
lump. 3 in derision, Clumsy fellow. 

uspann,(CR) s.f. Argumentation, attempt to 
compel assent, or force couviction— W.of Ross, 

fussarb, s. Death. : 

usuireachd,** et Usury. 

ut,* v.a. see put. Dh’ ut e bhuaidb e, he push- 
ed it gway from hin ; ut i, shove her. 

ut! ut! int. Expression of disapprobation or 
dislike. 

utac, see ultag. i 

utag, -aig, -an, s.f. Strife, uproar, confusion. 2 
Outrage. 3* Turbulence. 4* Shove, push, 
jostle. 5 see rüdan. 

utagach, -aiche, @ Confused, clamorous, noisy. 
ci Turbulent, 3**Apt to push, shove, or jos- 

e. 

utagachadh, -aidh, s.m. Pushing, act of push- 
ing, jestling, shoving, or raising a tumult, 
noise or clamoür. Ag u—, pr.pt. of utagai-h, 

ea v.@ Push, shove, jostle, raise a tu- 
mult. 

utaig, see utag. 

utaigeachd, s.f. see utag. 

ütan, -an Argyll. for ratan Knuckle, 

utarras,* -ais, s.m. see ütrais, 

utarrais, see utrais. 

utarrasach, -aiehe, see utraiseach. 

uth, -a, pl. -an & -annann, s.m. Udder 
uthaibh làn, with their udders distended. 

uthach, -aiche, a. Uddered, relating to an udder. 
2 Having large udders. 

üthach, s.m. Mammal. 

uthachd,* s.f. Suicide. 2 Murder. Thug e 
dha fhéin, he committed suicide ; bheir e 
dhuit, he will de de away with your life. 

uthaehdail, -e, æ. Suicidal. 

üthag,( DM K) s.f. Sheep-louse—A pplecress. 

üthaibh, dat.pl. of uth. 

uthan,** s.m. Foam. 

üthar, -aire,@ see üthaeh. . 

üthar,(DMy) s.m. Period of six;weeks—the last 
three of July and the first three of August. Ip 
commences on a Friday and ends on a Tues- 
day. 

uthard, adv. Above, up, above there, above yon- 
der, up there, up yonder, on high, U. shuas, 
up aloft ; u. sud, up yonder. 

———, for urrad. 

utlaich, see udlaiche. 

utlaiche, see udlaiche. 

ütlaidh, see udlaidh. 

ütraid, -e, -ean, s.f. see üdrathad. 

ütrais, s.f. Confused mass of anything. 2 Mo- 
lestation. 3 Restlessness, fidgeting. |** gives 
this as gen.sing. of ütras.] 

each, -eiche, a. Confused, disordered. 2 


Le 'n 


a. 
Ue 





Troublesome, vexatious, annoying. 3 Fidget- — 


ing, uneasy, restless. 


eachd, s.f- Confusion, conpfusedness. 2 





Uneasiness, restlessness, fidgeting. 3 Trouble- . 


someness. 

——-—iche,** comp. of ütraiseach. More or mos% 
restless or uneasy. 

ütras,** -ais, s.m. see utrais, 

——ach, a. see utraiseach. 

———achd, see utraiseachd 

——aiche, see ütraisiche. 20. 

utrod,** see üdrathad. 

--——ach, on udrathadach 

utag, see ultag. 

ut!utj seeud ! ud T 


al tromi 
LU d VERSITY OF 


Origit 


ILLINOIS Ad 


v b= d pi Kë 
=| EM n d A gm Pn Lary Fi | m h 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


ben s y wl 





1003 





Proper Names 





It must be borne in mind that Gaelic sur- 
names, in the English sense, are not genera!- 
ly in use, at least in colloquial Gaelic, except 
when speaking of strangers. Every one liv- 
ing in a Gaelic-speaking district has a local 
name describing his trade or some physical 
ee as, Donnachadh reamhar, An saor, 

c. Sometimes they are named after the place 
they lived in last, or were born in, as, An 
t-Americanach, &c. If the person named is 
of a family long settled in the district he will 
probably be named after his father or grand- 
father, as Seumas a’ phiobair, (the piper’s 
James.) Where a person’s mother isa native 
married to an outsider, he may be called after 
ber, as Domhnall Ciorstan. Thus a Gaelic 
student whose friend is plain John MacDon- 
ald in the city, must not be surprised when 
he meets him at home, to hear bis compan- 
fons speak of him as, Iain Mhurchaidh 
Dhomhnuill Alasdair! The sole object of 
Gaelic surnames is to make the identity of the 
person «soem of as clear as possible through 
the speaker reminding his hearers by means of 
his name every time it is mentioned, to whom 
or where bert belongs.” 

Considerable care must be exercised in trans- 
lating English surnames into Gaelic, for exam- 

e, Donald Black is Domhnall Mac a’ Ghille 

huibh. The literal transtation, Domhnall 
Dubh, may, if used, prove very misleading, for 
that is much more likely to be the loca! appel- 
&tion of Donald Cameron or Donald Smith, both 
of whem have dark hair, than of Donald Black 
who may even be fair and locally known as 
Domhnall Bàn, but more presen as Domh- 
nall Alasdair or Domhnall Iain. Domhnall 
GE, is also a familiar Gaelic name for the 

ev 


The following list of names da the result of 


'the compiler's collecting from all available 
sources from 1880 to 1911. The names are not 
inserted here with the idea of setting forth any 
new theory regarding the correct form of any 
Gaelic name, but it is merely an attempt to 
gather into one alphabetical list, from all the 
newspapers, magazines, books, &c. in which 
they have appeared, the most up-to-date forms 
used by the best Gaelic scholars. A few of 
the names have been taken down orally by the 
compiler, but, owing to the authorities for the 
remainder not having been noted as the list 
was collected, it is impossible to give here the 
source whence each was obtained. The ab- 
sence of such a list from all other Gaelic dic- 
tionaries is a cause of continual disappointment 
to Gaelic students, Much pains has been taken 
to secure accuracy, and Dr. W. J. Watson, 
Edinburgh, has kindly revised and added to 
the list. Dr. Watson's additions are marked *, 
and are original Gaelic forms taken from the 
mouths of the people—not Gaelic translationg 
of Anglicized forms. Quotations from the Ord- 
nance Survey Maps, are marked OSM. 

The list may be added to in any Gaelic- 
speaking district, but care must be taken to 
spell the names exactly as they sound, and not 
according to what either the collector or native 
informant think they mean. 

As quite 20 Gaelic students require the 
Gaelic form of an English name to every one 
who requires the English form of a Gaelic one, 
the English forms are here placed first. 





ENGLISH GAELIC 
A’an, Ben Am Binnean 
Aberairder Pa ">, fa 
Bbearder ] Obair-ardair * 
Aberbrothock Obair-bhrothaig* 
Arbroath 
Aberchalder Obair-Challadair* 
A berchirder Obair-Chiardair* 
Abercorn Obair-Chuirnigh® +, 
A berdalgie E, GC 

alreadhaia, or iv- 

mem dheathain 
Aberdour Obair-dhobhair* 
Aberfeldy Obair-pheallaidh* 
Aberfoyle Obair-phuill 
Abergeldie Obair-gheallaidh 
Aberlour Obair lobhair* 
Abernethy Obair-neithich 
Abertarff Obair-thairbh 
Aberuchill Obair-rüchail* 
Aboyne A-beidh* 
Abriachan Obair-itheachan* 
Achabhraigh Achd a’ bhraighe* 
Achabrad , Achd a’ bhraghad 
Achacha Achadh a’ chadha 


T F 
(oo pr der PUN * 
JITTER AIE AB L) 
l ARI Y 
Sak |= 1" T 


ENGLISH GAELIC 
Achachonleich Ach a’ chonalaich* 
Achadalvory Achadh dail Mhoire 
Achafolla Achadh pholla 
Achafubil Aehadh a’ phubaill* 
Achagoyl Achadh gaothail d 
Achall, Loch Loch acha challa* F 
Achalochy Achadh locha | 
Aehaloist Achadh loisgte 
Achaluskin Achadh losgainn 
Achanault Achadh an uillt* 

Achanalt (Ress) Achadh nan ali? 
Acbandarach Achadh nan darach* it 
Achandoich Ach' an dobhaich 
Achanelid Achadh an éilid 

Achaninver Achadh an inbhir* 
Aehantee Achadh an t-suidhe 
Acharaele Àth Tharraeaill 

Acharanieh Achadh rainich* 1 
Acharn Ach-chàrn* 

Acharra Achadh a’ charraigh 

A chatascaild Achadh dà sgaillt* 

Achavae Achadh a’ bhathaich 
Achavraid Achadh bhràghaid 
Ach-a-vullin Achadh a’ mhuilinn* 


# 


,&E*, 


kd k y i E 


UNI 


Ld 
VM 
" 
| E | 


II) 


IF 
m e 


i J = 
ih A 4A -1 H L fi 
i e" 1 1 Lo j " T 


el i L3 


NOIS / 


ENGLISH 
Acheastle 
Achdaliew 
Achadanadar 
Achdaphuibil 
Achduart 
Achduchil 
Acbencar 
Achellach 
Achencairn 
Achengower 
Achenhew 
Achenrioch 
Achfary 
Achiity 
Achiltibuie 
Achinadrian 
Achinafaud 
Achinarnich 
Achincass 
Achincorvey 
Achindarach 
Achindrain 
Achinduich 
Achineiskich 
Achinhoan 
Achintie 
Achintiobairt 
Achintore 
Achintoul 


Achin-ty-halvin 


Achleach 
Achlean 


Achleshie (Cailen- 


der) 
Achleven 
Achlochan 
Achlorachan 
Achlum 
Achiunachan 
Achlyne 
Achlyness 
Achmore 
Achnabast 
Achnabeachin 
Achnaearry 
Achnaclerach 
Achnacone 


Achcastle 


GAELIC 
Achadh a’ chaisteil 


1004 
ENGLISH 





Ach do Liubha (of St. Lew) | a chtoldrach 


Achadh dà nàduir 
Achadh dà phubull 
Achadh Dhubhaird* 
Achadh dubh choille 
Achadh ai charadh 
Achadh nan eailleach 
Achadh a’ chàirn 

A chadh nan gobhar 
Achadh-eò 

Achaidhean riabhach 
Ach taigh Phàiridh 
Aichealaidh* 
Achd-ille-bhuidhe* 
Achadh nan droigheann 
Achadh nam fod 

Ach an fhéarnaich* 
Achadh cas ` 

Achadh na cairbhe 
Achadh nan darach* 
Achadh an droighiun* 
Ach an dubhaich* 
Achadh an iasgaich* 
Achadh nan uan 

Ach an t-sithidh (Ross) 
Achadh an tiobairt 
Achadh an todhair 
Ach an t-sabhail* 


Ach an taigh thalmhainn 


Ach’ leitheich* 
Achleathainn 

Aeh' leithisidh* 
Achadh-leamhain 
Achd an lochain* 
Ach’ loireachan* 
Achadh lium (?) 
Ach-ghluineachain® 
Ach’ loinn* 
Aeh linn an eas 


Ach nam beathaichean 
Achadh na cairigh* 
Ach nan cléireach* 
Achadh nan con 


Achnacree (Argytl) Achadh na crithe 


Achnacreebeg 
Achnacreemore 
The local etymology of the last two names, 
which gives the field of the little tree and the 
field of the big tree respectively, is wrong and 
quite at variance with the local Gaelic pro- 
nunciation, according to which the meanings 
are the little field of the trembling moss and 


Achadh na crithe beag 
Achadh na crithe mór 


the big field of the trembling moss. 


Achnafeanaig 
Achnahannet 
Aehnahinich 
Achnaleppin 
Ach n amaddy 
Achianelach 
Achiagarran 
Achiiangoul 
Achiaskioch 
Achnasheen 


Achnashellach 


Ach: asoull 


Ach na feannaig* 
Achadh na h-annaid® 
Achadh na h-inich* 


Achadh na leth-pheighinn 


Achadh nam madadh 
Ochdamh nan clach 
Achadh nan gearran* 
Achadh nan gobhal* 
Achadh na sgitheach 
Ach' na sine* 

Ach na seileach* 
Ach nan sabhal* 


Achnegie Achd an fhiodhaigh* 

Achness Achadh an eas 

Achoil Achadh na eoille 

Ach: ul Achadh a’ chùil 

Achray, Loch Loch Ath-Chrathaigh® 

Achriesgill Ach’ riszil* 

Ac abannoek Ach-da-bhannag* 

Ac lair Ochdamh a’ bhlair* 
Digitized Ny 

INTERNET ARCHIVE 


Achtaly 
Achtaytoralan 
Achtenny 
Achtereairn 
Achterflow 
Achterneed 
Achtotie 
Achumore 
Achvanie 
Achvoan 
Achvrail 

A dam 
Adamnan 
Advie 

Affray, Glen 
Affrick, Loch, &c. 
Agnew 

Agnish 
Aharacle 
Aigas, Island 
Ailsa Craig 
Ailsh, Loch 
Aird of Coigach 
Airdaily 
Airdentrive 





Airiecherie 


Arrinachruinach 
Airinasliseig 
Aisridh 

Alder, Ben 
Aldie 

Aldlarie 
Aldourie 
Alexander 
Alford 


Aline, Loch 


isary 
Allachy, (burn) 
AHadale 


—, Glen 
Allan, Allen 

, (place 
Allanbank ) 
Allanfearn 
Allangiack 
Allangrange 
Allanrich 
Almond, River 
— — — , Glen 
Allt a’ chamhna 
Alit an rian 
Alit na beadhan 
Allt na harra 
Allt na harrie 
Allt na main 
Allt Airiecheirie 
Allt skiaek 
A iness 
Alpine 
Alsh, Loch 
Altandew 
Altas 
Altehonier 








Altgreshan 

Alt Guish 

Alt Marky 

Alt more 

Alt na ghuissac 


Altan na eaorach 


Airdrie (A rdclach) 


{ 


GAELIC 


Achadh an toldaraich (field 
of holes or berings) 

Achadh an tulaich 

Achadh da torralan* 

Achadh taobh eanagh 

Achadh a’ chàirn* 

Uachdar-chló* 

Uachdar-niad* 

Achadh an tots 

Achadh mór* 

Ach Bhanaidh* 

Achadh a’ bhothain 

Achadh bhraigh a’ bhaile 

Adhamh 

Adhamhnan (pron. Yonan} 

Abhaidh* 

Gleann aifrinn \ 

Afraig* à 

Mac a’ ghniomhaid 

Aignis* 

see Acharacle 

Eilean Aigeis 

Allasan, Creag Ealasaid 

Loch Aillse 

Airde na Cóigich* 

Aird-aillidh 

Aird an t-snaimh 

Ardruigh* 

Airidh chéiridh* 

Airigh MhicGriadh* (not 
Criadh) 

Airidh nan Cruithneachd® 

Airidh ua sliseig 

Aisridh 

Beinn Eallar 

Alltaidh* 

Allt-Làirigh 

Dobhrag* 

Alasdair 

Alphort (Relig. Celt, ii, 192) 

Loch Aluinn* 

Amhlasairigh* 

Eileaebaigh* 

Alladai* 

Gleann Alladail* 

Ailean 


Alan* 

An Réim* 

An t-àilean fearna* E: 
Alan nan clach* 

Alan* 


Alan an fhraoich* 
Abhainn Aman* 
Gleann Amain* 
Allt a’ ghamhna 
Allt an ruighean 
Allt nam beathan 


Allt na h-eirbhe* 


A]lt na méinn* 

Allt Airidh Chéiridh 
Alk sgitheach 
Alanais 

Ailpein 

Loch Aillse (L. Ai’se) 
An t-alltan dubh* 
Alltais* 

Allt a’ choin uidhir® 
Alit gailbheach (?) 
Allt grannda* 

Allt Ghrisean* 

An t-allt giuthais* 
Allt Maircidh* 

Alit mär" 

Allt na giubhsaich* 
AHt nan sübh* ` 
Alit nan caorach* 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AE 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


ZK 


LH d 


ah Gét Ve 


D 
e 


ENGLISH 
Altbea 
Altnaharrow 
Altsputie 
Alturlie 
Altvulin 
Altyre 
Alvcs 
Alvie 


Ample, Glen 
Amulree 

An, Ben 
Ana! elia 
Analheilt 
Ananeaun 
Anerson 
Andrew 
Angus 


———, (district) 


Ankerville 
Anna, Loch 
Annat 


Annat Bay (Loch 


Bream 
Annabella 


Aonaclair, Ben 


Apitauld 

ADD, Glen 
ppin 

Applecross 








ee 


River 


(not ‘* ministear na Comraich.’’) 


Aquhorties 
Aradie 
Aray, Glen 


Arbroath 
Arcandeith 


Archibald 


Ard, Loch 
Ardalanish 
Ardali 
Ardanamar 
Ardantraive 
Ardcharnich 


 Ardchaple 


Ardchattan 
Ardchonnel 
Ardchronie 
Ardehyline 
Ardclach 


Ard-druimnich 


Althea 1005 
GAELIC ENGLISH 
see Aultbea Ardvower 
Allt na h-eirbhe* ie ahaliow 
Alit spütaidh j 
Allt rollaidh* Ardheslaig 
Allt a’ mhuilinn Ardindrean 
Alltar" A rdintoul 
Àbhais* Ardivachir 
" Albhaidh Ardival 
eol e Ardjachie 
ma ut 
Gleann Ambail* ES eg 
Ath Maol-Ruibhe* A ech 
. Binnean* rdlamont 
‘gee Annabella Ardlary 
' Ath na b-éilde Ae CAL 
Àth nan ceann* J Ard 
Ardlussa 
see MacAndrew Ardmucknish' 
E EN 
Machair Aonghais* pos MM 
Mum MM TOC ee Ardmarnock ` 
An annaid* ~, | Ardmore 
Am Pech mor, or Linne na Ardnaeross 
h-annaid* » | 4rdnadam 
Barabel Ardnagaul 
Beinn Eunacleit* réie Geng 
Ath-pit-allt* y dr eam 
' Gleann an aba* VE carpe ARR 
An Apainn f Ardnagoine 
A’ Chomraich* Ardnaniaskin 
Abhainn Crosan* zët 
_(Strath of) Srath Mhaol Chaluim* rdnaskie 
In the parish of Applecross is “air a’ Chom-.| Atdoch 
raich,” (not “anns a’ Ch—.") The minister | Ardochy 
of Applecross Ia" ministear a’ Chlachain,” Ardrishaig 
Achadh Choirthe* Ardroe 
Aradaidh (Loch named Ann- | Ardroil 
raidh in maps in error)* | Ardross 
Gleann Aora Ardrossan 
y dare bhrothaig* Ardsheal 
rean duibh Ardtalnai 
E E A 
loquialism, as Beisdean Dee 
ban, Beistean Maclain, &c.) ar 
Loch na h-àirde Ardullie 
Aird Alainis rear y 
Diti ux dl rich 
ege Gane Ardvroilach 
Aird an t-snaimh Ardvreck 
Aird -cheathairnich*® Ardyne 
Aird nan capull Argyll | 
Airde-Catain —, Duke of 
Aird na coingheill* Arienas 
Aird chrónaidh* Arighuary 
Aird a’ chuilinn Arihoulan 
Aird-chlach Arinackaig 
Aird-druimeanaich Aringour 
Arinarach 


Ardelve 


Ardelve market 


Ardentinny 
Ardeonaig 
Ardersier 
Ardessie 
Ardd, Loch 
Ardgaddan 
Ardgay 
Ardgour 
Ardgowan 


Digitized 


| 


Dy 


Aird-eilbh,or Àird-eilghidh* 


Féill na h-Airde* 
Aird an teine 
Aird Eónaig* 
Aird nan saor* 
Aird-easaidh* 
Loch na h-airde 

ird ghadan 
Ard gaoith* 
Aird-ghobhar 
Aird a’ ghobhainn* 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 








Arinascavach { 


Ariogan 
Arisaig 
Arity, river 
Ariveagaig 
Arkaig 





Loch 
Arklet, Loch 


Armadale 


GAELIC 
See Ardgour 
Ardthalamh* 
Aird-heisleag* ~- 
Aird an dreaghainn® 
Aird an t-sabhail* ` 
Rudha Aird a’ Mhachair 
Aird a bhaile* 
Aird-achaidh* 
Aird- *ehonghlais 
Aird a’ ghlamaidh 
Aird MhicLaomuinn 


Ardlarach 
Srath Ardail 
Ard-laoigh* 
Aird-lusa* 


' Aird-mhuciunis* 


Aird nam madadh? 
Ard-mhéara* 

Ard- meadhonach* 
Aird- -màr nag* 


-An t-Ard mór* 


Ard na croise 
Aird nan damh* 
Aird nan gobhal* 
Aird nan crasg*  .. 
Aird najh-aibbne * 
Aird nam murchan® 
Aird nan gaimhne* 


Aird an fhiasgain* 


,Aird an arbha* 

‘Aird an fhasgaidh 

Ardachadh* 

Ardochaidh 

Rudh Ard driseig, locally 
An Rudha* 

Ard-roth 

Eadar-dha-fhaodhail* 

Ard Rois or Mm am mo 

Ard Trosain* 

Àrd- ceile 

Àrd talnaig 

Ard-tórainnig 

Ard tur 

Aidilidh* 

Ardbhar 

Ard-mheirgidh 

Ard-mhürluieg* 

Ard-bhroighleach 

Aird-bhreac* 

Ardfhin 

Earraghàidheal 

“ Mac Cailein Mór ** 

Àiridh Aonghais 

Àiridh Ghuaire 

Àiridh Shuarlain | 

Airidh Neacaig* 

Airidh nan gobhar 

Airidh-nathrach 

Àiridh na sgabhach (sawe 


. dust) 
Airidh a ( for Airidh 
. Eoghain) 
Arasaig 

Aradaidh* 

Àiridh Bheagaig 

Airceig* 

Loch Airceig 

Loch Aireleit* 

Ard-laraeh 

Armadal* yh, D 


Original from 


"n IF Pa os së E 
ois VERS Y OF 
KA NK ! ul 


JRBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


ENGLISH 
Armine, Ben 
Arngask 
Aros 
Arpafeelie 
Arran 
Arriecheirie 
Arrochar 
Arscaig 
Artafaillie 
Arthur 
Artilligain 
Artney, Glen 
Asgag 
Asher 
Asia 
Assarow 
Assynt 
Athole 
, Duke of 


Atlantic Ocean 
Aitadale 
Attow, Ben 
Auehagoy!e 
Auchalator 
Aucharanie 
Auchedersen 





Auchengee 
Auchengeith 
Auchengower 
Auchengrouch 
Auchensaugh 
Auchentore 
Auchindown 
Auchinleck 
Auchtascailb 
Auchterderran 
Auchterflow 
Auchtertyre 
Augustus, Fort 
Aulay 
Auldearn 
Aulich 
Auliston Point 


Aultbea 


, River 
Aultgowrie 
Aultnasou 
Aultsigh 





a, 


Armine 
GAELIC 


Beinn Armuinn* 


Arn gasg 
Aros 


Arpa-philich or A.-philidh* 


Arainn 
Airidh-chéiridh 
Arrochar 
Arsgaig* 

Airt a’ faillidh* 
Artair 
Aird-Uilleagain 


Gleann, Artain,* Gl, Àrtair" 


Srath Asgaig® 
Alsir 

An Asia 
Asaireadh? 
Asainn 


Atholl or Athall 


Am Moireach 


An Cuan siar. The open At- 
lantic in W.1sies is Haat 


Atadal* 

Beinn Fhada* 
Ach’ a’ ghoill* 
Ach’ Chaladair* 


Achadh-raineach 
Achd-Eadarsan* 
Aucheleffen, Arran Ackadh-leth- pheighinn 
Achadh na geòidhe 
Achadh oa gaoithe 
Achadh nan gobhar 
Achadh nan grath 
Achadh nan seileach 
Aehadh an todhair* 


Achadh an dùin 


Achadh nan leaeann 


Acha-dà-sgaillt* 


Uachdar doirean 


Uachdar-chlo* 
Uachdar-thire* 
Cille Chuimein 
Amblaidh 

Allt Eire 
Amhlaich* 


Rudha nan amhlaistean 


Am Fain, 
Braonach 
Alit-beithe 


Allt-ghobhraidh* 


Allt nan subt’ 
Allt saidhe* 


Aven River (Banff) pues Athfhinn* 


Avendhu 


Avenvorie 
Avernish 
Averon, River 
Avich, Loch 
Avoch 

Avon, Ben 


Aylort, Loch 
Ayr, Heads ef 
Back 


Backies 
Badachro 
Badacrain 
Badantional 
Badcall 
Badd 
Baddagyle 
Badenoch 


| 

A tos saad eal a Vcc D Fa es i ` 
s LL! V Ka i =i | H wi 
l SEN Ar | T 

LE ks LE KS d 


An Abhainn dubh (Upper 


Forth 


Abhainn bhogaidh 


Abharnis* 
IR 
Amhai 


or Am Fain 


Obhach "ak Abhach)* 


Beinn Athfhmn?*® 
Gieann Athfíhinn* 


Loch Obha” 
Abhainn Abha* 
Leck Ailleart 
I»bhiig-air 
Cinn Inbhir-air 
Am Bac 
Baeannan 


Bad a’ chrotha ® 
Bad nan eezimhean* 


Bad av inneil* 
Bad-call* 


Pad 
Loch Bad a’ gheill* 
Bàideanach (drowned place) | Balloan 


1006 


 Ballyaurgan 


Balloan ` 
ENGLISH GAELIC 
Badenseally Bad a’ sgàlaidh* 
Badentarbert Bad an tairbeirt® 
Badicaul Bada Call* 


Badindean, Gl. Isla Bod an Deamhain* 
Badnaguin Bad nan gaoithean* 
Badnaguine,Suth'd Bad na cuingean 
Badrallach Am Bad railleach® 
Badvo Bad a’ bhoth* 
Bagastie, Strath Srath bhàgastaidh* 
Baile gheamh ragaim 
Baile a bheolain 
Bail' àn dennaidh* 


Baileveolain 
Bail'-an-dounie 


Baileebarn Beul-atha-chàrn* 
Old name of Dingwall, still 
Bailechail perpetuated in the name 
of a local inn* 
Bain MacGillebhàin 
Baith, Glen Gleanu na blaith 
Balachladaich Bail' à' chladaich* 
Balachraggan Baile-chreagain* 
Balachroan Baile-chrothain > 
Balaatyre Bail’ an tsaoir ; 
Balallan Bail’ Ailein* 
Batavil Bail’ a’ bhile* 
Balbeg Baile beag 
Balbtair Bail’ a’ bhlair® 
Balchallan Baile Chailein® 
Balcherry Baile-cheathraimh* 
Balconie Bailenigh* 
Baldoon Bail’ an Deng 
| Baldow Baile dubh 
Batedmund Bail’-Admaian, B. Aidmin* 
| BaMreish Bail’ a’ phris 
BalfuiH Bail a’ phuill* 
| Balgalkin Bail’-gailcinn® 
Balgibben Bail a' ghibein* 
Baigholan Baite-Dhomh’lain* 
Balgewan Bail’ a’ ghobhainn 
Balguneirie Baile gun iarraidh* 
Balgunioune Baile gun leann* 
Balgy Balgaidh* 
Balicherry Rail’ a’ cheathraimh® 
Balindore Bail’ an deora 
Balinoe Baile nedha 
Balindrum Bail an droma 
Balintochich Bail’ an Toisich* 
d d an todhair* 
intrai il’ an traghad* 
Balishare Baile sear* 
Balkeith Baile na coille* 
Ballachraggon Lón nam ban* 
Ballachroy Bealach ruadh 
Ballachulish Bail’ a’ chaolais 
Ballahuan Bail’ a’ chuain 
Ballantrae Baile na traigh 
Ballater Beal’tair, or Bealadair* 
Ballechin Bail' Eachain 
Bakegyle Baile Ghoill 
Balleigh Bail’ an lighe* 
EBallichatrigan Baile-Chatragain 
Balliehloan Baile-Chlamhain 
Ballickine Banleacainn 
Balligill Bailigil* 
Ballimeanach Baile-meadhonach 
Bal!imoney Bail’ a’ nihanaich 
| Knllinaby Bail’ an abaidh 
Bellingal Baile nan Gall e 
Wallingry Bail’ a’ gharaidh l 
Ballinluig Bail an luig 
Ballinreich Bail' an fhraoich 
Ballinroich Bail’ an Rothaich* 
Seep Baile Pheadrais* 
Balliski Baile-sgeulaidh* | 
Ban Bail' à! mheadhoin 
Bail an lóin* x 
UNIVERSITY OF ILL det IER 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 














Blairinroar 


GAELIC 


Barraidh 

Barr a’ chiopain* 
Bairlinn 

Loch Bairlinn 
Bàrr-seileach 

Parlan 

Barbhas 

Bad na sgalag® 
Loch nam badachan* 
Am Badaidh beithe* 
Au Bàbhun 

see Wester Kindeace* 


, Knockbain ee Seocaidh( Le Jock- 


ie’s croft)* 

Beitheach 

Beitheach mhér 

Bealach gearr 

Beith 

Peuton, (Mac an léigh in 
Islay) 

Dinaidb* 

A’ Mbanaehainn, or Man- 
achainn MhicShimidh* 

Paar 

Baodan 


\Na F'ir-bolg 


Baile 'Chrothain 

Bealadrum* 

Bail' a' bhile 

Baile Mac-gill'-Ebin* 

Baile MacDhuibh* 

Beul na h-uamha 

Beinn nam faoghla 

Meudarloch (i. e. 
[ea)dar dha loch) 


Allt Monochuill 


Baile Bhenneit, (Benedict )* 
Beo-chloich 

Bearnaraidh* 

Bearnas 

Bearghdal 

Loch Biorbhaidh 

Abaruig 


Beinn 


' Am Blàran odhar 


Bhealaich, Gl. a Gleann Baloch Badenoeh 


Lochaidh Bhraoin® 


Bhruichlinn, Dun Dun Bhrolchain 


Biogais 
Bindeil* 

Na Cnocan 

An t-Allt-beithe 


\ Ach na h-uamhach® 


Torr-beatha* 

A' Bheithearnaich 
Braonaigh* 

Preas* 


} MacGhilleDhuibh 


An Cnoc Dubh 
An t-Eilean Dubh 
An gàrađh dubh 


Bealach Lùnaig* 
Blàrach 
Bail’ a’ bhlàir* 


Blair [in] Atbole Blàr an Athoill* 


Balloch 1007 
ENGLISH GAELIC ENGLISH 
Balloch Bealach Barra 
. , (Inverness) Bail’ an loch* ` Barrichybean 
Ballochan:lrain Bealach an droighinn Barrolan 
Ballochantuy Bealach an t-suidhe* SORES UTR 
Ballochmyle Bealach maol Barsailleach 
Ballochyle Bal: ar chaoil Bartholomew 
. Balloan Bail’ an loin Rarvas 
Ballychluvin Bail’ a’ chlamhain Batnascallack 
Ballygillan Baile Ghiilian Battachan, Loch 
Ballygrant , Islay Bail’ a’ ghrana Batty bay 
Ballygreggan Bail’ a’ chreagain Baun 
Ballygroggan Bail’ a’ ehrogain Bayfield, Nigg 
Ballymena, Antrim Baile-meadhonach à 
Ballymoney Bail’ a’ mhonaidh 
Ballynaughton Baile Neachdain Beach 
Balmacaan Baile MaeCathan* Beachmore 
Ba!macarra Baile MacCarra* Bealochgair 
Balmaclellan Baile MhicGill' Fhaolain Beath 
Balmainach Bail’ meadhonach* Beaton 
Balmakeith Baile MacDhaidh 
Balmennoch Baile meadhonach Beaufort Castle 
Balmoral Baile Mhoireil Beauly 
Baluuchy Baile Mhuchaidh* : 
Balmungie Baile Mhungaidh* e , River 
Balnabeen Baile na binne* Bede 
Balnaboth Baile nam both® Belge (the ancient 
Balnacill Baile na cille* Irish) 
Ealnacoill Baile na coille Bellachroan 
Bainacra Beul ath nan cra* Belladrum 
Balnacraig Baile na creige* Belleville 
Bainacree Baile na craoibh’ Bellyclone 
Balnafettack Baile na feadaig* Belmaduthy 
Baluagard Baile nan ceard* Belnahua 
ZUM ac na seed E Benbecula 
Inagore aile nan gobhar 
Balnagown Baile nan gobhainn* Benderloch 
Balnain, Inverness Bail’ an fhain* Benmore Burn $t. 
-- , Badenoch Beul an athain Fillan’s) 
Balnakill Baile na cille | Bennetfield 
Balnakyle Baile na coille* Beochlich 
Balnasack Baile nan sac Bernera 
Balnespick Bail’ au easbuig Bernice 
Balnuig Bail’ an aoig* Berriedale 
Balole Bail' E Se EE 
: Both-fuidir Both-phuidir erwic 
Balquhidder — ( “Both-chuidir” Bettyhill 
Balreillan Baile-réidhlean* à 
Balshare . gee Balishare Bhraoin, Loch a' 
Balulve Bail Uilf, or Bail' Uilbh 
Balvack Bail’ a’ bhac* Bighouse 
Balvarras Bail’ a’ bharain* Bindal 
Balvenie Baile mhanaidh—Jain Lòm | Binns, the 
Bavicar Baile Bhiocair Birchburn 
Balvolich Baile mhullaich Birchfield, Kin- 
Ralvorist Baile Mhoirist* | cardine 
Balvulin Bail’ a’ mhuilinn Birkhall 
Bamtf Banbh* | Birkis 
Eanavie Bainbhidh* Birnie 
Banchor Beinnchor Birse 
Banchory Beannachar* Black 
Banff Banbh r Sie aer 
? MacEamailinn,or iom- ackhi 
Bannatyne alain Black Isle 
Bannockburn Allt a’ bhonnaich Blackdyke 
Banscoile Bansgaoil Black Lunans 
Barachander Barr a’ cheanndoir (Forfar ) 
Barbaraville locally An Cladach* Blair 
Barcaldine Am Barra-calltuinn Blair . 
Barma.idy Barr a’ mhadaidh Balblair 
Barnacarry Barr na cairidh 
Barnaguy Barr na gaoithe Blair Drummond 
Barnakill Barr na coille Blairfettie 
Barnaline Barr an ailean Blairfoid 
Barnashalig Barr n^ seilg ` Blairgie ` 
Barnbougle Bàrr na boglain jlairgowrie 
Bareite Barr-aon Biairinroar Muthill 


Blar Dhruiminn* 
Blàr-pheitigh* 
Blar-choighde* 
Blàragaidh* 
Blàr.goibhre | 
Biàr an ruathair* 


Blairmore 
ENGLISH 








GAELIC 
Blairmore Blàr-mór 
Blairour Blar odhar 
Blairwhyte Blar-choighde 
Blaud Blathaid* 
Blarcreen Blar-crithinn 
Blarich (Suth’d) — Blàraich —CR 
Blarleath Am Blàr liath* 
Blarnabee Blàr na bith* 
Blar-na-coi Blàr na cüinge* 
Blarnalevoch Blàr na Leitheoch* 
Blarninich Blàr an aonaich* 
Blaven Blàbheinn* 
Blughasary Blaoghasairigh* 
Boat of Garten Coit Ghartain* 
Boath Na Bothachan* 
Bochastle Both-chaisteil,* B.-chastair* 
Bochonie Both-chóinnigh 
Bogbain Am bac bàn* 
Bogie, Strath Srath Bhalgaidh* 
et Bog an fhuail* 
Ro SE ; Bog an fhuarain* 

Bog of Shannon Bog na’ seannan* 
Bogrow Am Bogaradh* 
Bogy, Strath see Bogie 
Boharm Both-sheirm* 
Bohenie Both-shinidh* [buig (CR) 
Bohespie Both-theasbuigh*, Both-eas- 
Bohuntin Foth-chunndainn* 
Boisdale Baghasdal* 

-—, Loch Loch Baghasdail* 
Boleskine Both fhleisginn* 
-Bolfraeks Both bhrac(prov. for breac*) 
Bolin Both-lin* 
Bohallie Both-shaihidh, B.-thailidh* 
Bona Am Banath* 
Bonahaven Bun na h-abhann 
Bonar Bridge Drochaid a’ bhanna* 


Boraveh (Colonsay) Bun a’ bheithe 


Bonawe Bun-Atha 
Bonskied Bonn-segaoid* 
Boor (Gairloch) Büra* 
Borenich Both-reinich* (i.e. rainich) 
Boreray Borroraidh 
Borgie Borgaidh* 
Borlay, Ewe Boralaidh* 
Borrowdale, or 

Borradale 1 Borrodal 
Borrowstouness see Bo'ness 
Borve Borgh & Borbh 
Botriphnie Both-draighnigh* 
Boturnie Both-tuairnigh* 


Eilean a’ bhotuil, Eilean 
Druim briste 
Sgire Bhagair 
Am Bogha mér 
Boyd Boid 
Boyne, R. (Ireland) Breughna 
Braal, castle Brei’al* 
Braan,R.(Perthsh.) Breamhainn* 


Bottle Island 


Bower, parish of 
Bowmore 


--——, R. (Ross) Bran 
Bracadale Bracadal (pron. {Breacadal) 
Braekla A’ Bhraclaich* 
Brackley Breac-leathad 
Bracklinn Braclann* 
Bradden, Loch Loch a’ bhradain 
Brae, Gairtoch A’ Bhruthaeh 
Brae Grudie Braigh Ghruüididh* 
Braeintra Braigh an t-sratha* 
Braelangwell Braigh-langail* 
Braclochaber Am Braigh 
Braemar Bràigh Mharr 
Brae Moray Bràigh Mhoraibh* 
Braerathy Bràigh Shrathaidh* 
Bra riaeh Am "räich riabhacb* 
Digiti: 
NTERNET ARCHIVE 


1008 


Braes of Doune 
Braes of Green- 





Bunachton 
GAELIC 
Bràigh Dhüin* 

{ Bràigh Ghrianaig* 
Braigh Thunga 
Bràigh a bhaile ` 
Brach a’ bhealaich 
Eràigh-ghleann beag 


ENGLISH 


ock, Cullander 
Brae Tongue 
Braeval 
Brae Vallich 
Braeglenbeg 


Braeglenmore ———— -.— —— mór K 
Brahan Brathainn* i 
Braingortan Bràigh nan goirtean `" 


Bran, Strath(Ross) Srath Bhrain* 

Branault Bràigh nan allt 
Branahuie Bràigh na h-uidhe* 
Brander, Am Brannradh* ts 
Branter, Gleann a’ Bhranndair 
Brawell Braigh a’ bhaile 

Brawl Breithal (SutA'd) 


ass of 
len 

















Breac-chu Breacachadh 
Breachat Braigh Chat* 
Breackachay Breaeachaidh* 
Breackerie Breacairidh 
Breacklate Breacleathad 
Breadalbane Braghad Albainn 
-—-- , Earl 1 “Mac ChaileinMhic Dhonn- 

of chaidh ” 

- Nort : 

side of L. Tay } Deisear 
Brecklach A’ Bhraclach 
Brenachie Breanagaich* 
Brevachoil Brenn choille,* L. Katrine 
Brenag, River Abhainn Breunag* 
Brenfield Breun-achadh 
Brerachan, Glen Gleann Briarachan* 
Breton, à Amhorach 
Bridge of Allan Drochaid Ailein* 
—— ——— Cally Drochaid Challaigh* 

—— of Don Drochaid Deathain* 
————— Earn Drochaid Éir* 
—— —— "Tilt Drochaid Theilt 
Turk Ceann-drochaid (D. Tuirc is 
CH hardly ever heard)* 

Bridgend Ceann drochaid 
Bridget Bride 
Brimishgan Bramasag E 
Britain Breatunn, gen. -uinn 


Brittany, native of, Amhorach 
Broadford An t-ath leathann 


Brodick Breadhaig 

Brodie Brothaigh* 

Broomhill Mes ee: An Cnoe 
--, Kilmuir 


Meng: 1 Aird nan cathag 


Broom, Loch, Ross Loch Bhraoin* 
—-—, Perth Loch Braoin* 
-——, Little An Loch beag 
Broom, River Abhainn Bhraoin* 





Broomtown Bail’ a’ bhealaidh* 
Brora Brüra* E $e ol 
Browlin Brobhlainn*. 

Brown Mac a' Bhriuthainn -a 
Bruan Bruthan 

Bruar Bruthar* 

Brucefield Cnoc an tighearna 

—— ——-—, North Loch SIDES 


Buachaille Etive Buachaill Éite* 
Buchan(B. ofjDeer) Buchan 

Buchanan Both-chanain (place) 
Buchanan Canonach ` 

Bucbanans, the Na Canonaich 
Buchantaidh,* Buthain- 


Buchanty tidh & Buidheintidh—CB 
Bucket Water Buichead* .— 

Buckie, Glen Gleann Bocaidh* i 
Buird, Beinn-na- Beinn a bhüird* a 
Bulroy A’ Bhuaill ruadh A 


B une chton Both Neachdain* det 


Runchrew 


ENGLISH 
Bunchrew 
Buudaloch 
Bunloit 
Buniarie 
Bun Owen 
Buriside 
Burracks 


Busbheinn 


Bute 

Buteman, a 
Buthkollidar 
Butt of Lewis 
Buy, Loch 
Caan, Dun 
Cabaan 

Cadboll 
Caddletown 
Cadearg 
Caerlaverock 
Caggan 
Caillach Head 
Cainikain 
Cairn, Glen 
Cairnskerry 
Cairnvickuie 
Caisteal Baicidh 
Caithness 
opze, Ord of 
, Earl of 
Calavie, Loch 
Calf of Mau 
Callander 
Callernish 
Callop 

Callow 

Cally, Bridge of 
Calnakil 
Caltrigil 
Calvie, Glen 








tive of 

, Loch 
Calvinist 
Camasie 
Cambrian, a 
Cambus 
Cawhusbirron 
Cambuschurrich 





-—,a n3- 


GAELIC 

Bun-chraobh 
Bun dà loch* 
Bun-leothaid 
Bun-larach 
Bun-obhann 
Taigh an daimh 
Na Buraich* 

Badbais bheinn* 

Baoghais bheinn 
Bód 
Bóideach 
Buth-coilleadair 
Rudba Robhanais* 
Lochabuidhe* 
Dun Canna* 
Cadha bàn’ 
Cathabul 
An Cadaladan 
An Cadha dearg* 
Cathair-beinn-thorraiche 
An Caiginn 
Sron na caillich 
Caineachain 
Gleand a’ chùirn 
Carnasgeir* 
Cathair MhicAoidh ` 
Caisteal Cuil Bhàicidh* 
Gallaibh 
An t-Ord Gallach 
Morair Ghallaibh 
Loch Cailbhidh* 
An Eireag Mhan' aach? 
Calasraid,Caltraid* & Calas- 
Calanais {traid 
Ca'pa 
Cala 
Drochaid Challaigh 
Cal na cille 
Ruiha Dunbheagain 
Gleann Cailbhidh* 


i Cailbheach 


Loch Cailbhidh* 
Cailbhineach 
Carnaisidh* 
Cuimear 

Caius 

Camas a’ bharain* 
Camus-curraich* 


Cambuscurrie, #: ss Camus-curaidh* 


Cambusdoon 
Cambuskenneth 
Cambusmore 
Cameron 





finlay 





Camgarry, Glen 
Caraghouran 

Campbell 
—— of 
Strachur 





kinglas 





voirlich 


nish 





of 





Craignis 





— 0 
Dunstaffnage 
— of In- 
verawe 
—— of 
Strachur 





Di gitzen Dy 


of Strone “ MacGIII' 


— of Ard- 


Camus donn 
Camus-Choinnich 
Camus mór 
Camshron, Camran 


of Lochiel, “Mac Dhomhnuill " Dhuibh" 
of Letter. 


vn Mac Mhic Mhartainn "' 


onaidh'' 
Gleann Camaghair 


Camagh’ran*,Cam-ghobhran 


Caimbeul 


^« Mac Mhic Artair "' 
— of Ard- 


'" Mac Iain riabhaich " 


“ Mac Mhic Bhaltair " 


of Ask- p Mac lomhair " 

} "MacDhughaillCreaginnis'' 
} “ Mac Aonghais an Dùin ” 
} “ Mac Dhonnchaidh” 

} * Mac Mhic Artair " 


Poena EE. 8 Ka. fer Ad re 
INTERNET ARCHIVE 


1009 


ENGLISH 
Campbell Castle 


Campbells, the 


Catlodge 


GAELIC 
see Castle Gloom 
Sliochd Dhiarmaid O’ 
Dhuibhne 





————— of Bar- ). 

caldine & Baile- }Sliochd Phara bhig 

veolan 

— of Caimbeulaich bhoga 

Cawdor Chaladair 
Campbelltown, d Baile nan Caimbeulach 

(Inverness) 
———— e { Ceann-Loch-ChilleChiar- 

(Argyll) ain, Ceannloch 
Camusinas Camus Aonghais 
Camusine Camus-éidhinn 
Camusluinnie Camus luinge* 
Camusnaherie Camus na h-eirbhe 
Camus nan Gall Camus nan Gall* 
Camusteel Camus-teile* 
Camusierach Camus-tearach* 
Camustionavaig ^ Camus-dionabhaig 


Camus Trol*® 
Camus-yic-Erchar Camus MhicF hearchair 


Canisp Canasp 
Canaidh, Eilean Chan- 
Canna fhaidh, au t-Eilean tar- 


suinn 


Cannich, Glen Gleann Canaich 


Canreayan Ceann a’ riabhain* 
Cantray Canntra'* 
Cantyre see Kintyre 


Caoidhe, Loch-na- Loch na cuithe* 


Caorunnach A’ Chaoirnich 
Capenoch Ceapanach 

Capernich A’ Cheaparnaich* 
Cape Wrath see Wrath 

Caplich Caiplich* 

Caputh A’ Cheapaich* Capai;- ^" 
Cardross Cas rois 

Carie Càraigh,* Cairigh—CR 
Carlonan Car-lónan 

Carloway Carlabbaidh 
Carmichael MacGhilleMhicheil 
Carnassary Càrn-asaraidh 


Càrn Bhrein* 
Carn dubh 'Ic an Deóir 


Carn Bhren 
Carn dubh aig an 


Doire 
Carnich A’ Chàrnaich * 
Carn nan Conacht Carn nan Conach 
Carnoch A’ Chàrnaich* 
Carn Toul Càrn an t-sabhail 
Carr Bridge Drochaid Charr* 
Carr dubh, Ross An Cathar dubh"* 
Carrick Carraig 
Carrieblair Blar a’ charaidh* 
Carron, Loch Loch Carrunn* 
Carsaig Carsa aig* 
Carse of Bayfield ! Mor’oich-Chinn déis, Mor’. 
Carse of Kindeace 1 oich* 
Carskie Crasgaidh 
Carswell Carsalach 
Cartomie Cathar-tomaidh* 
Carvie, Glen Gleann Caraid* 
Casandamtf Cadha nan damh* 
Cassley, Glen Gleann Charsla’* 
Castlebay Baile MhicNéill 


Castle Corbet 

Castlecraig 

Castle Gloom 

Castlehill, (Znver- 
ness) 

Castle Leather 

Castle Leod 

Castle Sween 

Castle Tirrim 


An Caisteal dearg* 
Taigh na créige 
Caisteal Glòim 


Caisteal Still” 
€aisteal Lethoir* C. Leath- 
Cül-dà-Leotbgid* [oir—CRE 
Caisteal Shuinn 
Caisteal Tioram 


Cattanach Catanach 
Catherine Catriona 
Catlodge Caitleag 


Cawdor 


ENGLISH 
Cawdor 
Ceander, Loch 
Ceann-an-oba 

eit 
Celtic 
Cnanonry 
Chapel-park 
Cuarles 
Charleston 
Charlotte 
Charmed Isles, the 
Cheir’ail, Ben 
Chicken Head 
Cihisecan 
Chisholm 


-——_—_—— of 
Chisholm 
.—— ——-8, the 
Chonzie, Den 
Chreagain, Srón a’ 
Jhrinlet, Eas a’ 

Christina 

Cüristopher 

Chroisk. Loch 

Chulash 

Churin, Lochan 

Clacüiaiow 

Clachclevan 

Claciinaharry 

Clachtoll 

Clachuil 

Clack fin 

Ciadich 

Claggan 

Ciaisdarran 

Clan Chattan, a 
member of 

Clan Duff 
Jlaona 

Ciara 

Clare, Kiltearn 
"are, Loch 

Clark 

Cl: shody 

Clashlochy 
las^n2»muiaeck 
‘iashven 

Clashyuie 

Clathick 

Clava 

Cleis 

Cleish 

Clerk 

Clerk hill 

Clesedughe 

Clibreck 

Cliff 

Cliff House 
lifton, Tyndrum 

Clochkel 


Cloichfoldich 
Cloncaird 
Cloyulin 


Cluany Bridge 
Clune, Alt 
Clunes, Lochaber 


j 


Clunes near Inverness was named by a recent 
proprietor from above, whence he came. The 


GAELIC 
Caladair* 
Loch Ceanndoir* 
Ceann an óib 
Cellach,gen.-aich; Coilteach 
Ceilteach 
A’ Chananaich 
Pàirc an t-seipeil 
Tearlach 
Baile Thearlaich® 
Tearlag 
Na h-Hileanan Sianta* 
Beinn a’ cheire geal 
Rudha na Circe* 
see Shiskine 
Siosal, Siosalach 


! Siosalach Srathghlais 


Na Siosalaich 

Beinn Chomhainn* 
Sròn a’ chritheagain 
Eas a’ chrin leathaid 
Ciorsdan 

Gille Chriosd 

Loch a’ Chroisg* 

A’ Chulais 

Loch Chaoruinn 
Clacha dubha 
Clach-chlamhain 
Clach na h-aire* 

A' Chlach-thuill* 
Clach-thuili* 

Clach fionn 
Cladaich,* Claidich—CR 
Claigcann 

Clais an torrain 


Catanach 


Clann Dubh 
Claon-àth 
Sorcha 

An Ciar* 

Loch a’ chlàir* 
Mac a’ chléirich 
Clais-fhada 
Clais-lacha 
Clais na maigheach* 
Clais-bhau 
Clais-bhuidhe 
Ciachaig* 
Clabhalag* 


Clais 


Mac a’ chléirich 

Cnoc a’ chléirich 

Clais dubh-ghleann 

Clibric* 

Cliubh* 

Taigh na cliubha 

Achadh nan tuiridhnean* 

Clach gheal 

Clach-phollaich,* Cloich- 
bhollaich—CR 

Cluain nan céaird 

Clach a’ mhuilinn 
Clo-mhuilinn—CR 

Drocheid Chluainidh* 

Allt a’ Chluain 

Na Cluainean 


old name was Fingask. 


Cluny 

Cluniter 

Clyde, Strath 

Clyne (now Mount- 
gerald) 


Digitized by 


AAN 
UTERA 


Cluanaidh 
Claon-leitir 
Srath Chluaidh 


; An Claon* 





























pronunciation. 


ainn ( Ross) OSM. 
Cnoc a’ ghille 
bhronaich OSM 
Cnocan 
Cnoc an Frangach 
OSM 
Cnoc Fyrish 
Cnoclady 
Cnoc Vabin 


Coag 

Coast, Gairloch (or 
First Coast) 

Coast, A ultbea (or 
Second Coast) 

Cockaliue 

Cockney, a 

Cock of Arran 

Coe, Glen 

Coigach 


Achlochan, 
Achduart 








Conan Cridge 
, Strath 
Contiv 
Contullich 





Cnoc al na gamh- 


1010 Contullich 
ENGLISH GAELIC 
Clyne Clin,(for claoin, locative case 


of claon, a declivity, and not as usualiy stated 
frou. cluain, which would not give the local 


} Cnoc na goibhnidh® 


} Cnoc Gille mo Bhrianaig* 


An Cnocan 
| Cnoc Fraing 


Cnoc foighris* 
Cnoc leathadaidh* 
Cnoc Mhabairn* 


CnocLiathFoid,OsM Cnoc Léith bhaid* 


Cumhag (for Cumhang)* 
] An t-Eirthire* 


An t-Eirthire donn* 


IM àlainn 


Lunnainneach 

An Coileach Arranach® 
Gleann Combann 

A’ Choigeach* 


The five-fifths of Coigach are—Achnahaird, 
Acheninver, Achabhraigh and 


Drochaid Sguideil* 
Srath Chonuinn* 


Cunndainn* = 
Cunntulaich* E Eh 
Original from 
INIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS A 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


Coignafearn Coig na feàrna* 
Coilleter Cuingleitir*  - 
Coilintuie Coill’ an t-suidhe 
Coillegillie Coille Ghillidh* 4 
Coillerigh Coille-ruigh' 
Coillintogle Cùil an 6-seagail* 
Coil-lyal Coille-liathail 
Coinn Mheall, 
Beinn Coinncam » 
or Coinneamh Conmheall : 
mheall K 
Core Attadale Coire Atadail* 
(Applecross) i 
Coire, Caisteal-na- Caisteal nan Córr* E 
Coirenahenchy Coire na h-eunchaidh | 
Coire Y «ivack Coire Ghearraig* 
Coryvreckan Coire bhreacain 
Coldraia Cul an draighean 
Coldwells Am Bealaidh* : 
Colin Cailean, gen. -ein 
Colinton Baile Chailein 
Colintraive Caol an t-snàimh 
Coll, Island of Colla 
Coll, (person) Colla 
Colonsay Collasa 
Colquhoun Mac a’ chombaich 
Colquhouns, the Clann a chombaich 
Columkille Calum Chille 
Colydrain Cili-droighinn Y 
Compass An Com-pas* 
Comrie (Contin) ` Comraigh* 
: (Perthshire) Cuimrigh(& Cumaraigh CR) 
Conaglen Conghleann* 
Conais Allt a’ chonais* 
GEN } Comhuall 
Conchra Conchra* 
Coniveall Conmheall 
Connel (Lorn) : A' Choingheal 
= —— — , (cat- 
aract—'' Falls of d A’ Chraos 
Lora ” 
Cononbrae Bog domhain* 


== 
| 
i 


Convinth 


ENGLISH 
Convinth, Glen 
Cook 








Coolin Hills An Cuilfhionn—CR 
Coquet Isle Eilean Cogaid 
Coppachy Copachaidh* 
Corachria Corr-chriadh 
Coran, (river) Corainn 
Corlarach Corr-larach 
Corn, Ben-na- Beinn a’ ehuirn 
Cornhiil Cnoc an airbh* 
Cornton Bail’ an Loch? 
Cornwall (county) Corpghall 
Corrachaive Coir' a’ chaitheamh 
Corran An Corran 
Corriehallie Coire-shaillidh* 
Corriemulzie Coire-arh uiltidh* 
Corrieyachie Coire-bhacaidh* 
Corriewick Coir’ a’ bhuie* 
Corriehuran Coir’ an fhwarain 
Corrish Cerr-imnis, Corrais 
Corrow An coire 
Corryarrick Coire Ghearraig 
Corrybrough Coire broch 
ail e i oill 
Hie Coire-shaiHidh* 
Gorryhaltoch Coire-shalach* 
Corrynabera Coire na h-eirbhe 
Corry Point Carn a’ ehoiridh 
Corry Vacky Ceire Bhacaidh* 
Corryvreckan d ege (B.'s caul- 
Cerslet Crois-leathad* 
Coruisk Coir’ -uisge ; 
„Loch L Coir'-uisgo 
Coryvreckan pee Corryvreckan 
Corylach Coire-chlach 
Corvest Coire-bheist* 
Cotterton Achadh nan coitear* 
l SE CN huil* 
—, (Badenoch ! 
rum s ) Na Cuileagan* 
Coulbackie Callbacaidh* 
Couthall Cnoc na cuil* 
Ceulin Culainn* 
Coulmore A’ Chàil mhóir* 
Coulside, Loch Loch Cülasaid* 
Coultry, Loch Caoltraidh* 
Courthill Cnoc a’ mhoid* 
Cove An Uaghaidh* 
Cowal Còmhal ` 
Cowan MacComhainn 
Cowie Collaizh* 
Coygaeh, Ru Rudha na Cóigich* 
Coylet Cuingleathad* 
Coylum Cuinglewm* 
Crackaig . Crachdaig 
Craggen An ie 
Craggie 
, Loch Loch Creagach 
Craig Cheat oh 
--——, (Gairloch) orgain 
Craizandaive Creag GE d 
Craizdarach Creag an daraich* 
Craigellachie Creag-Eileachaidh 
Craigencallie Creag na caillich 
Craigens Na Creagain 
Craigentinny Creag an Leinen 
Craigiehow Creag a’ chobha 
Craigleith Creag liath 
lg Sot lime 
Graigmaddie Creag a’ mhadaidh 
oer Creag a’ mhuilleir 
Craignafeich Creag nam fitheach 
Craignis Creaginnis 
Graignure Creag an iubhair 
D "ENT I y 
MITERNET ARCHIVE 


GAELIC 
Gleann Confhadhaich 
MacCuiga in Arran 
An Cuilbhionn, 





1011 Cumbrae 

ENGLISH GAELIC 
Craig Roy A' Chreag ruadh 
Craig Royston Creag Trostain* 
Craigs Taigh na créige 
Craim, Loch na Loch na creamha 
Craleckan Cra-leacainn 
Crarae Carr-ei(bh)e* 
Crask Crasg 
Crathie Craichidh 













Crawford (person) 
Cray (Glen Shee) 
Crear 


Creag Pheaeach 


Creag Illie 
Creag na EE 
Creag 


Cretshengan 
Crieff 
Crrman 


Croftcarnoch 
Creftcrunie 
Creftn: ullan 


E 





Cromas 


-Crossiebeg 
The 


Cruachan, Ben 
Cruach Neuran 


© 
e 


a 

Cuchullin Hills 
———— Sound 
Cuilishie 
Cuilinuick 


Culehoinnich 
Culeraggie 
Culduie 
Culkein 
Culkenzie 
Cullicudden 
Culliss 
Culloden 
Culmailie 


Creagach na caor- 
ach 


Creamhain, MacCreamhain 


Crathaigh* 


Criathar 
| Creag achadh na caoraich 
Creag Crocean,osmM. Creag-chrocan * 


Creag fhiaclach 


Creag Phulach osm Creag follais 


Creag illidh* 
Creag leathainn 
Creag nan garradh 
Creag Baoiridh* 
Creag Staoinait 
Gride* 

Craoich* 
Cri&thrar 
Croiesheangan* 
Creoibh* 

Crionan 


Crinigart,Gartmore rir uad Àrd 


har* 

Gleann crotha 
Croit-charnach 
Croit a’ chrünaidh* 
Croit an àilein* 
A’ Chroic* 
Cromba* 
Caolas Cromba® 
Crom-fhasadh 
Srath Chrombail 

Jrembail 
Crom-leathad* 
Cros 
Alit tarsuinn 
An crosadh beag 


Crowlin (islands? Crolaig, Crelainn.* 
passage between Crowlin Islands and 
Scalpay is called An Linne Chrólaigeach* 
locally 


Cruachan Beann, 
Cruachan 

Cruachan an fhiùran 

Crumbaidh 

Gleann cruitein 

Ob Chùsig* 

see Coolin Hills 

An Linne Sgitheanach 

Caolaisidh* 

Cuil na muice 

Cuinneag* 

Curabol* 

Culbàieidh* 

A’ Chuil- choinnich* 

Cui a’ chreagain* 

Cüilduibh* 

Culeinn 

Cul Choinnieh* 

Cul a’ chudainn* 

Cul an lios* 

Cuil-lodair (for lodain)* 

Cul-mhailidh 

Cuil na h-àtha* 

Coillte-buidhe 

Cuilt 

Cul-tuinidhe 

Cuilbhócaidh* 

Cual-Sian 


Comar nan allt, Colmoneala 


Cumradl mór 


mta 
ke: =| 
SPLIT 


Lex, 
KC 
Ta^ Zei 








‘Cumbras | 1012 Duisky 
ENGLISH GAELIC ENGLISH GAELIC 
Cumtrae, Little Cumradh beag Dornadilla, Dun Dùn Dornaigil 
Cumming Cuimein, Cuimeanach Dorney An Doirnidh* 
— — — — 8, the Na Cuimeinich Dornie An Doirnidh* 
Cuniside Caonasaid Ceannaiche na Doirnidh the Dornie merchant. 
Curitan Curadan The old name—Bun-da-loch is now applied 
Currach, a An Currach only to the east end of the village* 
Cie Mac 'uirigh & ’ac 'uirigh— | Dornigill see Dornadilla 
= CR (MacMhuirich) Dornoch Dornoch ` P 
Cyderhall Siara* Dorothy Diorbhail 
Cyril Caoral, Cuirealan Dorrygorrie Doire Goraidh 
Dailcheanna Dail-choinnich ... | Dosmuckaran Dos-mhuearain* 
Dailermaig Dail-Dhiarmaig( Dhiarmaid) | Douchary Ducheiridh* 3 
Dalachulish ` ` Dail a’ chaolais : Douglas Dubhghlas 
Dalchully Dail-chuilidh *|—— ——-, (person) Dùbhghlas 
Dalkeith Dail-ché* Doune An Dunaidh 
Dallas Dalais* Dounie Dunaidh* 
Dalmally : Da'!-mhailidh Dourag, (river) Dobhrag 
Da!nafree Dail na frithe Douren, Glen Gleanu nan darach 
Dalnatrad Dail na traghad Dowhill Dubh-choille 
Dalnavie : Dail-neimhidh* D n Dubh-thallaidh- CR 
Dalness Dail au eas* gings. Dubhailigh* 
Dalnessie Dai! an easaich Downie Dunaidh 
Dairaddy Dail-radaidh Drian, Glen Gleann nan droigheant 
Dalreavich Dail riabhach Drienach An Droighneach = 
Daltot; Dail-tobhta Driminault Druim an allt* 
Dalvina Dail-bheinne Drimnin Na Drimnin 
Dales con eege T Droitham Drochaid riabhan* 
alwhinnie ail-chuinn Droma, Loch an . 
Dalzell Dail-gheal * d'aan g } Lochaidh Droma* 
Dane, a Lochlannach Dron Drongaid 
Darach MacGllle Riabhaich Drumalbin Druim-albainn- 
Darlochan Doire-lochan Drumancroy An Druim cruaidh* 
Daruel, Glen Gleann da Ruathail Drumcudden Druimchudainn* = 
Davaar Eilean da Bharr Drumderfit Druim(a)diar* 
David Daibhidh (pron. Dàidh) | Drumdil Druim(a) daol* 
Davidsons, the Clann Dàibhidh Drumdyre Druim/a) doighr*  : 
Daviot Deimnidh* | Drumgarve Druim garbh 
Davoch beg |  Dabhach beag Drumlee Druim liath 
Dealt, Ben ; Beinn Beinndealt* Drummond Druimivn* 
na diollaide,OSM. S Drummonds, the Na Druiminnich 
Deanaich Dianaich* Drummossie Druim-Athaisidh* 
Dee, Strath Srath Dé, Srath Dhé Drumnadrochit Druim na drochaid 
Delavorer Dail a’ mhoireir Drumvamarg Druim nam marg* 
Dell, (Lewis) Dail Drumnasaille Druim na saille 
——, North Dail a thuath* Drumouehter Druim-uachdair 
—, South Dail à dheas* Drumrunie Druim(a) Raonaidh* 
Delny Deilgnidh Drumsmiital Druim(a) smiotail* 
Denmark et Ce Drumsynie Drum eem cola Ge 
: Dearg thulaic : f Druim-mnigh* (old gen. 
Derculich | Dearglaich CR Drumuie magh) 
Dermid Diarmid Drunkie, Loch Loch Drongaidh* 
Derriieane Torr-leathann Drymen Druimiuu* 
errivorchie Poire Mhurchaidh Drynich Inch Innis Droighnich 
erry, Glen Gleann Doire* Drynie Droighnidh* 
Derryguag Doire dhubhaig* : , Park Paire Dhroighnidh* 
Deucheran Diühh chea(th) r(amhn)an Drynlea Droigheanu liath 
ewar Deòir, Deòireach Drynoch An Droighneach* 
Dhu loch Dubh-loch Duart (Mull) Dubhart 
Diabeg Diabaig* ,(Lochalsh) Dubh àird i 
Dibidale Diobadal* ag A Duasdale Dubhastail : 
: f Inbhir-pheofharain* 2 see| Dubh-chraige, "KS d : l 
Dingwall d ee EE Beinn-dubh-chraige d 
Dippin Dà-pheighinn Dublin aile àth cliath* E 
Dirriemore An Diridh mor* Duchally Dubhchailigh* UM 
Dithrabh, Loch an- Loch an dithreibh* Duchary Dubhcharaigh* a 
Dluich Dlàth-fhaich Duff Dubh d 
Dochaird Dabhach ard Duffy see MacPhee ed 
Docharty, Glen Gleann Dochartaith Dugald Dighall | 4 
Dochcarty Do’ach Gartaidh* Dugaraidh Dubh-gharaidh* ` 
Dochfour Dabhach phur* Duheartach Dà-Irtich j n 
Dochrie Dabhach Duich, Loch I e oce li 
Doire seirbhe,Loch : : x | Duilater n Duibbleitir 1 
ka b Loch Doire na b-eirbhe* | Prt Lochan Loch an duibh leathaid ; 
Don, River Deathan* Duirnish sce Duirinish E 
Donald Domhnal), gen. -uill Duisker Dubh-uisge E 
Donnan’s Isle Eilean Donnan Duisky Dubh-uisge 4 
Original from 






Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS ATS 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN | 


| 


e = 


a NE =a 
- $ ~ 
us 

* 


= 


- 


geg en EE 


ENGLISH 
Dull 
Dulnain 
Dulsie Bridge 
Dumbarton 
—— shire 
Dumfries 
Dun, the 
Dunachton 
Dunad 
Dunaineroy 
Punaughton or 
Dunachton 
Dunaverty 
Dunbeath 
Dunblane 
Duncan 
Duncans, the 








shire 


Dull 1013 

GAELIC ENGLISH 
Dul* Dychlie 
Tvilnean Dyker's Burn 


Drochaid Dhuülthasaidh* 
Dun Breatunn* 
Siorramachd Dhun Breatunn 
Dum-ífris 

Siorramachd Dum-fris 

An Dùn 

see Dunaughton 

Dun Athad 

Dunan cruaidh 


Don Neachdainn 


Caisteal] Dun-àbhartaidh 
Dun Bheitheadh* 

Dun Blathain* 
Donnchadh, gen. -aidh 
Clann Donnchaidh 


Dun Can (Raasay) Dùn Canna* 


Duncanston 
Durconnel 
Duncow 
Duncraggan 


Duncraig( Lochalsh) Am Fasadh, Am F. àluinn, 


Duncrieve or Dun- 
crivie 

Dundee 
Dunderave 
Dunderawe 
Dundonnell 
—— — — — Lodge, 
. site of 
Dundurn 

Dunean 

Dune Alliscaig 
Dunfallandy 
Dunfermline 
Dunfin 

» Dunglas p 
Dun gobhal, Logie 
Easter 

Duniasgan 
Duuira 

Durkeld 
Dunloskin 
Dunmaglas 


Dunmore 
: Dunnet 

Dunolly 
Dunoon 
Dunrobin 
Dunscore 
Duuskaith 

Dunskeig 
Dunstafinage 
Duntaulich 


Duntelchack 


Dunure 
Dunvegan 
Dunvornie 
Dunyardil 
Dunyveg 
Dupplin 
Durine 


Bog a’ mhiodair* 
Dun-Chomhnuill 
Dun-coll* 
Dun-creagain* 


és chraobh 


un-déagh* 
Dün-dà-ràmh 
Dun an rudha 
Acha-dà-Dhómhnuill* 
An t-Eilean daraich* 
Düàn-düirn* 
Dun-ian i 
Dùn Alaisgig* 
Dun-falandaidh* 
Dun Pharlain 
Dun fionn 
Dun glas 


\ now An Dun* 


Dun (fh)iasgan 
Dun-iara’* 
Dun Chaillinn 
Dun-losgainn* 
Dun Mac.glais* 
Dùn MacTuathail,*(Drum- 
mond, Aberfeldy) 
Dun mar? 
Dunaid* 
Dun-ollaimh 
Dun ombain 
Dun-robain* 
Dun-sgoir 
Dun-sgath* 
Dunsgéitheig 
Dun-sta(fh)inis* 
Dun Teamhalach* 
Dun-deilcheig (i.e, Dun t- 
seilcheig)* 
Din-iubhair* 
Dun-bheagan 
Dun-bheirinidh 
Dun Dearduil 
Dun Naomhaig 
Dubhlinn 
Dubhraoin 


Duirinish, Lochalsh Diurinnis E 


Skye 





Called Dàthaich nam mogan and am Fearann 
mogannach, locally, by the inhabitants of 


Trotternish, 


Durnamuck 
— Durness 

Duror 

Duthil 


Digitized by 


Diurinnis 


Doire nam muc* 
Duirnis, Ditranais 
Duror 

Daoghal* 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


Dyne, Glen 
Dysart 

Ean, Loch-nan- 
Earavick 

Earn, R. 

, Loch 

, Strath 


Earnaich 


Earshader 
Easdale 
Eastertyre 
Eathie Burn 
Eay, Ben 
Ebost 

Eck, Loch 
Edderton 

— Farm 
Edderlinne 
Eddrachillis 
Eddraisk 
Eddraven 
Eden 
Edenkillie 
Edinan;ple 
Edinburgh 
Edincbip 
Edward 








DEE 





Kglish nam braren, 


Egypt 

Eidard, R. 
Eididh, Seéir-an- 
Eigen, Ben 

Eigg 


Earradale 


GAELIC 

Dubh-choille 
Allt an digeadair* 
Gleann domhain 
Diseart,* Diseart—CR 
Loch nan eun 
Earabhaig* 
Abhainn Eire 
Loch Eire 
Srath Eire z 
Ruàha àird, locally Aird 

Eirionnaich 
Iar-seadair* 
Eisdeal 
Iochdar-tire* ` 
Athaidh, Allt Athaidh 
Beinn Eighe* 
Eubost* 
Loch Aic 
Eadardun* 
Baile nam foitheachan* 
Eadarlinne* 
Eadar-dà-chaolais* 
Fadar-da-uisge* 
Eadar-dà-bheinn* 
Aodann* 
Aodann na coille* 
Aodainn Ambail* 
Dun Eideann 
Aodainn a’ chip* 
Imhear, Iomhar, Eideard 
Eaglais nam bràithrean 
An Eipbit 
Eidird 
Sgéir an t-séididh 
Beinn Éiginn* 
Eige, Eilean Eige 
Eilean nam ban mora 


An adjacent loch given in 0.S.M as Loch na 
mna móire, should be Loch nam ban móra. 


Eil, Loch 
Eilean-na-coomb 
Eilister 

Einig, River 
Eishart 
Elchaig, Glen 
Eldrable 
Eleraik 


Ellanvow 
Ellen-a-vulig 
Ellen-na-roan 
Ellen's Isle 
Ellon 

Elphin 

Elriek more 
Elruck 
Emaraconart 
Embo 
Endiart Water 
England 
English, adj. 





Englishman, an 
Enoch, Loch 
Eoradale 
Eorrapaidh 
Erbusaig 
Erchite 
Erchless 
Eribol 
Ericht, Loch 
Eriskay 
Erradale 


— language 


Loch Pall 

Eilean nan caoimh 
Aolastradh 

Eunag* 

Loch Eiseort 
Gleann Eilcheig* 
Eildirebal 

Iolaireig 

Gleann Hilge 
Eilginn* 

Ealasaid 

Eilear a’ bhogha 
Eilean a’ bhuilg* 
Eilean nan ron* 

An t-Eilean molach* 
Elain— Book of Deer* 
Elfionn, Ailfionn `, 
Eilrig mhor* 
Iolairig 
Tomaire-comhnard 
Éuraboll 

Eideart 

Sasunn, gen. -uinn 
Sasunnach 

Ai Bheurla 
Sasunnach 

Loch Eanach 
Eòrradal* ` 
Eòrrabaidh* 
Earbasaig* 
Earchoid, Airchoighd* 
Earghlais* 

Éurabo!l 

Loch Eireachd* 
Aoraisgeidh* 
Eàrradal* 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


ENGLISH 
Erraid 
Erribol 
Errick, Strath 
Erridale 
Errocht, Loch 
Erskine 
Eskadale 
Eskinnish 
Essich 
Ethie 
Etive, Glen 


, Loch 
Ettridge 
Euphemia 
Eurach 
Europe 
European, an 
Evaig, Glen 
Evan 
Evanachan 
Evanton 
Evelex 
Ewe, Isle 





Ey, Glen 


Eye, Peninsula of 


——, Loch 
Fain 
Fairburn 
Falkirk S 
Falloch, Glen 
Fanans 
Fannich, Loch 
Fannyfield 
FaraHne, Loch 


Farar, Glen Strath Gleann Srath Farar 


¥ arikaig Water 
Farlary 
Farness 


Erraid 


GAELIC 
Eilean Earraid* 
see Eribol 
Srath Fharragaig* 
see Erradale 
Loch Eireachd* 
Arascain 
Eisgeadal 
Easgiunis 
Easaich* 
Athaidh* 
Gleann Éite 
Loch Bite ~^ 
Eadrais (Eadar-dà-eas) 
Oighrig 
Iùbhrach 
An Roinn Eòrpa 
Eòrpach 
Gleann Fhiodhaig* 
Eòghann 
Eochanachan 


‘Bail’ Eòghainn, am Bail’ or 


ibh'eag* 
Eilean Log 
Loch Iù ` 
Iù, Iùbh 
Eòghann 
Gleann Bigh®* 
An Aoidh* « 
Loch na h-uidhe* 


' Na Féithean* 
: Braon, Farabraoin* 


An Eaglais bhreac 
Gleann Falach* 

Na Fàna 

Loch Fainich* : 
Am Bog riabhach* 
Loch Farralainn* 


Farragaig* 
Farrlaraigh* 
Fearnais 


Far Out (or Farrid | ay Fharaid* 


Head) 
Farquhar 
Farquharson 


-— © 


Invercauld 








Farr 


Farragon, O.S.M. 


Fasagrianach 


Fashren 
Fasnacloich 
Fasnakyle 
Fassifern 
Faygarvick 


Fearn 





parish 
Fearna beag 
Fearna mór 
Fernan ` 
Fehait 
Fein 
Eellon mór 
Fender 
Fendom 
Feochan, Loch 
Fergus 
Fergusson 
————— — — of 
Balmacruchie 
— of 
Daifallandy 





——8, the 


Fearchar, gen, -air 
MacFhearchaír 


* Mac Mhic Fhionnlaigh ” 


Siol Fhionnlaigh, 
Clann Fhearchair 


Far 

Feargan* 

An Fhasadh chrionaich,gen. 
na Fasadh crionaich 

Faisbheinn* 

Fas na cloiche* 

Fas na coile* 

Am Fasadh-fearna* 

Féith a’ gharaidh bhig 


Manachainn Rois, locally a’ 


Mharachainn* 
Sgire na Manachainn 


\ Na Fearnan* (Applecross) 


Fearnan (Loch Tay) 
An Fheith bhaite* 
Fé-liune 

Faoileann mor 
Fionndar* 

Na Fana* 

Loch Faochain 
Fearghas 
MacFhearghais 


“ MacAididh '' 
‘* MacFhearghais " 


1014 


ENGLISH 
Fergussons, the 
Ferindonald 


Fort Augustus 


GAELIC 
Clann Fhearrzhais 
Fearann Dómnhnuill* 


The district from the Alness river to the burn 
of Allt na lathaid to the east of Dingwall. 


Ferintosh An Toisighea cud* 
Fermoy Fearnmhuighe 
Fernaig Fearuaig* 
Fernate, Glen Fearnaid* 
Fern-na-more Fearna mór . 
Fernsdale Fearnasdail i 
Ferrin Vir Quire Fearann MhicGuire 
Fersit Fearsaid 
Feshie, Feisidh 
Gleanu Feisidh 





Feus, the races 
Fiannaidh, Sgorr- 


nam- 
Fiddich, Glen 
Fife 

Fifeshire 
Fillan 


, Strath 





Finbracken 
Fincastle 
Findatie 
Finderlie 


Findhorn, River 
Findon 
Findynate 


Fingask 


Fingland 
Finglas 
Finglen 
Finlarig 
Finlas, Glen 
Finlay 
Finlayson 


Finnan, Glen 


Finnart 
Firemore 


"recae E 
FitzGerald 
Fivig 
Flanders 

-— Moss 
Fleteher 
Fleet 

-——, Strath 
Fleuchary, 
Fleucherries 
Flodday 
Flodigarry 
Flodobay 
Flora 
Flowerdale 








(Old) 
—— House 
(New) 
Fiuehlady 
Fodderletter 
Fodderty 
Foin Bhein 





Folais (Gairloch ) 


Forbes 
——-—es, the 
Forres 
Forsinain 
Forsinard 
Fort Augustus 


House 


Sgorr nam Fiann(t)aidh 
wi Fidich 


core o ER Fiobha 
Faolan 
Na Sraithibh,Sgire Sraith- 
d ibh. ld name—Srath 
Eitrieh 
Fionn-bhreacan 
Fenn chasial* 
Fionn-dabhach 
Fionnlarach 
Uisge Éire* 
Fionndun* 
Fonn doimhneid* 
Fionnghaisg (now Glunes, 
near Ino-rness.) 


Fionnghteaan* 
Fionniairig* 

Gleann Fiennghlais* 
Fiennlagh (not -adh) 
MaeFhionnlaich 
Gleann Fiuan* 
Gleann fhionain—CE 
Fionn-aird 

Am faithir mór 
Faisgairidh 

Mac an iasgair 

se hs an ot ie 


t, Gearailteach 
SC 
Flan 


ras 
A’ Mhome Fhlànrasach 
Mac an fhleisdeir 

leod 


F 
Srath Fleoid 


Fliuchairidh 


Fledaigh* 

Eilean a’ chinne mhóir 
Fleód a’-bhaigh 
Fionnaghal 

Am Baile mér* 


An Taigh Dige* 


Taigh Dige nan gorm leac* 


Fliuch leathad* 

Farleitir* 

Fodhraitidh* 

Foinnebheinn* i 

Fóghlais* 

Foirbeis, Foirbeiseach 

Na Foirbeisich 

Farrais* 

Forsain-fhàin* 

Forsain-àird* 

Cill Chuimein l 


ENGLISH 
Forth, River 
Fortingall 
Fortrose 
Fort William 
Foss 
Fowlis 
Foyers 
, Falls of 
France 
Frances 
Francis 
Fraser 








of Lovat 
8, the 
Fraserburgh 
Freeburn 








Freevater (or Bal- Frith Bhatair* (i.e. Walter's 
nagown Forest) 


of Culbokie 


e Cen Inbhir-lóchaidh 


ag 
Palais (= Foghlais). 
Foithir* 
Eas na smuid* 
An Fhraing, 
Frangag 
Frangan . 
Friseil, Frisealach 
** Mac Uistein ” 
see Lord Lovat 
Na Frisealaich 
Baile nam Frisealach 
Allt na Frithe* 


Forest) 


French (language) Fraingeis 


Ag ionnsachadh na Fraingeis, learning the 





Prench language M 
Fresgill Freisgil* 
Freuchie Fraochaidh* 
e , Loc Loch Fraochaidh* 
Frew, Fords of Na Friü'acban* 
Friza, Loch Loch Phrisa 
Fruin, Glen Gleann Freoin* 
Fuday Island Fudaigh 
Fullarton MacLothaidh—Arran 
Fura Island Eilean Futhara, E. Fura* 
tery royll) V An Fhüirneis* 
Fyne, Glen Gleann Fhine 
-——, Loch Loch Fine a 
Fyrish, Cnoo Foighris* 


Gael 


Gàidheal, gen.sing. & n. pl. 
Gàidheil om 2 


Gaelic (language) A’ Ghàidhlig 
i Gaiz* 


Gaick 
Gairletter 


och 





site of 
Gairlochy 
Gairnog Water 
Galbraith 
Gallon 


Gallovie 
Gallow Hill (Tar- 
bat 


Gearr-leitir 
Aird na Caillich 
Loch gearr 
Gearr-loch 


Achadh Deuthasdal* 


Gearrlochaidh 
Goirneag* 

Mac a’ Bhreatnaich 
GaHan 
Gealagaidh 


l Cnoc na croiche 


Galloway, Mull of Maol nan Gall 





Ga/lowshill, (Ur- Cnoc a’ chrochaidh - 
quhart 
Galway Baile nan gailbhinn 
Gantocks Na Gamhn(t)aich 
Ganuisg Gann-uisge 
Gany see Geanieg 
p An Garbad* 
bd 
Garbhchriochan see Dictionary 
Gardenstown Baile-gharaidh 
Gargustown Baile-ghargaidh* 
Garioch Gairbheach* 
Garrabost Garbost* 
Garrachra Garbh-chea(th)ra(mh) 
Garraron Garbharan 
Garrowchorran Garbh-chorran 
LC Glen, Perth- 
ire 
| , Inver- Gleanna garadh 


| ness ; 
(geg? , Raver, Perth \ Garadh 


Dir IT 


PE DATE =a Low =, = 
L L (BLUE ri 17 Li 
INTERNET ARCHIVE 


Forth 1015 
GAELIC ENGLISH 
Abhainn dubh Garry, River 
Fartairchill* (Gairloch) 
A’ Chananaich* Garrynahine 
Gartachara 


Garten, Boat of 
Gartgunnal 


Glassary 


GAELIC 


} A’ Ghairbhe* 


Gearraidh na h-aibne * 
Gart a’ charraigh 

Coit Ghartain* 
Gart-dhuineil 


arth Gart* 
Gartie (Mid & W.) Gartaidh* 


Gartloskin 
Gartmain 
Gartmore 
Gartness 
Garty 
Garva beag 
——— more 
Garvanachy 
Garvary 
Garve 

, Loch 
Garvellan 
Garvelloch 





Gauer, (river) 
Geanies 


Gearran, Beinn na 


OSM. 
Gedd, Loch 
Geddes 
Geddeston 
Geofiry 
George 
Germany 
Geusachan 
Geyzen Briggs 
Banks 
Ghaordy, Meall 
Ghiuthais, Alt a’ 
mhór 
Ghruinnard 
Gigha 
Gight, Bog of 
Gilbert 
Gilchrist 
Gillanders 
Gillespie 
Gillies 
Gilmour 
Gilp, Loch 
Gilroy 
Girnag Water 
Gisla, River 
Glackbeath 
Glackour 
Glacnasenshesen 
Gladfield 
Gladsmuir 
Glaickarduich 
(Knockbain) 
Glaickerduck 
(Urray) 
Glaickmore 
Glaisven 
Giamis 
Glascairn 
Glascarnock 
Glaseow 
Glaslet 
Glasletter 
Glass 
—ÀN Loch 
-——, Strath 
-——, River 
Glassary, 


| Glaic an dubhaig* 


Gart-losgainn 
Gart-meadhon 
Gart mór 

Gart an eas 
Gartaidh 
Garbh-ath beag 
— mor 
Garbhan achaidh 
Garbhairidh* 
Gairbh* 

Loch Maol Fhinn* 
Garbh Eilean 
Garbh Hileach* 
Garadh Bheolain 
Garbhaidh* 
Gai:g 

Gamhar* 
Gàthan* 


Beinn Garaig 


An Geadloch* 
Geadais* 

Baile nan Geadas 
Goiridh 

Seòras, Seòrsa, Deòrsa 
A’ Ghearmailt 
Giùthsachan* 





! Drochaid an obh* 


Meall Ghaoirdidh* 


1 Allt a’ mheirbh ghiubhais* 


Gruinneard* 

Giogha 

Bog na gaoithe* 

Gillebride, Gilleabarb 

Gillechriosd 

Gilleandrais 

Gilleasbuig 

Gill’Iosa, Liosach [L. is also 
a native of Lismore.] 

Mac ’Ghille mhoire 

Loch-gilp 

Mac ’Ghille ruaidh 

Abhainn Goirneag* 

Giosla 

Glaic-beithe 

A’ Ghlaic odhar* 

Glac nan sean innsean” 

Leac a’ chlamhain* 

Sliabh a’ chlamhain* 


A’ Ghlaie mhór* 
Glas-bheinn* 
Glamas 

Clais ’chairn* 
Clais-charnaich 


Glaschu 

Glasleathad* 

Glasleitir* [—CR 
Gleanna Glais* Gleann G. 


Loch Glais* 

Srath Ghlais* 

An t-uisge Glasach 
Glasairidh 


r 1] TT r 


N rp i oh 
| | d AT E- E L " Cie 
= V EI. LI - 


LLINOIS 


E KE? I^ ^ mi E s P "Ir e) KL d 


i i 
La 
d | 


Glasven 1016 Immirrioch 
ENGLISH GAELIC ENGLISH GAELIC 
Glasven Glaisbheinn* Grumb-inore Grub mór 
Gls sswell Glasaill Grumbie Grombaidh 
Glecknahavil Glac na sabhal Guinag River Goibhneag 
Gledfield Leth 'chlamhaig,* Guisachan Giuthsachan 
Leac 'chiamhaig* Gullion, Ben Beinn Ghualainn 
Glenbucket Gleann Buichead* Gulvain Gaothail-Uheinn 
Gleubuckie Gleann Bocaidh* Guun Guinue, Gunnach 
Glencroe Gleann cro* of Braemore ** Mac Sheumais Chataich” 
Glendebadel Gleann Diobadail* Gunns, the Na Gunnaich 
Glenelg Gleann Eilg Gylen Gastle Caisteal Gaoilean 
Glenfruin Gleann Freòin* t‘alkirk Hacraig 
Glengyle Gleann Goill* Hallater Allt thaobh-leitir 


ciency (Se ES 
Glenshiel Gleann Seile* 


Glenstockdale Gleann Stocadail* 
Glenure Gleann Iubha:* 
Gloe, Ben-y- Beinn a ghló* 


Glomach, Falls of Eas na Glómaich* 
Gloy, Glen Gleann Glaocidh* 


Gluich An Glaodhaich* 

Goat Fell Gaoda-bheinn* 

Gobagrepan Gob a’ ghrianan $ 
Goraidh, Goiridh [name fa- 

Godfrey cctiously applied to the fox] 

Golspie Goillspidh 


Geodha nan calman 
Geodha nan dunan 


Go-na-calman 
Go-na-dunan 





Gonval Conn-bhaile 
Gooseburn Allt nan geadh* 
Gordon Gòrdan, Gòrdanach 
- , Duke of An Gòrdanach 

-- Hall Lag an Nòtair 





Na Gòrdanaich 
Gormag* 


Gordons, the 
Gormack Burn 





Gorstan An Goirtean fraoich 
Gortendoil Gort an doill 
Gorton An Goirtean 
Gourock Goraig 
Govan, Cille Mhaoil Chaluim 
Gow Gobha 
Gowrie Gobhraidh* 
-- , Glen Gleann Gobhraidh* 
Graat, Allt Allt grannda* 
arare ; Giorsal 
Grada SECH 

(now Badvoon) } Gràdal 
Graham Greumach 


Na Greumaich 

Monadh Dhruim Uachdair 
west of Struan ; Monadh 
Minigeig east of Struan* 


Grahams, the 


Grampians, the { 








Grant Grannd 
of Grant An Granndach 
ae E m MacPhadruig T 
Grantown Baile nan Granndaich 
Grantully Gar’n tulaich* 
Gray Ciaran 
Greece A’ Ghréig 


Green Dasses 


Meall gorm* 
Greenleonachs 


Lianagan a' chuil-bhàicidh* 


Greenock Grianaig 

Greenstone Point Rudha na cloiche uaine* 
Gregor Griogair 

Gregory MacGriogair 


Griam, Loch 
Grivie Water 


Loch Ghriam* 
Griabhaidh * 


Grosebay Greosabhagh 
Grubmore see Grumb more 
Grudie Gruididh 

—--—, Glen Gleann Gruididh 
—-—' Water Abhainn Grüididh 


Gruinard River, : x 
“the Rockies” in Na Coineasan 


Grumb-beg Grub beag 





Hainasord, Loch 
Hanty, Glen-a- 
Harold 
Harold’s Rock 
Harris 

, Glen 
Hartfield 
Haskeir 
Heathfield 
Hebraic, adj. 
Hebrides, the 





Loch Chamasort* 
Gleann shean-taighe 
Arailt, Haral 
Creag Warail 

Na hb-Earradh 
Gleann thairis 
Coille Mhüiridh* 
Haisgeir* 
Cal-fhraochaidh 
Eabhrach 

Innse Ghall 


Hebrew;,(language) Eabhra 


——— (person) 
Hector 

Hee, Ben 
Heisgeir 

Helen 

Hell’s Glen 
Helmsdale 
Henderson 
Henry: 


.| Hercules 


Herne Bay 
Herries, the 
Hervie, Glen 
Heskernich, Ben 
Highbank, Lewis 
Highfield, Urray 
Highland, adj. 
Highlands, the 
Hilton 

Holland 

Holy Loch 

Hope 

Horn, Ben 
Horseshoe Bay 


Eabhrach, gen, -aich 
Eachunn 

Beinn shith 
Hei(l)sgeir* 

Eilidh 

Gleann Iarruinn* 


Bun-Illidh (1),* B.ilidh—CR 


MacEanruig 
Eanruig 

Iorcall, gen. -aill 
Camus na corra 

Na h-Earradh 
Gleann thairbhidh 
Beinn Theasgarnaich* 
Tabàc 

Ciarnaig 
Gàidhealach 

A’ Ghaidhealtachd 
Bail’ a’ chnuic 

An Olaind 

An Loch Seunnta* 
Hób* 

Beinn Horn* 
Crudh-an eich 


Gu'm bic’ ait’ am bi thu 'san là, bi an Crudh 
an-eich a’s t-oidhche. spend the day where 
you like, but spend the night in Horseshoe Bay, 
(a well-known anchorage in Sound of Kerra- 
ra)—old direction for sailors, 


Hourn, Loch Loch Shuirn 

Hugh Uisdean, Eòghann in Argyl? 

Hughstown Cnocan cruaidh* 

Humberston see Upper Kildun 

Hungerhill Cnoc an acrais 

Hunish, Ru Rudh Hünais 

Huntly Hunndaidh 

Hurdy Hill Cnoc Gille Chürdaidh 

Husabost Husabost* 

Hutcheson MacUistein 

Hutick, Ben Beinn Thutaig 

Tag, Glen Gleann Fhiodhaiz 

Iarlish (island) Earlais* 

Iarlraig Iolairig 

Icolmkill or Iona I, i Chaluim Chille, Eilean I 

Idrigil Idrigil,* lodraigil—CR 

Ilachaneuve Na h-Eileacha Naomha* 
near them are.. Na h-Eileacha Dubha" 

Ima, Ben Beinn Ime* 

Immer An t-Iomaire 

Immeroin Iomaire Eóghàin* 


Immirricch, (now t Sal a è 
Strathyre village An t-Ioma're Riabhach 
Original from 


Léen Ee 
UNIVERSITY 


k : 
| mo A ALA — A h gm 
J CA SES) d A L H Pir rol L7 xk 


- 


d EN E a e c AT 
U J Ki KK ! LJ » e | 


Inch 1017 Kerryoro 
ENGLISH GAELIC ENGLISH GAELIC 
Inch Innis Ire, Strath Srath-iodhair or -eadhair* 
Inchaduey Ireland Eireann 
Inchaidan, Ken-4 Innis Chailtnidh Isabella Iseabal 
3 more : Isauld I's-allt (i.e. Innis-allt)* 
nchaffray nnis-aifrinn Isla Ile, an t-Eilean Desch 

Inchard, Loch Loch Uinnseard ure mp Innis dian* 
Inchbae Innis beith Italy An Eadailt 
Inchberry Innis bhàiridh James Seumas, gen. -ais 
Inchcape, Suth’d Innis ceap Jamestown Baile Shiamais (Sheumais) 
Inch Egra Innis Sheighear Jamieson MacShimidh 
Inchina Innis an àth* | _ | James Temple Cnoc Seumas Chaisteil 
Inchintaury Innis an t-searaigh, Innis| Jane ine 

: an t-tamhraidh Janet, Jessie Seònaid 
Inchkeith Innis Ché Janetown Torr nan clar, Baile Séine 
Inchnairn Innis an fhearna* Jeannie Sionag 
Inchnevy. Innis-neimbidh* JESUS CHRIST IOSA CRIOSD 
Inchommie Innis a’ chomanaich Jewry Judhachd 
Inchoraig Innis na seamraig ohn Iain, Eoin 
Inchree Innis ruidhe, Iunis righ The latter form is always used in Scripture, 
Inchrory ` Innis Ruairidh? and colloquially in Skye—Iain*in other parts. 
Inchvannie Innis Mheannaidh * Seathan " appears in popular lore. 
Inchvuilti Innis &'mhuilt Johnson Maclain 
Indies,{the East Na h-Innseachan shìos Johnstone Bail’-Iain 
——-,the West Na h-Innseachan shuas Joseph Sedsaidh 
Inellan Eun-eilean, I an eilean Judith Siubhan 
inens (K. of Bute) Na h-aoinidh Julia Silis 
Ingan Iongan Jura Diura 
Inion Na h-inghean --—, Sound of an Linne Rosach 
Innerwick Isbhir-mhuice Kailtown Bail’ a’ chàil, a by-name of 
Innisfallen Innis faillean a partof Dingwall retained in a localinn 
Innie Aoineadh —** Baile chaul inn.” 
Innisherrich Innis searraich Kaimes Camas* 
Innistore. Innis torran Kallin, Uist Na Ceallan 
Inshlampie Innis lanndaidh Camus nam muclach, lo- 
Inver Inbhir Kames cally Camus 
Inveraithio Inbhirathaidh Kanaird, Loch Loch Cainneart 
Inveran Inbhirean Kathel Cathal 
Inverary Inbhir Aora Katewell Ciadail 
Inverasdale Inbhiràsdal Katherine Catriona 
Inverawe Inbhir Atha Katrine, Loch Loch Ceiteirein* 


Inverbroom, or 
Balloan 


or Foy Lodge 
Invercannich 
Jnvercarron 
Invercassltey 
Invercauld 
Inverchaolain 
Inverchaple 
Invercruskie 
Invercoe 
-Inyercoran 
Inveresragan 
Inverewe House 
Inverfarigaig 
Invergarry 
Inverghueseran 


Invergordon 


. Inveriavenie 
Inverie 
Inverinate 
lnverkeithing 
Inverlael 
Inverlochlarig 
Inverlochy 
Invermark 
Invermeran (Glen- 

lyon) 
Invernahyle 
Inverness 
Inversuaid 
Inveruglas 
lona 


Di IT 


QUU ENS 
a A F 1 
INTERNET AR 


CHIV 


! Bail' an loin 
Inyerbroom Lodge 


An Fhothaidh 


ed Chanaich* 

Inbhir Charrann* 

Inbhir Charsla* 

Inbhir Callaidh 

Inbhirchaolain 

Inbhir-chapull 

Inbhir Chro«gaidh* 

Inbhir Chomhann 

Inbhir-chorainn* 

Inbhir-easragain* 

Taigh na Pluie aird 

Inbhir Faragaig* 

Inbhir-gharadh 

Inbhir Ghiuthsaran 

An Rudha, Rudha "nach 
Breacaidh (’nach=aon- 
ach, market)* 

Inbhir-riamh-ainnidh 

InbhirEigh,* I. Aoighe— CR 

Inbhir-ionaid 

Inbhir-Cheitein 

Inbhir-Lathail 

Inbhir Lóchlairig 

Inbhir-lóchaidh 

Inbhir-mhairc 


Inbhir Meuran 


Inbhir na h-aighle 
Inbhir Nis 
Inbbir-snathaid 
Inbhir Dhübhghlais 
see icolmkili 


Loch nan ceal* 

Ceann a’ chaolais 
Ceann Loch Biorbhaidh 
Loch Ciaran 

Ceann na cabaig 


Keal, Loch-na 
Keanchilish 
Keanlochbervie 
Kearan, Loch 
Keboch Head 


, 








Keir Cathair 
Keiss Céis 
Keith, (person) MacShithich—CR, Ceiteach 
Kellon Ceall-fhonn 
Kelso, New Eadar dha charrainn 
Keltie, Kinross Coillte 
Keltney Burn Cailtnidh* 
Kelty Cailtidh* 

A name of frequent occur- 
Kenmore, enence, generally m., but 

sometimes f.—CR 

» LUE Apple- | 4! Gheann'/mhor (s.f.) 
-- , L. Tay An Ceann'mhor Geo.) 

Ceannaideach, MacUalrai 
Kennedy d MacUaraig 
Kennedys, the Clann MhicUaraig 
Kenneth Coinneach, gen. Ach, 
Kennoway Ceann a’ bhaigh 
Kenvar Ceann &' mhara 
Keoldale Cealdail 
Keppoch Ceapach 
Keppochmuir An Sliabh Ceapanach 
Keprigan Ceapragan 
Kernsary Cearnai sar 
Kerr Ciar, Mac Ghille Chiar 
Kerrara Cearrara* 


An Ceathramh Comh’lach 
Abhainn Chearraidh 
An Ceathramh cruaidh 


$8 


Kerry, Cowal 
Kerry River 
Kerrycroy 




















: xerrysdale 1018 Kinnamonie 
ENGLISH a GAUE SE Eran P GAELIC. 4 
ail-chearraidh, A' Chath- ilmahog ill-ma-Chu 
Kerrysdale air bheag Kilmallie Ciil Mhàilidh 
Kerrow an Ceathramh :Kilmahu Cill-mo-Chua 
Kerrowaird Ceathramh ard Kilmahumag Cill-mo-Chbumag 
Kerrowgair aspis s gearr Speen ee 
ort Cheiseig, ilmaluag ill-mo-Luaig* 
d Ferry ő Aiseig Cheiseig Kilmaree T Ma Ruibhe* y 
iarnan ea(th)r(amhn)an : d Cille-marnag,* 
Kiel Cill ! Kilmarnock Gerten OR. 
Kilarrow Cill-a-rubha Kilmaronag Cill-mo- Rónag 
Kilbarchan Cill Bearchain* Kilmartin Cill Mhartainn 
Kilberry Cill-bheiridh Kilmelford Cill mhealaird 
Kilbirnie Cuil-bhraonaidh* Kllmeny Cill Mheanaidh ` 
Kilblaan Cill-Bhlathan Kilmichael Cille Mhicheil 
Kilbrando Cill Bhrannain, Kilmodan. Cill Mhaodan 
n Cill Bhreanan Kilmonivaig Cill-mo-Naomhaig 
Kilbrennan An Caolas'Ranndanadh* — | Kiimorack Cille Mhorag (St. Moroc) 
Sound An Caolas Sranndanach* | Kiimore Cill Mhoire 
Kilbride m Brighde i uud nr Oban A’ Chille mhór 
: ill Chalmaineala, ilmorie 
Kilcalmonell Cill Cholmain Eala Kilmory Cille Mhoir 
Kilcalumkill Cill Chalum chille Kilmuir e 
Kilchattan Cill Chatain Easter š 
Kilchiaran Cill Chiaran Kilmun Cille Mhunna à 
Kilchoan Cill Chomhghan Kilmure Cille Mhoire $ 
Kilchoman Cill Choman Kilnave ` Cill naoimh d 
Kilchrennan Cill Chreanain Kilninian Cill Ninean [ 
Kilchrist Cill Chriosd Kilninver Cill an inbhir 
Kilchurn Caol a' chüirn Kilpatrick Cill Phadair 4 
Kilcoy Cuil-challaidh* Kilravock Cill Rathaig* (ME 
Kildalton Cill Daltan Kilronan Cill Ronain 
Kildary Caoldaraidh* Kilsyth Cillsaidh . 
Kildavie, Weem ` Cill-dà-bhi Kiltarlity | Cill Taraghlain 
Kildermorie Cill Mhoire* gie district Bràigh na h-àirde” 
Kildonan Cill Donnan* Kiltearn Cill Tighearna* 
Kildrummy Cill Drumaidb Kilvarie Cille Mha-ruibh 
Kilduft Coille-dubh Kilvaxter Cille Bhacstair 
Kildun Cill-duinn* Kin, Glen Gleann cumhang 
e- ,Upper,now Y cay ani nica ch Kinbeachie Cinn a’ bheathchaidh* S 
Humberstone j ei Fin uscnsrae Kinbrace Cinn a’ bhràist 
Kilean Cil Eathain Kincardine Cinn Chardainn 
Kilelegan Cill Fheileagan eege Ceann na creige* 
Kilellan Cill Ellan neurdy, i : : 
Kileonain Cill Adhamhnan Strathspey den Geier 
e S Cill Findchan sen A :nn.chirdaidnit 
Kilfinichen Cill Fhinichin 3 Rosemarie inicie 
Kilfinnan Cill Fhianan indeace iun-déis 
Kilkenzie Cill Choinnich e- CNL fatzege, $ Cinn-déis mhér* 
Kilkerran Cill Chiaran of oper ! \ Kn ae 
Kilkivan Cill Chaomhan Bayfield te Ciun: dela Dee Shita 
Killagruar Cill a’ ghriothaire oi 2 LILCIC, t e * 
Killanallan CUI an &iüein now Ankerville f Cinn-déis bheag 
Kil!andrist Cill Anndrais Kinder, Loch Loch “eannda* 
Killanish Cill Aonghais Kindrochet . Cinn-urochaid 
Killarow see Kilarrow Kinellan Cinn-eilein* 
Killarney, Ireland, Cilleavuaidh Kingairloch Ciun Ghéarrlocl 
Killean, Appin Cill Sheathain, C, Eathain | Kingarbh Cinn-gharbh 
Killen Cill Fhannaidh,C. Annaidh* | Kingarth Ceann-garbh 
near ittis... .... Cnoc an teampuill* Kinglass Conghlas 
Killearn; Cill’ Earnan Kingoldrum Cinn Cholldrum* c 
Killearnan Cill Iürnan Kingsburgh Cinnse-burg è —  ' 
Killennan Cill Adhamhnan King’sCross, Arran Peighinn na croise 
Kilihounich Cill Choiunich Kingshouse Taigh 'n rìgh 
Killichassie Cill a chasaidh Kingscauseway Cabhsair an righ 
Killichronain Cill Chronan Kingussie Cinn a Ghiuthsaich 
Killiecrankie CoilleChnagaidh,alsoCoill’ a’ Kinkell Ceann na coille 
Chreathna/ch: [different parts.) The battle Kinloch Ceann Loch 


was fought at Raon Ruairidh, near Urrard. 


Killiehuntley 
Killiemore 
Killilan 

Killin 
Kil'ineuar 
Killisport 
Killocraw 
Kilmachalmaig 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


Coille Chunndainn* 
A’ Chil! mhór 

Cill Fhao!ain* 

Cill Fhinn 

Cill an iubhair 
Caolasport* 
Coill-chnó 
Cill-mo-Chalmaig 


Kinloch beg. beag. ` 
Kinlochbervie Ceann Loch Biorbhaidh 








| Kinloch Luichart Ceann Loch Luicheirt 


Kinloch Moidart Ceann Loch Modert 


Kinlochmore Ceann Loch mór Nus: 
Kinlochspelvie: Ceann Loch Spealbhaidh 
Kinnaird .Ceann na h-àird 
Kinnairdie Cinnàrdaidh* 
Kinuamoine Ceann na mdine*® 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS ATS 


URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 








H 
e 
| 
-— 
| 
t 
ei 
| 
| 
` 
| 
4 


— EY 


M 

b dha n d 
ane | it 
AL Ab A NEUE. 


* 
A 


o ry 


Sek 2 





Kinnell 1019 — — 
ENGLISH GAELIC ENGLISH 
Kinneil Cinn-alla* Braemar) 
Kinnellan Cinn eilein Lamentation Hill 
Kinettles Cinn it'ais (t soft)® 0.S.M. 
Kinniachdrach Cinn iochdarach Lamlash, Loch 


Kinnouth, Mull of Maol na h-Oth 


Kinrive Ceann-ruighe 
Kinross Ceannrois 
Kintail Cinntàile*(i.e. C. an t-sàile) 





, native of Tàileach, Sàileach 








Kintalen Cinn an t-sailein 
Kintra Ceann-tragha, Cinn-tragha 
Kintyre Cinntire 
Kirkaig Abhainn;Chiacaig 
Kirkan Na Cearcan* 
Kirkburn ` Caochan na h-eaglais 
Kirkcudbright Cille Chuithbeirt : 
"RS : Sgìre cnoc na gaoithe 
pru arte) 1 Sire: Mhoire—OR 
site of par- 
ish church, for- }Cnoc Mhoire 
merly Wardlaw 
Kirkiboll Circe-poll 
` eng : Circe-post 
church of’ LO Mhicheil* 
rish of : } Sgire Mhicheil* 
rksheaf. SE mhór s i 
n Clachan Aillseach, 
Kirkton, oe locally an Clachan 
— ———-, Golspie — Baile na h-eaglais 
Kirktown Baile Ba cille 
Kirkwall Baile na h-eaglaig 
Kishorn Ciseorn* 
pus Pete s 
nappac ’ Chnapaic 
Knock An ade” 
Knockan Cnocan 
Knockancuirn Cnocan caoruinn 
Knockando Cnoc cheannachd 
Knockandialteig Cnoc an dialtaig* 
Knockangle Cnoc aingil 
. Knockantoul Cnoc an t-sabhail* 
Knockbain an Caoc bàn* 
Knocheushin C€noc nan cuirean 
Knockfarrel Cnoc-fearralaidh* 
Knockantinny Cnoc an teine 
Knocklea Cnoc liath 
Knocklearachz Cnoc-cléirich 
Knock Mulreesh Cnoc Mhaol-rise 
Knocknacean Cnoc nan ceann* 
Knocknahar Cnoc na h-aire* 
Knocknavie Cnoc an fhéich bhuidhe 
Knoydart Cnoideart x 
Kyle (district) Coille 
Kyle Akin Caol Acain 
Kyleakin (hamlet) Scalpa ’chaoil 
Kyle of Lochalsh An Caol* 
aylescow e onient 
aolas Bóideach or 
Kyles of Bute Na Caoil Bhódach 
Kyllachy Coileachaidh 
Lachlan Lachlann, gen. -ainn 
Lagalochan . Lag an lochan 
. Laganchauldin Lagan challtuinn* 
Lagavulin Lag a’ mhuilinn 
Laggan An Lagan 
Laghura' Ladharra 
Laglingartan Lag-luingartan 
Lagnaha Lag na h-aibhne 
Laichley, Loch Loch Ligh* 
Laid An Leathad 
-—— House Taigh an leathaid* 
Lair Luirg* 


Làiriz Ghruamach, 
O0.S.M. (between 


Làirg Dhrüà* 
Aviemore and 


MOMS KE rea diy 
WIERNE! ARCHIV 


Lamond 
Lamont 


UE 
Lebe ———— es 


GAELIC 


| Oreag a’ choinneachan® 


Loch an eilein 
Laman 
MacLaomuinn 


Lamont of Lamont MacLaomuinn 


Lamonts, the 
Lanark 


Lanarkshire 


Lapich, Scour-na- 


Larachantivore 
Largiemore 
Largs, Ayrshire 
Largs, Kintyre 
Larne, Ireland 
Latheron 





parish 
= wheel 
Lawers 
<a, Ben 
Lawrence 
Laxdale 
Laxford 
Leachkarlem 
Leacoliaguin 





‘Leadnalubcroy, 


Lealty 
Leamnamuic 
Lean, Glen 
Leanagboyach 
Leanaig 

Lean Carn 
Learnie 
Leault 
Lechanaich 
Leckmelna 
Lecknary 
Leckyvroun 
Ledbeg 
Ledgowan 
Ledi, Ben 
Ledmore 
Lednagulin 
Lednock, Glen 
Lee, Loch 
Leeks 


Lees 


Leieh 
Leiravay 
Leith 
Lemlair 
Lennie 


Lennox 
Lentran 


Lephinchaple 
Lephinkill 
Lergychoniemore 
Lernock 

Leslie 
Lesmore 
Lethonn 
Letter 
Letterchall 
Lettermay 
Letters 

Letter Walton 
Lettie 


Clann Laomuinn 

Leannüraic za 

{ Siorramachd Lannraig— 
Bliadhna Thearlaich 965. 

Leanndaidh 

Langal* 

La(n)raig,* Lannraig—CR 

Laoighcionn 

Laoiginn 

Scurr na Lapaich* 

Larach an Taigh mhóir 

An Leargach mhór 

Na Leargaidh Ghallda 

Na Leargaidh Chinntireach 

Lathurna 

Lathroinn, Latharan—CE 

Sgire Latharan 

Latharan a' phuill* 

Labhar 


Beinn Labhair 


A 


. Labhruinn 
. Lacasdail* 


Camus-bhradan 

Leac an leum 

Leac Ola(th)again 
Leathad na lub cruaidh 
Leth-alltaiah 

Leum na muice 

Glen Leathann 

Léanag bhoidheach 
Léanaig* 

An Leathan carn 
Leatharnaidh* 
Leth-allt 

An Leachanaich* 

Leac Mailm* 
Leac-nathraoh 

Leac a’ bhróin 

Leathad beag 

Leathad a’ ghobhainn* 
Beinn Lidi,* B. Lididh—CR 
An Leathad mér 
Leathad nan gillean 
Gleann Liadnaig* 
Loch Ligh* 

Lic* 


. Mac a Lios 


Lethach 
Leurabhaigh* 
Lite 
Luim an Lair 
Mac an Lamhaich 

Na Leamhanaidh 

Na Leamhanaich 

Leantran 
Cumhang Lànaigh* 
Lóchail* 
Leth-pheighinn-chapull 
Leth-pheighinn na cille 
Learg a’ chonnaidh mór 
Leatharnach* 
Mac an fhleisdeir 
Lios mór* 
Leth-fhonn 
Leitir 
Leitir Choill à 
Leitir Mhaighe 
An Leitir* 
Coille na leitir 
Leth-taobh 








Lettoch 1020 MacCloy 2h. 

ENGLISH GAELIC ENGLISH GAELIC 
Lettoch An Leth-dabhach* Longrigg Iomaire-fada 
Leurbost Liurbost* Loogbow Lorg-bó 
Leven Water Uisge Leamhna Loru Lathurna 

Glen Gleann Leamhann Lossit, Dun & L. Losaid 

Levincorrach Leth-pheighinn corrach Loth, Glen Loth 
Lewis Eilean Leòdhas, Leòdhas | Lothian Lodainn 
Lewis, (person) Luthais | Louis Luthais ` 
Liathach, Ben Liathghach* Louisa Liüsaidh 
Liddel Lithdal Lovat A’ Mhorfhaich ` ` 
Lienassie Lianaisidh* , Lord “ Mae Shimidh ” 1 
Liffy, RiverIreland +Ruireach Love Mac-ionmhuinn—Arran d 
Ling, River Abhainn Luinge Lowland Gallda | 
Linlithgow Gleann Iucha* Lowlander, a Gall, gen.sing. & n.pl.. Goill 


Linnhe, Loch Lowlands, the A’ Ghalldachd 


} An Linne sheilich 








( outside Corran) Loyal, dad Kee? 
d — —, Loc och Laghail 

(inside Corran) Van Linne dhubh Loyne Leana s 

Linus 1 Linn’ a’ bhuig bhàin Luberoy An Lüb chruaidh 
An Linne Lubnaig, Loch Loeh Lüdnaig* i 

Linside* Lianasaid Luce, Glen Gleann luis | 
Linshader Liseadaar* ucy Liüsaidh 
Lipachlairy Leób a chléirich Lude Leothad,* Ledide 
Lismore Lios mor Ludovick Maoldonuich | 
— — ——,8, native of Liosach Lui, Ben Beinn ,Laoigh = 
Livet, Glen Gleann liobhaid Luib Vulin Lùb a’ mhuilinn 


Livisie Glen Geann Libhisidh Luichart, Loch Loch Luicheart * 





te MacDhunleibhe Luing Luinn 
Livingstone { Mae an léigh ——, native of ` Luinneach 
Loandhu An Lon dubh * Luke Lùcas 
Loanteanaquhatt Lòn taigh nan cat* -—, (surname) — MacLücais 
Lochaber SÉ Lochabar pe exea PA 
--—_—_———., of or be- undie unndai 
longing to } Abrach, Cabrach Lybster Liabost : 
wit " man,a Abrach Ke ge per d'Sr ; | 
ochals Lochaillse tract. of the Brit- : 3 
ee Kyle of An Caol (Aillseach)* D er rn na Cloiche | 
ochearron, à na- eo ]I-y-maen E 
7 tive of seine UE ee Ee Lóinn Eege ] 
ochay, Glen Gleann Loch8,G1. Lóchai ynchat (for oinn d 3 
Loch Eck Loch Aic Lyon, Glen Gleann Liobhunn 33 
Lochgilphead Ceann Loch Gilp MacAdam MacAdhamh 
Donzoilhbad Ceann Loch Goil MacAffer MacCathbharra 
sks Ceann Loch! Goibhle—CR | MacAinsh see MacInnes I 
Lochhead Ceann nes ^4 ed? MacAlasdair S 
Lochhournhead Ceann Loc uirn acAllister o 3 
Lochiel Loch iall ` Loup “ Mac Iain Duibh ” i 
Lochindaal urs an ane á Ma Pe Clann Alasdair ` ei 
Lochindall och an Dala acAllisters o | — CM 
Lochinver Loch an Inbhir* Loup Clann Eoin duibh | E 
Lochletter Lochleitir* MacAll MacCathail =) 
Lochnagar Loch na gàire* MacAllan MacAilein M 
Lochnell Lochnaneala MacAlpine MacAilpein 3 
Lochoisnie Loch Oisinnidh MacAndie MacAlasdair We 
Lochouie Loch an t-suidhe MacAndrew MaeGill' Anndrais 3 
Lochranza Loch Raonasa Macanro Mac an Ruaidh (MacIain E 
Lochs Na eae y agora inal t 
Lochy R. Inverness Lochai 1 acArtair, MacArtainin ` 
—, Perth see Lochay | MacArthur Skye — fe 
Logans, the Sio! Loganaich MacAskill MacAsgaill bz 
Logie An Lagaidh* MacAulay MacAmhlaidh 
Logie Easter Lagaidh MacBain MacBheathain 





Clann Mhic Bheathainn 


Modern name Marybank, no article. Lag- | MacBean D. 
MacBheatha ,MacBheathaig | D 


aidh is fem. and always used with the article | MacBeth 








on the West coast. MacBrayne Mac a’ Bhriuthainn 
Logierait Lagan ràit MacCadie MacAdaidh 
Loinond, Ben Beinn Laomuinn MacCaffer - MacCathbharra 

, Loch Loch Laomuinn MacCaig MacCaog 
London Lunnainn MacCall MacCathail ' 
Londonderry Doire MacCallum MacCaluim . 
Lonemore An Lón mór MacCarthy MacCathachaidh 
Loneroid An Lòn roid* MacCaw MacAdhamh 
Lonevine Lon a’ bhinn MacClintock GC 
Longa, E, Hilean Longa MasClon see Clark 
, passage * MacClew 
tween & mea he i pAn caol beag MacCloy } MacLughaidh 





\ 
Original from 






Digitized by 
INTERNET ARCHIVE 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS Ad 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN < 


ek E Poe ee. | 























ir CHEN ee > 
gn v d 












































Maotfluie 
ENGLISH GAELIC 
MacCluie MacLughaidh 
= MacCodrum MacCodrum 
MacColl MacColla 
MacColls, the Sliochd nan Collaidh 
: làmh dhearg 
MacCombie 4 MacThomaidh 
MacConnachie MacDhonnchaidh 
MacCorquodale MacCoreadail 
MacCormick MacCormaig 
MacGobhainn 
, MacGowan MacCòmhguan 
MacCrimmon MacCruimein 
MacCringan’s Rudha MhicNaomhain 
MacCulloch MacCullach, MacLulaich 
MacDermid MacDiarmaid T 
MacDhomhnuill, 
MacDonald Domhnullach 
e xh er Maclain Airdnamurchan" 
Glanranala ` P “Mac Mhic Ailein " 
— zm C) ` : 
b. Gienalladale } ‘* Mac Iain dig > 
ebe of k “« Mac Iain ” 
Glen simis } * Mac Mhic Alasdair ” 
E Ti } “ Mac Mhic Raonuill " 
E } ** Mac Ailein Mhic Ailein ” 
— of \ “Mac Mhic Dhùghaill 
Morar (Mhorair) ” 
— of the \ “ MacDhomhnuill nan 
Isles Eilean ” 
ag y | i Sliochd Iain Mhic Raonuil! 
Evo Clann Uisdein 
oe & the } Clann Domhnuill Shléibhte 
—— of : 
re duamureha us Clann D. Airdnamurchan 
O0 e 
Glenearry l Clann D, Ghlinn garadh 
ER, h 
Kaoh ; } Clann D. na Ceapac 
———— 0 e 
Clan Ranald i Clann Raonuill 
—, (des- 


cended fro.m Lf e 
` Jain Dubh eld- }- Clann Edin Duibh 
est. son of Alas- | 




















dair òg) 
mB EPA MacGhille Dhonaghart 
MacDougall MacDhüghaill 
T ——— Lathurna 
Clann Dùghaill, 
MacDougalls, the Na Düghallaich 
MacDowell MacDhùghaill 
. Macduff MacDhubhaich 
- —s, the Clann Dubh 
. Macduff, Ben Beinn MhicDhuibhe 
MacEchern MacEachairn 
MacErchar MacFhearchair 
MacEwen MacEòghainn 
MacFadyen MacPhaidein 
J MacFarlane MacPharlain 
— 0 Mac a’ Bhairling, MacPhar- 
that ilk lain 
—— —8,the  Clann Pharlain 
J MacFarquhar MacFhearchair 
MacGeorge MacSheorais 
MacGilchrist MacGilleChriosb 
MacGill MacGhille 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


1021 


ENGLISH 
MacGillony 
MacGillivray 


a 


MacGlashan 
MacGowan 


MacGregor 





Gregor 


— of Mac- 


Mackirdy 


GAELIC 
MacGill’Onfhaidh 
MacGille bhrath 
Ciann MhicGillebhrath 
MacGlaisein 
MacGhobhainn 

d MacGriogair, Griogarach, 
Griogalach— W. of Ross 


An t-Ailpeineach 


YR: s, the { Clann Ghriogair, 


MacGuire 


Machrie, Glen 








Na Griogaraich 
MacGuaire 
J Gleann na machrach 
l G. na macraidh— Fionn 


Machrie Machaire 
MacHardy | MacCardaidh 
Machrihanish Machaire Shanais 
Maclan MacIan 
MaclIchan. MacFhitheachain 
Macindeoir Mac an Deòir 
TEE SE (Mac Iain 
MacInlay MacFhionnlaigh 
Macllroy Mae Ghille ruaidh 
MaclInnesg MacAonghais 
BOO S RE MR \ MacAonghais Cheann Loch 

that ilk Aluinn 

-——es, the Clann Aonghais 

Macinroy | ya e a (Mac Iain 
Macintosh Mae an toisich 
— of Mac- Ar 

ES Mac an toisich 


Macintoshes, the 
Macintoshes of 








Clann an toisich 
Sliochd Ailein 


Kellachie 
Macintyre Mac an t-saoir 
—s, th Claun an t-saoir 
Maclsaac Maclosaig 
MacIver MacIomhair 
MacKail MacCathail 
MacKay MacAoidh 
, Lord Reay MacAoidh 
of Rinns MacAoidh na Ranna 
of Strath- 


nayer 


Mackays, the 


























MacAoidh Abrach 


Clann MhicAoidh, 
Siol Mhorgain 


Mackechnie MacEachairn 
Mackellar, MacEalair 
Mackendrick MacEanruig 
Macxenna MacCinaoidh 
Mackessack Maclosaig 
EE MacCoinnich 
Achilty } * Mac Mhic Mhurchaidh "* 
——— O0 Y 
Gairloch } * Mac Mhic Iain” 
Bu. MacCoinnich 
fort Mac 
ie Ge E 
Mackerchar MacFhearchair 
Mackichan MacFhitheachan À 
Mackilligan MacGill Fhaolagain 
Mackillop MacPhilip 
Mackimmie MacShimidh ; 
Mackinlay MacFhionnlaigh 
Mackinnie MacCinaoidh ; 
Mackinnon MacFhionghuin 
E Mull _ a sept l MacTiridh or MacSiridh 
Ma, SEN MacFhionghuin 
a the Clann MhicFhionghain 
Mackintosh see MacIntosh 
Mackirdy MacUrardaigh 


Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


1 























» AT 
LINA a M. 


Le . | 


Mackrycul 1022 aryburgh 
NL — TN 
ENGLISH , GAELIC ENGLISH GAELIC 
Mackrycul MacNiocail MacNevin MacCnaimhin 
MacLachlan MacLachlainn MacNichol MacNeacail 
—s, the ARR n ws aud ae ee 
MacLagan s = acLathagain— acNider , Mac an fhig eadair 
ay : Mac-Ghille- h 
MacLaine of MacGhill'Eathain Locha- MacNiven MacCrithein—4 
: i ’ n—Argylt 
Lochbuie : buidhe Maconie Mac-nia 
—Lochbuie f Sliochd Mhurchaidh Buaidh | Maoia  MacBhail ie 
MacLaren MacLabhruinn , MacPhedran MacPheidearain 
MacLarty Mac-fhlaith-bheartaich MacPhee Mac-a-Phì 
MacLaverty see MacLarty ———..—s, the Mac-a-Phi Cholasaidh 
Epi) ia MacGhill Leathain M — 
MacLean 1 MaeGhill Eathain See of { Mac Mbuirich, ‘‘Cluanaigh"” 
"m aid of } ** Mac Mhic Eòghainn ” ea of f Clann Mhuirich 
*Mac Mhic Iain," : 
e ——— of Coll “ Mac Iain Abraich ” d qune of { Na Canonaich 
bee iff Daat RE Dhubh- | MacQuarrie isi Mana 
: M - Vei ai 
—.-— ofKinger- f rr Mac MhicEachainnChinn- —-—8, hes Claun Ghuaire 
loch 1 ghearrloch à MacQueen MacCuiun, MacShuibhne 
— 8, en 4 Clann Ghill'Eathain ——g the Clann Shuibhne 
--8 of Doch, : MacRae MacRath 
garroen d Gm fO Bhuidhe ` ` [lorte ` Menen 
acRai acArat 
"Reset Mull | dra — ZE 
u arruin: ac ie ac Ratbei 
Mac) ean’s Nose Srón mhór d MacRury MacRuairidh 
is nan erp en MaeS wan MacSuain 
acLeay ac an Mact M t-sagai 
MacLeish Mac Ghil’ ‘Los’ Machen, MacTh. Aimhais de en 
MacLellan MacGill’Fhaolain MacVarish MacMharais 
MacLennan MacGill’ innein : MacVean MacBheathain 
MacLennans, the Clann Ghill’ innein MacVicar MacBhiocair 
MacLeod ; MacLeòid MacV urich MacMhuirich 
MacLeod of Harris MacLeòid MacWilliam MacUilleim 
were of Mac- l MacLeòid Maddy, Loch Loch nam madadh 
^ gnus APER 
SECH of ** Mac Ghille Chaluim " äer NU siet Meinnidb* 
" MacLeod’s Ta- Malcolms, the Clana Chaluim 
bles ^ (mount: CTT Maleoimson MacCaluim 
e ise aol-losa 
MacLeods ofDun- ` : Mal j M ll ig— * 
vegan&Glenel Siol Thormaid ne allaig—CR, Malach 
fee : a Mala-àrd 
MacLeods of Lewis Sìol Thorcuil Mallert 


MacLintock 




















MacLinton MacGhillFhinntain 
MacLucas MacLucais 
MacMahon MacMhathain 
MacMartin MacMhairtinn 
MacMaster MacMhaighstir 
MacMichael i aw ea 

s acMhaolain 
MacMillan 1 MacGhillemhaoil 

Kintyre. of M Urea 
MaeMhaolain mór 

——— of Knap 3,’ Chnaip 

Sa Clann Mhaolain 

F SEN Clann MhicGhiltemhaoil 
MacMurchy MacMhurchaidh 
MacNab Mac an aba 

— ofMacNab Mac an aba 

—8, the TAB an SCH (for M 

: ac-an-uidhir (for ac 
Macnair Iain-uidhir 
MacNaughton MacNeachdainn 
TAN —s, the Clann MhicNeachdainn 
MacNee MacRigh 
NaeNeilage MacNiallghuis 
MacNeill MacNéill 
————— of Barra MacNéill 


s, the 


«———— 





| 


Ter, 
TERNET ARCHIVE 
Shan) = FAX | NK 


Mac Gill Fhionntag 


Clann Michel 


Mallie, Glen 
Mally, River 
Malavina 
Mamgarvia 
Man, Isle of 
Man, Calf of 
Manish, Ru 
Maolachy 
Maovally 
Mar, Earl of 


Maree, Loch 


Maree, Island 
Margaret 
Marion 
Marjory 
Mark 

Markie, R. 
Marksie, Glen 
Mars (star) 
Martha 
Martin 
Martin, Isle 
Mary 


(In conversation Mairi.) 


Gleann mailidh 
Mailidh 

Malamhin 

Mam-garbh 

Eilean Mhanain 

An Eireag Mhannach * 
Rudha Mhanuis* 
Maol-achadh 
Maobhalaidh 

Morair Mharr 


Loch Ma-ruibh (old name 


Loch Feadhal feas) 
Eilean Ma-ruibh 
Mairearad 
Muireall b 
Marsail 
Marcus 
Marcaidh 
Gleann Marcasaidh 
Mart 
Moireach 
Martainn 
Eilean Mhartainn 
Moire, Muire 


EE Los 


p 


Air Muire, by St, 


Mary ; Muire tha ! by St. Mary it is! Muire 
cha’n el ! by St. Mary it ts not ! 


Maryburgh 


Baile Mairi 


UNIVERSITY ( JOS 
JNIVERS JF ILLINOIS 


URBANA-CHANM 


e TON SE 9A 


Mashie Water , 1023 Munro 


-aun 1 


ENGLISH GAELIC ENGLISH GAELIC 
Mashie Wator Mathaisidh Monyquil Moin’ a’ choill 
Mashie, Strath Srath Mhathaisidh* Monzie Magh-iodh* 
Matheson MacMhethain, Mathanach | Moore MacMhordha 
Mathesons, the Clann Mhathain Morangio Moraistidh* 
Mauchline Mavh-linne Morar Morar 
Matthew Mata Morar, North Morar MhicShimidh 
Matthewson MacMhata Morar, South Mòrar Mhic Dhùghaill 
Maxwell MacSual Moray Moireibh* 

May Màili More, Ben ( Perths) A’ Bheinne mhór 
Mazeran, Glen Gleann Masaran* More, Ben (Mul) A’ Bheinne mhór Mhuileach, 
Meadie, Loch Loch Meudaidh Morenisn M ór'nis* 
Mealfourvounie ` Meal-fuar-mhonaidh Morel Moirl* 

Moall Ghaordie Meall Ghaoirdidh* Morefield A7 Mhór-choille 
Meall-am-madadh Meall a’ mhadaidh Morefield Cottage An Ceanna-chruinn 
Meall-aundrary | Meall andrairigh Morie, Glen Gleann Mhoire 
Mearns A’ Mhaoirn* Moriston, Glen Gleann Moiresdean* 
Measach, falls of Easan na Miasaich Morlich Burn Mórth'laich* 

Meath, Irefand A’ Mhidhe Morness Mornis* 

Meddat Meitheid* Morning star, the Aoine 

Mevegernie Mivearnaidh* Morrich more A’ Mhor’aich mhér 
Meig Water Abhainn Mig* Morria k Moireasdan 


MacMhoirein—Islay 


Meikle Daan 
| Dathan mhór* Morrison of Lewis Mac Ghille Mhoire 


Meikle Ferry(for- 


merly Porfin-\ port mér* ( Clann Mhic Ghille Mhoire. 
coulter) Morri th Na Moireasdanaich 
Meiklie, Loch Loch Miachdlaidh* CREO, une Clann a’ bhreithimh in 
MEME ENT Muir: ` Gi 
elfort eileart órth'laich (i,e.mér-thul- 
Mellaig Mealach Mortlach 1 aich) 
Mellis Maol-Iosa Moruisz Morusg 
Melness Mealainis* Morven A’ Mhorairne§ A 
Melton Charles Meallan Thearlaich* Morvern Marbhainn à 
Meivaig Mealabhaig* Morvich A’ Mhoraich* : 
Menteith Teadhaich* Mossend Ceann a’ mhonaidh 
Menzies Méinn,* Mèinnearach Mongstot see Monkstadt 
Menzies of that ilk Am Méinnearach Moulin Maoilinn 
Menzieses, the Na Méinnearaich Moulinearn Muileann-fheàrna* 
Meobie Miath Poll Moultavie Multamhaigh 
Mercury (star) Ceadoine Mount, Cairn-o’- Carn mhon* 
ah Meithinnidh* Cnoc na h-iolaire dier ko 
uinne, Goirt- : ; e part near outlet of L. Eye 
ean-a’- } Goirtean a’ bhuinn Mount Eagle is also called Cnoc na h- 
chad "Si MED RERO" uidhe 
Sial, Gairloc ia Mountrich (former- Ves 
INE Miabhaig’ EE Lon Chomhghan 
Midoxyate An t-uchd meadhonach Mountgerald Claon 
Midtown Baile meadhonach Moyley A’ Mhuaigh (loc. of magh) 
Migdale Migean Muck Island Eilean nam muc, Tir-chrain 
Milbuie Am maol buidhe Muckairn Muc carna 
'" Millcraig Muileann na creige* Muckernich A' Mhucarnaich* 
Milntown Baile mhuilinn, Mudale - Modal 
Baile mhuilinn Anndra* | Muic, Glen Gleann muice ' 
. Milton Bail’ a’ mhuilinn Muich Dhui, Ben Beinn muic duibhe i 
Minard Mionaird* Muieblairie Muigh bhlàraidh* A 
NE "T A’ Mhaoil Muirends Mórdun* 3 
inch, the Little Milton Eonan : ^ 
(between Skye + Cuan Sgithe, Cuan Uidhist | Glenlyon ^ f Muileann Eodhanain 
and Lewis) Muir-of-Ord Am Blàr dubh 
Minch, the Outer Cuan nan orc (sea of whales) Am Monadh dubh 
iotag K i Meideag* Muirtown SS 
iseag, Cruach- ` Muirshirlich ur-siarluich 
nam- j NS DUNT aes Muldearg A' mhuil dearg 
Moidart Mùideart Muldaonich Id. Eilean Mhaoil Domhnaich*. 
Moidart, Loch Loch Mùideart Muile. An Dreolluinn (an- 
Moireach, the A’ Mhoraich Mull, Isle of + cient poetical name—MacAl- 
Molleboye Mullach-buidhe pine ? 
Monachalmore Monachul* Mullardoch, Loch Loch Maol Ardaich 
Monachyle Monchall—CR Mullindry Muileadradh 
Monar, Loch Loch Monar* Mullintrae Maol an tràigh 
Moncrieft Mon eraoibh Mulloy Mac an luaimh 
Mcness, falls of | Mon-eas (for Bun-eas)* Mungo Mungan 1 
Moniack Moin-itheig* Munlochy Poll Lochaidh 
Monk:-tadt Mogastad Munlochy Bav ` ` Ob Poll Lochaidh 
Monkstown Baile nam manach Rothach, Mac an Rothaich, 
Moni goicry MacGumoerait ` Munro MacAdaidh (in certain 
Montrose, Duke of An Greumach mór families only) SÉ 
Original from 
Digitized by : UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 


INTERNET ARCHIVE URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


Munroof Fowlis 


ENGLISH GAELIC . 
Munro of Fowlis Tighearna Folais 
Munros, the Clann an Rothaich 
Munster, Ireland  A'Mhumha t d 
Murovach, A name applied to the inhabitants 
of Uist by those of the neighbouring islands. 
People living on the west side of Uist are also 


thus called by the inhabitants of the east side. 
Murchie MacMhurchaidh 
MacMurchaidh, 
Murchison MacMhuirich 
MacCalmain— Ross-shire 


Murchison (ehief) "" MacCalmain ”’ 


Murchadh, Muireach In 
Murdoch the North the mutilated 
form Murdo is used in 
English. 
Muriel Hr Mos A 
Murlagan urlagan l 
Murphy MacMhurchaidh 
Munay Moireach Kr 
Murrays of Athole Siel Mhoiridh, S. Mhoirich 
Murthly Mórthlaich* 
Musseibargh Baiie nam fiasgan 
Muthil Maothail* ‘ 
Myles Maolmoire 
Naasb Nast 
Nairn Inbhir Narunn 
Nairn, Strath Srath Narunn* | 
Naughton Neachóainn 
Nave, Ard Aird an naeimh 
Naver, River Nabhuir* 
Navity Neamtaitidh, Neamhaididh* 
Nedd An Nead* 
Neill Niall, gen. Néill 
Nell, Loch Loch nan eala 
Nelson MacNeill 
Ness Nis 
Ness, Loch Loch Nis 
Nessintulaich Niosantulaich 
Nethy Water Neithich* À 
Nevis, Ben Beinn Nibheis* eg 
Newmore An ne’ mhór* j 
Newtonmore Bail' or an t-sléibh* 
Niehol Neacal 
Nieholson MacNeacail 
Nicholas Neacal 
Nid, Loch Lochaidh Nid ` ` 
Nigg ’N eig (locative of an eag)? 
Nigg, Hill of Beinn ’n eig 
iven Gille naomh 
Noble Guaire 
Noe, Glen Gleann Nodha 
Noid Nuide 
Nonakiln Neo’ na cille, Nei’ na cille* 
Nonach An onach* 
Norman Deu : 
n Cuan tuathac 
North Sea, the ( An Cuan tuath 
Norway Nirribhidh” 
Norwegian, a Fionn Lochłainneach 
Nosebridge, Islay Nomhasbrugh 
Nostie Nòsdaidh* : 
Novar Taigh an Fhuamhair* 
Oa Island Eilean O 
Maol na h-òige 
Oa, Mull of Maol na h-Otha—Fienn 
Maol na h-Oth—CR 
An t-Oban Lathurnach* 
Oban zk d loeriiy An t-Oban 
Obbenin Na h-óbainean 
Obsdale Obsdail* 
Ochtavullin Ochdamh a’ mheinn 
Ochtertyre Uachdar thir 
Ochtow An t-Ochdamh 


Ochtownruche Ochdamh ruadb 


r | 
Wa E EE ME 
WIERAE | BRI T 
— 1 — i 1 Të a 


1024 


ENGLISH 
Octayuilin 
Octobeg 
Octofail 
Octomore 
Oe, Glen 
Oe, River 
Ogilvie 
Ogilvies, the 
Ogle, Glen 
Ohirnie 
Oich, Loch 
Oisnie 
O’ Kean 
Ollany 
Oldshore 
Oliver 


. | Onich 


Openbam 
Orchil! 

Orchy Glen 
Orehy, Bridge of 
Ord 


Ordie,* Loch 
Ordhill 
Orkney 
Ormacleit 
Ormiscaig 


Ornsay, Isle 


Orrin, River 
Otter 
Overscaig 
Owen 

Owie 
Owskiech 


Oykill, River 


y 


Petty 


GARL‘C 


see Ochtavullin 


An t-Ochdamh beag 


Ochdamh fada 
Ochdamh mór 


Gleann nodha 


Abhainn nodha 


MacGhille brhuidhe 


Sìol Ghillechriosd 


Gleann Òguil* 
Odharnaidh 
Loch O'ich* 


e Oisinnidb 


ain 
Alltanaidh 


see Asher 
Oilbüreis 


Ombanaich*® 
Othanaich—CE 


Na h-óbajnean 
Urchoill, Urcha* 


Gleann Urehaidh 


ke 


Probhaid. Urchaidh 


An t-Ord 


Loch ordaigh* 


Conoc an ùird 
Arcaibh - 
Ormacleid 
Ormascaig* 


Eilean Biarmain 
Kilean Iarmainn 


Kilean Orfhasa 
Orthainn* 


An Oitir 
Ofarsgaig* 


Eòghainn 
Ubhaidh 


Loch Osgaig® 
Oiceil S 


Pacific Ocean, the An Cuan séimh 


Paible 
Paisley 
Palgavie 
Partick 
Paterson 
Patrick 
Patt 
Pattack 
Paul 
Paulfield 
Fean, Glen 


Pearsie 
Peffer, Strath 
Pe 
Peinacresh 
Pelaig 
Penalbannach 
Penick, Nairn 
Penifiler 
Peninver 
Pennycasile 
Pennyfuar 
Pennygowan 
Pennymore 
Penrith 
Cumberland 
Pentland’ Firth 
Persian, a 


Peterburn 
Peterhead 
Petley 
Petty 


Paibeall 


Paislig 


Pol-garbh 


Pearraig* 
MacPhadruig 
Padruig 


A’ Phait* 
Patag 

Pal, gen. -ail 
Am Bard* 


Gleann Peighinn | 


Parsaidh 
Srath Pheofhair* 
Peothar 


Peighinn ai Chrois** 
Peallaig* 
Peighinn Albannach 
A’ Pheighinneag* 


Peighinn nam fidhlear* 


Peighinn an inbhir 
Peighinn a’ chaisteil 
Peighinn a’ phüir 


Peighinn a’ ghobhainn 
A’ Pheighinn mhór 


Farsach** 
Peairt 
An Druimineach 


Pàdruig, Peadair. 


} Piorait (locally called Peerit) 
An Caol Arcach* 


Para is 


an abbreviated form of 
Pathrnig. Pacair~Arran 


Alltan Phàdruig 
Ceann Phadruig 
Maolbuidhe 
Peitiah* 


Bini 752 


Phascally 


ENGLISH 
Phascally 
Phoineas 
Pict, à 
Pictish 
Picts, the 
Pitalmit 
Pitcalnie 





Pitcastle 
Pitchurn 
Pitculzean 
Pittenglassie 
Pitf 

Pitfuir, Black Isle 
Pitfure, SutA'd 
Pitglassie 
Pitgrudie 
Pitilie 
Pithogarty 


Pitkerrie 
Witlochry 
2Xlundie 
aduthy 
Pitmain 
Pitnacree 
Pitnellies 
Pitoulish, Loch 
Pitourie 
Pittentrail 
Pittenweem 
Plaids, Ross 
Piatchaig 


Plockton 


Ploverfieid 
Plucaird 
Polbain 


Poleriscaig 
Polgavie 
Polglass 
Polgown 
Polin 
Polenturk 
Poltachie 
Pollagharry 
Pollandraw 
Pollanduich 
PoHantarie 
Pollo 
Polloch 
Polly, River 
Polly willin 
Polnicol 
Pookandraw 
Poolewe 

—, village of 





Porin 
Portavaidue 
Portcamel Suth'd 
Port Buckie 

Port Charlotte 


Port Henderson 
Gairloch 


GAELIC 
Fas-choille 
Fothrais, Fotharaig 
Piochdach 
Piochdach 
Na Cruithnich 
Bail’ an ailm 
Baile Chailnidh, 

Cuilt-eararaidh 


-— Strath of Srath-chuilt-eararaidh 


Pit a’ chaisteil 
Baile-chaoruinn 
Bail’ a’ choillean * 
Bail’ a’ ghlais-tir* 
Baile-Pbaididh* 
Pit-fhuir* 
Baile-phuir* 
Bad a’ ghlasaich* 
Baile- üididh* 
Baile na moine 
Bail’ an t-sagairt 
Baile nan sagarb 
Baile-chéiridh 
Baile Chloichridh 
Pit lunndaidh* 
Baile-’ie-Dhuibh* 
Pit meadhon 
Pit na craoibhe 
Bail’ an ianlaith* 
Pit-ghealiais* 
Bail'-odharaidh 
Bail’ an traill 
Baile na h-uaimh 
A’ Phlaid* 
Plat-chathaig* 
Ploc Loch Ailiso 
locally Am Ploc 
Blar nam feadag 
Ploc-àivd* 
Am Poll bàn* 
Poll Éirisgaig* 
Polgarbh 
Am Poll glas* 
Polgamhna 
Pollan 
Poll an tuirc* 
Poll-achaidh 
Poll a’ ghearraidh* 
Bog an t-srath 
Poll an dubhaidh 
Poll an tairbh 
Am Pallan* 
Poll loch 
Abhainn Phollaidh 
Poll à' mhuilinn 
Poll Neacail* 


locally Abhainn Ià 
Pórainn* 
Port a’ mhadaidh 
Port a’ Chamthuill* 
Port nam faochag 
Sgiba 
Port Ghaidheal, Fortingal* 
Port an Sgumain,* 
locally Portigil* 


Portiich Port fhlich* 

- Portmahomack Port-mo-Cholmaig* 
Portuacroish Port na crois 
Portnahaven Port nà h-abhann 
ortnelian Port an eilein 
Portree Port rìgh 
Portvasgo Port an fhasgaidh 
Port Wemyss Bun-othan 
Potarch Bridge ^ Poit Earc* 
Poultock Poll a’ phoca* 

Digitized by 
INTERNET ARCHIVE 


1025 


Priesthill 
Priest Island 
Prosen, Glen 
Prussia 
Purcell 
Queebec, Tain 
Queich, Glen 
Querrell 
Quhary, Glen 
Qubynuisgyrne 
Quinaig 
Quintin 
Quirang 
Quoich, Glen 
— -- , in- 
habitant of 
Raa, Loch 
Raanich 
Raasay 
Sound 





Rachel 


Raddery 
Raffin 
Rahoy 
Raitts 
Ralia 
Ramore 
Ranald 
Rana!dson 
Rankin 
Rannoch 
Rarichie 
Rassal 
Rattray 
Rea, Ru 
Reay 
-—, Lord 
, parish of 
Rebecca 
Red Castle 
Redegich, Ru 
Redfield 


Red Point 1 


Reelick 
Retliuch 


Reiff 
Reileiridhe 
Relugas 
Remuil 
Renish 
Renzy, Loch 
Requill 
Reraig 
Resaurie 


aS 





Revochan 
Rhe an chath 
Rheindown 
Rhiandogyrie 
Rhibreac 
Rhi-chalmie 
Rhiconich 
Rhidoroch 
Rhifail 
Rhilinn 
Rhiloisk 
Rhilonie 
Rhiroy 
Rhi-sealbhag 
Rhitongue 


Rhitongue 
à ENGLISH GAELIC 
; Pow Burn Allt a phuill* 
Power (person) Paorach 
Presmuckerach Preas mucraigh 


Cnoc an t-sagairt 
An Cléireach* 
Gleann Práàsain* 
Pruisia 
MacSporain 
Muileanu Luaidh* 
Gleaun Cuaich* 
An Coireall 
Gleann Chaorach 
Cuiunsgearna 
Cuinueag 
Caoiutean 
Cuithe-Fhraing 
Gleann Cuaich 

} Cuachanach 


Loch Ra 

Au Rathanaich 

Ra’ arsa*® 

An Linne Ra’arsach 

Raonaild, Raonaid, 
Raodhailt 

Radharaidh* 

Ratlhfionn 

Ra-thuaith--CR 

Ràt 

Rath-liath 

An Rath mór* 

Raonull, gen. -uill 

MacRaonuill 

MacFhraing 

Raineach 

Rath-riachaidh* 

Rasal* 


Haitear* : 


An Rudha Réidh® 

Dùthaich Mhie Aoidb 

MacAoidh 

Sgìre Meaghrath* 

Beathag 

An Caisteal ruadh 

Rudh Réitichidh 

An Raon dearg 

An Rudka dearg —— 
An Radha lachdainn* 

Réilig 

Ruighe-fliuch 

MacGhille ruaidh 

Bogha ai Bhüraieh* 

Ruighe-téirsda 

Ruigh-lügaés* 

Ruighe-maol 

Rénis* 

see Loch Ranza 

Ruigh Dhughaill 

Réaraig,* Réirig* 

An Ruighe samhraidh 

Ruigh-shaluis (i.e. ehroiuis)* 

MacGhilleriabhaich, Kintyre 

Ruigh Bhuadhachain* 

Ruigheau &' ehatha 

Ruigh an duin* 

Ruigh an dogaidk 

An Ruigh breac* 

Ruigh-Chalmaidh 

Ruighe-chéinnich* 

An Ruigh dhorcha* 

Ruighe Phail 

Ruighe-l nne 

Ruighe-loisgte 

Ruigh an lóin* 

An Ruigh ruaidh 

Ruighe na sealbhag 

Ruighe-Thunga 


D M Ke 
LL L i | 
d I - 


UNIV 


LJ 
M = 


LLINOIS 


IRR ANA-CHAMPAIGR 
Ki 4 Lj e ! [^ sé NW e © E e E ! 


IA 
La 
ti 





Rhives 

ENGLISH GAELIC 
Rhives Na Ruigheannan* EN 
Rhi-voult Ruigh a’ mhuilt 
Rhuvaal Rudh' a’ mhàil 
Rhynie, Ross Rathan* | 

Aberd'nghire Roinnidh i 
Ribigill Ribigill* 1 
Ri-chaisteil Ruigh a' chaisteil 
Richard Ruiseart 
Ricroy Ruighe-cruaidh* E 
Ri-garry Garadh 
Rigollachy Ruigh- zhobhlachaiđh ` 
Ri-horral Rui; zhe Harald* 1 
Rimichie Ruigh michidh* ~ ' 
Rinavie Roinnibhith* ; Wu 
Rinnes, Ben Beinn Riuneis | ul Bee 
Riochan | , Riabhachan* Ska 
Risdell, Glen ' Gleann-fhreasdail SÉ 
Rispond Ruspuinn* mpm. 


Eilean Ruisteil 


Ristol, Isle Mm 
Taigh an rothaid 


Road House 


Robert Raibeart , d 
Robertson MacDhonnchaidh | 
——— — — 5, the Clann Donnchaidh 





—8$, pro- { * Donnchadh reamhar 
genitor of the Mhie Aonghais ”’ 





Robuic, Alt Allt an ruadh bhuic 
Rockfield A’ Chreag* 
Creag Tarail beag* 
Ruairidh, shortened Rory. 
Roderick { The latter is facetious- 
ly applied to the fox. 
Rodil Rodail* E 
Roe Roth 
sgire Rao'ird* 
Rogart Raoghard —CR 
Róghard--Rob Donn 
Rogie Ro'agaidh* 
Rome An Ròimh ` 
Rona Ròna | 
-- native of  ERónach . 
ST Sy, see Ranald 3 
orie (or Balna- M CH 
gown Water) Uaraidh* M. 
Kory ,. See Roderick 3 
-—, Strath Srath Uaraidh* 
Rose Ros 
-—— 8, the Na Ròsaich 
Rosehall’ Innis nan lion 


Rosehaugh 
Rosemarkie 


Pit Dhonnchaidh* 
Ros-maircnidh* 





Roseneath Ros-neimhidh 
Roshk, Loch see Rosque 
Roshyen An F’hrosbheinn 
Roskeen Ros cuibhne* 
Roskhill An Roisgeil* 
Rosmarkie gee Rosemarkie 
Rosque, Loch Loch ai chroisg 
Rosquern Ros a’ ehüirn 
Ross (person) Ros, Rosach 

, (place) Ros 
Ross-shire Siorrachd Rois 
Ross-shire man, à Rosach 
Rossol Rosail* 


Rosses, the 
Ross of Mull 


Clann Anndrais 
An Ros Muileach 


Rosyth Ros-suidhe 

Rothes Rathais* ne 
Baile-Bhoid, Cill Bhruie 

Rothesay (i.e. St. Brock) 

Rothiemurchus Rata mburchais 

Rovie Romhaigh* 

Roxburgh | Rosbrog—B. of Clanranald 

Roy Ruadh* 

Roy Bridge Drochaid Ruaidh 

Roy, Glen Gleann Ruaidh 


Ruair, Loch-a- Loch an ruathair* 


Digitized by 


INTERNET-ARCHIVE 


"Bn Manish 


e = 


1026 Seonr na Lapich : 
ENGLISH GAELIC 
Ruantallan Rudha an t-sailein 
Ruaroch Ruadharach 


Ru Hunish 
Ruchill Water 
Ruemore 


Rum 


Rudha Hunais 

Abhainn Ruchail* 

Rudha mor 

Eilean Ruma, ‘ Rioghachd: 
na Forraiste fiadhaich ” 

Rudh’ Manuis* 


Ru Noa Rudh' an Fhomhair* 

_| Ruskie, Loch Loch an Rusgaidh 
Russel, ' Applecross Riseal* 
Russia. Ruisia 
Ruthven Ruadhainn 
Ryan-crovich -Ruighean-cro bheathaich 
Ry-an-traid ) Ruigh an traghaid 
Ryefield i Ach’ an t-seagail* - ^7 
Saddell Sadal 
St. Andrews Cill Rimhinn 


St. Colvin’s Chapel Cill Chaomhain 
St. Finnlug’s Cill Fheilea; van 


St. Kilda S Iri 
St. Ninian’g Cill Nineain 
Salachail Salackail 
Salachan Salchan 

| Salen Mull 


An Sàilein Muileach ` 
, LochSunart An Sailein 








| Sallachan see Salachan 
Sallachy Salachaidh* 
Sallachry Salchraidh 
Salmon MacBradain 
Saltburn , Allt an t-saluinn* 
Samuel | sr Ap Somhairle— Skye, 
Sanachan ' Samhnachan P 
Sand Sannda* 
——, Big Sannda mhór* 
"we X Bert Sannda bheag* | 
Sanda nr. Mu A e 
of Kintyre Abhainn ) Wee 
Sandavore Sannda mhór ` t 
Sandwick Sandabhaig* 
Sannox Na Sannagan 
Sanquhar Seann chathair 
Sarah Mor, Morag 
Sarclet Sarcleit* 
Saunach Samhnach 
Saval-beg Sàbhail beag* 
Savalmore Sàbhail mór* . 
SON TUAE Sgallabha 3 
calpa : 
Scalpay \ Scalpaidh 
Scandinavia Lochlann d 
Scarba Sgarba SCH 
Scardroy Sgard ruaidh* d 
Scarinish Scarainis* 
Scatwell Scatail (beag & WS 
Schiehallion Sidh Chailleann* 
Scone Sgain 
Sconser Sgonnsar 
Scorguie Sgorr gaoithe 
Scoribreck Sgorrabreac 
( Alba, gen. Albainn & Alba. 
No article except in gen. 
Ann an Albainn, in Scot- 
Scotland land ; righrean na h-Alba, 
| the kingsiof Scotland ; "Brà- 
ghad Albainn, Breadal- 
bane, 
, native of 
Scotch Albannach ` 
Scots ; a 
Scotscalder al’ nan Gall* : 
Scotsburn Allt nan Albannach . 
Scottish Albannach í 
Scourie Sgobhairigh 


Scour na Lapich Sgùrr na Lapaich* 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 


AT 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 3 


$3 aad 





zt E Dr EEN 


bd V A 


Le atm A 7 


win i, a nc de 


2 See 


Se SS See es 


Stack of Scudburgh 


ENGLISH 


GAELIC 


Scudburgh,Staek of Sgüdaborgh* 


Scuir Fhuaran,OSM 
Scuir Ouran 

Scuitchail 

Seafield Lochcarron 

DI Earl of 


Seaforth 
, Earl otf 


, Loch 
Seil Id. 
Sgreadan 
Sgurr Marxie 
Shader 
Shanish, Loch-na: 


Shandwick 
Shanwell 
Shaw 
Shawbost 
Shaws, the 


Shaw Park 
Shean Ferry 
Sheannlep, 
Shedog 
Shee, Glen 
Sheechaillin 
Shenyal 
Shenyalie 
Shenwall 
Sheriff, Loch 
Sheriffmuir 
Shervie, Glen 
Shetland 
Shiant Isles 
Shiel, Glen 
, Loch 
, Water 
Shieldag 
Shilloch, Glen 
Shin Bridge 
—, River 
Shinness 
Shira, Glen 
Shiskan 
Shiskine 
Shuna 

Sian 

Sim 

Sime 

Simon 
Sinclair 


s, the 


Skaebost 
Skeinidh, Skeir-na- 


 Skelbo 


Skelpick 
Skene 

s, tho 1 
Skiach, Loch 
. Killearn 
Skiag, Suth’d 
Skibbercross 
Skibo 
Skineid 
Skinnertowng 
Skipness 


. Skye, Isle of 


Slackbuie 
Slaggan 























Digiti: 


MITE =] " ET 


Sgürr Odhran 


Sguit chathail 

Rudh' an ois, An Rudha 
see Grant of Grant 
Siphort 

** MacCoinnich,” 

“ Cabar-féidh ”’ 

Loch Shìphoirt 

Saoil 


Sgriedan 
Sgùrr Marcasaidh* 
Siadar* 


Loch na seann innse 
Seannduaig* 
Seanndabhaig—CR 

Seann-bhaile 

MacGille Seathanaich 


Dës 


Clann Mhic?Gille Sheath- 
anaich— A rgyll 
Paire an t-seàdh* 
Port an t-Sithein* 
Sean-leapa 
Seideag 
Gleann sith 
see Schiehallion 


Seaun-bhaile 


Loch an t-siorra 

Sliabh an t-siorra 

Gleann Seirbhidh* 

Sealtainn 

see Charmed;Isles 

Gleann Seile 

Loch Seile 

Seile 

Sildeag 

Gleann Seilich 

Drochaid Sun? 

Sin* 

Sinneis* 

Gleann Siora* 

Siosgan 

An Seasgann 

Eilean Siüna* 

Sithean 

Mac a’ Reudaidh 

Sim 

Sim 

Mae na cearda 

Clann na cearda(in the west) 
Singleir (in the north) 

Sgéubost* 

Sgeir na scainidh 
Sgeireaboll—CR 

Sgeilbol* 

Sgeilpeach 


Sgain 
Siol Sgéine, Clann 
Donnchaidh Mhàirr 


N 


Sgitheach* 


Siobarsgaig* 

Sgiobull 

Sgianaid 

Baile nan sginnearach* 
Sgibinnis 

An t-Eilean Sgitheanach, 
Sgith.* Clàr Sgithe—poet. 
Sloc-buidhe 

An Slagan-odhar* 


t Ei 

= em T 
Pi 1 |. 
ARCHIVE 
NX vL 








1027 


ENGLISH 
Slagharn 
Slamanan 
Slapin, Loch 
Slattadale 
Sleat 
Sletill, Cnoc 
Sleugach 
Slievevin 
Sligachan 
Sligo 


Slioch, Ben 

Slis-chilis 

Sloch-muichk 

Sloy, Loch 

Slumbay 

Small Isles 

Smiigle, Alt 

Smith 

Smithstown 

Snizort 

Soilairzie 

Solomon 

Somerled 

Sonachan 

Sophia 

Souters, the 

Spàidan, Bruthach- 
nan 


Spain 





, & native of 
Spanish 

Spean, Glen 
Spelvie, Loch 
Spey, River 


——, moor 
through which it 


runs 
Spinuingdale 
Spittal 
Spout:iRollo Fall 
Sronafian 
Sronbhrochlan 
Srondavain 
Sron-saobhaidhe 
Sruban, Loch 
Stack, Ben 


Staffin, Loch 


Stairchaol 

Stattic Point 
Stenscholl 
Stewart 

——— of Appin} 


——s, the 
——s of Appin, 
h 


slof Athole, 





the 
Stewarton 
Styx, 
Stillaig 
Stirkhill 
Stirling 
Stockinish, Loch 
Stomino, Ben 


Stonehaven 
Stoney-blather 
Stornoway 


Storr,Old man ot4 


Strathlachlan 
Strachur 


Strachur 


GAELIC 
Slac a’ chàirn 
Sliabh Manann* 
Loch Slaopain 
Sléiteadail,* Slatairdal 
Sléibhte 
Sl éiteil* 
see Slioch 
Sliabh eibhinn 
Sligeachan*® 
Shgeach 
Loch Slinn* 
An Sleaghach* 
Slios a’ chaolaig 
Sloc muic* 
Loch Sloidh 
Gleann Sluagh 
Slumba* 
Na h-Eileannan 
Smigil* 
Mac a’ ghobhainn 
Bail’ a’ ghobhainn 
Sniosort, Sniothasort 
Soilleiridh 
Solamh 
Somhairle 
Samhuachan 
Beathag 
Na Südraichean 


Bruthach nan Spardan 


An Spainnt 
Spainnteach 
Spainnteach 

Gleann Spiothain 
Loch Spealbhaidh 
Spé* 

Sliabh Ghrannag, & 
Griantachd 


ne ee 


Spainigdail 

Spideil* 

Sput Roilidh* 

Sron nam fian 

Srón-bhuachaillean 

Sron-damhain 

Sròn na saobhaidhe* 

Loch Struaban 

Beinn Stace 

! Stafin* 
Stafainn—CR 

Staidhir-chaol 

Rudha Stadhaig* 

Steiseal 

Stiùbhart 

Mac Iain Stiùbhart na he 
Apuinn 

Na Stiùbhartaich 
Stiùbhartaich na h-Ap- 

uinn 


Stiubhartaich Athaill 


Baile nan Stiübhartach* 

Na Stuicean 

Stiallaig 

Meallan a’ ghamhna* 

Sruighlea* 

Tsoch Stocainis 

Beinn an tomain, 
Beinn Staim 

Caladh nan clach 

Stiana Bleadar* 

Steornabhadh* 

Bod Stórr* (euphemistically 
Bodach Storr) ` 

Srath Lachiainn 

Srath-chura 


Strae 





1028 Tollie 

ENGLISH GAELIC ENGLISH GAELIC 
Strae, Glen Gleann Sréith (?)* Tarkea Burn Allt Tearcan* 
Stalker, Cas. Caisteal Stalcaire Tarland Tarbblann* 
Stranraer Sròn reamhair* Tarlogie . 'Tarlogaidh* 
Strath An Srath Tarnaway l'aranaich* 
Strathavon Sal? geri A reed Tarail* 
Strathblane rath Bhlathaiun Tarvie PAPERS 
Strathdee Srath Dhé Tarvy Tairbhidh CH 
Strathdon Srath Dheathain* Tavanagh. Inch Innis Da-mhanach*(?) 
Strathdugh Srath dubh Tay Tatha 
Strathy Srathaidh* —, Loch Loch Tatha 
Strathfleet Srath fledid —, Strath Srath Tatha* 
Strathmore An Srath mor Tayanock Taigh nan cnoc 
Strathsgaig Srath-asgag Taycargaman Taigh- -carmagain 
Strathwhellan Tir-chuilein Tayfuirst Taigh a’ phuirt, 
Strathy Suth’d An t-Srathaidh Tayinloan Taigh ’n lon 
EECH Srath-eadhair T ath Bealach, 

-——_—_— village see Immirrioch AyD Bealach nan lao gh 
Streens, the Na Srianaibh* ———-— Castle Caisteal a Bhealaich 
Strome Ferry Port an t-Sroim Taymore Taigh mor 
Stromness Stromnis 'Tayness Taigh an eas 
Stronachlachair ` Sròn a’ chlachair Taynloan see Tayinloan 
Strone Sron Tayutruan Taigh an t-sruthain > 
Stronechrubie Sron-Chrubaidh ‘| Taynuilt Taigh an uillt F 
Stronesker} Srón-iaszair Tayval!ich Taigh a’ bhealaich 
Strontian Sron an t-sithein Tayvullin Taigh a’ mhuilinn 
Struie An t-Srüigh* | Teablair Taigh a’ bhlàir* 
Struy, Strathglass Strüigh Teachatt Taigh a’ chait* 
Struy, Bridge of Drobhaid na Srüigh* Teachus, Loch Loch Tiacais 
Stuch-a-chroan Stuic a’ Chróim* Teafrish Taigh a’ phrìs 
Suilven Beinn bhuidhe Teanafruich Taigh an fhraoich* 
TEEN Ho. iv Ae AS Teanahuig TER na ce 
Suddy uidhe (S, beag mór s d aigh an t-sluic 
Suie, Loch Loch an t-suidhe ) | Teanalick Taigh an lüi«* 
Suisgil Sisgil 'Teanassie Taigh an fhasai:!h* 
Sulven see Suilven Teandallan Taigh nan dailan 
Summer Isles Na h-Eileanan Samhraidh | Teandalloch Taigh an dalach 
Sunart Suaineart* Teandore Taigh an todhair* 
Sunderland Islay Sionarla; inn Teainnich Taigh an aonaich* 
ded de Sonnagh-erioch Teatle doses Je 
Sunny Brae, x Teawi aigh a’ bhuic 

Urquhart \ Am Braighead mosach Renee Taigh 'gheata* 
Susan Siüsaidh Tegarmuchd, Dull An Teagarmachd 


Sutherland (place) Cataibh 
— ——-— (person) Suthurlanach 


Uisge i hcàdhaich* . 


Teith, River 
Srath Thealnaidh* n 


Telnie, Strath 


As 





























—, Chief of Ns Tenafield Taigh na fidhle* 1 
Clan } Morair Chat Tenandry An t-Seanaontachd z 
—,Earl of Morair Chataibh Ternan, St. Torranan 3 
—, Kyle of An Caol Catach Tervin Tairbhein | 
——,0f or be- Letsch Thaddeeus Tadhg, Taogh E 
longing to | Thanahine Taigh na h-aibhne E 
Sutors of Cromarty Na Südraiehean* Theobald Tiobaid A 
Swanibost Suaineabost* Thomaneun Tom-eun 1 
Sweden An t-Suain Thomas Tàmhus, Tómas 3 
— ———, native of Fionn Lochlainneach Thobhais Shoirbheis H 
Sween, Castle Caisteal Suain* Thomson MacThòmais E 
Swordale Suardail* Thundergay, Arran Ton ri gaoithe* q 
Syal Saoidheal* Thurso Inbhir Theòrsa * 3 
Syre Saghair* Tighnabruich Taigh na bruaich Si 
Taagan Na Tathagan ——— —-.—— ,dis-f Ceathramh Chomhghaill i 
'i'abac Tabac* trict & parish locally An Ceathramh 
Tables, MacLeod’s Tables, MacLeod’s Tighnafiline Taigh na faoilinn 
'l'abost Tàbost* Tilin Taigh linne E 
Tain Baile Dhubhthaich* Tillyminnet Tulaich-mheannait* d 
Talich, the An dailich* Tilt, Glen Gleann Teilt a 
Talladale Tealladal* Tiree Tir-iodh* d 
Talmine Toll-min Tirergain Tir Fheargain* a 
Tanera beag Tannara beag Tiretagain Tir Aodhagain X4 
; more Tannara mór* Tirevagain Tir a’ mhathagain S 
Tannachy Tan’-achadh Tirghoyll Tir a’ Ghoill* 3 
——, Suth’d Tannachaidh* Tirrim, Castle Caisteal Tioram 
Tannar Burn Tanar* Tirinie Tir-inidh* Y 
— —- Glen Gleann Tanar* Tirpersie Tir-phreasaich* e 
Tarbat An Tairbeart* Tirvaagan ` Tir a’ mhathagain 
2 ENess Rudha Thairbeirt* Tobermory Tobar Mhoire - 
T arbert An Tairbeart Toberonochy Tobar Dhonnchaidh 
Yari Water Tarbh* Tollie Tollaidh* 
Original from 
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS Files 
INTERNET ARCHIVE URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 

















Turret, Glen 
Perthshire & 


| 


Gleann Turraid 


Lochaber 
Turret, Loch Loch Turraid 
Tweed, River Tuaidh* 
Tweedle Tao’udal 
Tye-an-tore Taigh an todhair 
Digitized by 
INTERNET ARCHIVE 











Vuroch, Ben 


Vuya 
Wales 
Walsh 
Walter 
Wardlaw 
Waternish 


Tolly 1029 Waternish 
| ENGLISH GAELIC ENGLISH . . GAELIC 
Tolly Tollaidh* Tyndrum Taigh an droma 
Tollvah Toll a’ bhathaidh Tynribbie Ta gh an ribidh 
Tomenagne Tom-eun Tynrich Taigh an fhraoich 
Tom.low Tom dubh Tyree Tir-iodh* ves 
1 mintoul Tom an t-sabhail Uaz, Ru-na- Rudha na h-Uamhaig 
Tommy Tómachan, ''ómag— Ross-sh | Uag, Glen Gleann F hiodhaig 
Tomnahurich Tom na h-iübhrai:h* Uags Nah-Uamhagan* —. 
Tongue Tunga Uaine, Lochan OSM. for Loch Uanaidh 
, parish of Civn t-saile MhicAoidh Uam Var An Uamh mhór : 
, Kyle of Caolas Thunga* Uarie, Ben Beinn Uaiiidh (Uaraidb)* 
Torasay Torrasaidh Udale eech 
‘orba Udrigle Udrigill 
Lage pou SR Den ae € b d 
‘ore n Todhar E Uie, Ben einn Aoid po 
'l'ornabakin Torr nam bacan Vig Uig 
Tornabrock Tòrr nam broc Uillian Uileann 
Tornahosh | Torr na h-oisg! Uisgentuie Uisg' an t- suidhe 
Tornapreas Treabhar nam preas Uisken Uisge- ain 
Torness Tòrr an eas Uibhist (Called Tir a’ mhur- 
Torosay 'Tórosaidh* Uist ain, land of the bent-grass, 
Torquil Torcull 2 by the people of the neigh- 
Torridon Toirbheartan* . bouring islands) 
Torrisdale Torasdail* Uibhistieh, (Called Muran- 
Torris Trean Torr a’ phrìs droigheann ——, a native of d aich by the people of the 
RR DIR ed -rainich ce Seda bebe islands) 
oscaig ghseaig* ——, North ibhist mu thuath 
Toskary Tosgairidh ` ` —, South Uibhist mu dheas 
Totaig Uitir Oitir 
Toteig j d E S " Ulhava Ulbha*. 
otegan otaichean ( Ullapool apu 
GE, E Aa Tulach* AES , Praes of Ae Vi Le 
oul, Cairn rn an-t-sabhal . à ainn Illidh 
Toulvaddie Toll a’ mhadaidh* Ullie, River Abhainn Ilidh—CR 
Tournag Turnaig* Ulsterman, an Ultach 
had Rothesay Tollard Ulva Ulbha 
owle | see Tolly Unapool Unaboll 
EC ARC United States, the E aitean Aonaichte 
ressait, Perth Unity na 
An Treasait—CR 
Tressady Treasaididh* ees ped 1 Urchanaidh* 
Treig, Loch Loch Tréig* Ure Glen Gleann iubhair 
romie, Glen Tromaidh Urigill Uiriollaich 
romlee, Loch Loch Tromlaigh* Urquhart, L.Ness 
rossachs, the Na Trdiseachan ! (person) \ Urchardainn 
! , Trondairnis (Called Dwth- ina Ross An Tóisigheachd* 
Trotternish aich nan stapag and Am |... , Glen Gleann Urchardainn 
eeh TUN, d the —s,the Clann Urchardainn 
GO 1r1n15 1 Me - * 
Truderscaig Loch Yrü(n)darsgaig* DT dh eb: neg yino 
Truim, Glen Gleann Truim* Ussie tisaidh® 
4 o * S a a 
fons T z EA Vaich, Strath  Sràth Bhàthaich* 
Tuirnaig Tùrnai alentine alan — 
Tuitumtarvach a rove tairbheach* Valican, Loch Loch Mhaileagain 
'Tuilibardine Tulach Chàrdainn* Vallay Uàlaigh 
"'ullich An Tulaich* Vamor delay”)! Bail ur 
Tullymet Tulaich mhait* er iem poet j 
ees EE Vellich, Loch-a- . Loch ai bhealaich ] 
— Bridge Drochaid Theimheil Veunachar, Loch Loch Bheannchair* 
—— ——, Loch Loch Teimheil M m Bheinn ae A 1 
ertach, Seuir-na- Sgürr nam featag Scu 
Tumore EE mor * Veyatie, Loch Loch Mheathadaidh 
Tundergarth Ton-ri-gaoithe 
Turk, Bridge of see Bridge Voil, Loch Loch Bheothail" ) 
Turk, a Turcach Yailidi, Beo. 4 Pee Mhiviale (tte of dew 
Turkion a Vraggie, Ben Beinn Bhragaidh 
Turnalt Tarn-allt Vrotten, Loch Loch Bhrodain* 
Turner Mac an tuairneir Beinn a’ Bhuraich, Beinn a’ 


Bhuraich nam - madadh 
móra* 

Eilean Ehuidha* 

Cuimridh 

Breathnach 

Bhatair 

now Kirkhill 

see Vaternish 


Original fram 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


Waterton 1030 Cairbre . 

ENGLISH GAELIC ENGLISH GAELIC 
Waterton, Fearn Baile nam fuaran Wick Inbhir-Vig `, 
Watten (parish) Sgìre Bhatten -——, (parish) Sgire Inbhir-Uig 
Wauchan OSM, for Na h-uamhachan Wilkhaven Port nam faochag i 
Weem Uaimh William Uilleam, gen. -eim 
W ellhouse Taigh an fhuarain* Williamson MacUilleim 
Welsh Cuimreach Willie Uilleachan 
—— — language,the Cuimrig Wilson MacUilleim 
eibi a Breathnach, Cuimbreach, | Winifred Una d 
West e AE d Toe Ae a a Carbh 

e a An dail shuas u m Parbh. An Carbh i 
Whitewells Am Fuaran ban* Wrath, Cape 1 Lewis* " Md 
Whyte MacGhille bhain Wyvis, Ben Beinn Uais ~- 
Wiay ‘sê Eilean Bhia Yairhead 


~- A'jCheir éud 
K 


i v 


A SHORT ACCOUNT 
OF THE PRINCIPAL 
Persons amd Places 


MENTIONED IN. 


OLD GAELIC FOLK-TALES AND POETRY. 


(From Armstrong’s Gaelic Dictionary.) 


deed cR 
- 





A ghaidh-an-t-sneachd, (Agandecca), the daugh- 
ter of Starno, king of Lochlin, whom her fa- 
ther barbarously slew, for having informed 
e of a plot which had been laid against 

is life. 

Ainnir, (ain-fhear), the father of Erragon, 
Trothar and Starno. 

Aliaid, (all-aite) a Druid, or, as Ossian terms 
him, a son of the rock, in allusion to his 
dwelling among rocks and caverns, 

Alenecma, an ancient name for Connaught in 
Ireland. 

Althan, the son of Conachar, was the chief 
bard or laureate of Arth or Art, king of Ire- 
land. On the death of Arth, he attended his 
son and;suecessor as chief bard. 

Althos, one of the sons of Usnoth, chief of Etha, 
by Slissama, the sister of Cuchullin. 

Amun, an Irish chieftain, was the father of 
Feard, who was slain in single combat by 
Cuchullin. 

Aoibhir-diuinn, the daughter of Branno, king 
of Lego in Ireland, and wife of Ossian. Her 
beauty is celebrated in the Fourth Book of 
Fingal and other poems of Ossian. 

A oibhir-chaomha (Evircoma), the wife of Gaul, 
and daughter of Casduconglas. 

Ardar, the son of Usnoth, chief of Etha, and 
Slissama, the sister of Cuchullin. He was slain 
in battle at an early age, by Swaran, king of 
Scandinavia. 

Artho, king of Ireland, was the father of that 
Cormac who was deposed and murdered by 
Cairbre the son of Borbaduthul. 

Atha, Cairbre’s palace in Connaught. 

Baile Clutha, signifies the town of the Clyde, and 
is supposed to be the Alcluth of Bede. 


MEC Se eS ge eS m 
s IAIL T C EI A ol 
i — HL j i i 

LEN i= nike i 


ec E JS 


Beltanno, the wite of Cairbre son of Cormae. 

Bolg, The southern parts of Ireland were so 
called from the Bolg, or British Belgze, who 
settled a colony chere. 

Borbar (borb-fhear), the father of Cathmor the 
generous, and of Cairbre the usurper. He was 
brother of that Colcullamh (Colgulla) who re- 
belled against Cormac, king of Ireland. 

Borbaduthul, another name for Borbar. 

Bosgeal, (fair-hand), was daughter of Colgar, a 
Connaught chief. She was wife of Cairbre, 
the son of Cormac, king of Ireland, who was 
dethroned by Cairbre, son of Borbar. 

Bosmin (smooth-hand), the only daughter” of 
Fingal, by Clatha, the daughter of Cathula, 
king of Innistore. : 

Braigh-gheal (fair-neck), wife of Cuchullin. 

Braigh-soluis, the sister of Cairbre, who slew 
Cridhmor in single combat. B. was secretly 
in love with Cridhmor. The fatal issue of 
this contest broke her heart and hastened her 
death. 

Bran, Fingal’s favourite dog. 

Bran, Brano, A river in Caledonia, probably 
one which falls into the Tay near Dunkeld. 
Brumo, a plece of worship in Craca, one of the 
Shetland Isles. t 
Cairbre, lord of Atha in Connaught, and chief 
ofthe Fir-bolg. He was the son of Borbor. 
After the violent death of Cormac, king of 
Ireland, he usurped the government, He was 
a man of great bravery, but of an insiduous 
and sanguinary disposition, and would make 
any sacrifice for power. He bore a lurking 
hatred to Oscar the son of Ossian. At Gabhra 
in Ulster, these rival heroes engaged in single 

combat, and fell by mutual wounds. 


A^ ab i = = ^ 
Ad Nae. 


S 


t LS 2 X 


k~ 








Cairbre 
assumed the government after his father, and 


reigned but a short while. 


who was dethroned and murdered by Cairbre 
the son of Borbar. 


Caithbaid, the son of Armin, and the rival of 


Dubhchomar, by whom he was slain. 

Caithbaid, or Cathbait, the grandfather of Cu- 
chullin. 

Calthonn, the son of that Rathmor who was 
murdered by Dunthalmo, a prince residing on 
the Tweed. C. and his brother Colmar were 
kept in confinement by Dunthalmo, but were 
liberated by Caolmhal his daughter. 

Caoilte, a Scandinavian chief, who was slain by 
Cairbre. 

Caol-abhainn (a narrow river), the residence of 
"rue situated to the south of Agricola's 

a 


Cavimhal (a woman with small eyebrows), the | 


daughter of Dunthalmo, a cruel and ambiti- 
ous prince, who resided on the Tweed, 
; rescued from her father’s captivity Calthonn 
. and Colmar, the sons of the chief whom be 


murdered, and afterwards became the wife of | 


the former. 

Caomh-mhal, daughter of Sarno, king of the 
Orkneys. 

Curraig-thura, (carraig nan tur), the seat of 
Cathulla, king of Innistore. | 

Cairuil, one of tbe bravest of the sons of Fingal. 
lie was slain in single combat by Gaul, ina 

, Gispute of precedence. The bards poured 

i their lamentation over him in the beautiful 

! poem called Bas Charruil.- Another person 

— of the same name was the son of Ceanfeadhna, 
Cuchullin's bard. 

Qa rthonn, the son of Clessamor and Maona. He 
was slain by his own father in single combat, 
in which each had engaged, without knowing 
his opponent. 

Carunn (car-abhainn) A stream in Scotland, 
now called Carron, falling into the Forth 
near Falkirk. 

Cathbaid or Cathbait, see Caithbaid, 

Cathlinn, or Gath-linn, Name given to a certain 
star by Fingalian mariners. Some apply that 
name to the North Polar star, 

Cathmor, son of Borbar. Unlike his barbarous 
brother Cairbre, the usurper, his bravery was 
of the noblest description. He was not more 
brave than hospitable and generous. His 
modesty was such, that he could not bear to 
hear mention made of his own achievements. 
He was much attached to his brother, but 
affection towards such an object was more 
like a crime than a virtue. 

Cathwil, or Cathul, the son of Maronnan or 
Moran, was the:friend and companion of Os- 
ear, son of Ossian. He was murdered by 
Cairbre, the usurper, in consequence of his 
attachment to the family of the dethroned 
Cormac. 

Cathulla, king of Innistore, and father of Cla- 
tho, the second wife of Fingal. 

Ceann-nan-daoine (the head of the people), the 
son of Duthmaruno or Dubh-mhic-Roinne. 

Claon-mhal, an aged bard or druid. 


Ciaon-rath, a district on the shore of Lego in 


Ireland. 

Clatho, the daughter of Cathulla, king of Innis- 
tore. She wasthe second wife of Fingal, to 
whom she bore Reyno, Fillean and Bosmin. 

Clonar, the son of Conglas, of Imor, one of the 
Hebrides, 

lomo, the son of Sithmhal, of Lora. He þe- 


Digitized by 
INTERNET ARCHIVE " 


1031. 
Cairbre, the son of Cormac, king of Ireland. He 


She 








Crothar 
came the victim of a jealous Irish chief. 


Cluan-fhear (man of the field), was killed in 
He was succeeded | 
by his son Artho, the father of that Cormac | 


battle by Cormac Mac Cona, king of Ireland, 
the father of Roscrana, the first wife of Fin- 


gal. 

Cluth, Clutha, the river Clyde. 

Clun-gheal, the wife of Connor, king of Inish- 
una, anl mother of the beautiful Suilmhall. 

Colc-ullamh, the brother of Borbar. 

Colgach, one of the ancestors of the tribe of 
Morni. 

Colgar, the eldest of the sons of Trathal, the 
grandfather of Fingal. Another Colgar was 
the son of Cathmul, and principal bard to 
Cormac, King of Ireland. The only part of 
his poems which has come down to posterity, 
is à tender dialogue on the loves of Fingal, 
and his first wife Roscrana. 

Coinal, à Fingalian chief. He was the unwit- 
ting cause of the death of his mistress Geal- 
mhìn.  Brooding over his calamity, he be- 
came weary oí life, and in battle he threw 
himself, unarmed into the midst of the enemy, 
and was slain, 

Comhal or Cumhal, the father of Fingal. The 
accounts of his achievements which have 
come down to us are but scanty. Hislife was 
unfortunate, and his death untimely. He 
fell in early youth, in an engagement with the 
tribe of Morni. 

Conan, the ‘thersites of the Fingalians. Ossian 
aud Ullin never mention him but with con- 
tempt. : 

Conar, one of the kings of Ireland. He was 
the father of that Corinae who was dethroned 
by Cairbre, and the son of Treunmor, the 
great grandfather of Fingal. It was owing 
to this connection that the great Caledonian 
hero was involved in so many Irish wars. 

Con-ban-carglas, the daughter of Torquil-torno, 
king of Crathlun in Sweden. Her father wag 
defeated by Stairn, and slain, and she was 
carried off by the conqueror, and driven to 
distraction by his brutal trea! ment of her. 

Congal, a petty king of Ulster. 

Conmor, king of Inishuna, was killed in an in- 

yasion of his kingdom. His son Cathimor suc- 

ceeded him. 

Connal, the son of Dubh-earron, Another of the 
same name was a renowned Fingatian, who 
was Slain in battle against Dargo the Druid. 
Some say that he fell by the hands of his mis- 
tress Cridhmor. 

Cormac, son of Arth, king of Ireland, He was 
dethroned and murdered by Cairbre, who us- 
urped the government. ‘ 

Cormar, one of the warriors who attended Cu- 
mhal, the father of Lineal, in his last battle 
with the sons of Morni. 

Craca, one of the Shetland Isles. 

Cridh-min, the second wife of Dargo. Her pre- 
mature and sudden death was occasioned by 
a rash experiment which her husband aud his 
comrades made use of to put her coujugal af- 
fections to the test. The catastrophe is rela- 
ted by Ullin, in his pathetic poem, Dan an 
Deirg. 

Cridhmor,mistress of Connal,the son of Diaran. 

Cromghias, one of the warriors who attended 
Cumhal, the father of Fingal, in his last battle 
with the s. ns of Morni. ` 

Cromia, à mountain in Ulster. 

E re K mts one of the Orkney or Shetland 

sles. 

Cronan, a stream which emptied itself into tle 
Carron near Stirling. i 

Cro!har, the ancestor of Cathmor, and the Grat 


Original from 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


Crothar 


of his family who settled in Atha. 

Crumthormod, see Cromthormod. 

Cruth-gheal, son of Grugal, was one of Cuchul- 
lin’s chiefs. He was slain by Swaran, king 
of Scandinavia. 

Cuchullin, son of Seuma, and grandson of Cath- 
baid. a wise and warlike Druid. In early 
youth he married Braigh-gheal, daughter of 
Sorglan. His wisdom aud bravery procured 
him the guardianship of Cormac, the young 
king of Ireland, as well as the management of 
the war against Swaran, king of Scandinavia. 

' His amazing strength is still proverbial among 
the Gael. Some say that one of his palaces 
was in the Isle of Skye, the remains of which 
are still shewn, Campbell asserts that he was 
slain on the banks of the Legon, in battle with 
Torlath, a chief of Connaught. 

Daorghlas, one of Cuchullin’s followers, Also 
a name given to Dermid, the progenitor of 
the Campbells. 

Dardulena, daughter of Foldath. | 

Dearg, son of Collath. He was slain by Ubar. 

Dearg, a warlike Druid, who vaialy attempted 
to restore the fallen dignity of his order. 

Deo-ghréine, daughter of Cairbre, and wife of 
that Cruthgheal who was slain in battle by 
Swaran, king of Scandinavia. 

Deud-gheal, the adulterous wife of Cairbre. On 
separating from her first husband she recei- 
ved one half of his goods, of which, at 
Cairbre’s request, a fair division had been 
made by Cuchullin. She afterwards became 
the wife of Feaird,the son of Amun, but being 
incensed against Cuchullin, on account of an 
imagined unfairness in the division of Cairbre’s 
property, she instigated her husband to a sin- 
gle combat with him, in which Feaird was 
slain, 


Diarmad, son of Duibhne, a young Fingalian 
warrior, from whom the Campbells derive 
their pedigree. His encounter with a wild 
boar, and his death consequent thereon, are 
celebrated in a poem by Ossian, in Smith’s 
collection. 

Dora, a mountain near Temora. 

Dubh-chomar, one of Cuchullin's chiefs. He 
was Cathbaid's rival for the affections of 
Morna, and slew him in single combat. He 
brought news of Cathbaid's fate to the lady, 
and renewed his addresses, in the hope that 
his bravery might win her heart. She begged 
to get his sword still covered with Cathbaid's 
blood, and plunged it into Cathbaid's breast. 
In the agonies of death he prayed her to ex- 
tract the weapon. She no sooner did so, than, 
with a dying effort, he buried it in her bosom. 

Dubh-mhic- Roinne, son of Stairnmor, He wasa 
brave warrior, but the poems which give de- 
tails of his exploits are extinct, He was one 
of the heroes who attended Cumhal, the fa. 
ther of Fingal, in his last battle against the 
sons of Morni. He lived in the north-east of 
Caithness. 

Dubh-srón-gheal, one of Cuchillin's horses. 

Dubhmor, Dumor, father of that Minshuil who 
was forcibly taken off by Lamba, one of the 
leaders of Dumor’s army. Minshuil’s affect- 
ions were placed on Ronan, who on hearing of 
the deforcement, went in pursuit of Lamba, 
whom he worsted and slew. 

Eirin, Ireland. 

Emhir-aluinn, see Aoibhir-aluinn. 

Emhir-chaomh, see Aoibhir-ehaomh. 

Eragon, son of Annir. 

Etha, a tract of country in the west of Scotland. 


= — 8. EX s 1 
1 1 4 i 
L = A L | = 1 3 ` | H V 


1032 


Fail, Ireland. 
Feaird, son of Amun, an Irish chief. 


Feargus, second son of Fingal. 





Hidalla 


He fell 
in single combat with Cuchillin, against 
whom he had been instigated by his wife, the 
infamous Deudgheal. 

From him des- 
cended Fergus, son of Erc or Arcath, who is 
styled, in Scottish annals, Fergus II. This 
Fergus came to the throne about 100 years af- 
ter the death of Ossian, that is, about the be- 
ginning of the fourth century. His genealogy 
is thus recorded by the Gaelic seanachies— 
Fergus mac Arcaith, mhic Chongail, mhic 
Fhearghais, mhic Fhionnghail nam buadh, 
Fergus the son of Arcath, the son of 
Congal, the son of Fergus, the son of Fingal 
the Victorious. 

Ferait-Artho, son of Cairbre‘ Mac Cormac, king 
of Ireland, by Baltanno, daughter of Cona- 
char of Ullin. 

Fingal, king of the Caledonians, the hero of 
one of the most splendid epic poems in any 
language. He was the son of Cumhal and 
Morna the daughter of Thaddu. He was the 
father of Ossian, and his grandfather was 
Trathuil, the son of Treunmor. 

Fideallan, the first king of Innistore. 

Fillean, the sonof Fingal and Clatho. He lost 
his life in the cause of the family of Conar, | 
king of Ireland. He is often called '* the son 
of Clatho, ” to distinguish him from the sons 
which Fingal had by Roscrana. 

Firbolg, supposed Lo have been a colony of 
British Belge, who according to Irish anti- 
quarians, settled in the South of Ireland. 

Fiet, wife of Learthonn, chief of the Fir- 


olg. ! 

Foldath, the friend of the usurper Cairbre, 
whom he assisted in dethroning Cormac, king 
of Ireland. He wasof the race of the Fir- 
bolg, aud was fierce and fearless, although 
generous. 

Gabhra, a narrow vale in Ulster, where Cair- 

bre, king of Ireland, and Oscar, son of Ossian, 

fought and fell by mutual wounds. 

Gealmhin, daughter of Conlaoch, and the mis- 

tress of Comal. She was accidentally slain by 

an arrow Shot by her lover. 

Goll, Gaul, the son of Morni. He headed his 
clan for some time, and disputed the super- 
iority with Fingal himseif. He was at length 
worsted and brought to submission, After 
this he became the most faithful friend and 
ally of Fingal. He was ardently fond of a 
warrior’s reputation, and sometimes, in the 
absence of the Caledonian chief, he was en- 
trusted with the command of the Fingalian 
forces, but his valour was too impetuous for 
conducting an army. He owed his death to 
the following circumstance. A party of Fin- 
galians,having gone to plunder the hostile isle 
of Ifredine, were followed, some short time 
after, by Gaul, without any attendants. He 
landed on the island after his friends had 
pillaged and leftit. He was surrounded by 
the exasperated inhabitants, against whom, 
with his back to & tree, he maintained a des- 
perate conflict, until, amazed at his valour, 
and afraid of his strength, they rolled à mass 
of rock down upon him which broke his thigh.. 
He thus became incapable of further resist- 
ance, and fell a sacrifice to his enemies. 

Gorlo, king of the Orkneys. 

Gruamhal, the lord of Ardven. 

Hidalia, Idalla, the chief of Claonrath, on the 
shores of Lego in Ireland. In Temora, Ossian 
speaks in praise of his personal beau'y aud 


Pa at Ja 


Me, 


4 Se 





2179. afa. 


Hidalla Le 


tot ——— 


poetical genius. 

Innis-fàil, an ancient name of Ireland. 

Innis-thoirne, an island in Scandinavia. 

Ithonn (the isle of waves), one of the Hebrides, 
perhaps Iona. 

Lamha, one of the leaders of Dumor’s forces. 
He was an admirer of Dumor’s daughter Min- 
shuil, to whom, with her father’s consent, he 
paid his addresses, which were slighted. He 
carried her off by force, but, being pursued, 
he ao her. He was slain by Ronon, his 
rival. 

Lamhath, a small stream running behind the 
mountain Cronmal (Crom-mheall), in the West 
Highlands. The rocky banks of this river af- 
forded a hiding-place to Cairbre, the only 
remnant of the race of Conar, during the us- 
urpation of Cairbre the son of Borbar-duthul, 

Lano, a lake in Scandinavia, the mist of which 
was said to be pestilential, 

Lathmon, supposed to have been a Pictish 
prince, 

Learthonn, chief of the Fir-bolg, and ancestor 
of Cairbre and Cathmor. 

Lego, a lake in Ulster. - 

Lochlann, Lochlinn, Scandinavia. 

Lodainn, Lod, a place in Scandinavia, Ossian 
makes frequent mention of the spirit of Loda, 
meaning thereby Odin, the divinity of the 
northern nations, 

Lora, a precipitous stream in Argyllshire, near 
Selma. Alsothe hill where the stream has 
its source, and which is remarkable for being 
the place where Cathmor posted himself pre- 
vious to his engagement with Fingal. 

Lorma, king of Innishuna. He succeeded his 
father Conmor, and was slain in an invasion 
of his kingdom. 

Lotho, a river in the north of Scotland, perhaps 
the Lochy. 

Luath (swift), Cuchullin's favourite dog. 

Lubar, à stream rising in Crom-mheal, a hill in 
the West Higülands. Near it was fought the 
first battle in which Gaul, the brave son of 
Morni, commanded the forces of Fingal, 

LIubar, a river in Ulster. 

Lulan. a river in Sweden, now Lula, 

Lumar, a hill in Innishuna, 

Mac-an-Luinn, (the son of Luno), the sword 
of Fingal, so called from Luno its maker, a 
Scandinavian armourer. A traditional ac- 
count of it says, that every stroke of it was 
mortal, and that Fingal only used it in cases 
of pressing danger. 

Malmhin (Malvina) the daughter of Toscar. She 
was the mistress of Oscar, the son of Ossian. 
Manos, king of Scandinavia. He invaded the do- 
niinions of Fingal, and, in a personal encount- 
er with that hero, was worsted, disarmed and 
bound. He regained his liberty on condition 
that he would either renew the general enga- 

" gement, or leave the land asa vanquished foe, 
He embraced the latter condition with grati 
tude, and embarked, after swearing that he 
would never re-invade the country of his con- 
queror. After setting sail, his men, stung 
with disappointment and defeat, prevailed on 
him to return and renew the combat. He 
yielded to their request, and landed on Fin- 
gal’s territory. A p aad battle ensued, in 
Eh Manos and his bravest chiefs were 
slain. 

_ Maronnan, the brother of Toscar. 

Mingheal, the mistress of Dearg or Dargo, the 
son of Collath. Her lament over her husband, 
wiho was slain by a boar, is still extant, and is 
full of pathos and affection. 


Digitized by 


B INTERNET ARCHIV 


[ — 


` 1033 


Struthmor 


Moilena, a plain lying between the hills Mora 
and Lena, through which flowed the stream 
Lubar. 

Momad, a, name given to Gaul, son of Morni. 

Mora, a hill in the West Highlands. 

Mora, a hill in Ireland. 

Morbheinn, Morven. All the north-west coast 
of Scotland was so called,yet some learned an- 
tiquaries confine the name to the Isle of Mull. 

Morna, the wife of Comhal or Cumhal, and the 
mother of Fingal. Another female, of the 
same name, was the mistress of Cathbaid, who 
was slain by Dubhchomar. 

Morna, a {district in the south of Connaught, 
once famous for being the residence of an 
archdruid. Here was a cavern, supposed to 
have been haunted by the spirits of the Fir- 
bolg chiefs. 

Morni, the father of Gaul. On his death-bed 
be directed his son to lay his sword (the 
sword of Strumon) by his side, with injunct- 
ions not to take it away but on occasions of 
imminent danger. 

Nathos,the son of Usnoth and Slisama the sister 
of Cuchullin. 

Og gholl, or Oguill, the son of Gaul, one of Fin- 
gal’s allies. 

Ossian, a celebrated Caledonian warrior and 
poet of the third century, was the son of Fin- 
gal, the Caledonian king, and Roscrana. He 
attended his father in most of his wars in 
Ireland, aud succeeded him in the command 
of the army. At an advanced age he lost his 
sight, and became of course unfit for the busi- 
ness of the field. He cheered his misfortune 
and his solitude by celebrating the exploits 
of other; warriors—the subject of which his 
poems principally treat, The companion of 
his misfortune and solitude was Malvina, the 
amiable widow of his son Oscar. It is pro- 
bable that it is to this female,who committed 
these poems to memory, that we ought to at- 
tribute their dissemination amongst the bards 
of her time, and their transmission for six- 
teen centuries, from one race to another, of 
appointed rehearsers. ` 

Ronan, the lover of Minshuil, the daughter of 
Dumor. His mistress was forcibly taken away 
by his rival Lamba. He went in pursuit, and 
a bloody engagemeut ensued, in which Lamba 
was slain by Ronan, but Lamba, anticipatiug 
his fate, put Minshuil to death. The circum- 
Stances of this deforcement are recorded in 
the beautiful poem by Orran, entitled Cath- 
lamha. 

Roscrana, wife of Fingal, and the mother of 
Ossian. She was the daughter of Cormac Mac 
Conar, king of Scotland. ` 

Runma, the father of Lamhor. 

Runi, Ryno, the son of Fingal and Clatho. 

Sellama, Selma, the name of a Fingalian pal- 
ace, of which the ruins are still seen in Ar- 
gyllshire. There is another Selma in Ulster. 

Sith-àluinn, (stately pace) one of Cuchullin's 
chiefs, who was slain by Swaran, king of 
Scandinavia. 

Sith-fada (long pace), one of Cuchullin’s horses. 

Sonmor, the father of Borbar-duthul, chief of 
Atha, and grandfather of Cairbre the usurper. 

Starn, king of Lochlin, was the son of the bar- 
barous Ainnir. He was the ayowed foe of 
Fingal Revenge, cuuning and cruelty, were 
the prominent features of his character. 

Starnmor, the father of Dubhmaruno. 

Strumon,a place in the neighbourhood of Selma. 
It was the residence of Gaul, son of Morni. 


Struthmor, one of the warriors who accompani: 


A 


UNIV 
LJ 


L| 
1 


rm B a el i nu mci 
-— LI L KE LI LU E 


E. Base A. 
fr OF ILLINOIS A 


N 


Struthmor 


1034 


Uthorno 


ed Cumhal, the father of Fingal, in his last | Treunmor, the great-grandfather of Fingal. Al- 


battle against the sons of Morni. 

Süihnhall, the daughter of Conmor, king of 
Inisthuna, She fell in love with Cathmor, 
the brother of Cairbre, king of Ireland, who 
had sent him to the aid of her father, whose 
territories had been invaded, On his depart- 
ure from Inisthuna, she accompanied him in 
the diseuise of a young warrior, but on the 
death of her lover, which happened a short 
time after, she returned to her native country. 

Ti-foirmal, Taigh-foirmeil, the only one of Fin- 
gal’s palaces that was built of wood. Here 
the bards met yearly to recite their composi- 
tions, previously to their being submitted to 
the judgment of Fingal and the other chiefs, 

Taighinóér, Temora,the residence of the supreme 
kings of Ireland, and the name of one of Os- 
sian's poems, 

Tlathmin,tne mistress of Clonar son of Conglass, 
chief of Imór. 

Tonn-theine, a star so called by the Fingalian 
mariners. 

Torcuil-torno, king of Crathlun, & district of 
Sweden, He was slain by Starno, king of 

"Seandinavia, in an engagement which took 
place in consequence of à misunderstanding 
at & boar-hunt, to which he bad invited 
Starno. 

Trathal, the son of Treunmor and grandfather 
of Fingal. 

Treun-fhear, brother to the king of Inniscon. 
supposed to have been one of the Orkneys. 





though the poems are extinct which recorded 
his achievements, he was, without question. 
one of the first warriors of histime. He col- 
lectei and joined the warlike Caledonian 
clans, and opposed their united strength to 
the Roman invaders, thus forming a barrier, 
which defeated all the strength and discipline 
of the legions of Rome. 

Tara, acastle in Ulster, and one of Cuchullin's 
residences, hence he is called Lord of Tara. 
Üleirin (iul-Eirinn), a star known by that name 
in Ossian's time, meaning the guide to Erin. 
Usnoth, the chief of Etho, & district on the 
west coast of Scotland, d 
Uthorno, a bay in Scandinaria. 


ve 


“ Is obair-là tòiseachadh " 
—Gnath-thacal, 
Ach is obair beatha criochnachadh 
| Beachd a’ chomh-chruinniche. 


* Beginning is a day's work ” 
— Gaelic Proverb, 
But finishing is the work of a life-time 
— Compiler’ s note, 





(RES 


1035 


List of Subscribers. 








* Subscribers now deceased. t Orders received through Miss Farquharson. 


The Most Hon. The Marchioness of Graham 
Brodick Castle, Arran, 

Lady Kemball, London. ; 

Col. the Most Hon. the Marquis of Tullibardine, 
M.P., M.V.O,, D.S.O. N.S 

His Excellency Lt.-Governor Fraser, Halifax, 

Hon, S. R. Erskine, Banchory Devenick (3 cop.) 

Hon. R. I. MacDonald of the Isles, London. 

Sir Donald MacAlister, M.D., M.A., F.R,C.P.. 
Principal of Glasgow University. 

Sir John Rhŷs, M.A., Oxford. 

+Alexander, Miss, Bridge-of-Allan, 

fAlison A., Harrogate. 

Astley, Miss, Arisaig, 

Bain, R., Glasgow. 

Bannatyne, J. 5., Glasgow. 

Bannerman, J.R., Glasgow. 

Barion, Mr., Oban. 

*Beaton, D., Mackay, Queensland. 

Beaton, Rev. D., Wick. 

Beaton, M., Inverness. 

Beaton. N., Milan, Quebec. 

*Black, Donald, Leeds. 

*Blair, Rev. R., D.D., Edinburgh. 

Blundell, W.H., Oxford. 

Boland, J. P., M.P,, House of Commons, 

British Museum Library, London. 

Bruce, Alex., Pollokshields. 

Burgess, Alex., Gairloch. 

Burnley-Campbell, Mrs., of Ormidale (7 copies) 

Burnside, W., Catford. 

Caller, Rey. G., Tyndrum. 

Calder, J., Back, Lewis. 

Cameron, Angus, Blair Athole. 

Cameron, Donald, Spean Bridge. 

Cameron, Ewen, Hillhead, Glasgow. 

Cameron, John, Tobermory. 

Cameron, Rey. Kenneth, Brora. 

(Cameron, William, Poolewe, 

Cameron-Lucy, Mrs., of Callart. 

Campbell, Alex., Largs. 

Campbell, Alex., Eastbourne, - 

Campbell, Mrs. A., Oban. 

Campbell, Angus, Langside, Glasgow. 

Campbell, Colin, Port Ellen. 

Campbell, J.of Barbreck, Lochgilphead. 

Campbell, John, Maryhill, Glasgow. *Grant, Rev. D., Dornoch. 

Campbell, J. McN., Glasgow. Grant, Rev. Duncan, Sheffield. 

Campbell, Rev. M., Gabarus, N. S., Canada,  , Grant, John, 35, Geo. IV. Bridge, Edinburgh. 









Dawson & Sons, London, E. C. (2 copi 

Dewar, Rev. J., B.D., Crieff. : cu 

tuor PE MADE: 

ouglas ‘owlis, Edinburgh. (2 copies 

Downey, Rev. J., Warragul, Visto : 

Drummond-Hay, Miss Edith, Perth, 

*Dwelly, Mrs., Kingston-on-Thames. 

Dwelly, Mrs., Herne Bay. 

D'Welly, Mrs., Malmesbury. 

Dwelly, G. A. F., Ewell, Surrey. 

Dwelly, Harold, Western Australia, 

Dwelly, H. C., Stoke-Newington. 

Dwelly. R., Chard, Somerset. 

| Dwelly, T., Saltash, Cornwall. 

Dwelly, W., Wiveliscombe, Somerset. 

Edwards, O., Llanuwchllyn, N. Wales, ^ 

Erskine, Mrs., Westminster. 

Farquharson, Miss L. E. of Invercauld,London, 
(4 copies) 

*Ferguson, James, Comrie. 

Ferguson, Norman, Ascog, Bute. 

Fergusson, Dr., Alloa. (2 copies) 

Fergusson & Mitchell, Dunedin, N.Z. (10 cop.) 

Finlayson, D.K., Grand River, N.S., Canada. 

Forbes, J., Harrington Square, N.W., 

Forbes, Rev. W. A. McF., Marykirk. 

Fraser, Dr., Dundee. 

Fraser, Alex., Inverness. 

Fraser, Dr. A. Duncan, Falkirk. 

Fraser, Rev. Duncan, M.A., Milan, Quebec. 

Fraser, Hector, Fort William. 

Fraser, John, Pietermaritzburg. 

Fraser, Miss L. S., Kensington. 

Fraser, S. H., Inverness. 

Fraser, T. S., Leeds. 

Gaelic Society of Glasgow. (10 copies) 

Gaelic Society of London, “Dictionary Fund" 
(22 copies) 

Gardner, Alex., Paisley. 

Gates, H. C., Muswell Hill. 

Gibson, Wm., Holmwood, Surrey. ` 

Glllies, Wm., W. Dulwich. 

Glasgow, A. N., Barnesville, Minn., U.S.A. 

Golubzow, D, D., Port Said. 

Goodwin, Edmund, Peel, Isle of Man. 

Grant, Rey, Alex., Bernera. 


Campbell, Rev, N., Dingwall. (2 copies) : 

Cardiff Public Library. Grant, Mrs. K. W., Glasgow. - 
Carmichael, Rev. D., Colonsay. Grant, Wm., London, E.C. 
Carmichael, Rev, D., Reay, Thurso, Harding, C.F., Leon, Nicaragua, 
Cattanach, Ewen, London. Harrison & Sons, Pall Mall. 
Chavasse, C. A. Malmesbury. Havard-Jones, Rey. H. T., Soham. 
Chisholm, J. A., London, E. C, Hay, Wm., Glasgow. 

Clark, Donald, Logie Almond. Henderson, Angus, Kilchoan. 
Clemenson, Peter, Balallan, Lewis. Henderson, A.D., Ewell, Surrey. 


Comunn Gàidhealach, An, Glasgow. (9 copies) | Henderson, Rev. G., M.A. Scourie, 

Comunn nam Fineachan, Dundee. (3 copies) | Highland Society of London, 

Concannon, T., Cluan Eois, Ireland. Holmes, W. & K., Glasgow. 

Cook, J. A., Lamlash. Howard, Rev. W.W., Northam, North Devon. 
Cook, W. B. Causewayhead, Stirling. (2 copies) | Hutcheson, Alex., South Govan. 

Craigie, Dr. W. A., Oxford. Hutcheson, Wm., Drumnadrochit. 


Cunningham, R. Y., Campbeltown, Argyll. Inverness Public Library. 


Dand, J., Sutton, Surrey. Jefferess, Dr., Chatham. 
Davis, C. H. S., M.B., Meriden, Conn, U.S.A, | Johnson, D.J., Cranbrook, British Columbia. 
Davy, Miss W., Spean Bridge. Jones, Capt. B.G., 1st Batt. Leinster Regiment, 


3 T 2 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


1036 


Jones, E.D. Kensington. 
Jones, Dr. D. Rhŷs, Cardiff. 
Jordan, J.H., Scranton, Pa., U. 
Kemp, A. G., Harrow. 
Kennedy, Rey. H., Corpach. 
Kennedy, Rey. J., Lochranza. 
Kerr, Murdo, Aultbea. 
Laing, Rev. Norman, Lochmaddy. 

Lamont, M., Quiney, Mass., U.S.A. 

Lane, T. O'N., Cliffoney, Sligo. 

Lawrie. E., Poolewe. 

Leeds Public Library. 

Legislative Assembly, Victoria, B.Columbia. 
Lindsay, J. Arrochar. 

Livingston, Colin, Ardtraigh, Fort William. 
Loch, Chas., Carlisle. 

Loch, Sydney, Culcairn, N.S.W. 

London Library, the, St. James's St., S. W. 
Low, Wm. M.A., Coatbridge. 

Lyon, Mrs., Warrington. 

MacAdam, Rev D.M., Sydney, C. Breton. 
MacAlister, R.A.S., Cambridge. 
MacArthur, A., Vancouver Island. 
MacArtney, W.H.C., Sevenoaks. 
*MacAulay, Rey. D., Reay, Thurso. 
MacAulay, Donald J., M.D., Halifax, Yorks. 
MacBean, L., Kirkcaldy. 

MacCallum, Duncan, Connel. 
MacCallum,jHugh, M.A., Hillhead, Glasgow, 
MacCallum, J., Alvinston, Ontario. 
MacCallum, J., Carradale, Kintyre. 
MacCowan, Hugh, Oban. 

MacConnal, Johh, New Brighton, Cheshire, 
MacDiarmid, Dr. Jehn, Deland, Florida. 
MacDiarmid, Neil, Inverness. 

MacDonald, A. Southampton. 

MacDonald, Alasdair, Irvine. 

MacDonald, Rey. Angus, Rothesay. 
tMacDonald, Angus L., Stornoway. 
MacDonald, Archd., Glasgow. 

MacDonald, Rev., D. J., Muasdale. 
MacDonald, Geo., Birmingham. 
MacDonald, Hugh, Oban. (2-copies) 
MacBornesld, H. L., Dunach, Oban. 
MacDonatt, James, Burnley, Melbourne, 
MacDonald, James, Milwaukee, Wis., U.S.A. 
MacDonald, Miss Jane, Hughton P.O., Beauly. 
MacDonald, John, Topeka, Kan, U.S.A. 
MacDonald, J. F., Linlithgow. 

MacDonald, Miss Juliet, Fort William. 
MacDonald, K. L., of Skirinish, Skye. 
MacDonald, M., Cromarty. 

MacDonald, Malcolm, Toronto. 
MacDonald, Norman, Kingston, Ontario. 
MacDonald, Capt. Ronald, North Syduey, N.S. 
MacDonald, W., Govan. 

MacDonell, Rev. Andrew, Fort Augustus. 
MacDougall, A., Fernie, Brit. Columbia. 
MacDougall, Coll, Glasgow. 

MacDougall, Duncan, Callander, 
TMacDougall, D. B.,?Easdale. 

MocDougall, John, Hastings. 

MacFadyen, Duncan, Hyne, Coll. 
MacFarlane, Douglas, MacDonald Coll.,Quebec. 
MacFarlane, Maleolm, Elderslie. 
MacFarlane, Robt., Dumbarton. 
MacGillivray, D., M.A., Glasgow. 
MacGinley, P. T., Sheffield. 

MacGregor, A. S., Mekiwin, Manitoba. 
MacGreyor, Chas., Spean Bridge. ' 
MacGregor, Dr. Donald, J.P., Ealing. 
MacGregor, T. J. C., Sophia, Bulgaria. 
MacGregor of MacGregor, Miss, Balquhidder. 
MacInnes, Lt.-Col. John, V.D., Partick. 
MacInnes, Ronald, Chiswick. 

MacIntyre, Angus, Glasgow. 

MacIntyre, D., London, W. 

MacIntyre, John, Casterton, Victoria. 
Macintyre, Dr., Airdrie. 


S. A. 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


MacKenzie, Col.-Sergt. J., Gairloch. 


{ MacLeod, Rev. [ 
| MacLeod, M., Miavaig. 


Maclsaac, Duncan, Oban. d 
MacIver, Donald, Bayble, Lewis. 
Maciver, John, Cambuslang. 
MacIver, Miss I., London, W. : 
MacIver, K., M.A., B.SC., Dunfermline. 
MacIver, Malcolm, Stonewall, Manitoba, 
MacIver, P. J., Kyleakin. | 
MaeKay, Alex., Dornoch. , 
MacKay, Archd., Lochearnhead. A 3 
MacKay, A.H., Supt. of Education, Halifax, 3 
MacKay, Chas., Highbury, London. [This was 

my first subscriber.) ce are 
*MacKay, Donald, Highgate. -` = ' a 
MacKay, D., Maryburgh. 
MacKay, Rey. D. F., Tiree, one 
MacKay, Eneas, Stirling. 
Mackay, Rey. G. Stornoway. 
MacKay, J.G. Portree. (3 copies)  . 
MacKay, J. G., London. (5 copies) 
Mackay, Wm , Inverness. 
MacKay, Wm., Craigmonie, Inverness, 
MacKechnie, Allan, Tobermory. ; 
MacKeggie, J. A.. Glasgow. 
MacKenzie, A. S., Lexington, Ky., U.S.A, : 
MacKenzie, Donald, Killimster, Caithness. 
MacKenzie, Donald,EGlasgow. 
MacKenzie, Rev. Duncan, Gairloch. 
MacKenzie, Dr. F. M., Inverness. 
MacKenzie, G. R., Glasgow. 
MacKenzie, Ian, London, E.C. 


OE atm ad ^id ^" n a7 Can A HEEN 






MacKenzie, Kenneth, Kensington, (2 copies.) 

MacKenzie, Rev. W. A., Craigston, Barra. 

MacKenzie, W. D., Henley-on-Thames. 

McKerchar, John, Upper Holloway. 

Mackie, Rev. N., B.A., Glen Innes, N.S.W. 

Mackie, W.H., Bovey, Minn., U.S.A. 

Mackinlay, ©., Carradale, Kintyre. 

Mackinlay, John, Rothesay. 

Mackinnon, Professor D., Edinburgh. 

Mackiunon, Ronald, Walton-on-Thames, 

Mackintosh, Alex., Forfar. 

Mackintosh, Rey. Alex., Fort William. 

Mackintosh, Rev. D., Acharacle. 

Mackintosh, John, Inverness. 

Mackintosh, Dr. R. D., Mortlake. 

* Mackintosh, Dr. W. A., Stirling. 

MacLaine, John, Portree. i 

MacLaren, Alex. & Son, Glasgow. (10 copies) 

MacLaren, Chas., Belgraye Sq., London. . 

Maclean, Alex., Dundee. d 

Maclean, Allan, Kamsack, N. W.T. 

Maclean, Angus, Partick. 

Maclean, Archd., Rutherglen. : 

Maclean, Rey. D. Dunvegan. (2 copies) 

Maclean, D., Inverasdale, Poolewe. 

Maclean, Donald, Partick, (2 copies) 

Maclean, Rev. Dugald, Gairloch. j 

Maclean, Rev. G. M., Fort William. 4 

Maclean, John, Glasgow. 

+Maclean, Mrs. Joseph, Barra. 

Maclean, Prof. Magnus, Glasgow. 

Maclean, Rev. Norman, Colinton. 

Maclean, R.C., Highgate. 

Maclean, W., Lochboisdale. Ki 

Maclehose & Sons, Glasgow. | - 2N 

Maclellan, Rev. W., Lochboisdale y 

Maclennan, Alex., Lochluichart. T 

Maclennan, D., Shettleston. | tu 

Maclennan, Dr., Honolulu.’ $ 

MacLeod, Rev. Angus, Knock, Lewis. 

Macleod, Archd., Dunkeld, 

MacLeod, A.R., Edinburgh. 

MacLeod, D. Hyndland, Glasgow. 

MacLeod, G.G: Ardgay. ` ^ 

MacLeod, Rev. John, £dinburgh : (a 

MacLeod, J.P., D. Atty. Gen., Victoria, B.C. . 
M., M.A., Broadford. E. 





Original from P 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS Ag 
URBAMA-CHAMPAIGN 4 


1037 


Nicholson, J. K., Milan, Quebec. 
Nicolson. T., Stornoway. (2 copies) 
O’Brien, A. P., Barnes, 
Orr, Neil, Edinburgh. 
Parker, Mrs. Chevallier,' Fairlie, 
Paterson, Hugh, Southall, 
Perkins, S. W., Aberfeldy. 
Powell, Mrs. Wm., New Orleans, 
Pratt, A. W., London, E.C. 
Proudfoot, R. B., Kirkcaldy. 
Pullar, P. MacD., Glasgow. 
Quiggin, E.C., Cambridge. 
Ramsden, Miss H., Kingussie, 
Ramsay, D., Durango, Col., U.S.A. 
Reid, A.F., M.A., F.G.S., Glenalmond. 
Reid, D., Struy, Beauly. 
Reid, Duncan, Glasgow. 
Renton, R. G., Bronx, New York. 
Ritchie, Rev. R.L., Bonar Bridge. 
Robertson, Rev. C. M., Craighouse, Jura. 
Robertson, D., Perth. 
Robertson, Rev. D. J. Manse of Jura. 
Robertson, W. J., Manchester, 
Robertson, James, Calvine. d 
Robinson, F. N., Cambridge, Mass., U.S.A. 
Ross, Rev. D. C., Appin. 
Ross, Rey. Rodk.. Inverness. 
| Ross, W., Birkenhead. 

*Rücker, Miss, Blackheath. 
| Russell, Rev. J. C., Edinburgh. (2 copies) . 
Ruthven, A.J., Upton Park, London. 
tRyan, Mrs., Roy Bridge. 
Sandeman Public Library, Perth. 
Scobie, A. H. MacKay-, Esq., 1/Essex Regt, 
*Sharp, Wm., Murrayfield, Midlothian, 
.[Sharp, Mrs. Wm., London. E 
Simpkin, Marshall, Hamilton, Eent & Co., Ld. 
fSinclair, the Ven. Archdeacon, London. | : 
Smith, Finlay, Belfast, P.E.I. Canada. 
Smith, J. F., Cranbrook, B. Columbia. 
Smith, Murdo M., Milan, Quebec. 
Sorby, Rev. J. A., Enmore, Somerset, 
Sotheran, H. & Co., London. 


MacLeod, M., Ibrox. 

MacLeod, Rev. R. C., Morpeth. 

MacLeod, Clan Society, Edinburgh. (2 copies) 
MacMillan, Malcolm, Priceville, Ontario. 
MacMillan, —, Fairfield Rd., Inyerness, 
MacMillan, Thomas, Crianlarich. 

MacMillan, Thomas, Cumnock, 

MacMurray, Alex., Motherwell. 

MacNab, Wm., Fielding, New Zealand. 
MacNaughten, Miss L., Balquhidder. (6 copies) 
MacNaughton, Miss C., Glenlyon. 
MacNaughton, W.A., M.D.,D.P.H., Stonehaven. 
MacNeill, A. G., Alves. 

MacNeill, A. Kilchrennan. 

MacPhail, John, Rothesay. TA 
MacPhater, Chas., Glasgow. 

MacPhee, Duncan, Cardenden. 

MacPherson, D., Falkirk. 

MacPherson, Rev. Donald, Glendale,C. Breton. 
MacPherson, John, Dibaig, Ross-shire. 
MacPherson, Norman C., Ceantangbhall, Barra, 
MacPhie, Donald, Cumbernauld. 

MacPhie, W. D., Warragul, Victoria. 
MacQueen, Rey. Ewen, Bonar Bridge. 
MacRae, Rev. Alex., M.A.,*Dartford, Kent. 
MacRae, Alex., Daviot. SON 
MacRae, Capt. Colin, Otter Ferry, i 
MacRae, Donald, Dundee. 

MacRae, Dr. F., London, S.W. 
MacRae, Farquhar, Gten Innes, N.S.W. 
MacRae, W. B.. Poolewe. i 
MacRaild, Angus, Glendale, Skye. | 
MacRitchie, David, F.S.A., Edinburgh, 
*MacRury, Rev. J. Snizort. 
MacTaggart, Dugald, Dundee, 
MacVicar, Rey. A. J., Duror. 

Martin, Lt.-Col. M., Broadford, Skye. 
Martin, Rev. D. J., Oban. 

Matheson, Alex., Glasgow. 

Matheson, Major Duncan,Stornoway. (2 copies) 
Matheson, John, M.A., M.D., London. 
Mathieson, R., Glengarry, Victoria. 

Mayhew, A, H., Charing Cross Rd. (15 copies) 
















Meachan, L. A. McE., Marysville, B.Columbia.| St. Francis Xavier Coll., Antigonish, N, Scotia. " 
Meachan, Wm. McL., Marysville, B. Columbia. | Stewart, Alex., Falkirk. ; es 
Melven Bros., Inverness. Stewart, D., Philadelphia, ear ia 


se 


Stewart, Miss Harriet, Drimnin. tw 
Stewart, Hugh, Cranbrook, B. Columbia. =. 
*Stewart, John A., Barnhill, Perth, 

Stewart, Kenneth, Slumbay, Lochcarron(3 cop.) 
Stewart, Wm., Fortingall. 

*Stewart, Major Wm., Obbe, Harris. 
Stoddart-Maclellan, Majori R. B. of Kilmelfort, 
Stuart, H. C., Washington, DO. [(5 copies) 
Stuart, W. T., Papeete, Tahiti. Ee X 
Sutherland, Andrew, Wick, EXE 
Sutherland, Innes, Paisley. 

Sutherland, R., Dornoch. 

Sutherland, Rev. W., Lochbroom. 

Swan, Allan, Greenock. 

Thomason, Maj.-Gen. C. S., Earl’s Court. 
tThorp, Mrs., Eaton Sq., S.W. 

Tolmie, Rev. A.M.C., M.A., Campbeltown, 
Tolmie, Miss F., Edinburgh. . 
Urquhart, David, M.A., Kyle of Lochalsh. 
Urquhart, Dr., Perth. 
Von Dieckhoff, Rev. Cyril, Fort Augustus, 
Watt, Rev. L. MacL., Alloa. 

Walsh, R, F., Eglinton, Co, Derry. 

Watson, Mrs., Edinburgh. 

Whyte, Henry, Glasgow. 

Wilson, John, Footscray, Victoria. 

Wilson, Dr. J. Leslie, Newcastle-on-Tyne, 
Wyllie & Son, Aberdeen. (3 copies) 

Yeldham, Miss, Brook Green, London. 

Young, H. & Sons, Liverpool. (2 copies) 

Yule, Miss, Muir-of-Ord. (23 copies) 


Melven, Wm., Glasgow. 

Menzies, D. P., of Mengieston, F,S.A.SCOT., 

— F.N.G.S., Plean Castle. 

*Menzies, Miss, Edinburgh. E 

Menzies, John & Co., Edinburgh. 

Meyrick Library, Jesus College. Oxford. 

Michael, Rev. H., Broughton, N., Scotia. 

Milne, Rey. J., D.D., W. Linton, Peebles-shire. 

Mitchell Library, Glasgow. 

Mitchell, Alex., Inverness. 

Montgomery, F., Melvaig, Gairloch. 

Tiorison, W. M., Annfield Plain, Durham. 

Morrison, A., Ranmoor, Sheffield, 

Morrison, Miss S., Peel, Isle of Man 

Mulloy,'M., Tooting Junction. : 

: Muuro, Rev. Donald, Conon Bridge. 

Munro, John, J.P., Oban. 

Munro, Rev. J. M., Campbeltown, 

Munro, Rev. M. N., Taynuilt, 

Murchison, Angus, Portree. 

Murison, J., Hammersmith. 

Murphy, J.J.F., London, S.W. 

Murray, Donald, Aberdeen, F[(2 copies) 

Murray MacGregor of MacGregor, Miss, Perth. 

Murray, N. A., Dell, Quebec. 

Myles, Kirk, Wheathampstead. 

Napier, Theodore, Edinburgh. 

New Bedford Library, Mass., U.S.A. 
Nicholson, A., Dumfries. 

. Nicholson, A.D., Milan, Quebec. 

Nicholson, A.M., Skigersta, Lewis, (2 copies) 


Nicholson, C., Chingtord. | "Zimmer, Prof. H., Halensee, Berlin. 
Original front 
Digitized by UNIVERSITY LU F -- N 0! : A 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


n d CH EE AM CR 
IKITERBNIET AB H KI E 
Ul 4 | | P "aL. | i^ n L | W — 


p mg 





As the length of above list may induce thoughtless 
persons to think that I am “ making a good thing” out 
of the publication of this Dictionary (and in fact such a 
happy state of things has been hinted to me several times) 
I feel that some explanation is due from me. 

Quite another two pages could be filled with the 


names of those who have only paid a small proportion 


of their subseriptions, or who have paid nothing at all, 
in spite of many urgent applications for payment. I 
fixed the price of the parts at 65d. each, post free, being 
the actual eost of materials used, not including repairs to 
machinery, &c., working hard all the best years of my life for 
benefit of Gaelic students quite free of charge. Many 
complained that they could not pay so much as 63d. a 
part, which represented the enormous sum of 12d. per 
month ! why any ordinary individual spends more than 
that in matches or ink. On making an extract of the 
amount of unpaid subscriptions at time of going to press, 
I was dismayed to find it reached a total of £72, 1s. 3d. 

I think I have made it plain now that it 1s the 
Gaelic-reading public who have * made a good thing” of 
this Gaelic Dictionary, and not 


THE UNFORTUNATE COMPILER. 





D | | y T ed LJ [| ILL ^ LI i Dh 
NTERNET ARCHIVE URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 








G 


1918 LIST OF 






j ECORDS for 
| Che Genealogist, 


AND 








COMPENDIUM OF NOTES 


on the 
DWELLY FAMILY, 
from 1174 to 1912, 
Compiled by E. DWELLY. 
With many Chart Pedigrees, Price post free, 2/1. 


.— T' = 
tire Iu | EE " | - i E 
Lee Liu 1 V IE " Mil. j 
== = = — nope ym = — ERE " = A k arh P — 8 
KITERMET AB WE IRRANA AAD A DCR 
à EN L3 ni LT, rà m Oat La pu Gili 1 
— i — e Se P EI i ine i ti Lm Jee A FLEX L 


DWELLY’S 
Parish Records 


A new series of volumes for publishing 
Parish Registers,Inscriptions on tombstones 
é&c. They offer an exceptional advantage 
to Genealogists over similar works now in 
progress, as all matter collected for publica- 
tion is indexed as soon as possible afier re- 
ceipt. Indices will not be printed as that 
would cost more than printing the text, but 
the MS. index may be consulted for the fees 
mentioned on another page and which are 
quite nominal. Information is available 
at once in this way that may not be printed 
for months or even years, as if the data ob- 
tained relates to a county concerning wnich 
sufficient has not been obtained to fill a 
volume it must be delayed till more comes 
in for it is not desirable to mix counties in 
one volume as a rule. | 


Somerset and Devon are now being dealt with, and any 
unpublished Parish Registers, Monumental Inseriptions, 
&e. relating to those two counties will be especially wel- 
come at the present time. 


Vols. 1 & 2, containing the most delapidated of the 
Bishop’s 'franseripts at Wells, now in the press, 
Price x5s. net each. Index to these two vols. 
may be consulted. They contain about 23,000 names. 





The following inscriptions have been copied and the 
names mentioned in them are now included in Index 3. 
Argylishire—(Benderloch) Achnaba, Ardchattan Priory, 

Baile Mhaodain, and Cladh Chaluim Chille. 
N. Devon—Brendon, Countisbury, Mortishoe and Tren- 
tishoe churchyards. 
Hants.—Old Alresford churchyard [ Part only. | 
Kent—Herne churchyard, Herne Bay ch. &oburehyard. | 


NTERNET ARCHIVE JRBANAZCHAMPAIGN 





Misbop s Cranseripts at Wells, 
(FIRST PORTION) 


DWELLY’S PARISH RECORDS, Vol. 1 


Abbas Combe, 1597, 1602, 1603, 1605, 1606, 1612, 
1613, 1653, 1665, 1667. 

Aisholt, 1598, 1699, 1607, 1608, 1609, 1615 (P), 
1617, 1623, 1666. 

Angersleigh, 1528, 1599, 1616, 1623, 1636, 1663, 
1668 & 1669. 1679, 1736. 

Asbbrittle, 1599, 1681. 

Asüill, 1615, 1616, 1621, 1663. 

Ash Priors, 1610, 1625, 1636. 

Ashwesk, 1598, 1607, 1608. 

Axbridge, 1597, 1596, 1599, 1602, 1605, 1621, 1629, 
1685, 1663, 1664, 1669, 

Babcary, 1598, 1607, 1608, 1617, 1638 

Babington, 1607, 1608, 1615, 1617, 1623. 

Backwrell, 1603, 1905, 1607, 1608, 1617, 1629, 1634, 
1636, 1639. 

Battongborough, 1599, 1605, 1606, 1610. 1621,1622, 
1629, 1634, 1685, 1639, 1640, 1663, 1668. 

Barrow Gurney, 1622. 

Barrow Minchin, 1617. 

Barrow, North, 1598. 

"M St. Dayid, 1607, 1008, 1615, 1617, 1638, 

Batcombe, 1597, 1605, 1607, 1608, 1616, 1617,1629, 
1662, 1669. 

Batheaston. 1609, 1616, 1622, 1623. 1670. 

Bathford, 1608, 1617, 1622, 1636, 1662. 

Bathwick, 1600, 1615, 

Bawdrip, 1602, 1602, 1615, 1622, "1636. 

Bedminster, 1599, 1623-4. 

Beercrocombe, 1607, 1613, 1616, 1617, 1621, 1622, 
1623. 1686. 

Bickenhall, 1615. 

Bicknoller, 1617 

Bleadon, 1608, 1609, 1616, 1623. 

Bourton, 1615, 1617, 1623, 1639 

Bradford, 1594, 1595, 1596, 1697, 1605, 1606, 1618, 
1615, 1621, 1622. 1662. 

Bradley, West, 1605, 1607 (P), 1608, 1623, 1629, 
1636, 1637, 1639, 1667, 1670, 1073. 

Bratton, 1608, 1615, 1617, 1623, 1608. 

Brewham, 1607, 1608. 

Bridgewater. 1597 1601, 1605, 1606, 1608, 1622, 
1627, 1629, 1636. 1639. 1667, 1668, 1669. 

Brimpton. 1602, 1615, 1617, 1618, 1636, 1638, 1639, 
1678. 1695. 

Broadway. 1598, 1630, 1663. 

Brockley, 1598, 1599 1602, 1603-4, 1607, 1609,1615, 
1616, 1617, 1621 1622, 1623, 1629, 1634, 1636, 
1639 1640 

Brompton Ralph between 1603 & 1642 

Brompton Regis, 1638. 

Brushford, 1622, 1678. 

Buckland Dinnam. 1603, 1605, 1615, 1630, 

Buckland St, Mary, 1599, 1609, 1617. 

Buckland, West, 1607, 1621, 1629. 

Burnett, 1599, 1617. 1623, 1689, 16.. 

Butcombe, 1605. 1606. 1607. 1609, 1615, 1621, 1622 
1623, 1929, 1631. 1635, 1640, 1686 1679. 

Butleigh, 1598, 1615, 1616, 1622, 1634, 1637. 

Cadbury, North, One not dated, 1639, 1610, 

Cadbury, South, 1607, 1617, 1623, 1638, 1679. 

Camel, Queen, 1607. 

Camel, West, 1597 1613, 1623, 1629. 

Oameley, 1605, 1606, 1613, 1623, 1639, 1668, 1002, 
l b 

Camerton, 1607, 1608. 1616, 1629, 1636. 

Oannington, 1607, 1639 





Castle Cary, 1615, 1621, 1623, 1639. 

Catcott, 1597-1600, 1607, 160S, 1615, 1617, 1621, 
16??, 1635, 1636. 1639, 1640. 

Chaffeombe, 1599, 1628, 1638. 

Charlecombe, 1635, 1638. 

Charlinch, 1607, 1803, 1617, 1621, 1663. 

Charlton, 1598 [1639 

Charlton Adam, 1607, 1609, 1615, 1623, 1635, 1630, 

Charlton Mackerell, 1599, 1000, 1617, 1629, 1639, 
1663. 

Charlton Musgrove, 1599, 1615, 1616, 1639, 1683, 
1672, 1678, 1679. 

Cheddar, 1608. 1616, 1617, 1621, 1623, 1635, 1637, 
1662, 1663, 1664, 1675. 

Cheddon Fitzpaine, 1607, 1608, 1637. 

Chedzoy, 1597, 1613, 1639. 

Chellington, 1599, 1607, 1608, 1615, 1636, 1631P) 

Chelvey, 1599, 1607, 1608, 1618, 1615, 1016, 1629, 
1635, 1636, 1639, 1640, 1662, 1608. 

Chew Magna, 1605, 1616, 1621. 

Chewstoke, 1605, 1609, 1617, 1622, 1623. 
ewton Mendip, 1623, 1632. 

Chilcompton, 1607. 1608, 1635. 1663, —(P) 

Chilthorne Dormer, 1615, 1621, 1636. 

Chilton, 1608, 1617, 1621, 1622, 1323. 

Chilton Canteloe, 1607, 1608, 1615,1€17,1623 1666, 

Chilton Trinity, 1661-85. 

Chipstable, 1607, 1659, 1615, 1616, 1617, 1623. 

Churchill, 1609, 1621, 1634, 1635, 1638, 1689, 1840, 
1663, 1607. 

Clapton, 1599, 1609, 1615, 1617, 1663. 

Claverton, 1615, 1623, 1636 {1666 

Clevedon, 1607, 1622, 1623, 1629, 1633, 1639. 1540, 

Closworth, 1598, 1603. 

Clutton, 1609, 1615, 1623, 1638. 

Coker, West, 1608, 1613, 1623, 1639, 

Oombe Flory, 1621, 1623, 1628, 1634, 1636. 

Combhayes, 1602, 1021. 

Combe St. Nicholas, 1636, 1639. 

Compton Bishop, 1506, 1607,1608, 1615, 1616,1621. 

Compton Dando, 1616, 1623, 1679. 

Compton Pauncsfoot, 1590-1639, 1601, 1602, 1606, 
1615, 1616, 1621, 1629, 1635, 1610 

Congresbury, 1605, 1606, 1608, 1609, —(?), 1615, 
1621, 1683. 

Corfe, 1607, 1609, 1615, 1621, 1623, 1663. 

Cossington, 1606, 1607, 1621, 1635, 1639, 1640. 

Cothelstone, 1607, 1615, 1623, 1638, 1667, 1678, 1679. 

Cranmore, East, 1607, 1612, 1615, 1521, 1622,1628, 
1635, 1639, 1669. 

Cranmore, West, 1697, 1598,1606, 1607,1629,1636, 
1637, 1639, 1668. 

Creech St. Michael, 1607, 1616, 1623, 1625, 1639, 

Crewkerne, 1599. 

Cricket Malherhie, 1604, 1607, 1608, 1615, 1617, 
1621, 1623, 1637. 

Cricket St. Thomas, 1599, 1621, 1622, 1623, 1639, 
1663, 1678. 

Croscombe, 1607, 1608, 1609, 1623, 1639, 1672 

Croweombe, 1504, 1595, 1696,1597,1608, 1608,1613, 
1614(?),1628, 1639, 1670 

Curry, North, 1018, 1621. 

Curry Mallet, 1597, 1598, 1605, 1607, 1615. 

Curry Rivel, 1607, 1629, 1638. 

Cinder, 1598, 1605, 1600, 1607, 1603, 1613, 1621, 
1630, 1635. 1636, 1640. 

Ditcheat, 1605, 1607, 1023, —(?) 

Dodington, 1597, 1598. 1599, 1605, 1606, 1607,1609, 
1615, 1617, 1621. 1622, 1630, 1635, 1639, 1640, 
1962 10603, 1666, 1567, 1670, 1672, 1079, ` 


UNIV 


d i 


no NI f ‘a | am Ir 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGRN 


N TAER fele frz ^3 
H* Y CIF VIS | 


UTI 


Transcripts at Wells, ( Dwelly's P.R. Vol. 1)— 


Donyatt, One between 1610 & 1622, 1623, 1629. 

Doulting, 1615, 1617, 1629. 

Dowlish Wake, 1599, 1607, 1610, 1615, One before 
1639, 1639. 

Downhead, 1615, 1617, 1622, 1630. 

Drayton, 1599, 1639. 

Dunkerton, 1608, 1609, 1615 

Durleigh, 1599, 1607, 1609, 1615. 1619, 1621, 1623, 
1639 (P), 1666, 1678, 1679. 

Durston, 1608, 1615, 1622, 1639, 1678, 1679 

Kmborough, 1598, 1605, 1606, 1607, 1608. 1609, 
1622, 1629, 1630, 1634, 1635, 1639, 1640 

Englishcombe, 1609, 1618, 1635, 1673. 

Eumore, 1607, 1608, 1609, 1615, 1621, 1622, 1639, 
1666, 1678, 1679 

Bvercreech, 1629, 1639. 

Farley Hungerford, 1616. 

Fiddington, 1597. 

Fitzhead, 1609, 1623, 1636, 1063. 

Pivehead, 1598, 1609, 1635, 1636 ` 

Foxcott, 1598, 1607, 1608, 1609, 1615, 1622, 1623, 
1630, 1635, 1689 

Freshford, 1601, 1609, 1617,£1623, 1688. 

Frome Selwood, 1598. 

Glastonbury ($t. He nediet), 1607, 1616, 18629,1663 

(st Jobn Baptist), 1597. 1598. One un 
dated. 

Goatburst, 1598, 1607, 1608, 1609, 1622, 1636, 1039, 
1662, 1667, 1670, 1679. 

Hardin ton, 1598, 1609 

Halse, 1599. 

Harptree East, One between 1597 & 1626, 1605, 
1607, 1609, 

Harptree, West, 1598 9, 1599, 1606, 1607, 1613. 
1623, 1627, 1629, 1630, 1635, 1636, 1637, 1639 
1663, 1667, 1669, 1672, 1678, 1680. 

Hatch Beauchamp. 1609, 1637 

Hawkridge, 1598, 1609, 1623 

High Ham, 1597, 1607, 1610, 1612, 1613, 1622, 
1623, 1624, 1629, 1635, 1639, 1640, 1663, 1668 


DWELLY’S PARISH RECORDS, Vol. 2 


Wil Farrance, 1602, 1607, 1609, 1615, 1619, 1622, 
1623 

Hinton Blewett, 1623, 1667, 1669. 

Hinton St. George, 1597, 1599, 1602, 1605, 1607, 
1615, 1622, 1623, 1685, 1639, 1667, 1669. 

Holcombe, 1604, 1608, 1639. 

Holford, 1615, 1632, 1678, 

Holton, 1602, 1629, 1636. 

Horsington, 1599, 1607, 1608, 1609, 1663. 

Huish Champflo wer, 1597, 1616, 1623 1638. 

Huish Episcopi, Two undated, 1615, 1623. 

Huntspil!, 1623, 

Hutton, 1621, 1622, 1623, 1629, 1668. 

Llichiester, 1594, 1595, 1596, 1616, 1635. 1666. 

]iton, 1616, 1622, 1623, 1629, 1635. 

Isle Abbotts, 1593, 1594, 1595, 1598, 1604, 1600, 
1605, 1609, 1616, 1635, 1679. 

Isle Brewers, One between 1598 & 1600,1606.1607, 
1609, 1622, 1693-4. 1635, 1639, 1667 

Kenn, 1607, 1609, 1613, 1623, Que between 1621 
& 1629, 1630, 1635,:1636, 1639, 1640. [1635. 

Kilmersdon, 1603, 1609, 1615, 1623, 1629, 1630, 

Kiltou, 16:1, 1623, 1635, 1664 

Kilve, 1618, 1621, 1623, 1636. 

Kingston Seymour, 1622. 1635, 1636, 1639 | 

Kitti-ford, 1621, 1635, 1636, 1078. 

Laverton, 1609, 1635, 1639. 

Langridge, 1609, 1623, 1635, 1639 

Leigh, 1639, 1610. 

Leigh-upon-Men«ip, 1607, 1608, 1662, 

Liistock, 1607, 1503, 1623, 1628, 1678, 1679 

Long Ashton, 1623, 1629, 1637, 1639, 1662, 1668, 
1671, 1679, 


Digitized by 


INTERNET ARCHIVE 


Long Sutton. 1607, 1616, 1617 (?), 1622, 1029 
Lopen, 1609, 1623, 1639. 


Lufton, 1598, 1609, 1635, 1639. 


Lullington, 1595, 1630 a 
Lydford, Kast, 1615, 1628. 

Se West, 1623 [ 1638. 
Lydeard, Bisbops,One between 1595 & 1613 1623 
Maperton, 1612. 1621 1678, 1679. 

Marston Bigott, 1607, 1608. 1609, 1622, 1623.1639. 
Marston Magna, 1603, 1621, 1622, 1623, 1625.1673, 
Meare, 1605, 1607. 1608. 1610. 1616. 1639 1663, 

1668, 1619. 
Michael Church parish, ( Batb), 1598. 1621 1639. 
Midsomer Norton, 1616, 1636, 1637, 1639. 

Milton Clevedon,1607, 1613, 1622,1623, 1629,1639, 

1636, 1638, 1639, 1640, 1663, 1668 
Minehead. 1639. 

Misterton, 1613, 1639 

Monckton Qombe, 1599, 1634 
Monckton, West, 1599, 1618, 1623. 1639. 
Moorlinch & its Chapelries ‘— 

Moorlinch, 1598-9, 1599, 1622, 1679, 

Sutton Mallett, 1628 

Stowell in Moorlinch, 1598, 1623 

Chelton in Moorlinch, 1615 
Montacute, 15958,1605, 1606, 1607, 16160,1639 1698 
Muchelney, 1620, 1623, 1639, 1695, 1696 
Nettlecombe, 1598, One undated, 1605, 1606, 1607, 

1609 1622, 2623. 1629, 1636, 1637 1639. 164. 

1663, 1669, 17623 
Nynehead, 1605, 1606, One between 1617 & 1638, 

1621, 1636, 1639. 1640, 1662, 1663, 1669. 

Norton St. Philip, 1609, 1613, 1621, 1639 
Nunney, One undated, 1636. 1639 

Oare, 1599, 1613, 1623, 1670 

Orchardleigh, 1634, 1636 1663. 

Orchard Portman, 1602, 1603, 1606, 1607, 1609, 

1623, 1636, 1637, 1639, 1676 
Pawlett, 1597 8, 1622, 1623 
Pendomer, 1609, 1623 
Pennard, Fast; 1599, 1607, 1608, 1621, 1635, 1639, 

1640, 1679 
Pennard, West, 1607. 1693, 1637, 1639. 

Pensel wood, 1599, 1613, 1693. 
Perrott, North, 1599. 1602, 1613, 1623, 1637. 
Pilton 1616, 1621, 1623, 1629, 1630, 1636, 1637, 

1639, 1640. 1663, 1666, 1667, 1668, 1669 
Pitminster, 1622 
Portbury, 1637. 

Pylle, 1622, 1627. 
Quantoxhead, East, 1608, 1615, 1621, 1622, 16835, 

1639, 1679, 1681, Two undated. 

4, — West, 1613. 
Rodney Stoke, 1602, 1605, 1607, 1609, 1621, 1622, 

1623, 1635 1636, 1637. 1639, 1640, 1663, 1744 Á. 
St. Catherine, 1598, 1605, 1623, 1629. 1630, 1670. 
Sampford Brett, 1609, 1623, 1627, 1629, 1635, 

1675,,1679 
Seaborough, 1594, 1595, 1596, 1597, 1598, 1609, 

1613, 1622, 1623. 

Seavington with Dinington, 1599, 1623, 1674. 
Seavington St. Mary, 1621, 1623. 
Shapwick, 1605, 1606,1607, 1608, 1621, 1623,1636, 

1637, 1639, 1640, 

Shepton Mallet. 1609 (P), 1615, 1620 (?), 1616, 

1621, 1623, 1629, 1636, 1637, 1664, 1679. 
Shepton Montague, 1617, 1630. 

Shipham, 1639, 

Somerton, 1599, 1613, 1637 (?) 1695, 1699. 
Stanton Drew, 1607 1614-5, 1616. 

Stanton Prior, 1599, 1668, 

Staple Fitz Paine, 1623 (1635, 1662. 
Stocklinch Ottersay (or Otbery ). 1609, 1622,1624, 
Stogumber. 1638. 

Stogursey, 1623. 

Stoke, North, 1598, 1605, 1635, 1639 

Stoke Perrow, 1613, 1023, 1629, 1630 (P) 

Stoke St. Mary, 1635. 


Original from 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS A 
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 





Tramcripts at Wrile (Dwelly’s P. R. Vol 2) 


Stoke St. Michael, 1622. 

Stoke.sub.Hamdon, 1621, 1623. 

Stone Kaston, One between 1594 & $1597, 1598, 
1602, 1606, 1608,4009, 1621, 1623,1627, 1629, 1636, 


Walton-by-Street, 1617, 1639, 1663. ! 
Wanstrow, 1605, 1616, 1621. 1623, 1636, 1678. 
Wayford, 1613, 1639 

Weare, 1598, 1610 (?), 1621, 1623, 1629, 1639. 
Wellington, 1616, 1618, 1622, 1637, 1682, —— ? 
Wellow, 1599, 1610, 1623. 


1639, 1663, 1687, 1669. 
Stowell, 1613, 1021, 1623, 1636. 
Stowey, next w, 1602, 1606, 1622, 1630. 
Stowey, Nether, 1631, 1682, 1639, 1639 (?) 
Stowey, Over, 1598, 11613. One between 1598 & 


16 
Stratton, (on the Fosse), 1599, 1607, 1608, 1609, 
. 14423, 1666. 

Stringston, 1609, 1638, 1678, 1079. — - 

Sutton Bingham, 1605, 1609, 1621. ^ 

Swell, 1630, 16— ? 

Thorn Coffin, 1609, 1613, 1623. 

Thorne St. Margaret, 1623. 

Vhurlbear, 1613, 1623, 1676. 

Timberscombe, 1598, 1609, 1621, 1623, 1678. 
Timsbury, 1605, 1600, 1613, 1621, 1622, 1623, 1627. 
Tintinbull, 1598, 1609, 1612, 1617, 1621, 1623. 
Trent, 1598, 1601, 1607, 1617, 1623, 1675, 

Trull, 1508, 1617, 1623, 1627, 1666. 


Westbury, 1623, 16236,1637, 1639. [ 
Weston Bampfylde, 1623, 1625, 1629, 1639, 1672, 
Weston-in-Gordano, 1593-7, 1599, 1605,1609, 1622, 
1623, 1639. 
Whitelackington, 1609, 1621, 1623 
Wilton, 1598, 1609, (c.1615). 1616, 1623, 1663, 
Wincanton, 1629, 1636, 1637, 1637,:1672. 
Winford, 1609, 1630 (P), 1639 
Winsford, 1621, 1622, 1623, 1639. 
Winscombe, 1598, 1623. 
Withel, 1609, 1613, 1621, 1623, 1629. [1637 
Wiveliscombe, 1598, —— ?, 1622, 1623, 1636. 
Woolly, 1606. 
Wootton in-Pilton, North, 1608, 1613, 1621,1623, 
1623, 1636, 1639 
Wraxall, 1614, 1621, 1626, 1629, 1630, 1636, 1637, 
1689, 1641, 1678. 
Yarlington, 1599, 1669, 1672, 1673. 
A $4 og ct 
Ubley, 1609, 1616, 1617, 1623. Yatton, 1623, 1662, 1663, 1677, 1679. 


U ill, 1598, 1609, 1623, 1699. [1639,:1662 Yeovilton, 1599, 1609, 1621, 1623. 
alton-in- -Gordano, 1599, 1609, 1616, 1623, 1629, INo place named, 1598, 1636. 


The above are only those transcripts which are in most 
danger of being soon illegible, and the great bulk of the re- 
mainder make it impossible for the compiler to copy them all 
personally. Anyone who has copies of those of any parish or 
date not included above or who cannot supply more than 
their own parish will greatly oblige by sending what they 
have to be included in next volume. It is only in this way 
that all the transcripts at Wells can ever be printed. 


DWELLY'S 
Genealogical Indices. 


Index 1— Variations of Surnames. 

Index 2—Unindexed Printed Parish Registers. 
Index 3—Dwelly’s Parish Records. 

Index 4—Any unindexed material not in above. 


Fee to search above indices 5/-, which includes 
details of any number of one surname up to 12. 
Further extracts 3d. each. A list of the various 
spellings met with, without giving source of each, 
may be had for 1/-. All enquiries must be accom- 
panied by remittance and stamp for reply. Should 
no reference to the required name be found one-half 
of the 5/- fee will be returned. 


Digitized by 
KITEDRKRIET AD/ALIJ 
h E PD YE Br, Ke | T 


HHI 
T 


E. DWELLY, 


Genealogist & Record Searcher, 
* Holly Bush,” Margate Road, 
HERNE BAY, KENT. 


Old Deeds transcribed and translated. ; 
Parish Registers, Old Wills, Are, searched in any 
part of the counlry with speed and accuracy. 


Somersetshire investigations a speciality. 


FEES VERY MODERATE. 


Family History amd 
Pedigrees 


on modern lines from Public Records and other 
reliable sources. E. D. having an up-to-date 
Printing plant attachea to his office is able to 
print and publish the result of such investigations 
for clients where desired, on exceptionally favour- 
able terms. Illustrations and facsimilies of 
documents provided. 


Persons having transcripts of unpublished Parish 
Registers of Devon or Somerset, or of inscriptions ot 
all the monuments, tombstones, &c. inside or outside 
any churches ip these counties, can have them pub- 
lished free of charge, if early application is made. 


Ke di Gen A dä A Zell RC gun ` 
` IA i i 
d EG JE ARCHIE IE 


THE ILLUSTRATED 


Gaelic Dictionary, 


BY 
E. DWELLY, 


The only up-to-date Dictionary of the Scottish 
Gaelic language, containing all the words and mean- 
jugs given by all its predecessors and a vast number 
not in any Gaelic Dictionary, but collected from the 
Common Cpeech of the people and the whole range of 
| modern Gaelie Literature, and | 


l 
| 
[ 
| 


| PROFUSELY ILLUSTRATED 
by the compiler. 


This is the only Gaelic Dictionary that makes a 
speciality of Technical terms, Localisms and Place- 
names. 


There is a list of over 3,000 Proper names. 





Every letter of the type has been set up by the 
compiler to ensure that accuracy which it is so diffi- 
cult to obtain 1n Gaelie typography. 


The Revised Edition is now ready. 


Price, in 3 vols., cloth, dmy. 8vo., £2. 2/- net 
and post free from— 





E. DWELLY, Publisher, 


or his sole agent 


Wie JT. Mayhew, 56, Charing Cross Rd. London. 


SOME BOOKS FOR SALE BY 


X. DWELLY, 
Margate Road, Herne Bay, Kent. 


Prices include postage in British Isles. Out-of-print or rare books sought for 
and found, The following offered subject to being unsold on receipt of order. 


Breton Grammar, Treasure, 2/- | 
vn — Glosses at Orleans LL: 
Celtic Review, Nos. 8, 11 to 14, 20 to 25 1/9 each, lot 12/- | 
Gaelic Grammar; Reid’s 1/9 | 
A Stewart’s, 3/9 
y Pocket bk. 1900, with descriptions of Clan tartaus, 
badges, &c., all in Gaelic 
Trish Grammar, O Coindealbhtain’s bi-lingual 2/2 
Eng.-Irish Dictionary, O’ Neill Lane’s, pub. 12/6 for 3/6 
Manx, Goodwin's First lessons in, 


5» . Dichonary : : j 
Welsh Dictionary, Spurrell’s 7/9 

„ Grammar, Rowland’s 4/10) 

„Practical lessons in 2/9) 
Armorial Families, Fox-Davies, 1895, 28/- 
How to study old documents, Thoyts 6/6 
Douglas, House of, Maxwell, 2 vols. pub. 42/- for 12/6! 
Percy, House of, Brenan, 2 vols. pub. 42/- for yt 
Heraldry of Fish, Moule's 
History of the Baronetage, Pixley ^ 

WANTED 


History of the Welles Family by Albert Welles, pub. in 
New York 1876, or another edition 1848. i 
i 


p ECCLE 1 tei = MW 
A ITTUITPRITT ARS igr IIDPEABRIA FLARAS A =R 
TERNET ARCHIVE URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


sn-pd#asn ssa22e/D1o'jsn.niuyeu'wwww//:dyu / sajeis payun 3y} ui ulewog sand 
xXr1duupxXr81/oo6£1/:31e'onin/z zozAeu' sjpueu'|pu//:dnu / LW ESOT £Z-ZT-6T0z uo payeiauag 





sn-pd#asn ssa22e/D1o'jsn.niuyeu'wwww//:dyu / sajeis payun 3y} ui ulewog sand 
xXr1duupxXr81/oo6£1/:31e'onin/z zozAeu' sjpueu'|pu//:dnu / LW ESOT £Z-ZT-6T0z uo payeiauag 





sn-pd#asn ssa22e/D1o'jsn.niuyeu'wwww//:dyu / sajeis payun 3y} ui ulewog sand 
xXr1duupxXr81/oo6£1/:31e'onin/z zozAeu' sjpueu'|pu//:dnu / LW ESOT £Z-ZT-6T0z uo payeiauag 





sn-pd#asn ssa22e/D1o'jsn.niuyeu'wwww//:dyu / sajeis payun 3y} ui ulewog sand 
xXr1duupxXr81/oo6£1/:31e'onin/z zozAeu' sjpueu'|pu//:dnu / LW ESOT £Z-ZT-6T0z uo payeiauag 





sn-pd#asn ssa22e/D1o'jsn.niuyeu'wwww//:dyu / sajeis payun 3y} ui ulewog sand 
xXr1duupxXr81/oo6£1/:31e'onin/z zozAeu' sjpueu'|pu//:dnu / LW ESOT £Z-ZT-6T0z uo payeiauag 











It 


0112 118030912 





